Whenever you're ready
Representative.
Okay so HB eleven is an act in
the office of the child advocate
and and we do have an amendment
on that but did describe the
bill.
It's forty three states have
enacted in office of child
advocacy or similar but office
and they were often formed at a
tragedy today we begin the
journey of becoming the forty
fourth St to provide such
services for children the office
the child advocacy is created
and administratively attached to
the office of the Attorney
General it is the desire that
this department will become an
arms length partner in the
pursuit of fair and correct
children services and will help
these complex and overburdened
systems at CYFD through their
fair support and resource
guiding through problem
identification assistance
organizational critical analysis
and the program and the
promotion of conflicts
confidence today I'm joined by
my expert witness Matt bank.
And I think.
We need to move for the
amendment so we are.
Representative thank you.
Thank you very much Mr Dixon for
getting us started thank you
Representative part of me for
explaining the bill can we have
a motion for house
appropriations and finance
committee amendment number one.
Okay it's been moved five
percent behind second by
Representative Sanchez and
representative to confirm it's
the point two two five eight
five four point one yes it is
great okay thank you very much
Representative can do you want
to can you explain the amendment
for strictly.
Sure.
R. M. please feel free tell me
your experts name again.
Matt Beck okay Mr back great to
see you thank you please go
ahead Mr chairman members of the
committee there are some
substantive changes and just
some grammatical changes the
first changes on page one line
sixteen striking this semi
striking semi colon making
appropriation master flight that
it's no longer requesting an
appropriation the second is on
page two line ten after the semi
colon insert and.
Page two line eleven after
advocate stricter remainder of
the line struggle of lines
twelve through fourteen and
strike line fifteen up to the
period.
On page four line five strike
and and insert in lieu there of
a comma okay the end let's hold
right there's everybody fancies
a ranking member tracking
Okay please go ahead.
On page four line seven.
After act.
Insert.
And one of whom shall have lived
experience in the foster care or
juvenile justice system.
On page six line seven.
After entity insert or any
person.
From the office.
On page six line twelve strike
review current systems to.
Insert whose parent guardian or
custodian is and that's a
substantive amendment to reflect
that it is not the child who
would be under investigation it
would be the parent guardian or
custodian.
On page seven line twelve.
After investigation.
Strike the remainder of the line
item on thirteen strike outcome.
And strike ninety.
And insert in lieu thereof
thirty.
On page seven line twenty two
strike recipients apostrophe.
And insert and move their of.
There.
On page eight line seven.
Strict.
The language address any
challenges accessing.
And and certainly there of
access.
On page nine line eleven.
After Department insert.
Comma the Supreme Court.
On page nine line seventeen.
Strike the word including.
After the COVID.
Page nine line twenty two
strikes substitute caregiver and
insert and Lou there of foster
parent.
And that reflects that the
children's code already includes
a definition for foster parent
that this bill had a substitute
caregiver.
On page ten line eighteen.
After improving.
In certain departmental.
On page sixteen line nine.
District substitute care givers
and certainly there of foster
parents.
On page twenty four lines five
through ten.
District seventeen in its
entirety its entirety which
reflects that we're no longer
asking for an appropriation.
And then the final changes to
remember the succeeding section
accordingly.
And many of these changes are to
to make this proposed amended
house bill eleven line up with
the Senate bill three seventy
three that's currently before
the Senate Judiciary Committee.
Great
thank you very much Mr back
thank you members first taking
time to go through that
let me go now to any questions
and and obviously questions
discussion on the proposed
amendment.
Some of.
Yes Mr Chairman representative.
once again just the instructions
that we got we first came in
this committee is that.
Anything substantive that we
wouldn't address it here is just
different because it's tracking
with a different bill out of the
Senate for what would be the
reason I know Representative how
do we we give her a pretty hard
time with her bill because there
is a substance that change to
the bill.
Will she carried thank you very
much of Madam there was a a
request made from members both
in the majority and the minority
to allow for more substantive
conversations to take place on
legislation that request was
made the very first day that we
I think.
With that along with the
committee's approach to taking
additional public comment and
other pieces I.
I don't think that this would be
different as we consider the
substantive thank you Mr chair I
just once again just seems to me
that
Maybe we because we're getting
used to this so we've.
Used a different measure
different time.
I know as we go forward I think
I think maybe it'll work itself
out I I appreciate that I as I
recall there was that request
that was made the very first day
that we began to hear bills
after we finished with our work
on the budget and I think very
quickly thereafter we've adopted
as you say within evolution an
approach to consider more
substantive conversations again
at the request of the minority
and some major members thank you
Mr.
Thank you other questions on the
amendment.
Care's a motion to accept second
from Representative Lujan let's
go ahead and this would be a
state can we have the roll on
this please.
Representative.
The.
This is on the amendment that's
been thank you very much for
this really just say this on the
amendment that Representative
part of me was proposed.
Representative Armstrong yes.
Yes.
Representative this.
Representative where yeah.
Yes.
Representative I.
Yes.
Shares of all yes.
Okay great so
thank you very much
Representative come you know we
have an amended bill thank you
Mr back let's go now for public
comment on house bill eleven
west are excellent
but let me go back is there any
additional comments that you
want to make then we'll go to a
public comment and a big thanks
to see our Attorney General
deputy Attorney General here
thank you very much.
So we do want to share that we
did strip the probation out of
this there is it's my
understanding there's two
hundred thousand dollars in
junior money to support this and
the Attorney General is here as
well it's my understanding that
that of the attorney general's
department will be absorbing the
rest of that okay thank thank
you very much for that thank
great to see you guys hear let's
now we're gonna go for public
comment so I start it if you
wish to give public comment on
house bill eleven please go
ahead and raise your hand yes
and we'll ask are excellent I
will go to first if there is
there are there comments in
opposition to house bill eleven.
Thing then let's go to support.
Thank you chairman and committee
members my name is Maryland back
and I'm the founder and
executive director of New Mexico
child first network a nonprofit
organization dedicated to
improving the lives of children
in foster care and those who
sent them for the past five
years we've been proud to stand
before your committees and
endorsed meeting for legislation
to bring forth an independent
and objective outside permanent
office of the child welfare
ombudsman or child advocate this
is a national best practices
demonstrated by the forty three
other states have a similar
office and it is were stating
that both Idaho and Louisiana
are currently considering this
legislation in our current
legislative term.
It is also particularly telling
that for one of the five worst
states according to Anne Casey
foundation's do not have a child
welfare advocate or ombudsman
but any Casey kids count data
book is an annual ranking of
states on sixteen key measures
and since the inception of the
kids count data book New Mexico
have unfortunately ranked forty
ninth or fiftieth the office of
juvenile justice and delinquency
prevention supports this model
and the American Bar Association
center on Stoughton and what
have actually written a book on
this model for the past two
years the legislative interim
committees have studied this
issue and this model as recently
as October when the fall when
that Colorado child on that's
been presented to your committee
much of what an ombudsman does
is so very beneficial for
complex system like what we're
seeing with our over burdened
and broken child welfare system
when larger system trends
identified in this office could
lead to swift timely resolution
and support one on one
assistance and I just want to
say that I did email your
committee including all of the
multiple reforms that CYFD has
attempted themselves for the
past four years so that is in
your email and if you have any
questions that site it so with
that thank you please stand in
support of this bill thank you
very much respect go ahead and
next please.
The okay
good afternoon Mr chairman
members of the committee thank
you for this opportunity to
speak my name is Allison
Endicott can units and I am the
legal director of advocacy Inc
we are the largest provider of
legal services for children in
CYFD custody in New Mexico and I
just wanted to ask you all to
support this bill
our organization if there is
anything we have learned over
the years is that CYFD cannot
police itself the only way to
affect meaningful change is
through independent oversight
transparency and accountability
and these will not happen for
within the department CYFD has
had ample opportunity to address
its H. issues which has resulted
in a toxic system of self
protection through retaliation
against critics and using
confidentiality as a shield.
This places children in harm's
way and has resulted in the loss
of critical resources needed to
help our families an independent
office using the on budgets
models used in forty three
states as mentioned by ms back
is a critical step in achieving
the level of accountability
needed to change our failing
system thank you very much for
your time thank you very much
miss communis okay now we're
going to go thank you Mr
Attorney General.
Good afternoon Mister chairman
members of the committee it is
not my usual practice to come
before the committee and stand
in support of a bill that was
just amended to strip out
funding for my office but I did
want to rise and support of the
office of child advocate I think
it's incredibly important I want
to make sure that every member
of the committee understands
that even without the
appropriation my office stands
prepared to help stand up this
office and get the reporting and
accountability that we so
desperately need when it comes
to protecting New Mexico's
children and I want to thank the
sponsor for bringing it forward
thank you very much thank you
very much Mr Tunisian.
Okay we're now going to go
online
we're going to go first to
Lucas Frank
Lucas for one minute whenever
you're ready please.
Yes.
Thank you for the time today my
name's Lucas I think I'm an
attorney and a license officer
here in New Mexico I rise and
support H. eleven which I think
represents I think the the house
has a choice to decide between
age eleven eighty six for sixty
one.
I I encourage you to about age
eleven which is a truly
independent oversight of
complaints filed against CYFD
I've emailed the reasons why we
love this referral and I is to
the committee but New Mexico is
asking its leaders are
meaningful and independent
oversight of complaints filed
against YFB age eleven by that
independent oversight the need
for sixty one does not and I
appreciate the time thank you
thank you very much right we're
gonna.
Thank you.
We're going to go now to
me to it's in the
the best bits any please for one
minute whenever you're ready.
Members of the committee my name
is Mike everything in a policy
manager little features
the intention of this bill we
are concerned that it is a
similar bill it could be for
sixty one children's and family
right act and we know that that
committee there has a there was
a committee of an impact on the
direct services providers and
tries part of that conversation
and as an organization that
works directly with impacted
families have often workers
across the state we do have a
question around our impact on
the Representative how many of
the leases of those that was on
the ground experience and in we
want to see the qualifications
of this person are they have off
orders what is there experience
across and what is the way IT
also working with tribes tribal
representation
and we should we really believe
that that person should have
extensive knowledge and
expertise and I have a level but
for system including various
communities tax and seventy as
well as delays.
In addition to their own houses
and we do appreciate intention
our community constantly is
asking how are we brought to the
conversation thank you thank you
very much.
Next we're going to go to Sallee
Bushire appreciate as Shelly go
ahead please for one.
Thank you Mr chairman members of
the committee my name is Shelly
move or and I'm the director of
the center to hear Advisory
Council and I have good news for
you because section thirty two
eight dash he was created by the
legislature in nineteen eighty
five to provide a permanent
schism for independent and
objective monitoring of the
children in the custody of the
fly at the one page
recommendation that you add to
this over the transfer of
resources and provision already
sent on this and it was really
good in the office will help you
get it up and running and it
just is extremely needed that we
needed it and that thank you
thank you very much Mr Kirk K.
finally we're going to conclude
our last person raised their
hand is Terry Cole Terry called
for one minute please whenever
you're ready.
Thank you very much members of
the committee my name is
memorable the president and CEO
for greater Albuquerque chamber
of commerce we believe that
external office one that is able
to investigate and reviews I am
fans and all the current in
state custody it is absolutely
necessary you're obligating
Mexico's leading and success in
protecting vulnerable children
we wish we didn't need a bill
like this I we're at a point
where in the independent agency
have the AG's office it is
perhaps the only way to rights
cages why performance
improvement when it comes to
safeguarding children from
highlands and endanger we should
be our highest priority and
arteries.
Thank you Mr chairman members of
enrollment thank you very much
miss okay that concludes our
public comment are there any
questions from the committee yes
there are.
We're gonna go in this order
members we're going to go to
representative elect Cruz
Representative Lujan
representative Allison and then
continue from there
Representative records please
thank you Mr chairman I'm not
clear about the funding
Representative can you explain a
little bit it seems like you
took funding out but that
funding will be necessary in the
future could you explain that a
little bit Mr thank.
Certainly so we had put in a
request for five hundred
thousand dollars in
appropriations and we have a two
hundred thousand in junior money
and the difference is is what's
the attorney general's office
office offered to support us
with sure if this bill is passed
there will be not sufficient
funding right out the gate to
put together this board.
Mr Chairman representative yes.
Thank you Mr thank you very much
Representative Cruz next
Representative Lujan then
Representative Allison
Representative of I apologize
not to Representative Lujan
please thank you thank you Mr up
thank you to sponsors and.
Turkey's General for we need to
do this work but it sounds to me
that regardless of legislation
that this this office is going
to be created is that correct
Mr.
Mr chair and and Representative.
Can you clarify are you asking
that whether this bill moves
through will this be created.
Representative Mr chair
representative I believe that we
require the bill to move through
for this office to be created Mr
chair
Representative which is based on
the testimony from the AG's
office I'm just asking for
clarification.
Mr chair and and Representative
I believe he's offering to
support this bill the creation
of this office.
Okay thanks for the
clarification appreciate that
the subject that's not my own
question.
so look at the summer in the
synopsis of the house bill
eleven and you know does is if
it's a big left and I can
understand some of the testimony
that we just heard regarding the
independent oversight that would
now be held attorney general's
office but I do have to note.
And you know
the significant issues
Register by CYFD FIR.
An understanding
A distinction of of this model
that also was was testified to
and how that works is as opposed
to what is already being done at
CYFD Mr chair representative Mr
chair and and Representative
currently there is not an
outside independent
advocacies a system for children
or families
associated with CYFD this would
be the first bill that provided
that.
Thank you Mr chair thank you
Representative but the so the
independent model that goes to
the R. twenty general's office
is that correct correct the
trip.
Okay so.
I mean I'm just reading here Mr
chair Representative the office
would be responsible for
reviewing CYFD is provisions of
services to children and
families receive complaints make
referrals operates a toll free
hotline investigate and attempt
to resolve complaints make
recommendations compiled annual
annual report subpoena witnesses
and other possibilities as
outlined in the bill is that not
happening at CYFD right now Mr
chair.
Representative Mr chair and
representative of not
independently.
So there is not an independent
office that reviews CYFD
concerns or complaints.
Mr Mr chair representative.
So this would be do duplicative
the only being done
independently at the AG's office
Mr chair representative.
Mr chair representative
I do not believe that it is
duplicating the services because
there is this is independent of
CYFD but I'm going to defer to
my experts.
Mr chair representative Lujan
two things first of all this is
not created within the AG's
office it is administratively
attached to the AG's office so
it is an independent office this
is administratively attached me
get support in terms of
overlapping staffing
administrative concerns the AG's
office as has stepped up to
provide the funding.
Right now for concerned children
and family members for children
there is the office of
children's rights which present
provides an internal process
through the office three CYFD to
address complaints by children
or on behalf of children but
that is done internally to CYFD
and ultimately stops with the
secretary what happens with this
independent office.
Is that I think it I don't think
in my experience I've seen that
there are real concerns about
perceived and real conflicts of
interest within CYFD for parents
and foster parents if you go
through the internal CYFD
process you are facing off
against a CYFD attorney who
for big decisions was involved
in that process goes through a
CYFD hearing officer who serves
at the pleasure of the secretary
and the ultimate decision in
that process is made by the
secretary is also not subpoena
power and so this independent
office has the ability to
receive those complaints
investigate the complaints and
report to see I T. on the
outcome of those complaints
what's found in that
investigation external to the
pressures of CYFD.
Mr chair again for clarification
so independent it's a contract
independent.
However the RP goes to set who
decides that Mr chair
representative.
Mr chair representative Lujan
that's that's outlined in the
bill so in the bill there is a
section for outlines of the
appointment of the state child
advocate to appointed by the
committee which is created in
section five which has nine
committee members who ultimately
make the recommendation for who
will be appointed as the state
child advocate for a term of six
years.
So it that that party got Mr
chair so it would be a six year
appointment and why is it a six
year appointment I don't see
secure appointment into many
situations Mr chair
representative.
Mr chair representative Lujan
that's the term that comes from
the model ombudsman act that
forty three other states have I
think that it probably has to do
with.
And as well as the governor that
it is independent from that
outside influence and and.
May proceed in different
administrations Mr chair
Representative see how we have.
Hard time keeping people on
their terms when the and of
appointments say if there was
someone appointed they the state
two years and then a new
appointment was made in that
person's appointment would then
start a six year appointment Mr
chair representative or with a
for bill the six year term of
the previous appointed Mr chair.
Mr chair representative Lujan I
would have to look at the
language of the bill I don't
have a clear answer for you
right now Mr chair move on to my
next question that's fine that's
just one of the things I haven't
seen how things are being run in
our state right now why bring
that question for Mr chair it's
nothing really concern here but
I just have I'm just trying to
get my my my head wrapped around
this and and not wanting to
duplicate things are already
happening to the state agency
that we have in place to do
these things and I understand
the concerns I understand you
know the the the type of
justification that you're
looking for through this
legislation I'm just worried
that this may cause more time
lapse or more
Mormon you should if you will in
and tracked trying cases and
when it all from what my my
perception is all goes back to
see why fifty in the end anyway
is that correct Mr chair
representative.
Mr chair.
Mr chair representative this
will be again an external
process from CYFD and so what
happens is if someone makes a
complaint this office they may
still make a complaint
internally to CYFD and this
office investigates resolved
that complaint on its own
outside of the pressures of CYFD
and there are real pressures for
frontline workers for foster
parents for children in the
system for workers in the system
and then they make a report on
the outcome of that both to the
complainant and fantasy Y. F. T.
so it is not duplicating any
efforts that are ongoing and
CYFD thank you Mr chair
representative I just said that
there could be two different to.
Investigations the same nature
if they're to complaints made in
both to the independent.
but some and and also to see
what days you could have the
same complaints going on at the
same time is that correct Mr
chair.
Mr chair representative Lujan it
would be two separate complaints
the subject matter may be the
same and there may be other ones
there may be a court procedure
in place there may be a.
Federal state it but you would
have different offices
investigating this office has
the power to subpoena witnesses
so that we can bring in
witnesses and would make it
would make a determination given
to the complaint and at the end
of the year given the CYFD Mr
chair representative there lies
my problem with this I want this
to be function I want this to
work I understand where this is
coming from and and believe me
I'm I'm I'm a hundred percent
and what you're trying to do
with their own lies a problem
you've there is duplication
impossible duplication and with
our court systems in the back up
and everything that our families
go through when they're in the
situations you can be trying the
same case in two different.
At the same time and and through
through different to different
games so to speak.
Is that not true Mr chair.
Mr chair representative Lujan
that is certainly a possibility
depending on where the
complainant makes the complaint
I.
As I said in in my experience I
think that and outside.
Objective independent
investigation will help not only
CYFD but certainly the children
who are not being provided the
services that they need I
understand that and I I full
full full heartedly will
understand I just want to make
some legislation if we're going
to be putting this much time and
effort into it it's it's going
to minimize those effects and
I'd rather see this be of help
through CYFD rather than our
Attorney General office for that
for that purpose or maybe the
end and not necessary not have
the AG's involved but for that
purpose alone that it can it can
cause that that that situation
to happen and I just have a
problem with that and I'd like
to see or understand or maybe
move to two way of fixing that
somehow but those are my those
are my questions is my name my
issues with this bill Mr chair
appreciate the time thank you
Representative Lujan next we're
gonna go to Representative Brown
than Representative Herndon and
ranking member Armstrong
Representative Brown please
thank you Mr chairman
Representative here neo and Mr
back thank you for being here.
Mr chair Chairman representative
as I was reading the bill I kept
seeing references to the
department and I was searching
for a definition of department
to know exactly which one we're
talking about so Mister chair
representative.
I assume we're talking about the
children youth and families
department my question is is
that correct and then also does
the children's code refer to any
department other than CYFD Mr
Chairman.
Mr chairman Representative Brown
in title thirty two a article
one provides the general
provisions for the children's
code where this this bill if
enacted into law would fall
under the children's code and
the definitions for that apply
throughout the children's code
unless defined otherwise and I
believe the third definition the
fourth definition is Department
and refers to CYFD so because
it's defined already and article
one of the children's code all
references to the Department in
this bill automatically referred
to CYFD and that is intentional
Mr chairman and Representative
and and Mr back so that was kind
of how I thought through it as
well but for anybody picking up
this bill without having known
anything about the children
because it was a little bit
confusing but I understand why
it's not needed Mr Chairman
representative.
I want I I was searching is is
reading the bill for a mission
statement about this new office.
And just curious if you could
point me to some place in the
bill where you think the mission
is to provide Mr chair.
Mr chair representative brown
but I think that the.
The mission statement I guess if
you want to call it there that
would be section six which
outlines the powers and the
duties of the office
which provides the duties of the
that were listed
Providing the duty to review and
determine policies and
procedures operated toll free
hotline best to gate attempt to
resolve complaints maybe decide
whether to investigate a
complainer for to another
agency.
Notify the complaint of the
intention to investigate update
the complaint on the process
work with relevant parties and
develop an implementation of
federal state and local laws.
Thank you Mr chairman
Representative Mr backs so that
that's that's kind of where I
landed as well but in particular
I was looking on page six is
section six of the bill page
six.
At item eighty two it's it's
starting at one twelve.
And this is the office shell and
then here's a sub to review
current systems.
To determine the extent to which
the department's policies and
procedures protect and enhance
children's personal dignity
right to privacy appropriate
health care and education in
accordance with state and
federal law so Mr Chairman
representative I.
I was really looking for
something to pop off the page
bike insured children safety.
I see you know I know to
children's dignity agree with
that right to privacy health
care educational those things
but I really wanted to see was
somehow this office is going to
help make children safer.
And maybe it's through this
process that that will occur Mr
chair representative Mr back but
I just wondered if there wasn't.
He needed there somewhere
perhaps you'd like to respond Mr
chair representative.
Mr chair representative brown
This bill is modeled on the
other forty three on buzz in
state and.
What happens in this bill is.
You don't want something so big
to swallow the roll and and so
this is not an end to the this
independent office is not there
to
to make policy or to or to drive
CYFD and tell it what tell us
what to do it's there to receive
complaints received concerns
from stakeholders at CYFD
independently and outside of
CYFD and determine whether they
protect children's rights
enhance personal dignity dignity
and operated toll free hotline
and so
these are specific measurable
identifiable tasks that this
office can do and make
recommendations to CYFD reports
on the outcomes of the
investigations and provide those
to CYFD so that CYFD can make
those changes if it believes
that they are appropriate and
and listening.
Mr Chairman representative and
and Mr back so.
I think with this bill this
house bill eleven is really
doing is setting up a grievance
process would that be the end up
in a nut shell health we could
describe it.
Mr chair representative brown I
don't think it's limited to
setting up a grievance process I
think that is one of the things
that that it focuses on
certainly the ombudsman outside
of just looking at children's
it children's rights and and
children's departments across
the country an ombudsman is a
general term for someone who
receives those kinds of
complaints there's thanks
ombudsman at Sandia national
laboratories who does that that
sort of process and so that is
one of the main drivers of this
but this office is broader in
that it does not only have a
dispute resolution process but
also reviews policies and
procedures operates a toll free
hotline if best practices and so
it is broader than that although
that is certainly a focus and I
think it's a correct focus
because having those complaints
in that dispute resolution
process outside of the system in
which those rights find some Y.
eight and a different
perspective on the concerns that
may not be addressed within the
department itself.
Mr Chairman representative and
and Mr backside thank you for
that answer
I I know from the fiscal impact
reports that CYFD responded and
said that this bill would
duplicate services and programs
already provided CYFD by the
office of children's rights and
that this administers the CYFD
previous process and that is
actually a concern that the lady
from Santa Fe just recently
right so I don't I'm not Mr
Chairman representative I'm not
troubled by that because I think
the process that we have right
now just for some reason isn't
really working and sometimes we
do need to watch dogs and gives
us a little more actual
perspective on not just the
problems that are occurring but
the the pervasiveness of the
process of the of the problems
that may be tied back to a
process it's not working.
Chairman Arafat but just a
couple more things I noted in
the bill that the office within
this is on page eight this is
section six of still I believe.
That the office would have a
partial it would have the
authority to so show to subpoena
witnesses to provide testimony
in cases.
And that's in which if a tele
your your your fidelity the
child has occurred so Mr
Chairman representative we we
have this discussion not that
long ago when the legislature
set of the state ethics
commission some people objected
to an officer HSD being able to
issue a subpoena of the thought
was that this is something we
usually go to the courts to do.
Process for getting a subpoena
and so at that when I read the
bill that kind of came back to
my mind and so.
I'm I'm not going to opine
whether this is a good idea or
not but it's did I just say I do
here I hope I did.
Thank you for.
but the idea that the office
could issue a subpoena it seems
in some ways it lacks the
safeguards or that justification
for getting a subpoena that we
normally would had if we had a
judicial process on that so I
just wanted to point that out
and then finally I just want to
say I I do support the bill
All right I I'm just beside
myself that that this problem
with the harm to children is
still happening and
you know we we should always
depend on a government agency to
solve our problems I think it
really starts in the home and in
the community and what children
are being taught and how they're
you know how to be treated so I
think this is worth a try hi I
appreciate Mr chair
representative that the care
with which the bill was crafted
I think even with amendments we
just adopted I think it's a very
very good start and I appreciate
very much all the.
Thank you very much
Representative Brown next we're
gonna go to Representative
printed.
Thank you Mr chair Mr chairman
presenters my first question to
you is when you were trying to
appropriate the five hundred
thousand dollars for the office.
This the office of the Attorney
General to put it.
Mr chair and Madam
representative weed we did not
we
I had worked for six weeks with
CYFD on another bill and quite
quite honestly Mr chair and
representative that bill even
though I I added a lot of input
into it I did not feel that it
went far enough and so this bill
itself was was dropped on the
very last day that we could drop
the bill.
So madam chair I mean the Mr
chair and presenters where did
to expect to have the five
hundred thousand house.
It as as I I said
we did we do have junior money
for this Mr chair and
representative
but
you know it may it may have been
my UP freshman ignorance when
when I went forward with this
bill.
Mr chair of the presenters of
the forty three other states
that are using this model of
ombudsman how many of those
basement offices our house
amendment turned into.
Mr chair representative for and
and I do not know the answer to
that.
Mr chair and presenters where
are most of these but then
offices house.
Mr chair representative turned
in I don't know the answer to
that and again this is not
housed within the that attorney
general's office as an
independent office that is
administratively attached and so
it will be alright I mean it it
it may well be physically in
there but it is not as if it
goes up to the chain to the
Attorney General the
administrative attachment
provides overlap for necessary
services administrative costs
that that fit into that overlap
but it is not a system it is an
independent system where it is
not going up to the Attorney
General for any others.
Thank you Mr chair members of
the committee I look at the
regulation licensing department
that there are several organ
agencies that are house within.
Regulation licensing department
that are administrative leave
yes and so I was just wondering
what your concept was when it
was first of when it was first.
Related and let me just ask you
Mr chair of.
Presenters how many employees
are you expecting in the
ombudsman office.
Mr chair representative turned
in I do not have the answer for
you on that I don't know the
intricacies of how that office
will be staffed or or lined up
what I.
What this bill is out at the
outset is the committee and the
chair in this bill goes into
effect in July of twenty twenty
four
in the in the in terms of that
time I expect that the that the
rules will be promulgated
pursuant to this act and then
address the staffing levels.
With that with what this.
Well my last question.
How did you know you need to the
five hundred.
Mr chair representative Vernon
My understanding of that is that
that is a procedure in the in
the legislature for junior
monies and and some amount of
money that that would.
Get get the ground running to
set up a committee to set up the
office and to yes to hire those
staff members within that budget
and so it my understanding is it
was a top down approach not a
bottom up approach meaning that.
Meaning that this office wanted
to be
fiscally conservative and fit
within that part.
Thank you presenters thank you
very much Representative turned.
We're gonna go to.
Representative Garrett than by
shared then Representative Lujan
for a second time Representative
Garrett thank you Mr chair I
just want to thank you
Representative and all the
divide diverse people who made
this I've heard from as an
educator I've heard from
principles I've heard from
advocates I've heard from foster
families who feel that this is
the step we need to take at this
time to address many of the
important things that have
happened so thank you for
crafting this and acting on it I
will be supporting thank you
thank you very much for percent
Garrett Representative Lujan for
second time please.
Thank you Mr chair I just want
to another just to clarify and
point there for got to mention
on the FIR page for the first
paragraph.
If the sponsor can respond to
this CYFD said the bill also
does not discuss or dress
federal confidentiality
requirements such as the health
information portability and
accountability act federal and
so forth could you address that
concern Mr chair.
Mr chair representative Lujan
there if there are two
confidentiality provisions in
this bill they fall in line with
protecting the information
within the children's code as it
is now protected healing section
is that it would allow the
office to see the department's
information it would make that
explicit to the to the point
that it's not now
it.
There's also I know circulating
in the house House Bill ten that
substantially revises
confidentiality provisions under
the children code to fall in
line with federal and state
requirements and this does not
in any way exempt.
The office of the child advocate
from those existing state and
federal confidentiality laws
that it must all always part.
Thank you for that Mr those this
is clarified I I was in of
several discussions regarding
this on other bills has of
listening to other bills but are
there any penalties or what
would those penalties be if any
of this information for to be
preached sicher.
Mr chair Representative Lujan to
my recollection is that it's a
misdemeanor
the to to violate the
confidentiality provisions of
the children's coats and I could
confirm that for you on page
twenty three line twenty.
that it is a excuse me it's not
a misdemeanor it's a petty
misdemeanor
that's.
Age twenty three line twenty
three twenty five.
Thank you Mr chair thank you for
that answer
I'm just a big person on the
confidentiality and and
protecting will normal
populations the at most I think
those are those are really low
penalties regarding the safety
and information regarding
families children and and women
and and and many other
populations that would be
involved for these cases so.
I know that would be a different
place to look at those penalties
but I just wanted to make
mention of that and and ask that
clarifying question as it's
addressed through the F. I. R. I
just think that this is you know
I I understand you know what
this is going to do and I and I
we're all looking for answers so
that we can.
Better protect again are most
vulnerable populations and I
know I commend you on the work
we've been doing with this and
all those advocacy groups that
are you know working with you as
well I just would like to see a
little a lot more coordination
with our own CYFD thank you Mr
chair thank you thank you
Representative Lujan we're gonna
go now to vice chair Texas.
Thank you Mr chair I don't
actually have a question so much
as a COVID and I want to piggy
back off of Representative
Garrett said as well as some of
the concerns that Representative
Lujan product and sort of go
back to your earlier point about
working with CYFD for several
weeks this session but also
flagged that the very first
iteration of this bill is
actually set to be introduced in
twenty nineteen
and so there has been
or there have been efforts for
the past five years to
collaborate and coordinate with
CYFD as well as within an
internal system and
unfortunately I think we've all
seen that that's not working and
so I really appreciate you
taking the lead on this I
appreciate the attorney
general's willingness to
be supportive and make sure that
we don't have any issues with
you know if there are gaps in
funding but really pleased to
hear that there is the two
hundred thousand in junior that
will support this program and
get it off the ground and so
with that I just wanted to once
again say thank you for taking
this on thank you very much vice
chair Dixon that concludes all
of our committee come at
Representative Mr back I just
really echo those comments and I
think there the external
stakeholders and thanks to miss
back in the child advocacy
network I think we really
appreciate the the.
Really deep collaboration the
the work that's been done and
it's great Mister deputy
Attorney General please I think
we want to very clearly F. of
the thank you for our Attorney
General and taking this up this
is something that in general you
pointed out will not be
overseeing it is independent but
that sort of support right from
the ground floor thanks speaks
volumes and is deeply
appreciated we'll go to.
Okay other at I want to go to
Representative Trujillo.
FOR a motion.
Okay the the staff there's a
motion to passed house bill
eleven as amended by
Representative Trujillo second
by Representative daylight Cruz
the city estate can you please
call the roll.
Hello.
Representative Armstrong yes.
Representative.
Yes Representative Lujan yes
explain my vote.
Representative one point.
Yes.
Representative launches.
Yes.
Yes.
I think yes.
Yes.
Percent of home please thank you
Mr chair.
Thank you again to the
sponsors of this bill I just I
just take concern Mr chair
representative when I see so
much information being put
forward by the agency that's how
responsible for.
For.
Doing this work already and I
just would ask that you know
that there is some really strong
effort to work with them and
make sure that we are uplifting
all you know all levels in all
of places where we are trying to
work and protect our children
and I understand what's going on
and there's you know the
coverage you get in the media
and everything that it is at
hand right now but I just really
take concern with with some of
these things that are going on
and I don't want to use up
resources or.
Duplicate or pilot you
Processes when we already have a
limited limited resources at
hand in our state and that's
that's really my concern were
allies so if we can.
Really sure of some of those
efforts I I I really appreciate
that because all hands on deck
when it comes to these efforts
thank you Mr thank you
Representative Lujan we're gonna
go next to we're gonna ask our
own Representative joy Garrett
to present Senate bill three as
amended.
and we see our friends.
Representative Garrett please go
ahead.
Your expert needs no
introduction but feel free to
introduce anyway.
will
Go ahead please thank you Mr
chair thank you committee
you should have a copy of the
bill but you don't have the
amended version I believe.
so on line twelve and thirteen
the Senate finance committee
amendment deleted making an
appropriation.
Because there's fifteen million
already in the budget.
Page three the lead section to.
Let me explain briefly Senate
bill three.
Which is the family income index
distributions flexibility came
out of a law passed in twenty
twenty one as a way to target
funding to specific high poverty
public schools based on their
household income and tax data so
instead of just coming out of
the at risk formula to the whole
district this targeted schools
which I think there's about a
hundred out of in the state who
got money
the other thing I want to say
that the bill does the initial
bill said that the money had to
be used in three ways divided in
thirds third had to be for
evidence structured literacy
interventions a third for
evidence mathematics instruction
and interventions interventions
no more than one third for
various other interventions that
are listed in the law this takes
away the one third one third one
third and let the local school
we're not just talking about a
district but we're talking about
a school select the
interventions and the way of
addressing their at risk
students however they decided
there's a list of about nine
ways they can use it I'd like to
have my it's my expert technical
witness John Cena deputy
director of the legislative
education study committee at in
remarks if we thank you please
be brief go ahead specific
technical assistance Mr chair
the pandemic thank you very much
we're gonna have for questions
thank you very much of them your
will is there anybody who wishes
to make public comment on Senate
bill three as amended.
Saying none I don't see anybody
on
online.
I do we have a Shelby Graeser
Selby.
For one minute whenever you're
ready please.
Hello.
Members of the committee meeting
the reserve with Mexico is our
children
only income and expenses of the
state funding.
Most of the schools that serve
our students from low income
families research estimates that
it costs about forty percent
more to educate a student in
poverty level has their affluent
peers we for the New Mexico
flexibility in SB three as well
as the continuation of that in
my internet access and ask the
committee to join us and support
you.
Thank you very much.
Okay I don't see any other hands
online let's go to the committee
are there any questions for the
from the committee.
That I go to vice chair Dixon
for a motion of the defense.
Thank you Mr chair I move that
Senate bill three is amended to
that's.
Is there a second second by
Representative Lujan okay the
city us they can call the roll
on the.
Yes.
Talk yes.
Yes.
Representative done through.
Yes.
Yes.
Here yes.
Okay bye voted fifteen to to
will tell centers they have in
the past thank you
Representative Garrett things.
Okay we have Representative
Ortez we're gonna ask our own
really are key voice on this
committee representative Sanchez
To also be there and great to
see Mr radius.
Some of them.
Okay chair yes Representative
Sanchez thank you please go
ahead presents House Bill five
forty five again feel free in
introduce expert even I
expertise to production.
Mr chair members of the
committee at thank you so much
for hearing eight this bill.
HB five forty five.
it's been a crazy day so this
bill it is companion bills to
that in the Senate right now I I
think
I will ask and I apologize my
mistake I asked vice chair Dixon
to move the house appropriations
and finance committee substitute
for House Bill five forty five
so moved.
As for effect there's a second
by Representative Satine Jana
members will go to discussion is
there any is there any
Any objection to adopting the
substitute for discussion.
I don't see and and this is a a
generic field so this is our
process I don't see any
opposition to opting this so
we're on the substitute chair to
please consider thank you Mr
chair members of the committee
so the a second commit that
community a second community
ditch infrastructure fund
already exists so what we're
doing with this bill as were
amending it to allow those as
secular as especially those in
the north right now and even
some in the south to use some of
the funds that are in that fund
right now to use those dollars
to do disaster relief mitigation
and restoration efforts it's
really really important what
Arsenio tells County right now
it also allows for those I think
is to tap into the fund to to
meet their cost share there's a
there's generous month their
genders monies in the federal
government right now but some of
them have a seventy five twenty
five cost here and our staff is
in the north don't have that
kind of money in their budgets
to meet that cost here so we
would allow a second to tap into
that and thirdly it takes away
the car share that exist right
now for infrastructure projects
of those funds are typically at
ninety ten we just did a big
infrastructure projects on my
second it costs like fifty seven
thousand dollars we did not have
fifty seven hundred dollars to
meet that match we had to go to
a foundation it took us a year
and a half to get those funds
and then by then they the costs
have gone up another ten
thousand dollars so it's it's
just out of reach for a sec yes
to meet their needs and with
that I'd like to turn this over
to my co sponsor Representative
Sweetser.
Thank you Mr chair
I don't want to understate how
important this fund is to
Anyone that
Deals with the second I know we
have a Mr Jonathan Martinez who
helps oversee the program it's
critically important.
Thank Representative Ortez says
Mr chairman
This money is put to use this is
what keeps our sectors running
because of the people that are
use them don't have the money
themselves to to do this project
so that's why this is so
important thank you Mr chair
thank you Representative Miss
Mister chair members of the
committee we do have an expert
victory as I know you all know
him good to see Mr is anything
like that before we go for
public comment Mr chair that you
happen to be here here to answer
any questions thank you very
much okay is there anybody here
who wishes to give comment on
house appropriations and finance
committee substitute for House
Bill five forty five.
Please go ahead we as great to
see a number of folks here let's
will ask folks limited to a
minute but please go ahead line
up in the middle and
We will go ahead and get
started.
Mr chair members of the
committee my name is Jonathan
Martinez at work with the
Interstate Stream Commission I
am the acequia program manager
so we I manage the A. C. I. F.
program again I stand here
generally in support of this
bill with well one of them one
issue that that we have and that
is the zero percent cost share
on construction projects we have
a little bit of concern with
that we already offer zero cost
your match in any of the
planning dollars that we have
available zero percent on the
engineering disaster recovery
stuff again no objection there
we think of zero percent is is
good there but on the cost share
for construction we feel that
there should be some cost your
obligation so that yes sick is a
little bit more engaged in the
process overseeing the
construction of the project just
verifying that it's built in a
cost effective manner and done
and done correctly for them
because it is you know they have
they have that financial
obligation to it so we feel that
there should be something
doesn't have to be ten percent
but something.
Thank you very much Mr Martinez.
Mr chair for the committee
members my name is Bronson corn
I'm here Representative in New
Mexico cattle growers we stand
and support yes ma'am of this
acequia bill giving money set
aside get it for infrastructure
work that needs to be done in
the event of a natural disaster
last year we saw catastrophic
not only fires but then we had
floods in on top of that and you
might wonder why can't growers
are standing up for water but we
have to have water to be able to
grow our crops what what we feed
our livestock so we're in strong
support I thank you very much
thank you very much Mr corn.
Good afternoon Mister chairman
members of the committee thank
you for this opportunity to
speak to my name is Julian Joyce
I'm with rocky mountain farmers
union and we stand and support
we do not have concerns about
the cost share
are a secular are different than
than private individuals having
skin in the game their political
subdivisions of the state that
do not receive their budgets in
a typical way on a run primarily
by volunteers these people are
very dedicated to the cause of
their secular as their skin is
already in the game with their
volunteer time and we feel that
this cost share funding is very
important for ensuring that we
continue to have agriculture and
parts of our state where we do
not have agricultural wells will
not have agricultural wells in
the future and do not have other
opportunities for maintaining
irrigation in those communities
thank you so much for this
opportunity to speak.
Thank you very much.
Good afternoon Mister chairman
and members of the committee my
name is Paula Garcia and I'm the
executive director of the New
Mexico sic Association we sent a
strong support of this
legislation yes they can
committee ditch fund is a
tremendous resource for our
community there are almost seven
hundred seconds in twenty three
different counties across the
state by adding to such recovery
this fund will be more
responsive to a second in their
greatest time of need and by
removing the cost sure makes the
fund more accessible to limited
resource communities we
definitely have skin in the game
this is our way of life we're
devoting our lives to this work
our livelihood and our way of
life and we urge you to start us
bill thank you very much for
your consideration thank you
very much.
On.
The chairman small and members
of the committee my name is
Lawrence Kight was and I'm here
representing the national Latino
farmers and ranchers and I'm
also a part of New Mexico for
neck Policy Council but we.
I I rents for thirty years in
southern Colorado and I was a
resident of two different the
second over there and we were I
I really understand you know
that that the second serve you
know sometimes it's really hard
for them to come up with money
for different things and
especially we just recently
met with a lot of people that
we're part part of the calf
canyon few hundred speak farger
and with the document U. S.
national Latinos and you know
when there's a disaster like
that I think it be really really
hard for them to come up with
you know that matching funds so
and so I think the this bill is
really important to to make sure
that things like that don't
happen thank you thank you Mr
guy goes.
Mr chairman and committee
members my name is Pam rhyme
here representing the New Mexico
food and agriculture policy
counseling from the table and
for all the reasons that have
been already stated we stand in
full support of this bill look
forward to passage.
Thank you very much history.
At thank you Mr chair committee
members for the record and
Roberts had unlimited I can't
say it any better than this
Garcia and our bill sponsors but
I would just add that the bulk
of our work is in rural New
Mexico in partnership with real
stakeholders much of that and
just take a communities and we
see first hand the importance of
investments in acequia
communities and infrastructure
those are investments in water
conservation and efficiency
their investments in agriculture
and food security and their
investments in New Mexico's
culture and traditions and so we
also support this bill thank you
thank you very much Mr Roper
okay I don't see any questions
online we're going to go to the
committee for questions first
we're going to Representative
Lewis sorry we have a list here
so we're going to go first
Representative Chatfield then
ranking member Armstrong and
then go to the.
Correct Representative
Chatfield.
My question was answered thank
you regum Armstrong.
Thank you Mr chairman thank you
for the presentation and and
bringing this bill do you know
how much money is in the fund
right now.
Mr chairman of Representative I
think that every year the begin
appropriation about two point
five million dollars into that
fund a CAF Fund please correct
me if I'm wrong.
Mr chair members of the
committee that is correct thank
you Mr chairman and so does the
fund.
I keep growing and what's the
total amount that's in there or
was visit expended every year.
Mr chair representative
Armstrong it's it's it's a it is
trying to be expended every year
and it's not a non reverting
fund and so the the remainder
does refer.
It does not reverse it does
revert thank you Mr chairman
thank you and
is this is there any language
well I was curious because this
is the cut a committee
substitute.
And so I was just curious why a
committee substitute what was
the substantive changes Mr chair
representative it's a more bill
of SB one force seven one
seventy six so in that bill
there was funding in there was
an appropriations and that bill
and there I think they're
stepping out language right now
I think maybe as we speak and so
Mr Chairman representative so.
So it's a committee substitute.
So I'm I'm not quite a yes that
the N. L. thank you ranking
member Armstrong and and this is
great for our all members and
and everybody listening this is
a a generic bill infrageneric
bills the those are have to be
adopted as that committee
substitute so it's it's sort of
the process that those bills
fall okay thank you Mr chairman
I just got that right as you
started explaining and so this
is exactly what you said a more
bill on the Senate side and this
is okay got it thank you very
much and is there Mr chairman is
there emergency clause in here
or is it just for anything and
everything and and why do we
needed if the funds already
there and we have access to it.
Man Mr chair and representative
there is an emergency clause on
this bill but there is an
emergency in the north right now
we don't have a way for our sick
as to tap into this fund the
existing fund to do recovery
projects to do disaster you know
mitigation projects you can't do
that right now with the monies
that exist so that's why we're
changing this bill in the in the
other really critical piece is
the cost share element so they
can they need to come up with a
cost share which actually is a
lot of a second out just they
don't apply for these funds even
though they need them because
they can't afford the cost share
thank you Mr chairman and and
Representative so is there a
sunset clause on here or is this
going to be forever.
Mr chair and representative I
think it's for ever and ever.
And then thank you Mr chairman
and and Representative I
personally would like to see a
sun set clause only because I
know there's an emergency right
now especially in the north
there's the black fire in the
south and I would like to see an
emergency clause on it because
this is just opening it up to
forever and ever amen but madam
Mr chairman and and
Representative that may not be
the best we should probably
reevaluate this.
To see if it's something that we
should keep doing you know put a
two year sunset clause on or
whatever the norm is just a
suggestion because I know Mr
Chairman representative that we
have lots of federal money going
that direction we have a hundred
million and and money could
coming from the state and so I I
think there's going to be help I
understand the the to to do away
with part of the matching funds
right now but I don't know Mr
chairman Representative if if to
just leave it wide open is the
best thing to do thank you Mr
chairman thank you
Representative thank you very
much thank you member I'm from
Mexico to go to a Representative
Lujan and simply whatever Lujan
please thank you Mr
And Sanchez I I'm always want to
you know stand up right away for
going to be helping our sickest
and our communities up there
just that from take off what
ranking member I'm trying to set
is that we have all these
funding in place already more
and more specifically the
hundred million dollars
That
Okay that bill that we heard
from one of the sponsors whose
here that already has made its
way out of the house what is the
portion for sake is out of that
fund that emergency fund Mr
speaker I mean Mr chair.
Mr chair so Anya secular as.
That are considered political
subdivisions if they filed a
claim with FEMA those are the
ones they're looking at so they
would.
have access to that money right
away and then they would
reimburse the state without the
money once it comes in.
that dollar amount Mr chair I
don't have the numbers Mr chair
thank you for that so that means
there's a lot of a sick is it
didn't didn't apply and cannot
now not revert in every version
type instance or ask.
For those funds maybe clear.
So they're going to be a lot of
the stages are left out and Mr
chair Mr chair there will be out
of that money if they didn't put
in a few months later thank you
Mr chair thank you Mr thank you
for that clarification
so.
Do we know I mean and with the
federal dollars and everything
that it that are in play right
now to and and and and all the
other funding mechanisms that we
have in just a revisions of how
we are looking to fund our water
projects I mean this is
something that you know we had a
water task force we had
everything in place.
What what additionally will the
stick is get from this Mr chair.
Sanchez Mr chair representative
I don't think they'll get
any more additional funding yes
Sir funding from from this
budget but we also have another
expert Mr chair in public Garcia
is it possible for Politiken
here come up here answers it if
there's any anything Sir I miss
Garcia I I think the questions
this this is a recurring amount
Representative and and expert
this is a recurring amount we're
not saying there's going to be
more in the recurring amount
correct correct Mr shivers a
committee that's correct there's
a two point five statutory
appropriation that happens every
single year but that's not we're
not adding or touching or
modifying the amount thank you
Mr chair thank you for
clarifying that that's that's
kind of what I was getting at so
Yes I mean I I think we're just
looking at the language in this
bill is that correct Mr chair Mr
chair representative that is
correct thank you I appreciate
that so much and
I would just mention to the
right if we were to put an
emergency clause that we would
be able to mitigate or address
if we have future emergencies
that we are projected predictive
believe going to be having
because of climate change so
thank you Mr chair thank you
sponsors for the thank you very
much Representative Lujan next
we're gonna have Representative
Montoya.
Thank you Mr chair.
Representative a Lujan
going down the same line of
thinking that I am that I am.
It is
We understand the FEMA funds
that are available for
disaster mitigation.
are able to be applied for and
the emergency the hundred
million dollars that we put out
in the budget was to allow for
immediate access of dollars from
the state that David would be
reimbursed by the federal
government
Mr
Mr chair and representative that
that's my concern is.
That was to help us get money
quickly to all these political
subdivisions that are affected
by the fire but.
The the idea was that to help
since this was a federal
disaster this is a federal.
This is a fire that got out of
control because the feds.
Did a prescribed burn in this in
the windy.
Spring and summer speaker and it
Mr chairman and representatives
I I think we're letting the Feds
off the hook here just a little
bit it should be there dollars
on this
going forward if something
happens like this again what I'm
concerned about is it would be
easy especially so we're since
we're saying there has to be no
match this fund has always had
to have a match to make sure it
doesn't get quickly depleted.
But in the future I see.
I can see the executives
potentially even if they're
federal dollars available going
to this fund immediately because
now there's no matches just
depleting state funds what we
could have federal funds that
which that should cover
potentially if it was a disaster
federal disaster declaration.
Mr chairman I answer I would
start there and there were a
couple I'm trying to do that
your questions but I mean it.
Picture here so I seconds right
now it use this money for a
variety of projects right and
now we're asking for is for them
to use those project that used
to be able to use those funds
for disaster relief but also
mitigation is sort of hazard
mitigation so that.
In case of another fire and the
inevitable floods that that
there's a second are ready
because you know I think is a
linger committees are in the
same area they're they're
working on they're working with
the land yet program to do
standing all these things are
are related so it's really
important that we're able to
allow the S. I guess to to tap
into this fund to to meet their
needs especially around the
ninety ten you and to also to
also take advantage and meet the
match for federal funds which
they cannot get if they don't
have the match I think that's
the real challenge here is that
that those funds are coming and
what they're able to match it so
when we and when we talk about
the projects you know there are
a lot of them are really really
big projects with some of them
are really small and even the
small ones there's challenges
for this I guess to to meet that
match so I I hear completely
hear you and I definitely don't
want to go into the down the
rabbit hole of of the fire again
because it's it's re live the
trauma but.
It's a it's it has been an issue
in the past it's an issue at
this moment and it will continue
to be an issue that a second
cannot take care of their
critical water infrastructure
the way they the way they should
be able to so so
madam chair and representative.
I guess I would've been more
comfortable with this of the
emergency language of been left
out of it.
Because then it would have been
for medication problems and but
with for me it's like we're
going twice at the same because
it's even mentioned
that because of the the fire and
the just kind of justification
for this and and we did the
other for that reason.
I'm just worried that the
purpose of the fund that it
starts to get depleted every
year without the match one of
things about the match is it
does help.
Does help maximize the number of
projects that can be done so you
get rid of the match and it
it'll get depleted and and and
frankly.
I don't so I think we'll lose
the multiplication of projects
because there's no match so I'm
I'm conflicted on this because
obviously we know what happened
in the north we know the need is
there right now.
But then putting this language
in.
For for for perpetuity does
bother me is as it does ranking
member Armstrong so I I I I'm
I'm concerned that I don't think
I can support this as it has
written.
Because I I now I see the fund
being depleted every year.
It's it's it's a concern.
And madam chair Mr chair
representative thank thank you
for that I mean I think the us
against would love nothing more
for the fund to be double or
tripled
that's in we we would love more
funding for that but but what
we're seeing is that a second
can't even apply for projects
and I'm on time I'm glad you
talked about the new because
FEMA doesn't work in all cases
right it's not it's not for
hazard mitigation you before a
fire which is what I think is a
really trying to do you know
might be preemptively ensuring
that there are some kids are
safe and and working well and
I'm happy to pass on Mr chair
representative Montoya the other
thing to know is that this fund
is not specifically for disaster
recovery in and of itself this
is for a wide range of the state
you projects the group the
reason why we would want to say
yes to go through trying to
apply for money for this fund
for suicide and instead of going
through state capital outlay is
it these the if this fund
insurers that they are fully
vetted and shovel ready and so
you said you thank you so
ciation others are really
pushing for steak is to go
through this source of funding
so that they are able to ensure
that we can get those projects
completed and done the other
reason as far as the costs are
depleting the fund right now
with that with the two point
five million dollars a year that
a statutorily comes to the fund
through the irrigation potential
works fund if funds about ten
projects even if the cost share
were to apply to every single
projects the only thing that
would happen is that would fund
nine projects instead of ten
projects and so it's it's it's
simply a matter of how many
projects get funded but again it
opens it up to state yes the
otherwise would not be able to
access the this fund for really
what are really critical
projects that may or may not be
for disaster recovery we believe
that adding that is us recover
language into stature right now
is important it as
Representative or yes that for
the case of future emergencies
that may come up that we have
access we're we're not lucky
enough to have a one million a
hundred million.
Dollar appropriation that
Representative Sanchez was able
to get across the finish line or
other types of federal funding.
Thank you Mr chair and
representative
would you be amenable I'm not
here but on the floor
potentially that
for language that if you're.
If you.
Our.
qualified.
For federal disaster relief
funding that you apply for those
first and not go after this fund
yes because it doesn't seem fair
to their seven hundred second.
It doesn't seem fair.
That when they're looking for
regular.
mediation.
Issues that.
Especially if there are federal
funds available.
In in a in a potential fire that
is a disaster is declared and
their FEMA funds available it
doesn't seem like it's fair.
Unless there is a provision that
they apply for those funds if
even if they took him out of
this out of this fund but they
be paid back by the.
the FEMA funds if they're
available this seemed it just
doesn't seem fair.
For all of the second as if if
there is a fire which W. fire
again they'll be then flooding
they'll be.
And that that that that whole
fund could be depleted.
I I want to take it to a second
if there's a if if there's
enough of a problem at that
point but if there's federal
funds available now or in the
future should be applying for
those funds rather than
depleting this fun and I and I
don't know what that what the
answer would be and I'm not
trying to to figure it out here
by the time we hit the floor as
much conversation I've heard
already I I I would assume.
That there's probably going to
be some sort of an.
A request.
to the sponsors to at least
consider that so I mean we don't
want.
This funds for a specific
purpose and it has been and
making it too broad I think can
make it become depleted too
quickly and that is a concern I
have.
so Mister speaker and and and
and and Mr Chairman I try to
give you a promotion I try to
give you a promotion twice at
least today thank you.
Mr chairman and representatives
of what.
For this how does the
application process change or
how do we make sure that it
doesn't get depleted two quick.
Mr chair representative would
you like to answer that and and
I see this Garcia whose miss
Garcia who is also Interstate
Stream Commission or if you want
to it having gone through the
application process pre very
good question can you sort of
walk us through what we would
see chance here.
It's important to continue.
Yeah.
For the engineering.
Two thousand and four.
There's there's Sen protections
in place to make sure that the
fund is at the.
And that's.
And.
The way.
The guidelines.
Covered
in that twenty five.
Our innovation is done.
Directed towards the exit.
Assistance program that is
before even coming to this
program.
Back the way that the Interstate
Stream.
It does cost.
This this program has.
Resources wisely
and this this bill was intended
to provide a little more I.
Thank you and thank thank you so
much Mr Burciaga thank you Mr
chair I am I probably gonna vote
against this today and like to
talk to offline about this
doesn't mean it's my vote on the
floor but I'm just concerned
about that I want to note the
guard rails are because and this
this is not anti a second this
is how I'm worried about it
being fair to all the secretary
just thank you Mr chair thank
you Representative Montoya we're
going to Representative
Pettigrew than Representative
Brown the representative Garcia
and then back to Representative
Chatfield.
Representative please thank you
Mr chair and thank you
Representative for.
Your legislation.
The majority Mr chair of my
questions have been asked and an
answer to some level the
government set through listen to
the rest and decide what to do
thank you Representative
Representative Brown please.
Thank you Mr chairman I think I
can be brief on this one.
representatives the the bill
title mentions amending the law
regarding the infrastructure
fund.
To allow for certain things and
kosher requirements.
The way I read Mr chairman
representatives to contradictory
I think it talks on page two.
At point nine that money in the
phone and this is existing law
Mr chair is money in the fund is
appropriated to the Interstate
Stream Commission to and I'll
just kind of do the subject in
the burbs provide funding for
seconds and Community ditches
and.
Match or meet culture
requirements of other state and
federal funding programs so that
seems to be the standard here is
that money is used for matching
our meeting.
Mr chair representatives and
then in subsection C. on my
twenty one it now says that the
Interstate Stream Commission
shall.
Develop a guard like secretary
of for funding eligibility and
then my twenty five provided
that no local cost share shall
be required so it seems
contradictory I think Mr chair
there's probably an explanation
but the bottom line is this does
remove the caution requirement
in my concern.
Mr chair representative is is
that there are some of staff
using community ditches that
probably can't afford
to do some cost share but this
takes away that requirement
altogether and in that respect
Mr chair I think the better way
to approach this might have been
to have a waiver allowed so with
some waiver language that says
that at the match requirement
could be waived under certain
circumstances and what we've
done in past bills for
transportation projects for
example Mr chair is say that the
local government has to put up
five percent and then there's a
hardship waiver in addition to
that and that way would be sure
we're capturing those
organizations that can afford to
do the cost here so Mr chair
representative if you would like
to respond I'd appreciate that
thank you Mr chair
representative so I want to
Representative first refer to
part see that provided that no
local cost share shall be
required this is in direct
reference to the Interstate
Stream Commission is ninety ten
program ninety percent of the
costs are covered by the I. S.
C. ten percent are covered by
the local yes at the the local
I. second yes I get that
supplying for the funds and what
we found is that that has been
the ten percent has been onerous
impossible and it makes sense I
guess not apply for that funding
infants dead they come to me and
others I imagine for capital
outlay funding for you to to
meet their needs not for the
cost share of for the entire
cost of the project when there
isn't already part of funds that
you deposit money that that
exists and I'm like I'd like to
turn it over to Victor for the
rest of the to address your
other is that the other
concerns.
Mr chair Representative Brown
you know that's that's exactly
the crux of why we're bringing
this forward is there are so
many I think yes that cannot
meet that ten percent cost share
that's been set as a standard by
the I. S. C. these are as
Representative Ortez began of
her testimony saying that you
know these are very unique
situations where their political
subdivisions of the state they
don't have the resources to meet
to meet the match requirement
which is why we're bringing
forward this bill because we
want to make sure that No
acequia is discouraged from
looking for through this fully
vetted process of getting
funding for their projects
because of this culture.
Thank you very much I I
understand perfectly what you're
saying your testimony is been
very strong about in the second.
Doing a project that I still
believe Mr chair that by saying
no local cost share shall be
required it does allow some
slippage shall we say it
regarding some groups could
afford to carshare gets them off
the hook to do so so for that
reason I may be voting against
the bill make up my mind in a
minute thank you Mr chair.
Thank you very much
Representative Brown gonna
representative Garcia I'll have
a couple questions and we'll go
to Representative Chatfield for
second thank you Mr chairman
thank you Representative for
this bill you know I came in
late because I was on the Senate
side but the.
It seems to the conversation is
pointing more or more The New
Mexico because of the fires and
then disasters it had and that I
understand that quite well
All they need to do is make sure
this fund that everybody of us
take a New Mexico have a fair
shot at the money and I know
that the the northern part of
the state is been
We can cannot for more of a
disaster with the that you'll
what are we going to do.
Or if you can answer it to make
sure that all the state can have
a fair shot at this.
Mr chair representative Garcia
that that's a great question and
you know and I just because the
normal thing is our up here
doesn't mean that.
We couldn't we couldn't get
Representative small the stand
over here to sit over here with
us but I'm sure that the record
I was not invited.
And for the record Mister chair
I miscellaneous so.
Representative Garcia posters Mr
chair representative.
In order to get there there's no
question in my mind that this is
for all the just like yes it
just so happens that we're you
know we're asking right now to
amend this with yeah I think
with the intention also of
knowing that I think is all over
the state are going to be
dealing with this issue as we
move forward but I I don't know
how many what what the
geographic ranges of us thank
you projects but I I imagine
that the I. S. C. is is using
their guidelines insuring that
there's geographic distribution
but.
Perhaps Mr chair representative
exit work of that Mr chairman
and Representative I understand
the needs of new of New Mexico
and that's well warranted you
know but at the end of the day
you know if there's a
reoccurring money we need to
make sure that everybody has a
fair shot at.
With that Mr chairman of the
twenty percent thank thank you
very much for some Garcia
Representative representatives
and and
Mr is a couple of quick
questions so first.
Yes and we're gonna go to
Representative Chatfield for a
second time no no
first.
This the the annual amount that
comes into this fund statutorily
is two point five million
correct Mr chair representative
this occurred Mr chair yes and
so it's it's not going to do
this legislation doesn't change
that this to be two point five
million that flows in every year
and is ranking member Armstrong
pointed out whatever of that two
point five million that's used
that is not used during that
year that will flow back out of
the fund that reverts.
Okay and so representatives and
Mr ray as we.
In FY twenty two I think I was
told and I asked Mr Abbey for
confirmation FY twenty two how
did none of the two point five
million dollars that was set
aside was used for the acequia
is that accurate.
Okay that's the fun we saw
Mr Representative I think.
There's I think it's very
helpful for us to know how much
has been spent so far in FY
twenty three I'm curious we.
but my read is that this fund
this doesn't change our fiscal
exposure the state still two
point five million every year
this doesn't change the cap on
how much we can cost share that
still the same I think it's been
two hundred twenty thousand
someone there the same technical
advising stays the same.
But we have examples of where at
least some perhaps all of this
fund have not been used in
recent years even though the
need has been very wide is that
correct Representative Ortez and
Mr Abbey.
Thanks to have.
And just to remind sorry Mr
Abbey please turn off your phone
thanks this rabbit please.
Got it got it.
Okay that I I appreciate that
clarification
it's finally Representative is
Mr ray as there are us whether I
think is or community ditches
those occur across our state
those are not limited to one
geographic region is that right
Mr correct okay and so this will
make it easier to apply for
these funds
For everyone across the board I
think it'll be important for us
to monitor if this moves forward
what that uptake is but we we
can move this bill today because
it does not create an extra
financial liability for the
state and makes administration
it changes the administration of
a program.
Okay thank thank you for that
we'll go back to Representative
Chatfield for second time
please.
Thank you Mr you know the first
time I did speak because like
quit reading been answered but I
want to for the first time in
should on my time here for
sometimes you just been around
too long I think that
all of public interest remember
this is speak to this but this
fund rate of two point five
million dollars a year.
And it is the aggregation works
construction fund.
So for many many years it didn't
go to the deal with their nation
works in construction it then go
to the bank is it just was
absorbed to make up the
shortfall in the state engineers
budget is that not true if you
agree with me shake your head
yes.
It just made up some shortfalls
in the budget and so.
Representative Stansbury myself
a few other said we are Tara
this thing just give Roberts the
most wrong.
Of funding in the state of New
Mexico it should go to be used
by the US state kids by
Community ditches for irrigation
works conf and construction
right because this year K. who
works in construction fund so
that happened a few years back
then it didn't get spent right
because it will everybody was
used to it be in the lord this
is my story I guess the way I
feel it happen in the.
Mr chair thank you
Mr chair of politicking do you
want to add anything to that.
Mr Chairman Representative
Chatfield I think you're correct
we've been around a long time.
but the the the are COVID as
well well appreciated about the
purpose of the fund the
irrigation works construction
for.
She works and doing planning
investigations
and and it has been used for
irrigation works including a
second as part of the issue
budget but in in two thousand
eight because of a budget
shortfall the legislative sure
legislature started tapping.
at the time we were told it
would be a temporary and when
the economy bounced back to the
the.
I think that's that's probably
part of it the gentleman to and
I just wanted to affirm that in
in twenty nineteen when this
bill was enacted there was also
a four.
That carved out partner cation
works construction fund Inc in
the statute.
Directed two point five million
dollar recurring appropriation.
In prior years there had been a
year two year appropriation.
So so this is however it stands
now in in fiscal year twenty two
that was it was not spent
because it was in.
Guidelines are still being
written but in fiscal year
twenty three
there is.
Mr chair it pays out as you said
the same amount every year it's
never going to deplete the the
other fund because it paid out
less than the interest off of
the irrigation works fund in its
it can rightfully needs to go to
irrigation works
Thank you Mr health thank you
very much Representative
Chatfield and a reminder of of
your extensive work across a
number of areas okay I don't see
any other questions we're going
to go to Representative Sanchez
for the motion and we're gonna
go to Representative Chatfield
for this.
All
right thank you very much and
seconded by Representative
Chatfield the city our state can
you please call the roll.
Health.
Representative are.
Pass.
Representative fox yes.
Representative.
Representative capital yes.
Representative drive.
Yes.
Representative.
Yes Representative Lujan.
Representative one point.
We'll take it.
Know what I like to explain more
about.
Yes.
Yes.
Yes.
Care small yes Representative
Brown to explain your vote.
Mr chair thank you I wanted to
be a yes on this bill I just I
still can't get past the fact
that there's no match required
of those who could afford to pay
one thank you thank you very
much Representative Pettigrew
please.
Thank you Mr chair and and while
I don't there are things with
the bill that I don't lie.
Their discussions I need to have
between now the house floor but
primarily I do not like the fact
that didn't have a sense of the
day thank you thank you very
much Representative Pettigrew
okay you have a do pass thank
you very much
for your time
we are now a committee that
concludes our business for today
right ahead of the fourth so
we're adjourns case.
