I thank you for your.
Yeah I'm here.
Great thank thank you very much
Okay I have a great I think
where we are on the web we are
here with a quorum members you
can see we're movin house bill
four forty nine first it's great
to see our own representative
Allison representative Duncan of
course secretary there as well
Representative Allison please
start us up on house bill four
four nine.
Thank you Mr chair in thank you
for moving the self.
Of.
House bill four four nine the
best description is in the title
of this bill and that is
revising eligibility for
assistance to displaced workers
and declaring an emergency and I
would like to introduce my
expert witness secretary of
workforce solutions department
so return there and then my co
sponsor Representative Martin
Duncan.
Thank you very much thank you
Representative Representative
think in anything to add in the
madam secretary would love to go
to you Mr.
Thank you madam secretary thank
you Mr chair members of the
committee with a brief overview
be
great at so Mr chair the energy
transition act passed in twenty
nineteen and it created a three
separate funds to help
communities after power plant
closes one for displaced workers
one for economic development and
one for issues specific to
Indian country the closure of
the PNM San Juan generating
station and Westmoreland mining
for the New Mexico was the first
closure that was covered by the
act of the workforce solutions
department is in charge of one
of those funds the displaced
worker assistance fund and this
bill expands eligibility for the
displaced worker assistance fund
by taking out the requirement
that limits it to workers who
have been laid off in the past
year this is important because
the layoffs after this project
began as early as twenty twenty
of the funds were not available
at that time and we don't want
those workers to miss out on
assistance and I guess so at
this point we have to receive
twelve million ninety three
thousand five hundred dollars is
our share of the PNM twenty
million dollars as a result of
the ETA we are seeking language
appropriation so that we can
begin to spend that money in the
budget bill and if this bill
passes that will be able to do a
significant outreach to the
community to make sure that we
provide every were displaced
worker who is eligible for this
money and I get them the support
they need with that will stand
for questions thank you very
much that secretary thing or
some awesome thing
Representative and can just one
quick question before we go to
our audience the to confirm
there is no fiscal impact to
this legislation correct.
Mr chair that's correct okay
great thank you very much okay
now we'll go to the audience is
there anybody who here who
wishes to speak on house bill
four hundred.
Please come on a.
Thank you Mr chair members the
committee John Lipschutz with
The New Mexico federation of
labor
we stand in strong support of
this measure and think the
sponsor for bringing it up when
the EPA was being proposed you
know obviously it's a great
piece of legislation
home labour got on board with
that piece of legislation for a
number of reasons but one was to
make sure that our our displace
workers from shutting down the
power plant we're going to be
taking care of that they were
going to have of funding to help
find new jobs to get them
through this period of time
while they were in between
employment and the fact that
this funding has not been made
available to most of those
displaced workers is we feel
maybe unintended
violation of a promise that was
made so to have this legislation
out here to make that promise
hold to make sure that these
workers are taking care of we
strongly urge the committee to
support this thank you very much
thank you.
Thank you.
Thank you madam Mr chair.
my name is mark strand I'm the
president of the central New
Mexico labor council and we
stand in strong support of this
we would like to see the workers
just receive what was promised
to them and what was due we shut
down the plant they are now
trying to provide more
employment inclement elsewhere
we were promised this and it
just hasn't come true so we
would just like to see the
promise fulfilled thank you very
much thank you very much for
strands.
Census great to see.
Mr chairman members of the
committee Lois Sanchez I'm the
executive director of the public
service company of New Mexico
executive director of government
public affairs excuse me and
worst we stand in support of the
bill we think Representative
Allison as well as a the
secretary for bringing this as
you know we were involved in the
ETA work in the past and our
available also to assist with
any questions that may come up
about that but we support this
in particular because we do very
much recognized the need in the
four corners for
for the our.
displaced workers and we believe
that this is a very important
change to make sure that they
are able to receive
the funds that are most
necessary for their continued
welfare so thank you thank you
very much for census okay I
don't see anybody else in the
audience Sir anyone online we
have one Santos Priego Santos
for one minute whenever you're
ready please.
And members of the table with an
axe.
Orders of members many of whom
are related I did.
The our lack of we saw this
forecast unanimous of you have
some of those thank you very
much thank you very much Mr
Greg.
Okay are we don't see more hands
on line I think so for members
will go to Representative
Montoya Representative Allison
for the motion when we get there
we're gonna go to questions now
first to Representative Cruz.
let let's do this let me thank
you I'm gonna go first
Representative Montoya and then
we would be representing the
crews of someone to.
Thank you Mr chair and
representative Allison thank you
for coming forth myself and mark
and asking us to to support this
measure for folks who don't know
mark.
Duncan Representative Duncan is
the more of the committee one of
the communities very affected by
this mass of the town of
Kirkland
myself and
Representative Allison both
worked at the of coal mines
which are also affected this
wasn't the money shut down when
the plant shut down.
And so this affects a all of
those workers as well and I I
know that I I put in thirty two
years there and I believe that
Representative Allison has a few
more years on me working there
at the money so.
Mr chairman and and
Representative Representative
Allison how may work how many
years did you work at the the
the the coal mines Mr chair
representative thirty seven and
a half years.
C. got me by five by five years
so Mr chair and and
Representative Allison
this is something that really
all we're asking is that the
funds that are meant and were
Is to be set aside for this
purpose just be distributed is
that correct Representative
also.
Representative would refer the
question to my experts.
Hi Mr chair and representative
monthly at yes at together with
the eight appropriation language
in I. H. B. two this will allow
us to distribute the funds.
Thank you Mr chair I just a.
I want everybody to to know that
this is how it's supposed to
work as far as monies are set
aside and then we get them
distributed I I think it's
unfortunate
that we had displaced workers
even though we knew it was
coming and the fund
distributions I didn't start
taking place at the moment that
the workers were displaced so
that's why I believe on the
house floor we need to make sure
we get that
emergency clause we need to have
enough folks to make sure
emergency clause is in place
because it the the funding to
start building distributed as
soon as possible thank you Mr
thank you very much
Representative Montoya
Representative Cruz thank you Mr
chairman and thank you
representative for bringing this
bill what is the length of time
that the fund will cover.
Mr chair of Representative dela
Cruz the funds it is available
indefinitely but our plan is to
just identify the displace
workers who are eligible and
distribute the money as quickly
as possible in the fund can
remain open to receive
additional contributions
appropriations federal funds and
then this could be distributed
over time.
Thank you Mr chairman our.
How many how many workers are we
talking about.
Mr chair representative dela
Cruz at with first estimates
came out the number that we
heard pretty frequently is about
six hundred now only about two
hundred and forty are currently
on unemployment benefits and
that can be for variety of
reasons so what we would do and
and also we know that good
portion of them are going to be
affected by this bill in other
words they'll become eligible
because we take out the one your
limit so we're looking at I
think a minimum of three fifty
and a maximum of six hundred
thank you Mr thank you very much
for percent of the cruise
representative Garcia please.
thank you Mr chairman
Representative Allison just
Jared how many people for this
fun not coming out of in the
proper manner that it should
have come out how many people
drive housing housing and cars
and so forth you know.
Mr chair representative Garcia I
do not know but having attended
the community meetings and
hearing a lot of first hand
stories of difficulties I know
it's been hard for these folks
to have to.
Mr chair of I'd like to refer to
my.
To co sponsor to answer that
question.
Thank you Mr chairman and
representative as the more I can
tell you that I've had many many
discussions with people that are
in our in our community we're a
small community but I've had
many discussions and and two or
three things they all mention is
more one I have to look at a
state I'm gonna have to either
move somewhere within the state
if I can find someone move out
of state in order to get to to
get and find employment and then
the second thing that happens is
is they say my kids are now
going to be living with my
parents and my grandparents to
go to school here while I move
out of state so that I can
you know make a living for a
family.
My.
My frustration is some of these
people lost their jobs a couple
years ago and they're still
struggling and still working out
of state and so all of their
skill set is gone.
And and or maybe Dawn if this
isn't it if this isn't done and
so there have been I I don't
know the exact amount but
there've been people of.
Representative you know.
In requests from the power plant
closed on in requests we have
the same basically the same
issue.
It's very unfortunate Mr chair
of.
That is a state the fund we're
now located sooner.
And maybe we could have
prevented some of those people
moving whatever they have the
one channel your house for your
car or whatever you can get it
back anymore and Mister chair
probably most of the minute up
there in the age of.
By a little bit younger myself
probably warm Strouse we want to
see maybe and if your house Mr
Allison at this point you can
get it back you know because
you're too old to start all over
again you know these are my
concerns the you know these
things have been addressed a
long time thank you thank you
thank you very much
Representative Garcia okay I
don't see any other Mr chair of
two and two Representative
Garcia I'd like to share a
narrative that I asked the
the local management the local
union leadership to give me some
information I'd like to share
than what please provide up to
the okay he says the first lay
off of thirty two west more than
minor student and now shut down.
Of San Juan generating station
was on November the second
twenty twenty.
Westmoreland inform the union on
February the fifteenth twenty
twenty two that one hundred
ninety four employees were
eligible for the severance in
training pay out of these thirty
two minors around twenty two.
Laid off miners receive the
severance and training money on
or around April the fourth the
union does not.
Does not know what the
individual amounts of the
severance or training funds that
were paid out due to each laid
off minor by Westmoreland.
Ten of the miners were recalled
back to work under the
collective bargaining agreement
in February of twenty twenty one
these ten employees being
recalled did not receive any
severance or training pay out
the ten recall miners who were
eventually laid off again will
have their severance or training
pay paid out significantly
reduced I'm sharing this because
I want the panel to know what
our constituents want through it
goes further to say because of
the low you seniority and the
first lay off of October of
November the second twenty
twenty.
The low probability of continued
employment in twenty twenty one
thirty hours the miners resigned
from their employment to seek
work elsewhere due to the
projected shut down of San Juan
generating station in twenty
twenty to an additional thirteen
hourly members resigned to seek
employment elsewhere due to the
shutdown of San Juan generating
station on September the six
twenty twenty two thirteen our
the miners were laid off on
October third twenty twenty to
thirty eight our new miners were
to be laid off ten of the thirty
seven at their employment
extended until December of
twenty twenty two on November
seventh eleven are the miners
were laid off on December first
twenty twenty to thirty seven
miners were laid off and on
December the third twenty twenty
three the ten extended minors
were laid off the number of
miners still employed for
reclamation work is currently
forty four with this number to
drop to thirty eight in twenty
twenty three so we can just
imagine what these families have
been going through so this would
be a very very welcome relief
when we release these funds to
the.
Thank you very much
Representative Allison thank you
for that thank you
representative Duncan madam
secretary
with that I don't see any other
questions we're gonna go to
Representative Montoya for the
most Mr chair before we do that
I'd like to give the floor to my
co sponsor to support I wanted
to say.
So this year I do have us short
of question is more about the
process okay so Mr chair this
price for the secretary ma'am
secretary
The money's in that is there is
that economic development does
the bill specifically.
Describe how the money will then
how how workforce solutions will
then distribute the money how is
that I'm just I'm just process
question Mr chair representative
monthly and their three funds so
the twelve million dollars for
displaced workers as is
currently with our department so
we are currently working with
PNM in Westmoreland to get their
full list of everyone who was
displaced going on the way back
to twenty twenty we'll do one on
one outreach many of these folks
we've already met with to do
career counseling to connect and
training opportunities to help
them get unemployment benefits
we'll do a series of you know
media outreach of in person town
halls and one on one connections
so that we make sure that we
find everybody and then our
initial payment amount we're
we're thinking is that twenty
thousand so that if there if we
do hit that sixty of six hundred
people maximum that we hear make
sure that we cover all the
workers if their remaining funds
after that if that and if that
new total number of workers
turns out to be smaller than we
can do additional rounds to
supplement.
Thank you very much for someone
to it thank you again
Representative and secretary
Representative Montoya will go
to you for the motion
Representative Allison for the
secretary thanks chair I moved
to pass on house bill four forty
nine with the emergency clause
with the emergency clause
Representative Allison said.
Okay and we do that order
because of course you're at the
witness table
okay then let's go ahead will
ask for the role on this but.
Accent yes Representative
Armstrong.
Yes.
Representative up yes.
Representative Brown yes
Representative Chatfield is.
Yes.
Representative Garcia yes.
Representative yeah yes.
Representative Harkins yes.
Representative condominium.
Yes.
Representative Sweetser.
By Terry Dixon yes.
Chair small yes.
Great thank you very much
Representative sect thank thank
you Mr.
Okay members
we're we're getting a new
substitute for House Bill five
fifty Representative Garrett can
we go to you for house bill
three seventy five.
Representative Garrett please go
ahead and introduce us to house
bill three seventy five and to
your.
Thank you house bill three
seventy five so charter school
expenditure plan my expert
witnesses Matt Paul from charter
schools of New Mexico public
charter schools of New Mexico I
should say
this bill.
Requires a chartering authority
which could be the Public
Education Commission a staffed
by the PED.
For a district to provide an
oversight in expenditures
for the money retained from
charter schools state
equalization guarantee
distribution so we're not going
to charter school gets its SCG
two percent up to two percent
for this bill we're replacing it
with up to two percent is
immediately taken off the top
but the chartering Authority of
to do various administrative
task there's a hundred charters
interstate forty five are under
and district like APS has twenty
nine thirty.
And then fifty five were under
the Public Education Commission
so it's just making
accountability and transparency
for that two percent with that
I'll have met at a few words
thank you Representative Mr
Paul.
Mr chair members of the
committee the reason why we feel
like this is important is that
SCG stands for equalization
guarantee and that means that
every student gets funded the
same in the state when we give
that money away to our
authorizer we feel like there
should be appropriate
accountability for what's done
with those funds
that's really what this bill is
about a number of authorizers
actually do this in practice
already but we think this should
be the standard across the the
the secretary all just note on
page one this up to language it
really is addressing to
statements that are conflicting
in statute right now on page one
lines twenty three twenty two
you'll see some Lee way for some
flexibility on what percentage
the authorizer keeps but the
next statement names two percent
and only two percent we're just
making those two statements
match and line up so there is
flexibility it would be up to
the authorize or whether they
withhold less than two percent
but it makes it clear that they
are able to do to withhold less
than two percent Mr chair
there's no appropriation in this
bill yes okay thank you very
much Representative Garrett but
Mr Paul is there anybody who
wishes to speak in the audience
on this bill.
Saying none.
We do have to folks online first
Laurenzo yes because.
Lorenzo for one minute whenever
you're ready.
and I think Mr yes if you can
you on here and we're still
showing you just muted.
Okay let's uh go to Sarah fitz
Gerald and instead Sarah fitz
Gerald.
Ceragon.
Go ahead.
Chair members of the committee
Senator senior vice president of
the greater Albuquerque chamber
of commerce were in full support
of this bill is a little is an
important transparency measure
for chartering authorizers and
education system.
Schools and families they serve
I have a right to know how that
would help funding agencies to
serve their charter community we
also appreciate the flexibility
this little contains
any changes offers relaxation at
two percent if the PC doesn't
need to collect every dollar
that two percent whatever it
doesn't need to see with the
charter school working used to
serve the students generated
that money through the funding
formula we need to do
professional work together to
increase accountability in a way
that translates to receive
taxpayer dollars are being used
a little more optimally in the
service of our commercials
students thank you thank you
very much miss fitzgerald.
We're back with Lorenzo yes this
let's go try vote and so for one
minute and if you can take
yourself off mute please.
I have a lot of guys.
Well we're going to members
actually because of that and I
apologize.
No worries we can hear you well
did you want to make any public
comment on house bill three
seventy five.
I don't know Sir okay.
Okay then we're gonna go to the
committee.
I don't see that there any
questions from
From the committee will go to
vice chair Dixon for the motion
Thank you Mr chair I would move
it to pass on house bill three
seventy five.
Okay it's been moved by
Representative Dixon saying by
Representative Trujillo can you
please call the roll on this
this.
Representative Armstrong.
Yes.
Yes.
Tactics that.
Representative that yes.
Representative Garcia yes.
Representative yeah yes.
No.
Yes.
Yes.
Yes.
Eight thank you very much for
the good thank you thank you.
Kate members we're gonna go to
we're still waiting on on house
bill five fifty we're gonna go
to Committee substitute for
House Bill two sixty and our own
vice chair Dixon is going to
present that and we may have
some questions for LFC and it's
great thank you for Mr Abbey for
being here on this.
Okay.
Let's.
Yep let's get that amendment.
US.
Okay the.
And work at the.
Okay
thank you very much Fiser
Dixon's will ask you maybe for a
brief explanation of the bill
and then we can explain was
promotion on the amendment and
we can expect payment.
Thank you Mr chair hospital to
sixty is a mental health parity
bill and basically it is
You know.
Bringing New Mexico in lines
sort of with the enforcement of
the federal provision that says
mental health care needs to be
treated the same as physical
health care and one of the main
things that it does is it allows
patients
to directly access mental health
and substance use to disorder
services without referral or
prior authorization and it also
requires plans to raise
professional rates to attract
and retain behavioral health
professionals I'm I would say
that those are the.
The sort of core points of house
bill two sixty and if I may if
there's move to discussing the
amendment that's fantastic thank
you very much vice chair Dixon
okay can ask for a motion to
move house appropriations and
finance committee amendment one.
Okay it's been moved by.
Okay Representative Lujan second
by Representative Garcia
So Representative as we see here
on page one line sixteen
seventeen.
The strikes making an
appropriation.
And then on page thirty four.
It strikes.
Section forty six in its
entirety.
So give time to sort of see
that.
Okay members we have we have
that are there any questions on
the amendment.
Okay is there any can we have
that motion Representative Lujan
to about the amendment.
She just oh sorry thank let's
move for can we have a motion to
adopt the amendment.
Okay it's been moved by
Representative Garrett second by
Representative Garcia serve up
and.
Is there any opposition to
adopting house appropriations
and finance committee moment
one.
Saying that you have adopted
bills we're back on the bill are
there any questions on.
How's a committee substitute for
House Bill health and Human
Services Committee substitute
for House Bill to say.
For such a field.
So the infamous question what is
the fiscal impact of this bill
and is their money and house
bill provided an S. will to to
cover that fiscal impact.
thank you Mr chair thank you
Representative Chatfield there
is a one million dollars in net
house bill two that is being put
in on the Senate side.
that is confirmed.
That thank you
And thank you for vice chair
Dixon there is Mr Abbey there's
also additional monies that are
going with
Related to health insurance
premium increases correct.
Our rate increase.
Great thank you very much okay I
don't see sorry Representative
Montoya please.
Thank you Mr chair would be more
appropriate to.
Have the Senate use a dummy Bill
to put this on their side since
their.
Going to be.
Putting it in the budget on that
side
Mr chair.
Mr chair and representative
Montoya there's actually a
companion piece in the Senate
currently.
So they're both moving so Mister
chair if that it is coming this
way do we need to take action on
this just uncomfortable.
Not that senators have
mistreated Representative the
truth in the past too much.
But and it was not on our side
and the money's not in the
budget on our site so I'm not
sure Mister chair if that's just
not a more appropriate way to
handle this.
Thank you thank you
Representative Montoya think we
have it we we struck the
appropriation we have discretion
but I appreciate very much the
questions for sure are there any
other
Questions related to it house
health and Human Services to to
the bill any other questions
Representative Garcia and
ranking member.
just for my information Mr chair
what if the money doesn't come
back from the Santo.
What happens in we will vote on
assumption is not going to be
funded that's.
Very troubling.
No I've been here for seven
years.
What we do the.
Thank you representative Garcia
this does not this and still has
additional steps to go through
including the floor but I think
appreciate the question.
Mr chair representative Garcia
would appear with perhaps LFC is
aware of
If it's included in a Senate
amendment or you know I'm open
to yeah I I I think we're not
going to and thank you by
projects and Mr Abbey if there's
anything you you want to add I
think we're sort of in that
period were close to knowing but
not.
You know details are fully clear
is there anything you'd like to
add.
Okay.
We will not ask no no we we we
don't want to put it into into
difficult of position
okay by your ex I think we've
also we've heard Senator Hickey
might be on his way
So that will we can.
let's hold off for just a little
bit we may come back to this
We're also members were sort of
in a bit of a holding pattern
around an amendment for house
bill four hundred as well.
so I think we'll go ahead and
send.
Yes I do I would like that up
okay before is still open.
Mr chairman I know the Senate
finance is looking at trying to
get other state funds to cover a
significant share of the costs
of course they have acted but I
know it's on the list they're
considering.
Thank you very much Mr Abbey.
And.
I guess
other state funds generally that
for the office of the
superintendent of insurance
which is currently where where
the appropriation that we have
struck
that is really that that is the
source of the office of
superintendents revenue is that
right Mr Chairman yes okay.
Okay members go ahead
representative Garcia.
Mr Chairman.
What Representative would David
Abbey stated that they're
working.
But right now with.
This forty seven and that'll
work on assumptions and is going
to be there it just doesn't work
for.
Need to take action on the today
right now I probably will know
against it not because I don't
believe in the prime to do here.
You know.
Mr abbey said the might be in
they're working on it but
they're not there.
May strategies chairman of
course.
The source of these what the
other state funds again I'm I'm
making recommendations Senate
finance to take this up.
And I'm making it because it is
not general fund obviously bill
house bill two left the house
they were.
There was not much more to add
but in general when you're
committees Senate finance look
at appropriations from other
state funds if the money so
there it is easier to advance
a recommendation from other
state funds again I can't commit
and Representative percent of
finance but I can represent a
pretty positive attitude to
addressing staff recommendations
from other state funds thank you
Mr ivory over Representative
Garcia any other questions no
stream from the top thanks okay
Representative Lujan please
thank you thank you Mr thank you
Mr Abbey for the for stating
that I think that.
Discussion we just had a bill on
the floor that we voted for that
had appropriations or another
state funds and we voted through
so I think if that is is
similar.
The thing that's happening right
now than this is what we're
action we can take if we if it's
the pleasure of the chair thank
you Representative Lujan Senator
Hickey it's great to see you
if you want to so we're we're on
the amendment we're on house
bill two sixty we've amended to
strike the appropriation yes
would like to ask you if there's
anything you'd like to add for
House Bill to sixty.
Including work with the Senate
finance committee regarding
inclusion of other state funds
for the offices superintendent
of insurance.
Great thank you Mr chairman and
representatives of it's my honor
to be able to give you a brief
description of what's in the
bill and the address these
particular issues
essentially what this bill does
is it removes barrier for people
who need to get access to mental
health right now they have to go
through referrals are are
and prior authorization and just
a lot of people don't get their
it also leverages the health
plans so that they have to.
Hey very fair and very
competitive wages as
significantly other states are
thirty forty percent around us
are ahead of us in behavioral
health and this requires looking
at state other states and the
health plans have to demonstrate
how they would pay a greater
amount than another state in
order to attract and retain here
So the end and then they're on a
whole nother number of other key
provisions the Senate has put it
into their portion and again I
don't know all the technical
language around it but that one
million dollars has been put in
New Adrian can confirm that to
you over in the Senate right and
and the last thing that is I I
made an error in in writing I
have proscribed methadone
prescribing that changes there's
three sections their eggs
exactly identical on this bill
because you have to cover large
group large group in state
because NACA that get exclusions
and then the individual market
and so it's it's in all three of
those sections in the that's
mainly
the key components bill and I'm
happy to answer the questions or
if you want more detail about
what the it really closes off
insurers loopholes that they've
used in the past to push people
out of residential treatment
centers to limit time and so
forth it gives people the time
they need to get the care and
then the other thing it will do
it will actually attract
professionals in behavioral
health to New Mexico because we
will be more competitive thank
with this thank you very much
Senator Hickey okay
The thank you very much sorry
Representative Trujillo thank
you very much thank you members
yes thank you I just want to
clarity when you talk about
other state funding talking
about the health care
affordability.
Talking about funds that come
from insurance premium taxes
that go into the insurance
department suspenseful to
separate from the health care
for the thank you I appreciate.
Great thank you right
Representative Trujillo ranking
member Armstrong please.
Garcia for a third time thank
you Mr chairman and and thank
you Representative Senator so
the health insurance premium tax
who pays that.
The healthcare insurance premium
tax
Paid by the insured company and
that is and has been that is
identified in.
Twenty twenty one Senate bill
three seventeen which was also
money no costsharing bill.
Thank you Mr chairman so so
that's not in this a reminder
Senator to go through the chair
please I'm sorry on that very
note no one of the thank you
members thank you Mr chairman
and how many insurance companies
are there in New Mexico that pay
into this.
That
I'm Mr chair and representative
that.
Pay into the health care
insurance Fund
Thanks for the program Mr chair
representative from we would
get.
There could be many more than a
hundred a hundred amount that
are paying virtually all the
premiums in the biggest source
of premiums happens to be.
Okay think that half of New
Mexicans are on Medicaid
Medicaid of managed care
organizations are paying that
premium tax probably about half
of.
Thank you Mr chairman and thank
you so basically it Mr chairman
and and senator and not shell
for mandating insurance
companies to pay this pay for
the for the for mental.
Health coverage all the things
listed on page two is that
correct.
Mr chair and representative
Armstrong it yes stand and what
it does insurance companies
historically have made up their
own quote standards of care
without looking at these and
applying them to behavioral
health this is actually in
national law that's already been
passed we are paralleling
national law with these
descriptions of these companies
I I'm sorry of these professions
having to use their generals the
generally accepted standards of
care and also parallel with
federal law that they have to
use the DSM five which is a
diagnostic manual used in
psychiatry psychology and so
forth.
Thank you Mr chairman and and
Senator
I I don't have any more
questions right now thank you Mr
chairman thank you very much
representative Garcia for there
to.
Okay thank you very much.
Okay thank you Representative
Dixon thank you committee for
good conversation we'll go to
Representative Lujan from ocean.
Mr chair and I moved to pass.
House health the committee
substitute yes on how if there's
House health.
Two sixty this is
great I have housing for to do
Pat at house health and Human
Services Committee substitute
for House Bill to sixty is
amended second by Representative
Trujillo
Yes.
Representative Rapp.
Yes.
This Rodriguez my can you please
call Representative Garrett is.
Yes.
Yes.
Yes.
Okay thank you go go go ahead
from previous.
Go ahead.
could you rate is tell us the
outcome of the vote so.
Okay great then for House health
and Human Services Committee
subsea for House Bill to sixty
is amended to do.
Okay members I think we seem as
raven and the room is is the
committee substitute ready for
House Bill five fifty.
Okay let's go ahead and try to
get that passed out as quickly
as we can.
We don't have okay.
Very.
Okay
all right members I think what
we'll do we're going to will
just stand in recess here for
Let's stand in recess until
about two thirty members try to
come back at two thirty to make
sure we have copies and we'll be
back.
