Representative Garrett.
Representative Hernandez.
He.
Representative Herndon.
Representative Herndon.
Representative Herrera.
Representative Herrera,
Representative Little.
Representative Lujan.
Representative Lu Han,
representative Pettigrew.
Representative Pettigrew.
Representative Sanchez.
Representative Sanchez.
Representative Sareana.
Representative Sareanov,
Representative Silva.
Here.
Representative Vincent, Vice
Chair Dixon.
Termon.
Great. OK, we have a core of
members. I know it's late, so
we'll try to work through these
efficiently, uh, our first bill
is House Bill 333. We'll go to
Rosa Hernandez and Duncan.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman, uh,
members of the committee, um, in
front of you is a house Bill
333. Uh, this is the cleanup of
contaminated uh sites. House
Bill 333 appropriates $50
million from the general fund to
the New Mexico Environment
Department for the purpose of
assessing and cleaning up
abandoned or neg neglected
contaminate sites, including
abandoned uranium sites with me,
uh, Mr. Chairman and members of
the committee.
Is my co-sponsor, um,
Representative Duncan, who's
also uh represents San Juan
County and uh joining us as well
will be, uh, our other
co-sponsor representative Beta
and our expert witness, uh,
deputy secretary John Roderick
L. ah, handed over to my
co-sponsor for for some works.
Thank you, sir. Thank you, Mr.
Chair and committee. Uh my wife
happens to be a uranium miner
nurse.
And so, um, she takes care of
the gentlemen that have been
exposed to these mines, some of
the things that they've endured
their entire lives after their
minds, so, uh, we've got one in
San Juan County and we just need
to start taking care of. Great.
Thank you very much. And uh Mr.
Chairman, members of the
committee, we stand for
questions. OK, uh, great, uh,
our first, the first, is there
anybody in public for testimony?
Please come on forward.
a widespread goal to get them
cleaned up.
any portion of $50 million
toward the effort, it will be
appreciated. Uh, congratulations
to Representative Hernandez for
his leadership, and once again I
want to acknowledge
Representative Alcon for getting
this effort uh or starting this
conversation a decade ago. Thank
you very much. Thank you very
much, Mr. OK, we're gonna go
briefly uh online to Camilla
Feibelman.
Thank you, Mr. Chair and members
of the committee. Thank you also
to the sponsors for bringing
this bill and to the committee
for including these funds in the
budget. I want to recognize the
urgency of cleaning up the 261
former uranium mine sites and 8
former mills around the around
the state. I'll also just share
that there are abandoned and
neglected groundwater spill
sites all around the state,
including one in my community,
the
Carlisle Village dry cleaner
spill. We managed to get on the
super fun list, but there are a
lot of these spills around the
state that aren't on that list
and are also gonna need
attention, so $50 million is
great to start and we'll have to
come back next year to make sure
we can get at every mine, every
tailings piling and all of these
spill sites. Thank you so much.
Thank you online will be Alicia.
ries
Um,
hello.
Good afternoon, Chair and
committee members. My name is
Alicia Carrie. I'm from the
Pueblo of San Domingo and a
registered lobbyist for NM need
to vote. Um, I'm here to speak
today speaking in support of
this bill, um, as it is
important to continue to foster
a safe and clean environment for
our community members to thrive.
We understand that a majority of
the contaminated sites are
located on, um, on or
a tribal lands, uh, thus
impacting our tribal
communities. So please, we urge
your support to um to pass this
bill. Thank you very much.
Great. Thank you very much. OK,
uh, that concludes our public
comment. We're gonna go to the
committee starting with ranking
member Chatfield.
Thank you, Mr. Chair, Mr. Chair,
is this money in House Bill 2?
Mr. Chairman, we do have the
entire amount in-house bill to
$50 million. So, Mr. Chair, when
the time is appropriate, I moved
to pass.
Great. Thank you. uh, uh,
ranking member Chatfield, we're
gonna go next to Representative
Brown. Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Thank you to the sponsors.
About 10 or 12 years ago I ran a
bill to clean up uranium mine
sites, and I could not get any
interest on either side of the
aisle to do this.
And so I'm really glad to see we
have a bill to do this, and we
have some funding. I hope it'll
be preserved to uh to get the
work started. So thank you both.
For doing this, Mr. Chair.
Excellent. Thank you very much
Brown and thank you for your
leadership on the issue as well.
OK, uh, I don't see any other um
comment, um.
Uh, wanted to just make sure we
keep our quorum, which we
Uh, are, yes, um, uh, thank you,
uh, legislators, great uh for
working on this beta. Thank you
very much, Deputy, uh, Roderick,
thank you very much. Um, we
really, I think we'll look
forward to the cleanup work
beginning soon and hopefully,
uh, the ability to um refill and
then continue to invest in this,
even as we push the federal
government to appropriately
support.
For the state, uh, members, we
are gonna, I, I am gonna ask for
a tabling motion on this simply
because it's a straight budget
bill, I think as we all know,
and again, thanks to uh
particular RHAFC members and
representative Obeda, um, this
is in the budget and so uh OK,
uh, we have a motion to table,
ranking member Chatfield, is it
in second, is there any
opposition to that?
OK Singan.
We've tabled the bill, and we,
uh,
are going to protect the money
and
Thank you very much. Great. OK,
committee, uh, this next bill,
uh, we'll ask for some beta to
stay up there.
149, there's an amendment that's
being passed out.
So this will be an amendment to
the um committee substitute.
OK.
Um
So, a beta, um, please go ahead
when you're ready, uh, present
House Judiciary Committee
substitute for House Bill 149.
Thank you, Chair. Thank you
committee.
We are presenting a House
committee. Would you like me,
chair, to present this up first
or I'm sorry, the.
And
Um, if, if you can tell us
briefly the bill and then we'll
go to the amendment and go from
there.
Thank you, Chair. Uh yes. House
Bill 149 is enacting the
supported decision making Act
and providing requirements for
supported decision-making
agreements, providing duties for
supporters, creating reporting
requirements, creating a
supported decision-making
program within the Office of
guardianship in the
developmental disabilities
Council and making an
appropriation.
Great. OK, uh, and then you have
an amendment. Can you read the
20,230 number rather. Yes, sir.
230728.1, that's the amendment
that we have. Can we have a
motion in a second. Great,
excellent. We're ready to go.
Thank you, uh, Representative
Duncan. The motion, uh, and
Representative Doo with the 2nd
to discuss the amendment, um,
what does the, the amendment,
yeah, talk us through, please.
Thank you, Chairman. I'd also
like to introduce my two.
Guests with me, I have secretary
Coltenbach and executive
director Alice McCoy with me
today.
Thank you, Mr. Chair, members of
the committee, the amendment
strikes the appropriation
language, uh, we no longer need
that preparation because it is
in House Bill 2, and if there's
a combination with that and grow
funding, we have the full
amount.
Great.
OK, it's been moved to adopt the
amendment by ranking member
Chatfield, seconded by uh
Representative Little. Uh, is
there any opposition to adopting
the amendment?
Seeing none, we've adopted the
amendment.
Uh, is there anybody who wishes
to make comment on the amended
committee substitute for House
Bill 149.
Come on up. Please be brief, but
thank you for being here.
Yeah.
Yes,
that's great.
Thank you. um, I think it'll
work with you, um, thank you,
Mr. Chair and members of the
committee, Ellen Pines
representing the disability
coalition, and we support this
measure, supported decision
making is a less restrictive
alternative to guardianship that
can be used by people with
disabilities and by older people
who don't need a full
guardianship but need a little
help making decisions, promoting
their self-determination in that
way, promotes their well.
being and it has the happy side
effect of saving money for the
state because you don't need to
pay for guardianship proceedings
for them. This would also help
the courts feel more comfortable
with this kind of arrangement as
an alternative to full
guardianship. This helps people
make their own decisions rather
than having them made for them
in a guardianship, and we urge
your support. Thank you. Thank
you.
Mr. Chair, members of the
committee, my name is Naomi
Valdez. I'm a registered
lobbyist for the New Mexico
Trailers Association. We stand
in strong support of this bill.
I want to thank the sponsor for
working with us on drafting, um,
supported decision making will
allow people with disabilities,
the autonomy and support that
they need to live full and
healthy lives. Thank you.
Thank you.
Mr Chair members of the
committee, Jim Jackson for
disability rights in Mexico. We
also support this and rather
than repeat all that, I'd just
like to give you one easy
example, an 18 year old student
in special education.
They're their own guardian, they
can make their own decisions,
but they want to involve their
parents, uh, they want to
involve some other trusted
person in their IEP meeting.
This is a good way of giving uh
the schools, the authority to
have other people access uh
their information, get them
together as a group, but it's
still going to be the person
with the disability who gets to
make that decision. So we
encourage your support. Thank
you. Great, thank you very much.
OK, uh, there are 4 folks
online, if we can limit it to
45 seconds or so, we'll try to
get through everybody, starting
with Chris LeRoy, Chris?
Go ahead, please.
OK, we can't hear Chris, so can
we go to Tommy Hernandez?
Yes, thank you, Mr. Chair,
members of the committee, Tommy
Hernandez, registered lobbyist
and public policy director on
behalf of the Alzheimer's
Association's New Mexico
chapter. I'd like to thank the
committee for considering this
bill. I also like to thank the
sponsor as well as the agency
for bringing such needed policy
forward. I'd like to register
and log our full support of this
legislation and respectfully ask
the committee to move it
forward. Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Great. Thank you. Um,
Uh, please introduce yourself
from the iPhone and go ahead for
45 seconds.
Uh, yes, hello, Mr. Chair. My
name is Pha Frank. I'm, I'm I'm
disability, I, um, I very
support this bill because um
this bill can enable um anybody
with people to go to um to just,
um, you empowered and be able to
make decisions and to get
further in the goals and dreams,
um, yeah, think you so much for
for your time and for your, uh,
and for your um patients, and
thank you for
The
Thank you for your time.
Thank you very much, Mr. Frank.
OK, and finally, we'll go to,
uh, if you could identify
yourself from uh admin, or no,
sorry.
Thank you,
members of the committee
if that's,
I, I think it is uh somebody
online. Apologies. Go ahead,
please.
My apologies, Mr. Chair. I'm
unable to update my name on
this, on the system. My name is
Nat Dean and I'm a disability
advocate in the interest of the
late hour I stand in support of
the bill. Thank you very much.
Great. Thank you very much.
OK, um, thank you,
Representative, as we've, uh,
OK, uh, we'll go to
Representative Brown. Thank you,
Mr. Chairman, and I just want to
say hi to John Arango. I see
he's on, on the uh on the web
webcast, uh, worked with John at
uh New Mexico Legal Services for
many years. So, um, Mr. Chairman
and uh Representative.
Um, I have to, um, just let you
know, I have not actually read
the bill itself, but I'm just
working off an analysis that
that I did read.
And I guess my big question is
how does this differ from the
power of attorney.
Which is a traditional, um, you
know, legal document that allows
for usually the person uh giving
the power consults with the
person to whom the power is
given. It's a dynamic thing, um,
uh, so if you could just tell us
how this is different, please,
Mr. Chair.
Thank you, Mr. Chair
Representative Brown for that
question. Yes, this, the way
this works and the way it's
different from a power of
attorney is that when you sign
over a power of attorney, you
don't have to be there. You're
giving your power and authority
over to someone else to execute
a decision for you or act in
your absence. The supported
decision making act is different
in that you are still present
and you are making the decision,
but you have the right to have a
supporter with you.
Thank you, chair. Thank you.
Thank you, um, Mr. Chairman and
Representative. So, um,
Really, truly with powers of
attorney, oftentimes it's like I
said, there's dialogue along the
way, it's not like you just give
over everything. If the person
becomes incapacitated, then the
durable power of attorney
survives, uh, for the holder to
transact business and there's a
fiduciary duty.
So could you tell us um a little
bit about
The fiduciary duty that I hope
exists here with this particular
uh document. Thank you, Chair.
Thank you, Representative Brown,
and just to step back just a
moment, you could have both with
this. You could have a supported
decision.
person designated and you can
also have a power of attorney
for certain situations, um, but
to your question about the um
liability, we
Initially have that in there.
We removed it.
And I'm gonna go back a little
bit on this, because there's
still a duty that's owed to the
individual. That's our position.
So we did remove it from the
first draft.
And we kept that. We, we
maintain the point because
there's still liability that's
owed to the individual, whether
it's a bank or a medical
facility or whatever institution
may be reading this document and
following it. Ms. McCoy expand
on that, Mr. Chair, uh,
Representative Brown, the main
difference is the supporter in a
supported decision making
agreement because they do not
have any decision making rights
or powers over the individual.
They do not have, they are not
fiduciaries themselves, because
they are not.
Taking over any kind of
authority for the person.
Their sole role is to provide
support to be there with the
person, you know, they may be
there to help them, um,
translate, so some folks um have
trouble communicating, need uh
caregivers or other kinds of
folks helping them with
assistive technology, for
example, and
The world is built where it's
really hard to get accommodation
sometimes, and this bill will
ensure that folks who need that
kind of support when they go out
into the world that they're
gonna have the right to have
those people with them. We uh
purposely did not have.
fiduciaries as part of this
bill, because again, we wanted
to keep the decision making
power with the individual,
that's the purpose of this
movement. Um, you know, it's
across the country, lots of
states have um passed this bill.
Texas was the first, um, and we
had a supported decision making
task force as well, work on this
and we had um
A judge on the task force who
was very explicit about wanting
to ensure that we were not
trying to make these supporters
fiduciaries because two things
can happen. One, it may
discourage folks from doing this
role, which is a really
important one. And the second is
that um
The second is that um I just
lost my train of thought. Um,
so,
But it was really important to
the judge that we did not have
fiduciaries, um, in this
particular role because it,
that's what it was, because then
it incentivizes the supporter to
try to substitute their own
judgments and decision making in
place of the person when they
should just be there to support
that person's um.
Uh, decisions. And finally, you
know, if they disagree with the
person's decisions, this is an
agreement between two adults,
um, both have to be part of this
to for it to work and so if
either the decision maker or the
supporter does not want this
relationship to exist anymore.
They can part ways. The
supporter doesn't have an
obligation or a duty to continue
serving that role.
OK, so I'm, I'm getting close to
fully understanding because I
think Mr. Chari he'll indulge me
just a little longer, so, um, I,
I want to make sure that the
And I guess it's the disabled
person who's getting this um
arrangement together with this
other person.
Um, I just want to make sure
there's no taking advantage of.
The person who's entering this
arrangement.
Um, what protections are there,
Madam Secretary, Mr. Chair, and,
uh, in this legislation.
Thank you, Mr. Chair
Representative Brown for the
question. So we know based on
Information that we all have,
um, some of us have a state
agencies and also in the news,
we know that abuse, neglect, and
exploitation of people with
disabilities are happening
today. Um, they happen because
people are hidden away because
they don't get to participate in
the daily life of that most
people get to, um, and we have
this world in the system that
that
That forces them sort of into a
corner, and that's when really
bad things happen to people when
they're hidden away from view.
So the purpose of this bill is
to get people into community
life, make sure that folks are
looking at them and interacting
with them and they're they're
part of, you know, everyday
life, and they get to experience
it. Um, another great thing
about this kind of agreement is
you have different supporters
for different kinds of um
decisions that you want to make.
And so you may have your mom
who's a
Nurse practitioner, I'm using
that as an example because my
mom's a nurse practitioner, you
know, she could be my medical
supporter and then I could have
my uh cousin who's an
accountant, he'd be my financial
supporter, and you'd have a team
of people helping you. And when
you have this kind of team
approach with different kinds of
folks helping you out. There's a
much less likely chance that
abuse, neglect, and exploitation
will happen to you, then if you
have, for example, a guardian
who's in charge of everything.
And you don't need to be around
for any of those decisions.
Yeah, um, so Mr. Chair and Ma'am
Secretary representative. I, um,
I do believe we have situations
where we don't need a
guardianship and don't want one.
And this is sort of an
intermediate, I think, um,
position.
To take. Um, could you tell us a
little bit about
Third party reliance on some and
you're all smiling, so I guess
you like that question, but tell
us about that, Mr. Chair.
Mr. Chair Representative Brown,
um, the bill does require third
parties to abide by the
agreement. There is a section on
that, um, and is now escaping
me, which section number it is,
um, and my computer just went
off. Um, however, um, we did
initially have a uh liability
waiver for third parties who
rely on these agreements, um,
after a lot of consultation with
um folks who do.
This kind of work, um, we did
take the waiver out, but the
requirement is still there for
people who get the agreement,
they must abide by it.
And that's what I'm sorry,
that's what Representative Beda
was referring to Section 11.
That's what I thought it was. 0,
1011. Thank you. Thank you for
that, um, Mr. Chair, and, um,
panel, I have a little problem
with that actually, because
Even in a power of attorney, a
third party does like a bank
doesn't have to take the power
of attorney, um, or, you know,
uh, abide by it.
So in this one I'm a little bit,
uh, I guess I'm
thinking this is a little bit of
thin ice for the bill, but um,
so, um,
Mr. Chairman, I, um,
I think of a situation where
someone is having a medical
condition that need, you need
some kind of hospitalization or
something.
And um
The person's unable to, to
really articulate and so takes
in a friend or family member to
the hospital, and sometimes the
hospital won't deal with that
person, and so I take it this
arrangement would require the
hospital to actually listen to
that person on behalf of uh the
primary. Would that be correct,
Mr. Chair. Representative.
Thank you, Chairman and thank
you, Representative Brown, and
yes, you gave such a perfect
example of how I use this every
day in my own life. I do a serve
as a caretaker for my
grandfather who's 87 years old,
he's confined to a wheelchair,
but he has a strong mental
capacity. He can advocate for
himself. He's trilingual, so
sometimes when he does take a
trip to the hospital, he needs
additional help, and he will be
very vocal and say I want my
granddaughter with me to help me
make this decision, and it could
be from
Helping him understand the
medical terminology, although
it's in English, he may not
understand it. He wants that
additional support there, and if
he's still having difficulty, he
will then call in my husband
who's fluent in Navajo, and he
will interpret in that way, but
what this bill does is it
provides empowerment to our
community members, it, it
provides them the opportunity to
say, I have a supported decision
maker in my life and I want them
here with me because then they
make the best decisions
possible, um, and I do agree
with you, we have
lots of instances where there
could be uh individuals who are
taken advantage of or hidden
like Miss McCoy said, but my
family uses this as a way to
empower my grandfather to keep
him active in his own life and
self-determined for his own
decisions. We see that it works
there and we know that it will
work for other New Mexicans.
Thank you, Chair. Thank you,
rep.
Well, thank you very much, Mr.
Chair, for the time and thank
you for answering my questions,
and I will support your bill
when we, unless we table it, I
guess.
OK, very good. Thank you, Mr.
Chair. Thank you, Representative
Brown, and great questions.
Next, we're gonna go to
Representative Duncan, then
Representative Garreth.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Um,
Thank you presenters and
representative um I use POAs all
the time in Arizona for my
business over there and so uh
Brown asked the one question I
was going to ask, and that's
just about the safeguards, so I
think that was us. So thank you.
Great. Thank you very much, uh,
Representative Duncan, uh, we
don't have some Garrett, uh,
we'll go to Roxanne Little.
Thank you, Mr. Chair, um, may I
make a motion for a deep pass.
Uh, we'll come back to you and
go to representative Silva.
Thank you, Chair. um, thank you,
Representative. I just want to
say how much um I appreciate how
your bills are grounded in
community and experience, um,
that just like gets me, so thank
you so much for being that um
teacher for me at least, um, so
thank you so much and really
excited to vote for this piece
of legislation. Thank you,
Chair. Great. Thank you. OK, now
we're gonna go to Representative
Little, um, and this will be,
um, yeah, go to little for the
motion on the um judiciary
committee substitute for House
Bill 149, Mr. Chair, I would
like to move a do pass on the
Housesoodiciary.
Substitute for house Bill 149 as
amended. Thank you. OK. It's
been uh moved by Representative
Little, signed by Representative
Brown in the opposition to that
motion, seeing none.
You got a unanimous. Great.
Thank you very much. Thank you,
Chairman. Thank you. OK, uh,
we're gonna go next to House
OK. Uh, thank you time, Garrett,
uh.
This rustle we love seeing in
our committee. Go ahead with
some Garrett.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. House Bill
206 is the New Mexico Finance
Authority water project fund
projects. It's the annual water
project fun projects
authorization bill. I'm carrying
it on behalf of EMFA Oversight
Committee, which unanimously
endorsed the bill.
It authorizes the New Mexico
Finance Authority to make grants
and loans for water projects.
That have been thoroughly vetted
from the water project fund.
So in October 29th, 2024, the
Water Trust Board meant to
approve the list of projects to
recommend to the legislature for
potential funding. This
recommendation follows a
thorough evaluation of
applications by a seven agency
review team. The final list of
projects includes 84 projects
whose
application requests total
approximately $256.4 million.
The 84 applications were made up
to from projects in four
categories, 13 flood prevention
projects, 6 water conservation
or treatment, recycling, or
reuse projects, 62 water storage
conveyance and delivery
projects.
And 3 watershed restoration and
management projects. Uh, let me
ask my expert witness if she
would like to add anything else.
Mr. Chairman, members of the
committee, know, I'm happy to
answer any questions.
Great. OK. Uh thank you very
much, Ms. Russell. Thank you,
Representative Garrett. Anybody
who wishes to speak and support
our opposition.
I don't see anybody, uh, we'll
go to questions, sorry I'm
Pettigrew.
Thank you, Chairman and thank
you.
Representative for
Your legislation, I have.
Question. I think it was
representative Ferrera that
presented this in front of house
a.
We talked about the fact that if
you'd had more money, you could
have funded more projects. Am I
correct on that?
Mr. Tur Representative, last
year at the urging of Senator
Grigs, we added.
was
Last year we added many at times
we have added, but not this
year. 200 million sorry, there's
200 million in the budget.
Already.
Thank you, and that's where I
was going to. So this is
underfunded based off of what
you have, but, uh, chairman, if
I understand correctly, you
still have enough funds to uh to
hit the 266. Is that correct?
Mr. Chairman, uh,
Representative, yes.
We talked in committee chairman
about whether or not that was
actually enough.
Because that, if I understand it
correctly, we actually had more
vetted projects, we just didn't
have the funding for it based on
the priority list. Am I correct
in that understanding as well.
Mr. Chairman, um, without the
200 million in-house Bill 2,
there would be approximately 160
million coming from severance
tax bonds and a distribution
from the Water Trust Fund. Um,
so either projects would have to
be downsized or they would have
to be bypassed because we
wouldn't have enough money to
fund them all.
Thank you, Chairman. Thank you.
Great. Thank you very much, uh,
Representative Pettigrew.
OK, um,
I don't see any other questions.
Uh, can we have a motion?
OK, it's been moved to uh um
For House Bill 206.
Second by Representative Little,
moved by Representative Duncan.
Is there any opposition to that,
uh, motion in no.
We've got that. OK, uh, we're
gonna, uh, roll House Bill 152,
and then we'll go to House Bill
315, um.
And, uh, representativeRazas,
thank you for being here today.
All right, Representative, uh,
and please, uh, your expert can
come on up.
That's good.
Mr. Chair, thank you very much
for having us here in committee,
um, I am here to present House
Bill 315.
Uh, this bill creates a
collaborative uh collaboration
between the Mexico Department of
AG, Salt and Water Conservation
Commission in the New Mexico
Department of Cultural Affairs.
Office of Archaeological Studies
to develop the statewide
archaeological field school,
education program to the New
Mexico State University.
Apparently there are only, there
are uh local soil water
conservation district projects,
including wild, uh, fire
recovery and fire mitigation,
uh, projects that are sometimes
delayed because of the
archaearchaeological uh
clearances that are sometimes
statutory statutorily required,
but there are occasionally
delays of the lack of of.
of non-supervised trained
archaeologist, um, this fund
will help train individuals,
presumably archaeological
archaeological excuse me, archae
archaeology majors, sorry, my,
my Spanish accent is not being
my friend today, to be at least
basically qualified
archaeologists to fill the
deficit of mentally trained
individuals, OK? With that, I
stand for questions.
Great. Actually, I'd like to
introduce my expert witness.
Mr. Chairman, members of the
committee, Debbie Hughes with
the Association of Conservation
Districts and um this is really
needed and we really appreciate
that you've put money into House
Bill 2 already. Um, I'm gonna
have to work with Senate Finance
because there was already a
confusion today as to why
300,000 was under state forestry
and all that, but I will, I will
work on that, um, but what
happens is, especially a big
thinning project or even a big
range project, um, they have to
walk like every every few feet
of it. And so if you can get
students that go
this training, um, then they
can, we can put as many people
out there as we can get trained.
And so it can really help get
for sitting projects done and a
lot of other projects done. I
talked to the, the top 4
service, uh, archaeologist. She
was thrilled about this,
actually wants to help support
it and help with training or
whatever, uh, cultures affairs
secretary and Shippo, totally
supportive, they're excited
about it. They want to work with
us. So I think we could have
something going in 6 months if
we get this funded. Thank you.
Great. Thank you.
very much. Thank you,
Representative Razas for
bringing this. Uh, we're gonna
go to first time ranking member
Chatfield, and then uh for other
questions.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Mr. Chair,
I have quite a bit of experience
in this field.
Uh, we spent, uh, half a million
dollars on one of the projects,
the big game habitat enhancement
Project and UNM came out and did
it, and guess what, they, they
have a lot of uh highly
qualified archaeologists, they
also have some students, and
those, they, they walk every,
every inch of a project we did
9000 acres of big game habitat
and in that one area we've done
a lot of others. I, I did a
privately a pipeline that went
across the ranch.
We had to get a, get a art
survey on that pipeline because
it was federal money.
And uh there's one archaeologist
available in all of
Uh, I know in our area and
really he's the only one I know
of up in, up there, that's
that's private. he's in out out
of Vegas, and he's booked up,
you know, and, and so, um, he
has to come out and just walk
that pipeline, any person, uh,
really that has done anything
can, can uh walk a pipeline and
see if there's a, a uh major
Ark site there and, and with
there, there wasn't uh some of
the other places that we work,
uh, is down in a flood zone and,
and there's obviously no major
arc sites in flood zones. So
with appropriate training, these
guys can, can uh go to town,
like I say, uh, it's required on
anything. It's triggered by
federal money oftentimes or
federal.
Land
Uh, so
Uh, statement, yeah.
Uh, I, I fully support this.
It's something that we need and
it'll get some kids trained or
some you know some people
trained, it might not be kids
all the time, but get some, uh,
there was a time when, when the
NRCS folks could go out and do
this. I remember that and then
they, they changed the
qualifications, so I think this
is a good way to go and a good
way to get some folks trained in
this field where we really lack
a lot of expertise right now.
Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Thank you very much, uh, ranking
member Chatfield, we're gonna go
next to represent Little.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Thank you,
Representative, and uh your
expert there.
Excuse me, uh, I am curious. I
was taking a look at your, the
uh the info sheet that you have
here and I appreciate it because
my question was going to be on
how your outreach efforts would
be conducted, and I got a bit of
information there, but I'm quite
curious where are you looking to
focus your time in.
Um, Mr. Chair, Representative
Little, um, we have 47 soil and
water conservation districts.
And so we have a very big
outreach just within our, our
organization and our uh 47 soil
and water districts work
directly with private lands,
when you, you very unique thing
about soil and water districts,
we can work on private land, we
can work with you on tribal
land. We can work on federal or
state land. So the soil and
water districts are the only
ones in statute have authority
to work on an entire watershed
basis. So we
also partner with lots of state
and federal agencies, so it
won't be hard to get the word
out. Thank you.
That's really good to hear, uh,
Chairman, um, if I may, I would
also like to offer uh for your
consideration, uh, students who
attend um schools like the Santa
Fe Indian School, the Native
American Community Academy, um,
the trey run university, uh,
colleges and universities, um,
they have a long history of
stewardship of the land in
their.
Uh, in their, uh, worldview, and
so, um, I can see there are many
of them who take on Mr. Chair,
um, the roles of that
stewardship through uh working
with forestry, um, water issues
and and other uh sciences that
that would be, I think, a great
resource, uh, a great group of
individuals who would have, um,
not just to don't just have the
interest, Mr. Chair, but a
vested
interest in doing this as well,
so um that would be my
suggestion to you and thank you
for bringing this bill forward.
Great. Thank you very much,
Representative Little. We're
gonna go next to our pedigrew,
then represent Hernandez.
Thank you, Chairman.
You know, many people may not
know this, but and with work
that I've done in the past is
acting county engineers for
several counties.
When we go through flood
mitigation or we go through
whatever we're going through.
And existing right away after
the flood when we're trying to
rebuild, has to have a new art
study.
Existing cleared right away.
In the state of New Mexico,
that's to have a new art study
done on it.
Close my mind.
And so
areas that we thin forests
before.
Have to go through this process.
So Chairman, uh, uh
representative and
Um
We talk this thing talks about
creating the field school
education program.
Can you give me some details on
what that looks like, how many
weeks, how many months, how many
years, and with the intention
with
If somebody just signed up for
that.
What do you anticipate chairman
Representative, the cost to be
and the timeline.
Um, Mr. Chairman, represented
Pettigroup. Thank you for
bringing that up. We actually
are working in the Kef Canyon
Hermit's peak doing all the
restoration for uh um the
asseas. We are having to get art
clearances on all those, even
though it burned and flooded. So
I totally understand. Um, we are
hoping to kind of marry this
with uh the workforce solution
somehow so that these whether
they're young or old, whoever is
taking this could actually get
paid and get the training, um, I
know Representative Doo is very
familiar with Workforce
Solutions. I'm not so much. I
had hoped to also work with um
the youth course, but all of
them just got unfunded, uh, just
the last few weeks and so unless
that comes back, but we've got
$300,000 we'll stretch that as
far as it will go. Um, the Forer
talked like it could be a
3-month training, um, the folks
at Cultural Affairs said maybe
we're like 2 months. So I don't
know exactly yet.
To
Sure, and, and oh thank God.
Um
That would be a 3 month
full-time training program.
Um, Mr. Chairman, representing
Pettigroup, yes, because it's
basically you're out in the
field, so it's not mostly
classroom, it's, it's out on the
field. And what I was told, if
you want to go on and become an
archaeologist, anybody that does
that has to have this field
training school. That's why the
For Service recommended that we
set this up because then it
would be valuable and hopefully
bring some more people into
that, um, we currently work with
about
13 archaeological firms in the
state, um, and we, we help our
nonprofit helps USDA get their
art clearances done.
So, um, I'm familiar with it
too, working with them, but
there's just not enough, not
enough folks trained and not
enough companies in New Mexico.
Chairman, I'm trying to get you
to get me down the rabbit hole.
With respect to this, because
We're gonna train somebody to be
able to do the art study.
Does that allow them to sign off
on the art study at the end.
No, Mr. Chairman Representative
Pettigrew, they will still have
to work under an archaeologist.
So what I did learn is, for
example, the For service uh as
Representative Chatfield
mentioned, um, if they are for
service employee, they can train
for a matter of few weeks and
become a para archaeologist to
work with the Forer. Same thing
with USDA, but if we bring um
anybody from the outside,
they're not working for one of
those federal agencies, they
have to go through this training
and still have to work under an
archaeologist.
Thank you, Chairman and thank
you for that. I have one last
statement to say with this, with
respect to what Representative
Lit talked about.
Um, I think this is a great idea
with respect to the, to the
tribal nations. One thing most
people don't understand is that
if you go through an area that
has received some kind of review
that there's potential.
Um
A potential art site that could
be tribal. You have to invite
every tribal nation in the
continental United States,
including Alaska, be able to
come to that site and pay for
that if they
Choose to
Information represented
Pettigrew. I've never heard that
before.
It's accurate. Thank you,
Chairman. Thank you.
Thank you.
OK, uh, next, we're gonna go to
Rate Hernandez.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman, uh, uh,
thank you again, uh, uh,
sponsor, uh, and an expert
witness, uh, I, um,
I'm proud to also like be a
co-sponsor on this bill with,
with, with the other members
cause I too understand the
urgent need for archaeologists,
uh, on the Navajo Nation, was
the chairman, um,
Uh, I, I worked at it on
irrigation project and it
stopped for 3 days because we,
we, we end up digging into an
Anasazi, uh, pit.
And, and we had uh this was a
federal, um, project, and we had
to stop for 3 days because there
was no archaeologist to, to do,
to, to do the investigation,
they had to get an
archaeologist, Mr. Chairman from
Flagstaff, to, to drive in and
and do the investigation.
And so, um, there's an urgent
need for this, um, I, I, uh,
also wanna mention that on
Navajo Nation for us to get a
homesite lease on, on our, on
our land, we have to get
numerous clearances and one of
those clearances, Mr. Chairman,
is an archae an arc survey.
And so, uh, it's very difficult
and this is all paid out of
pocket by each tribal member and
uh this is one of the reasons
why Mr. Chairman, housing is so
tough, uh, on the Navajo Nation.
Why we don't have electricity
because we can't have
electricity unless we have a
homesite lease and we can't get
home site lease unless we do the
art survey and everything else.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Uh,
that concludes my question.
Great. Thank you very
muchentative Hernandez. We go to
Representative Doo and then uh
Representative Silva.
Thank you. Thank you, Mr. Chair
and thank you, Representative
and Debbie for bringing this
bill. It's really exciting to me
because I, I used to share Grant
County with Representative
Trassis and Silver City is a
beautiful city. I don't know if
you guys have been there, but
they are absolutely horrified
that they're the next
catastrophic fire, that they
will be the, the victims of the
next catastrophic fire. And when
we would hold any sort of
meeting, I mean, like hundreds
of people show up, including the
um the monks from the Guadalupe
Montessori, the Montessori.
How many
not months.
There is also a Guadalupe
Monitor.
I don't have a second language.
It's just, it's just like, um,
Mr. Chair and Louis, are they
still all volunteer firefighters
up there. They are that I that I
know, Mr. Chair, excuse me,
representative, I believe so,
yes, and they've thinned a lot
of their property out, um, and,
and you know what, what I
learned, Mr. Chair, is that
Representative Chatfield should
have told me that I could have
cheated and just said arc, you
see.
You're my neighbor uh
representative. But anyway, um,
no, I, I think they are, and,
and you're right, we are afraid,
uh representative that will
become the next Rioso and uh
unfortunately, my friend here,
Representative Vincent has, has,
um, experienced that, and I
think that's a horrible thing
for any of us.
Any of us, so I appreciate
everyone's comments. I think,
Mr. Chair, what's happening here
is we're learning as we, as
we're discussing this, we're
learning that this is something
that maybe we should be doing in
regions, and not just in New
Mexico State, but this is just
the, the we're scratching the
surface, that we can have this
all across the state, so that
each region can can produce and
these, these people to help with
these arc sites, you know, and
and and surveys. So, um, we're
we're hoping that this starts
something good for the future.
Thank you, Mr. Chair and
Representative, and I agree with
you and I'm excited to see this
because there's so many students
that may not be college bound
that in a in a 3 months to 6
months at the most can be making
a really good wage, um, probably
more than their parents make,
um, and have work for as long as
they want it, because there are
hundreds of thousands of
sections of land that need to be
thinned for the
Wild land and urban interface,
the WUI and also for
What, what we need all over the
state. So I hope it grows. It
hits so many marks. It just hits
so many marks. It's job
creation, it's a, a gap in high
demand field and hopefully we'll
grow the next generation of
archaeologists. Thank you, Mr.
Chair. Great. Thank you very
much for down. We're gonna go to
next representative Silva, and
Representative Vincent, and then
uh back to ranking member
Chatfield.
Thank you, Chair. Uh, thank you,
Representative Terrazas, um.
And Debbie, correct, yeah.
Um, I just wanna, um, name my
support for this, and I, um, I
love working with Sierra County
soil and water. They helped test
our soil on our land out there,
um, and I learned a lot and it
was from someone who's local,
like they're from the community,
uh, same in the soil and water
in Otero and Donana. Like these
are folks that are
born and raised here, so, um,
really appreciate that uh
orientation, and then also Lake
Valley, um, also Sira County,
like that was at the bottom of
the ocean and uh taking my own
kids out there to look for
fossils, things like that, like
I think that's a really great
learning lab for lots of folks,
so the more that we can use that
as a classroom, uh, with things
like this is great. So thank
you, chair. Thank you very much
for uh Silva. OK, uh, next we're
gonna go to Reent Vincent.
Uh, great, we'll go back to
ranking member Chatfield, very
short, anytime we work on
federal land, we have to do
tribal consultation. The agency
knows all the hoops, and they
can usually get you through it.
OK, great, uh, great comments.
We're gonna go to Representative
Hernandez for the motion. Thanks
for and Representative Doo,
thank you, Representative Doo,
also for your work on this, and
we're really grateful it's in
the budget, uh, for the 2. We
will ask for a tabling motion
simply because it's already in
the budget, but great to have
the conversation here tonight.
Mr. Chairman and I moved to
table, uh.
of the bill, uh, House Bill 206.
Or 3:15.
0 sorry, sorry to bring that one
back. OK, uh,
And there's a motion by
representative, um, Hernandez,
seconded by Representative Dow.
Again, great work on getting
this in the budget. Repentrasas,
thank you for your work and
always great to see Ms. Hughes
here and thank you for your
work. Any opposition to that?
Any none?
We adopted that members that
concludes us for tonight. Thank
you so much for your work,
um, and we will see everybody
tomorrow.
