Raul please.
Representative Allison.
Can you see anything more.
Representative Allison.
yeah.
you
already asked me to call role
bill.
Representative Anderson.
Here.
Representative Armstrong.
Here.
Representative Brown.
Is getting locked in.
Representative Castellano.
You just.
Representative Chatfield.
Representative care.
Crowder.
Here.
Representative Dixon.
Here.
Representative Garcia.
Representative.
Representative Hochman Vigil.
Yeah.
Representative Lane.
Representative Lane.
Representative Lotta.
The European.
Representative Sarinana your.
Representative Sweetser.
Representative Trujillo.
Representative Brown.
Yes Representative Chatfield.
Representative Garcia.
Representative Lane.
Yes.
Representative lane.
I saw Representative Lane just a
minute ago on the screen yes.
Representative Lane.
I've seen him.
It's just muted or something.
Yes she's with the
representative Armstrong yes
there yes.
Representative Switzer.
Representative Trujillo.
I share small.
Here.
And representative chair.
Chair woman Lundstrom.
C..
Okay I don't think that there
are.
I think we've got
here.
Vice chair small.
Yes Representative.
I didn't get my name mentioned.
Okay.
Thank.
Okay we got your.
Okay Representative Allison I
did call you and I saw you.
Okay thank you Representative
Sweetser.
Here.
Anyone else that I missed that I
called.
Brown is here you just can't get
her camera on or unmuted.
Thank you representative.
What about Representative
Chatfield MI missing somewhere.
Right
now.
Okay I share small I think we
get start up.
The list of the participants.
Thank you
for.
Years excellent.
Thank you very much this would
be a state we're gonna get
started is I know Mr happen is
on to help give the United
requests this year eighty is yes
this is Chief Justice we go on
by chance Mr Burciaga probably
should be joining us.
Once again yet.
Okay we'll give that just a I
don't see brown.
We'll give a quick.
Committee members.
Speaking hello to join Mr Papp
and and then get started with
United requested the it is.
Mr chairman I just want to
confirm my audio is now working.
Confirmed.
Mr chairman.
I happen to know the rate of
brown and representative
Armstrong in the same office so
I know Representative brown will
be joining us momentarily.
Thank you very much
Representative Anderson.
Mr chair representative
Chatfield along I got to the
annex so he will join us in this
be a few minutes late.
Sounds great thank you very much
Representative and ranking
member Crowder and.
Was very very few chief justices
John.
Thank you very much Mr pep in
thank you Chief Justice Vigil
for joining us today we would
love if you and Mr happened
would
kick us off with the United
request of the judiciary for the
house appropriations and finance
committee meeting today thank
you thank you so much RT is
going to go first and then I'll
follow up with him so thank you
are you going.
Your goals for the recruiters
going over the budget hope you
all receive something in the
works like restaurants are.
Worker very go.
Representative is needed out
here
that kind of a high level
outline of our our unified
budget for those of you who are
not where we do have a bright
prosecutors and judiciary
current budget questions
starting April or may yeah
hearings are actually helping
the Senate finance rural public
legislature are in July and
Representative go up through
from our budget committee you
our chief gentis Council on then
to the Supreme Court everything
that is requested has to be
approved by the Supreme Court
that's how you get a unified
budget and many of you are
asking for the course of the
session when I talk with you
about appropriation that we're
trying to get avid Basco fuel or
somewhere else our existing
unified budget and the answer
that question
no usually and that's a
nonstarter for that reason well
there are cases before as a
protest last for Representative
Fajardo budget so are determined
by budgeted expenses
of the need for blood is or
We have our within that program
Representative dot specific
where they were budget you have
a discussion of where some of
the responses to the pandemic
what the what the judiciary has
taken we're very to learn
through the Supreme Court to
merging she responsive format
that year he needs every week of
course arsenic reminded me a lot
of this is John answer any
questions four point and keep up
the safest possible you more or
less what you're asking last
week we are restarting your
trusted workforce where a lot of
these unfortunate you have to
say process.
There is a questions about what
kind of thank if you would like.
Teachers insurers are
legislation again some of our
research working on some does
not work it's not about any of
the legislation members want to
talk about that
The HSD.
Apple pay seventy so you can see
where our districts as we have
thirteen judicial district
crossover this year legislative
districts but was no one to try
Boller counties.
And
one two counties returns are one
case for crowns.
And are very very cover many
multi judicial district.
The services representatives but
we can say when I talked about
the first edition your call are
you can see that map out
seventeen and walked are you
that's the year we've got Santa
Fe Los Alamos forms.
The leader of the unified budget
is summarized on page fourteen
and fifteen.
We have twenty sure so that the
judicial authorities that
budgets to which you appropriate
make appropriations
separate from the administrative
office of courts which are
responsible for your grass
report board yes thirty
districts next fall for more.
The governor parents policy for
Senator boards together.
Make up all of the of course we
are going to.
Yes we used to make the program
Boston magistrates are we this
report consolidated the measure
to the districts so master's
account based on your selection
the state what and your District
Court we're making requests for
match reports well funding to
provide for those bills that
so my my message here is that
all the requests that it your
lan Judiciary came together last
summer to make budget request
you know we were looking at
maybe a billion dollars
shortfall you're a little more
optimistic about their needs and
we are lab work in the back our
position when we were at that
point we were concerned about
that there is a shortfall.
Our approach taken by the
Supreme Court and unified budget
was to ask the legislature to
replace the funding that
internet internet in our house
bill one during the special
session so hospital to last year
during the regular session was
about three point eight percent
increase for the judiciary and
the request for this year that
was about twenty percent these
are the budget we have now was
very.
Not flat budget regarding
probation you make this year ago
what's happened in that year we
went down but we got we hope
that the legislature the barn
our funding Representative three
point eight percent request
thank you for your hard work.
Google is your will you have
recommendations from the
executive from the FAA
recommendations in your the
council legislative finance
committee.
about the year unified budget
request.
Yes difference in the way very
were approached your request
will see on the executive side
is just zero percent lower cases
we are right is right now with
this new year twenty one all of
the school year.
That's a real problem with
Europe problem for records.
Reasons one is.
Our highest priority current
funding this we're going to
testify on fire judges that the
legislature created last year.
It costs about one point two
million dollars the current
market the judges and associated
staff.
Course was in households who
grade Gretchen one.
Senator our house bill one
and that was a special
appropriation for the errors
were not quite happy mas we have
another request for getting us
point through fiscal year twenty
one the idea of being we put our
money in fiscal year twenty
budget who are.
Wow that's not recognized at all
by the executive director New
again one five point.
so you're gonna want my bonds I
judges well that invasion.
Yes the recommendations are are
I have to share the product
longer discussion with Medicare
is that we want to see our
analyst and the LESC in general
we care for the idea that if
we're gonna look at all costs.
Funding for the last four digits
FY twenty one.
There were us that we are the
larger to consider using some
one thousand HSD has for our
current operations one fiscal
twenty two.
What budgeted total of and while
would be able to increase the
budgets that records the
this report will be Matt Paul.
After a lot of discussion that's
the recommendations the
formality so you'll see that Mr
courts have increased LFC
recommendation about R. one
point seven percent about half
what we're asking.
And most importantly US ones
those gestures mostly in the
workforce I judges we're
creating our we would strongly
encourage you to consider the
recommendations made by on the
street one of the other part
with a lot of discussion will
discuss we didn't really have
with us at night I noticed that
How was he was introduced and if
you look at once in the middle
reflects the LESC
recommendations however.
For that.
Usually LCS the recommendations
that we get while we're walking
over longer actually built but
what you're one seventeen isn't
urgent point that reflects the
allergy recommendations for hope
very that's an indication of our
point here for you when their
budget request that are one
seventy is the framework with
which to begin because it does
reflect those distractions more
or less the recommended
budgeting Senator two million
dollars are what right now
there's one thousand and she
then that read up
Our point nine million dollars
of increases for budgets of the
Mr Fox Sports so
I really hope that what did you
do to start a framework that you
see hospital one seventeen.
lobby before your next we're
talking about the agency budget
is one recommendation and more
one on funded a request what
about which is the trousers
Department losses that you want.
and otherwise basically.
Our digestive Committee message
for the unified budget request
more rigorous process within the
judiciary all requests for this
is about twenty percent
workforce back we address our
your go will be finished we are
the wall regular session.
Working to get medical back in
June when we are trying to
reduce the deficit for war
thanks in one it's very
fortunate that that says a lot
more.
Hoping that at least the last
part of the three point eight
percent I thank you we'll talk
about what within does that
question or not.
In the pharmacy recommendations
what were the for the.
Exactly right.
Our priorities for the judiciary
some of these are one part of
the special request.
Funding.
Are not researching fired
special section.
At one seventeen and I want to
recurring mastic beach while.
Just walking also thank you in
order to what about those plans.
Thank you Mr have been.
Mister Chief Justice.
So.
I'm sorry I was muted.
I don't want to create any
feedback so I was there
members of the so honorable
Committee thank you so much for
the opportunity to be to appear
before you today.
On a personal level.
I never imagined in my life that
I would be and.
This position to appear before
any committee of this sort of
this importance in my capacity
as Chief Justice of the New
Mexico Supreme Court so that's
the level of honor that I have
in a period before you here
today.
You know these are terrible
times but the juror to but the
judiciary has responded.
Within twenty four hours of the
governor's declaration of a
public emergency the Supreme
Court issued its first
administrative order to ensure
that the courts remain open.
And operating well the courts
also followed public safety
public health and safety
protocols for the protection of
our employees of the judges and
all the people using the court
system.
We continued to keep the courts
open and operating under various
directives issued from the
Supreme Court and let me just
give you a process fuse small
statistics from March through
August of twenty twenty district
courts magistrate court to
metropolitan courts conducted
over two hundred and thirty
eight thousand hearings they did
this using tech technology
remote hearings and other
efficiencies.
In addition we established what
we call an emergency response
team to handle COVID related
matters in the courts all across
the United States the emergency
response team reviewed and
approved reduced operation plans
for all cords
for in person proceedings in all
thirteen district courts natural
court eighty one municipal
courts and thirty three pro
probate courts safety protocols
including screening at the door
temperature taking at the door
Mandatory masks social
distancing installing plexiglass
were necessary and disinfecting
high touch areas we also
provided all the courts with
necessary signage and supplies
masks hand sanitizers and jury
supplies in fact in the first
quarter of this year the
judiciary spent over two and a
half million dollars the COVID
response efforts for masks sure
supplies thermometers sanitizers
plexiglas barriers computers
cameras it in addition to that
over sixty nine thousand person
hours were expanded to ensure
that our courts remain safe and
open.
I am also proud to report to you
that the judiciary submitted for
reimbursement for COVID related
costs under the cares Act and I
I told our judges we were not
going to get any of this money
back but we were requesting that
they submit these requests for
reimbursements and they did as a
result of our efforts seventy
three thousand dollars were
returned to the general fund not
to the courts but we were very
very happy to do that.
Now the recent session special
session cut the judiciary's
fiscal year twenty twenty one
budget by almost three point
seven three percent and stripped
away seven hundred and thirty
six thousand nine hundred
dollars to fund I statutorily
created judgeships we are asking
that these cuts be restored
these which would essentially
result in a flat budget for the
last three fiscal years this
will enable the judiciary to
continue streamlining case
proceedings expanding technology
and making court process is
easier for the public to have
access all its safety of these
pandemic COVID times.
I am I am the judiciary are very
thankful to the committee for
Representative recommended
modest increases for certain
District Court.
And Mr David Abbey and his staff
in particular Amanda Dick Abbey
have been.
The best for us they represent
the best and professionalism and
expertise and I want you to know
how much we thank them for their
help and cooperation in working
with the courts in developing
the budgets that are before you.
With that I ask please to be
able to highlight certain
requests that are particularly
important to the judiciary.
RT mentioned judgeships I
judgeships were created by
statute if they were funded in
of the original house bill two
these are recurring funds that
that because of the statute that
was passed must be spent by each
District Court to pay for those
judgeships.
I this was based upon a US
workload study of the national
center for state courts the
first judicial district was
recommended for one even though
the study showed they need one
point five projects the second
was foot second district was
funded for two judges even
though the study showed that he
did five point seven judges the
third was funded for one judge
even though the study showed
they needed to point for judges
and in the twelfth judicial
district there were there were
funded one judge even though the
study showed that they need
needed to point for a judge's.
These positions in their costs I
have to size or not
discretionary they they must be
paid because they were created
by statute the cost for these
judgeships to recurring cost
totals one point two three
seven.
Nine hundred thousand
dollars.
The one in the special session
stripped the recurring funding
and made a one time allocation
of five hundred thousand to the
judiciary for these judgeships
so they could be funded the end
of this year to the end of last
year.
Now small percentage increases
that were recommended by the
committee for the first second
third and twelfth district
reached three partially restore
these recurring funds we ask as
our number one priority that
these funds the fully restored
as recurring funds to each of
these district.
Secondly free trial services
which deals with the release of
individuals arrested for
committing crimes.
Judges always have and always
will have the final say on pre
trial release in fiscal year
twenty with legislative support
the judiciary initiated pilot
programs in Santa and San Juan
counties using a data driven
tool called the public safety
assessment to assist judges in
measuring the likelihood of an
inability of an intro individual
charged with a crime with that
weight they would number one
committee new crime if released
especially violent crime and
number two the likelihood that
the individual would appear at
future court proceedings in
addition to these two pilot
programs the Bernalillo county
District Court had had the same
program using the same a
measuring tool.
Now in addition to that these
private programs did you sherry
established a centralized
operations center it's the first
of its kind in the entire United
States this centralized
operations center completes a
criminal history background
check using state and FBI
databases and performs an
assessment of flight risk and
you criminal activity released
using the public safety
assessment tool the results are
available to judges all across
the state of New Mexico before
defendants can be made available
all across the state of New
Mexico before a defendant makes
an initial appearance in court
to determine conditions of
release.
Now using these tools according
to the U. M. institute for
public research.
The study data from July of two
thousand seventeen to March of
two thousand nineteen six
thousand four hundred cases
their findings were as follows
and Bernalillo county more than
four out of five defendants are
Bernalillo county were not
arrested for a crime while on
pre trial release.
Ninety six percent were not
accused of committing a violent
crime well released eighty three
percent of those released had
known you criminal activity.
And they've also made a finding
that something as simple as a
text message from a pretrial
services officer to someone
that's been released record
hearing can reduce failure to
appear rates five twenty five to
thirty six percent.
These.
These these pre trial services
programs work and we're now
asking through the
administrative office of the
courts all of that.
Hundred and fifty thousand
dollars to expand evidence based
pretrial services in requests
you don't go and you Luna
counties which is the thirty
sixth judicial district and also
in Dona ana county which is the
third additional district
appropriating these funds I
emphasize will save these
counties money they will enhance
public safety and reduce we
arrests.
I let me just give you a small
example it costs a hundred
eighty dollars average per day
to house someone in the
metropolitan detention center.
Compared to a cost of nine
dollars and forty cents for pre
trial services Bernalillo county
this includes pre trial staff
and drug testing what does not
include electronic monitoring.
This this request is in the end
you'll see point services
division as a budget increase
which LESC did not recommend.
Third security for magistrates
courts.
Recent events have demonstrated
the need for security and our
public buildings and for our
employees.
Our judges and employees who
work in our magistrate court
houses all across New Mexico are
particularly vulnerable as a
practicing attorney I remember
going to some magistrate courts
of for on behalf of clients in
the magistrate judges sitting in
the in the court room by
themselves no one is there with
them conducting hearings and
conducted proceedings that are
were recorded no one around to
protect the.
Recent news accounts related
that possible targets were
courthouse and we took the best
precautionary measures we could.
It has been rightly said in
prior studies dealing with
courthouse security that is not
a matter yes there's going to be
an attack but when.
Indeed the clear need for
security at these courts house
has been repeatedly expressed in
the legislature we believe and
hope you agree at the time to
act on this dire need is now.
Hey C. has made a special
request of eight hundred
thousand dollars to provide
security and I District Court
statewide.
And and that came about as a
result of the reduction in the
actual formal request that was
made.
I implore you on behalf of our
judges and court employees.
To provide them with this will
Security they so they so much
need.
For.
The knock D. N. O. C. upgrade
with the nonsense were is the
secure connection established by
the judiciary between courts and
jails all across New Mexico and
that this allows judges to
conduct hearings involve people
involved the people arrested in
jail in custody remotely using
video technology this saves
transportation costs it provides
for security and it provides for
a quick efficient hearing up
interface between the judge and
the person.
Custody.
This is been proven essential
for courts to continue to be
able to providing due process to
these individuals during the
pandemic.
It's been proven that it's
valuable and that and that it
works and we need to these funds
to do this A. O. C. six two
hundred and seventy thousand
dollars for to upgrade and
integration project continuation
this includes replacing cameras
and detention centers and at the
AOC.
The request is made and in a
couple of places I want to
advise you first of all it's
made as a special request and
it's also made as a fiscal year
twenty to see to hi T. special
request what the differences
between those I have no idea
what I did want to advise you
that it is one request but for
some reason that maybe Mr can
explain its in two places LFC
did recommend approval of this
special request.
Yes the data exchange program
this is something I'm very very
excited about this program
originated in two thousand
nineteen when the legislature
wisely directed the New Mexico
sentencing commission to create
and maintain a data sharing
network to promote data sharing
information among criminal
justice agencies.
A part of this program was
rolled out in June of twenty
twenty which includes New Mexico
court data for many data sets
this includes open an active
warrants release orders
conditions of release domestic
violence orders of protection
this position at sentencing and
various civil justice.
Activities for example let me
give you an example there is an
active warrants a street now you
can go to the website on this in
this program and click on these
data points it will tell you
where the last known per with
the last known location was of
every person in that area who
had arrest warrants out for them
imagine this is the information
being shared among all police
agencies
in the courts and that's the the
goal of this project.
You can also see how many coal
court hearings are conducted and
what type and by who.
This program is also cloud based
so it does not interfere with
any justice partner database
everyone can access to this
through the clout.
I'm currently the project
includes San Juan county sheriff
warrants arrest bookings booking
sheets traffic citations the W.
why and traffic says citations
and it also has information
relating to Bernalillo county.
M. D. C. indicates.
Justice partners under this bill
will eventually include district
attorneys the public defender's
the department of public safety
the Law Enforcement
Administration corrections
mental health and probation and
supervision the value of this
tool for public safety is is
self evident.
Hey LCS asking for five hundred
thousand dollars as of fiscal
year twenty to special request
to support moving the project
forward to increase the number
of databases and the number of
agencies other than to Judiciary
who will be able to share this
data.
You'll see as the term of that
movie to the next faces two
hundred and fifty thousand
dollars and not and once again
even though the formal request
that was made was five hundred
thousand they reduced to two
hundred and fifty two hundred
and fifty thousand dollars as
the real as the actual cost that
this is going to make.
So we ask that LFC increase its
recommendation which was a
hundred thousand dollars to two
hundred and fifty thousand
dollars.
Why do you want to address the
courts and the judiciary coming
out of these.
COVID Dimmick tons.
Not withstanding the pandemic
the courts continue to confront
the ballooning case filings have
proceedings.
Well finally spell in the first
two months in the district
magistrate of metropolitan
courts they are now returning to
pre pandemic levels averaging
seventeen thousand two hundred
and seven new case filings per
month since March at the same
time the number of closed cases
have declined by about twenty
percent when compared to last
year.
Clearly a backlog is being
created during this pandemic.
We anticipate a daily job New
Filene's in three classes of
cases landlord tenant cases
foreclosure cases and consumer
debt cases as the courts come
out of this pandemic.
No it's not that the courts have
been idle we've conducted like I
said earlier numerous court
hearings throughout this
pandemic of trying to at the
same time to comply with safety
protocols the courts have
conducted again over two hundred
eighty thousand two hundred
thirty eight thousand hearings
are using technology remote
proceedings and other
efficiencies.
I am forming a task force as we
speak to establish a strategic
plan to handle the backlog of
cases that we anticipate coming
as we come out of the pandemic
the goal is to get to pre
pandemic levels as quickly as
possible but this is going to
take money to pay for extra
judges jurors court personnel
and mediation and facilitation
programs.
We are there for us for five
hundred thousand dollars for
this purpose.
The actual cost it it's going to
be is very very difficult to
predict so what we did was we
look to the as a measure of the
cost of the foreclosure
settlement programs into
districts the second judicial
district of the thirteenth
judicial district the second
judicial district has been
allocated three hundred thousand
dollars for its foreclosure
program at the thirteenth
judicial district a hundred and
fifty five almost a hundred
fifty six thousand dollars.
These programs in these two
districts had a settlement rate
of seventy two percent of the
settlements sixty nine percent
resulted in homeowners keep in
their homes.
The committee has recommended
fully funded these programs and
we respectfully ask that we be
given the option of implementing
similar programs in other
districts across the state and
utilizing additional sources to
address the cert significant
backlog that will result from
this pandemic.
The last thing I want to address
is the this is asking you to
provide the judiciary with
general appropriations flecked
Act flexibility in this time
the pandemic you know this this
Terrible disease spreads there's
no don't tell me where it's
going to go when it's going to
go where the hot spots are going
to be and the judiciary has to
have an opportunity to respond
appropriately.
The the COVID emergencies of the
need to address that will
continue for the next fiscal
year and again we must have the
ability to respond to this and
we have asked that the Supreme
Court up that we have asked that
language be inserted the general
plot procreation is act giving
the Supreme Court the authority
to move funds between courts in
the administrative office of the
course for quote COVID
emergencies as they arise where
the air rights no I recognize
that the committee does not
recommend language giving us
this is so this authority but we
ask that you please give this
careful consideration.
We have the ability to respond
to COVID emergencies and we must
be given this flexibility
We have discussed this in our
chief judges council which is
the chief judges from all across
the state of New Mexico and we
have agreed on a procedure so
that if if the Supreme Court
proposes moving funds from one
district to another district
that they will be fully vetted
in the same way that are up
budget requests are vetted and
we'll put be put to a vote
ultimately with the
determination from the Supreme
Court but it is not something
that will be done a **** nilly
will be given careful
consideration.
I want to thank you for this
time I hope it wasn't too long
it's not my practice to get too
long winded speech
I stayed ready for questions if
you have any and again thank you
for your time I do see on my
window here that it's snowing
and so we're all going to have
to get home those of Senator are
traveling so again thank you so
much for your time.
Thank you Mr Chief Justice I
want to apologize for missing
the first part of your
presentation we are are working
out the Kinks in terms of of
bill presentation and that kind
of thing but I appreciate it
we're not going to take
questions we're gonna go through
the whole presentation and then
we may go back and do that I
want to help the committee look
at page fourteen and fifteen of
the unified budget document that
was in your notebooks.
And as you can see each one of
the categories is and there are
the FY nineteen general fund off
budget as it goes through for
the Supreme Court court of
appeals AOC and then you can see
all the District Court that are
listed in there and then the
very last page on page seventeen
gives you the geographic
boundary of those district
courts.
So when you think about gosh are
you may not know where the first
district your second district is
you know and so forth.
But that Matt is a very handy
tool to have when no these folks
are are speaking I'm gonna turn
it over to RT and RT you know me
I wanted to be brave I want you
to be very brief we are three
hours behind schedule today due
to a very very long floor debate
so I'm going to ask you Sir to
be brief and we've got a whole
bunch of other agencies that
we've got on our schedule for
today so would you go ahead
already your next major very of
the Chief Justice happy go first
so I would be shorter more spoke
before he did I'm happy to
answer questions unless the are
you want different discussion
but I discussed unified budget I
went through are able to the map
okay.
Questions on any of the
committee members not to thank
you all right I appreciate that
so what I'm looking at that a
year unified budget did you use
page fourteen as your guide.
Yes yes Roger all right so
in the old days when we got into
districts we used to ask those
that are traveling the furthest
that they would speak first
that's not the case now
everybody's at the same distance
so I think what we're going to
do that is just to go through
these up very quickly and will
start from the top there and if
there's anything that we need to
say that say it RT you got your
hand up journalism wrong your
schedule the districts for a
repair Lonhro okay and you've
got us the Supreme Court of the
statewide point the president
are individual budgets next
Monday.
Of.
The court of appeals is that not
going to happen today that well
those are going to be Monday
afternoon next week all right
everybody else of the district
and metro will be on Tuesday and
we were just there doing
overview of the unified budget
for the members today okay so I
also have the key hearing shape
down from LFC that's listed here
what the LFC recommendations are
with that being said will ask if
there's any questions of either
Marty or the Chief Justice.
This is all right here they did
this for right now we're into
that's okay do we have any
questions.
Our.
Representative Allison yes I'm
looking at the unified budget
request summary yes Sir page
fourteen and fifteen of the.
Of the hardback versus the queue
for the key hearing issues at
the bottom the LFC
recommendation of one eighty
five point three million does
not correspond to any of the
other figures on page fourteen
and fifteen.
Is there in addition to go ahead
and doubt are your Chief
Justice.
Madam I'm not sure what
Representative Egolf is looking
at a hundred eighty five million
I can tell you that the whole
unified budget request is one
eight.
There were some additions about
four thousand for rate increases
from there we we have a control
over to actually pro just over a
hundred ninety million but it
may be that the recommended
amounts more or less than that
I'm guessing that's what I meant
yeah we're looking at here are
yes of the LFC recommends a
hundred eighty five point three
million for the judiciary as a
whole so the representative was
looking at the LFC so that
wouldn't tied down to that
wouldn't I with the unified
budget this the unified budget
is that by that point the
judiciary LFC is the legislators
a recommendation on what we
should what we should of put
into the budget so if we could
I'd like to ask the committee to
please look specifically at the
unified budget.
That's provided by the Chief
Justice and RT.
Any anybody else.
Thank you madam chair already.
You know we get just.
The ideas we get so much paper
in front of us the necessarily
the right paper.
His I've been looking at the
gender that was the.
That was not the correct gender
so I'll tell you what why don't
we go ahead down and thank the
Chief Justice for your
presentation today Sir certainly
your comments will be taken
under consideration and I
appreciate the time you spent
with then explaining some of
these things in more detail on
your trip out to Gallup it was
helpful for me to understand all
your pre COVID and post comment
issues and certainly I'll be
sharing that with the committee.
Thank you madam chair and thank
you again for this opportunity
thank you Sir thank you all
right members of the committee.
Okay let's move on then next.
I such issue still with us
three six dollars.
You're here to discuss agency
called three fifty six the
governor.
Yes good afternoon madam chair
members of the committee or I
guess I should say good evening
I know you guys about a.
A really long day and it's I
understand that I'll keep this
as brief as I can and provide
the information that you need to
move forward on this and so
Just wanted to go over is Chief
Justice Vigil said earlier it's
been incredibly difficult year
you know our office as well as
the executive an all of the
agencies have had ten months
worth of dealing with COVID you
know but we've also worked hard
to make sure administration
realizes other accomplishments
as well and so a few of those
are detailed on the slides that
I believe you have in front of
you and so you know I can talk
about those but I'm sure you
don't want to hear all of those
accomplishments and you guys to
look at those if you have
specific questions I'm happy to
talk about some of those
accomplishments I think the one
that I really do want to
highlight though is the cabinet
in your community it was
something that we started last
year and was doing incredibly
well we have had a couple of
those in various locations
across the state had taken a
pause during the legislative
session and had plans to come
back strong in every community
to you know bring our cabinet
there and talk with constituents
about issues that they were
facing and how we can best help
them and so unfortunately we
weren't able to continue that
because of COVID but it is
something that we started that I
feel you know made a huge
difference for constituents
across the state so I'm.
That for you thank you.
I'm going to ask Miss to
analysts also they want to make
it Madam to do the analyst for
this department want to make a
comment.
Madam chair and members of the
committee I and my name is Alice
Nichols and the LFC analysts the
governor's office I can review
that the different sheets that
Santo a a
yeah I can't part and acting CFO
together with me would you like
that yes if you would go ahead.
All right great.
So I'm the the
executive budget requests our
site there are executive budget
recommendations provided about
two hundred eighty one thousand
more in general fund revenues
and LFC recommendation and that
represents a three point four
percent increase over the FY
twenty one operating budget and
LFC recommendation represents a
three percent decrease and I'll
let.
At the base commissions.
You madam chair and members of
the committee I'm in regards to
the base the executive
recommendation provide about two
hundred nineteen thousand more
than the LFC recommendation for
personal services employee
benefits.
The office currently has about
eight to bake in fees and in the
FY twenty one operating budget
there is sufficient budget to
fill about two point five of
those thank you.
The executive recommendation
include the one additional FTE
and that is for the director of
equity and inclusion and that
includes a hundred and fifty
thousand additional.
All the LFC and executive
recommendation provide ninety
six thousand dollars for the
governor's contingency funds.
In regards to language both the
LFC in record LFC and exec have
come to consensus and includes
language specifying the
appropriation in the other
category includes ninety six
thousand for the governor's
contingency funds.
And in regards to performance
measures LFC and executive staff
have reached a consensus on
performance measures market.
Madam chair I can now turn it
back to trees that because I
don't or we can stand for
questions yeah I'm going to ask
the members to help us with the
personal services and employee
benefits calculation I'm gonna
ask Representative Dixon to tell
us what she sees her.
Thank you madam chair.
So.
Just to be clear I'm looking at
the three fifty six governor the
orange sheets.
Chart.
HSD co three fifty six page for.
Okay.
S. okay so.
It looks to me like and there
are eight.
Vacancies in.
The governor's.
Budget currently a full time
employees is that correct.
Yes that's accurate okay.
And.
Two point we would given
the amount of funds remaining
sorry madam chair and miss
because others given the
available funds for fiscal year
twenty one two point six of
those would be able to be
filled.
Yes.
So I guess my question madam
chair and it's because others
would be
How much if if you're asking for
an additional two hundred and
eighteen thousand more how many
positions that would fill in
addition.
Okay thank you madam chair and
members of the members of the
committee I'd like to clarify
that I'm we are asking for an
additional hundred and fifty
thousand above the current
operating budget and that would
give us enough funding to fill
about for the current positions
last the one additional position
we have leaving the agency with
about eleven percent vacancy
rate.
Thank you madam chair and miss
Montoya.
Appreciate that also and I just
need to say for the benefit of
the committee it's always been a
of the tradition of the
committee regardless of who the
governor is is that we allow for
the governor's budget
we just do that and we do that
for lieutenant governor also
it's been a tradition with our
Canadian license I've been on
this committee two thousand one
I want to I want to put that out
there I know that I've asked
that the lower they take in here
but
I want to take I want to ask for
that consideration was going to
Phelps Anderson and
Representative Albert Anderson.
You madam chair I was gonna ask
the analyst LFC analysts.
Is the Economic RecoveryCouncil
part of the governor's office
and is the money that goes to
the Economic RecoveryCouncil
included it watch it we're
looking at now.
Cindy.
Madam chair and members
Representative they are not it
is not part of our budget and it
is not currently included in our
operating budget.
Thank you madam chair then the
agency Montoya where will I find
that budget I I have some
specific questions to that
particular council and I'm I'm
wondering which state agency
will be the one will have the
opportunity to ask those
questions.
Madam chair representative I
understand I am not quite
certain I can definitely get
that answer for you and get you
the information as soon as we
are done with that.
Hello.
Yes thank you Representative
Anderson the Economic
RecoveryCouncil is a council
that was put together right now
to address COVID related issues
down Schlegel from our office is
working closely with that
council but there's not a
specific budget set up for the
council they review and make
recommendations and funding that
has come into the cares Act to
to address specific request
within the communities those
through department of finance
and administration to the grant
process that they have in place
and the money is allocated to
them.
Thank thank you very much for
that answer I'm a bit confused
so when the additional
information comes I'd like to
know how many secret meetings
they have conducted how much per
diem has been paid to the
members of the council and what
they consider their top three
accomplishments to be thank you
very much.
I'd like to get a listing of
that also staff I'd like to I'd
like to know how many meetings
state they've had and is there
opportunity do they.
Thank you equipment for their
meetings there so we'd like to
get some some of those copies
also so our staff will follow up
with that information.
Representative Herrera madam
chair but it can I just ask the
secret meeting question the per
diem and I'm sorry what was the
last request that you have
Representative.
His right his request was to
what were their top three
accomplishments thank you.
Okay thank you trace
Representative Representative
Herrera.
I'm
very curious about the the
stimulus money that's coming in
get a COVID under under really
president trump and and the
money that's going to come under
president I and I know we got an
additional four point seven
billion
already
allocated to the state of New
Mexico so what's difficult for
me is when we're when I'm
looking at these budgets and
looking at the numbers I don't
know how because these are all
executive branch decisions that
I'd like to know are you going
to make are you going to make a.
That information public how the
executive branch will allocate
some of it is directed some of
it is I guess discretionary or
eight up to you what department
gets what I'd like to know are
you is a governor planning on
making that the public so that
we can have a sense of of how
this money is going to flow
through the state.
Madam chair representative yes
it is our intent to make that
information available public
department of finance and
administration is working
closely with all of the
departments that are receiving
cares at dollars and COVID
funding and we're cooperating
that and plan to have you know a
dashboard that lays out all of
that money similar to what we
did last year with capital
outlay money where you go in and
look at a project that was
funded and see how that had been
spent and so we are working on
having availability for
individuals to see how those
allocated and spent.
Madam chair thank you.
I missed consenus I'd also like
to know when will you have that
available because that would
really help us in this budget
process okay Madam chair
representative that I don't have
an exact date but I can find out
of what the timeline is and get
back to you with that
information.
Thank you madam chair thank you
Mr.
All righty do we have anyone
else that has questions of a
tree so or the
The Dallas Representative brown
are you raising your hand.
Go ahead yes thank you your
thank you madam chair I'm just
curious for whoever can answer
this regarding the performance
measures summary one of the
items here it's an outcome of
the office of the governor and
that's constituent service cases
closed I noted that for FY
twenty the actual percentage of
cases close was ninety four
percent but apparently
there's a of a lower measure of
ninety percent expected for FY
twenty two so it's like a little
explanation why we have a
decline there and then I'm
curious to know the number of
cases that were handled in FY
twenty the types of cases and
what kind of staff assignment we
had to taking care of that
function the reason I'm asking
is we as elected officials are
always doing constituent service
trying to help them solve some
problems are usually related
this our issues with state
government agencies.
I know that house chief clerk
does a lot of constituent work
and I'm just curious if
if the governor's office is
getting at a different type of
case that comes to her attention
than what we might be saying no
it's a big question it.
Representative brown of course
our constituent services for FY
twenty was I'm gonna say largely
related to comment the office
received a total of four
thousand I mean forty six
thousand five hundred and eleven
constituent enquiring during
fiscal year twenty thirty six
thousand seven hundred and four
of those were directly related
to COVID in addition to those
cases we received from the March
to June time frame where we were
tracking those numbers we
received an average of two
thousand calls per week coming
into our front asked those calls
and those cases mainly ranged
from you know department of
workforce solutions that's been
a huge issue for us coming in
with individuals that are you
concerned there were several
mandates that came down from the
federal government that
fortunately provided additional
resources for individuals who
are no longer working but the
way those were rolled out in the
work that had to be done to rely
on the system to be able to do
that you know caused a bit of a
delay in getting those payments
out is going to be right program
and so you know individuals were
calling in our workforce
solution lines were receiving
upwards of a hundred and twenty
five thousand calls a day at on
some days and so they were
unable to manage although we
tried to staff up there as
quickly as we could pulling and
your staff and training them
from all departments that were
you teleworking that had
available staff and and also
contracting out the call still
continue to come into our office
at a high rate we were assisted
by lieutenant governor's office
to provided us some relief and
some staff to help with those
calls as well second to work for
solutions it was just calls
regarding COVID and Department
of Health anywhere from
questions or requesting masks or
wanting to report a business
that they felt was.
The non compliance we had you
know a lot of Department of
Health enquire res and then
third was calls coming in with
relation to Human Services and
services that they could obtain
and so
I think the decline that you're
seeing in the turn around time
was just because of the length
of time it's taking us to to
work those cases to conclusion
and get results for individuals
were not able to close them out
as quickly because sometimes you
know the the workforce solutions
basis with their overwhelming
numbers are taking them longer
to get back to us so that we can
actually close out a case but
the decline is not significant
in light of the number of cases
of the significance of how those
have increase our staffing level
in our constituent Services
Department has really we found
that it's we're don't have the
staff and it's been very
difficult to recruit during this
time period I think mostly
because we use the internet
quorum system that requires
training and oversight it's
really we found that very
challenging to do remotely and
get people trained up and so
we've used existing staff all of
the admins of the governor's
office have been trained and are
working on I. Q. and assisting
with caseload again lieutenant
governor's office has trade up
some of their staff and they've
helped with caseload and then we
will then a couple couple of
temporary staff to help assist
with us we are currently
recruiting for two full time
constituent services staff that
we do have funding in our budget
to fill and so the hope is now
you know with vaccination and
hopefully be able to get people
back you know in some sort of
semblance you know slowly we can
start to get constituents this
is individuals hired full time
and back in our office to help
to increase the turnaround time
on those cases.
So thank you very much for that
answer I think we've all had to
work together at whatever level
we serve to help our fellow New
Mexicans on this and I really
appreciate CNN Dacian that
you've experienced
pre COVID what was your caseload
looking light say before March
of twenty twenty I think three
pre COVID lets you have those
numbers in front of me
I don't exactly have those
numbers in front of us but I
believe that we were looking at
somewhere in the neighborhood of
eighteen to twenty thousand
cases on an annual basis in the
prior year but I can confirm
that represents your brand and
get back to you I I think a ball
park is and madam chair is
always looking for that I I
assume there was a doubling at
least of of what you're and
we're we're dealing with so
thank you very much and then we
create the time thank you
already thank you Representative
brown
because I'm not the host for
this meeting I'm not sure that I
see everybody's hands is there
any other member that has a
question for the governor's
office.
Okay I don't see any so I'm
going to ask for motion from the
committee.
Madam chair.
I'd move the executive
recommendation.
All right we have a motion to
have a second for the the is
that in chair thank you and we
have a motion and a second is
there any opposition to this.
I don't see any opposition so
it'll go into our building of
the budget with that
recommendation and thank you
Teresa thank you analysts madam
chair thank you very much I
appreciate your time this
afternoon and again if there's
any questions or comments or if
there's any you know concerns
that any of you have you know
please feel free to reach back
out to us and we'll we'll get
this information that you
requested back to units and the
banner thank you all right thank
you thank you very much miss
because Saddam's all right let's
move on to the lieutenant
governor I saw his smiling face
a little while ago is that how
is that you way better so I know
it's not just a picture great.
All right let's go to the to
avid then we'll go to the
lieutenant governor go ahead
analysts.
Thank you madam chair members
the committee for the lieutenant
governor budget recommendation
the executive recommendation
provided nearly twenty nine
thousand more appropriations
then the LFC recommendation and
the L. the executive
recommendation represents a flat
budget where's the LFC
recommendation represents five
percent decrease in general fund
appropriations and all at this
point I S. speak about the the
basic.
Okay misspent Clio.
Thank you madam chair and
members of the committee in
regards to the base the
executive recommendation and
thousand more for contracts in
the LFC recommendation primarily
for legislative liaison contract
and about fourteen thousand more
in the other category for travel
costs with the anticipation that
we do get to open up again and I
will that get of the lieutenant
governor will get to travel and
meet with constituents the
executive recommendation also
provides slightly higher funding
for personal services employee
benefits in regards to
performance measures LFC and
executive staff have reached
consensus on the performance
measures.
Madam chair before I turn it
over to our lieutenant governor
we do have a slide show if I
have your permission I would
like to upload that as well.
You know I don't know that we're
going to we're going to do that
Cindy I appreciated I'd rather
hear directly from lieutenant
governor we're way behind the
power curve on time I apologize
but if we could let's go right
to our lieutenant governor and
and give him the floor go ahead
Sir thank you madam chair so
good to be here and appreciate
all the work you and the
committee that do every single
year it's good to see bill
Valdez and the many years that
he's provided this this
committee as well as Cindy had
mentioned and as similar with
the governor's budget I'm
constituents are Mrs has really
been that demand for this year
never do we expect that we would
be in a pandemic and never do we
expect that the model
constituent service calls that
would come in would be at the
level that they have been but as
a state on but and but then it's
been true of reward to be able
to help so many Mexicans in a
time in need primarily around
unemployment issues stimulus
questions and then a lot on the
vaccines and testing more staff
has been really they stretched
very thin but yet have been able
to meet the need and to make
sure that we're responsive to
people across the state I want
to say thank you to this
committee for the support that
allowed us to purchase the I. Q.
constituent services system that
has been so helpful and
meaningful that we've been able
to communicate with the
governor's office is to reset
indicated we work very closely
with them to assist on the same
system and to ensure that we're
not having duplicates of cases
and making sure that we're
getting the most efficient use
of that technology so without
the committee supports and the
legislature support we want to
have been able to be at that
level we're fully staffed and
lieutenant governor's office the
work is is continuing and our
request would be to adopt the
executive recommendation to
ensure that as New Mexico opens
up and as we're able to track
brown specifically rural
communities that's been a big
effort that we've tried to make
sure that we're representing all
parts in New Mexico.
Going into rural communities and
I'm proud to say that we've done
that we're looking forward to
being able to do it even more so
once were beyond the pandemic
I'd like to recognize Martinez
to Baku's from my office as well
was on here and if there's any
questions that we're happy to
answer those questions thank you
for this time to share a little
bit of background of the work
that's been done is had a
governor's office all right
thank you Sir thank you
lieutenant governor for go to
questions I'm gonna ask
Representative Herrera tells
what she sees on the person
services chart on page three
anything there that we need to
see or know about.
You need to come off my your
omitted Representative Ferrer.
I'm so sorry madam chair thank
you
Mexico looks to me like you're
it of the total F. T. E.
positions are the same request
about the LFC and the executive
branch
I guess we go with the the
executive recommendation on this
this budget anyhow I guess
that's what I understand madam
chair.
Representative Crowder for
questions.
Go ahead Sir.
The.
Your.
Thank you.
Sorry Representative we are
having a little trouble hearing
your.
Can you hear me now yep yeah we
can now okay on the last page of
our volume three on the personal
service.
As part of eighteen thousand
dollars.
Yes.
Also
you thousand eight hundred and
twenty three dollars sent back
to.
I'm sorry Randy we're not
hearing it I think you have to.
What was the eighteen thousand
dollars useful for the transfer
out of the SCG.
You are here that
I'm sorry madam chair and it
couldn't hear their eighteen
thousand madam chair Cindy was
able to to pick that up but I I
on her has eighteen thousand I
apologize.
If I may madam chair try this
let's try it that way Randy
you're good I got the video so
that perhaps should have no
more.
Of the yes A. B. R..
Transfer sheet in the back of
our volume three it shows that
there is eighteen thousand
dollars transferred out of PSEB
I'm curious what that money was
used for instead of use for the
employees and transfer of fifty
thousand.
Eight hundred twenty three
dollars that was reverted back
to the general fund it was
unspent I have how come that was
not spent.
Yeah thank thank.
Thank you so much for the
question Representative so the
eighteen thousand that was used
we did have some contractual
services that were available
primarily for assistance during
the legislative session we would
and use that full amount so
that's why that was not used in
that line item there which were
able to get the supports of the
committee was able to move
forward with the I. Q. system is
far as the fifty thousand that
was reverted that that was
reverted and it was during the
time when there was the the
impact was our reserves were
were very low and then we saw
the impact in trying to do what
we could to make sure that we
were being as frugal as possible
and still getting the job done
but at the same time is making
sure that we were contributing
back to the general fund to
assist us when are are at early
stages of this pandemic where
finances didn't look as where
they're at today in our reserves
were much less much less than
they are now.
Thank you lieutenant governor I
I will tell you hearing the term
being frugal is the best thing
I've heard this year.
At thank you madam chair all
right I think you Representative
Crowder I don't see any other
hands up in the the vice chair
is been texting me if he sees
any have of if not I am ready
for a motion.
Madam chair yes move the
executive.
All right we have a motion for
the executives are sent in it.
Have a second for representative
Garcia is there any opposition
to that motion I don't see any
opposition so thank you
Representative are excuse me
thank you Montana governor of
former senator former LESC
member and and we appreciate it
thank you Sir for being here
today thank you madam chair
members of the committee.
Already go to the next committee
which the next hearing which is
the secretary of state.
I'm going to ask the analyst to
speak first and then I will ask
agency to loose all over our
secretary of state to speak so
let's go with the analysts first
please.
Thank you madam chair members
the committee again I'm Allison
Nichols of.
State and I'm
excited the DFA secretary of
state to one
overall sos the LFC and
executive recommendation provide
Pacific and increases in general
fund revenue or the secretary of
state's office and that's
primarily for the elections
program
overall the increase now see
recommendation by what's in this
local.
This bill and increasing the
executive recommendation is
about fifty six percent
It boasts recommendations also
provide one point six million in
fund balances and that's from
the federal help America vote
act granted the state received a
few years ago and is still using
number election security I'm the
recommendations both provided as
I mentioned significant
increases for election costs
amounts primarily to cover the
cost of consolidated local
elections and also to reimburse
counties for election costs and
that's a result of that recent
legislation that shifted more
the cost burden for election.
The state and wake counties
The executive recommendation has
a flat general fund budget for
the admin office program LFC
recommendations of two percent
decrease for that program
And
alternative assignment to go
into a little more detail about
admin ops okay Simon you want to
go ahead are up yet sounds good
good afternoon madam chair
members of the committee again
my name is Simon Miller and I'm
an analyst with DFA
so since about fiscal year
twenty fifteen the secretary of
state's office has relied on a
patchwork of special and
supplemental appropriations to
meet recurring costs so the last
couple years the executive and
the legislature have both were
to address this issue resulting
in a general fund budget
increase of about twenty five
percent from fiscal year
nineteen to fiscal year twenty
one the FY twenty two
recommendations again include a
substantial general fund
increase however the increase is
largely for as as Allison was
talking about is largely for the
November twenty twenty one
consolidated local election
which has never previously been
part of the secretary of state's
budget of house bill four oh
seven of twenty nineteen shifted
the financial responsibility of
administering the new
consolidated local election from
localities to the state so
that's why you see such a
significant general fund
increases in both
recommendations so if you now
turn to P. six point you all now
briefly go ahead and go over the
differences within this program.
The six four two is the
administration operations
program the purpose of this
program is to provide commercial
registration services to
businesses in New Mexico and to
provide many of the
administrative services needed
to carry out elections overall
the executive recommendation is
twenty thousand or zero point
five percent greater than the
fiscal year twenty twenty one
operating budget well the LFC
recommendation is fifty five
thousand four one point four
percent less than the fiscal
year twenty one operating budget
the majority of this difference
is in the person category the
executive help the person
category flat to fiscal year
twenty one well the LFC
recommends of fifty five
thousand dollar decrease both
recommendations include a
relatively high on funded
vacancy rate it's about nineteen
point eight percent in the
executive recommendation and
slightly over twenty percent in
the LFC recommendation are this
is because both recommendations
really prioritized the budget
increases in the elections
program mainly for that the
consolidated elect local
election look at discussed
previously so now I'll give it
back over to Allison to talk
about the elections program P.
seventy three I had else.
And yeah I I think we've pretty
much covered this the the
consulted local election and
reimbursement for counties which
is estimated at about
two million what were the key
you pieces of the increase here
recommendations also support a
network administrator position
that is federally funded and the
avid reached consensus on
performance measures and targets
for those programs.
Available for questions thank
you.
All right I'm going to ask Miss
the secretary of state to go
ahead and talk and then I'm
going to ask before we go to
questions about a call on
Representative Lane details what
he sees in the person services
chart let's start with your bag
if you would please.
just assaulted shatters sound is
not working she's going to call
in so many okay seconds well
well she's calling in Wirth
Representative Eli he can tell
us what he sees on the person
chart.
Thank you madam chair I am here
what I.
Thank you madam chair what I'm
seeing probably sticks out to me
the most is it looks like there
are nineteen positions that are
vacant for fiscal year twenty
one
That's probably the biggest
number that that we've seen so
far that sticks out to me okay
what column are you on
Representative.
Call and see.
All I'm saying they can't full
time equivalent and are these
funded.
Take another look at this list
as a state we've got Maggie on
the board here it is are you
there Maggie.
I see your face but we can't
hear you.
Madam chair and members of the
committee
running Calvin chief financial
officer for the secretary of
state's office okay I just want
just want to address that
question regarding the vacancies
we have continually had these
unfunded vacancies they are in
our unfunded and impart just due
to
You know attrition and and
natural vacancies however we
continue to request funding to
be a to fill these positions and
so we keep them open hopeful
that they will be funded we have
been unable to fulfill them and
so they continue to.
Contribute to our unfunded
vacancies we have had for.
Positions that were bacon for
over two years that were
recently closed out through
spoke so again we continue to
carry about a twenty percent we
can see right and we continually
asked to bring that down to
about ten percent which is
representative of art twenty two
request as well.
All right do we have the
secretary of state yet is she
able to join.
Madam chair she says that she's
trying to log out and back in
okay
All right.
Give a minute here to see if she
can get back in the.
In our room here.
We do have a note at the bottom
of our of our personal services
charge here.
noting that the agency
transferred a hundred and thirty
thousand to the personal
services employee benefits
category from the contractual
services and other categories
could you tell us what this for
while we're waiting on the
secretary of state to log in.
I'm here can you hear me we can
we can
carry it out keeps happening it
keeps switching to saying that
I'm connected by phone and I am
not.
I had so I apologize I don't
know what's going on.
Well we've we've had some
interesting situations we
apologize to we're all doing the
best we can so thank you for
being here today yes ma'am
thanks again for your patience
and please if if you want
running how to go ahead and
answer the question you just
asked.
By all means and and then where
whatever you can do you mind
answering that question they
will go to secretary of state.
Yes madam chair thank you the.
I assume that you're asking
about the transfer that was made
at the end of last fiscal year
from from personal services yes
so that was that was as we
continue to not be able to fill
positions because our budget
projections won't support a full
year of of the salaries we end
up with these kind of awkward
balances what we chose to do
at the end of last fiscal year
was anticipating
the costs that were related to
the match that was required from
the tears Act funding that we
receive to directly we used that
personal services to as match so
we moved it into the contractual
and other costs category as
match
in order to do that the pay for
the primary.
Endemic costs one of the
significant things that we did
again because we cannot hire is
that we did end up hiring
temporary employees under
contractual services so that's
what those funds were used for.
Okay all right thank you all
right let's go to the secretary
say that you are all yours.
Thank you so much madam chair
and welcoming graduations Mr
vice chair and other members
especially the new members for
those of you who have never sat
through as secretary of state
hearing during my administration
they tend to be at these
presentations tend to be quite
lengthy and complex and so at a
good knowledge in your the
privative of time necessary I'm
going to make try to make this
is inefficient as president a
presentation as possible you do
have I believe a paper copy of
our power point before you so
I'm going to really just had on
the high points of the
presentation and then of course
we will continue to answer any
questions you may have
So at we're starting on slide
three really for twenty twenty
at.
A French but it was a hell of an
election cycle a lot for us to
have to deal with not just here
in New Mexico but across the
nation we really had three
elections at the regular local
in twenty nineteen the primary
and the general in twenty twenty
that regular local election was
quite successful we're very
happy about it we had of course
our first pandemic collection in
the primary forty two percent
turnout very proud of that and
at the general election we had a
a record voter turn out at turn
out of sixty eight percent but
the total number was a record of
all time here in New Mexico and
thankfully cares Act funding
from Congress helped carry us
through the primary election and
from the the general state cares
funding for the general election
to ensure that we had COVID safe
practices at every polling
location.
I'm.
If you go to site for you can
see a little bit about how we
have managed to continue the
work at the secretary of state's
office in light of the COVID
nineteen environment I won't get
into all of those things we have
work to excuse me
madam secretary I don't have
that power point so you may have
to share screen on that we're
asking all agencies to share
screen so can you do that and
that just point to that page.
I would be happy to madam chair
I was I'm sorry I was told that
we couldn't do that so if
someone wants to give me that
the screen sharing capacity I
have it up on my laptop right
now okay it's just that I do not
have the hard copy in front of
me that doesn't mean that our
members don't but
Show of hands if you all have
your if you have a copy of this
we don't need to do the share
screen but okay I'm saying other
shaking their head that they
don't have it either okay okay.
Sure I'm sorry I'm not sure who
the committee at present as his
insurers thank and can you step
out make sure that they do that
for us please thank you.
Okay I think I've got it here
okay okay great great great
great
Okay if that.
So we're just talking about all
the elections last cycle at our
accomplishments and business
services hi this the slight
pertaining and we'll make sure
madam chair that you got a copy
of this I don't quite know what
happened there this is
apparently technology day of
technology fund so all of the
things that we have done in
order to make our office more
efficient the one thing that I
will point out on this screen as
we are making a special work for
twenty five thousand dollars to
improve our phone system I think
anybody including probably most
of you try to get a hold of our
office this last year have
fallen victim to our antiquated
a phone tree system and we
really do need to improve the
technology particularly in light
of the the working from home
environment to make that more
efficient so we can get those
calls answered quickly.
Our at the slight here we're
talking about our we do have
some special appropriations
before I get into our budget
request for the next fiscal year
we do have a three hundred and
eighty seven thousand dollars
special appropriation to
complete our ballot box project
which we started last year many
of our counties received at
ballot boxes which can be
permanently installed this is
part of again going back to that
legislation from house bill four
of seven that basically allows
the counties to be able to have
these drop boxes to collect mail
ballots whether it's a special
election and it's an all mail
election or whether they request
an absentee ballot so this is a
one time cost and will purchase
them install them.
I'm and ensure that they are
and.
Monitored etcetera we also have
a special election request
before you add as you all know
we it looks like we're gonna be
can see in the first
congressional district that none
of us were necessarily
anticipating and told very
recently that is going to come
up in this particular fiscal
year that we are currently in
it's likely going to be in may
of this year depending on when
the vacancy occurs when
Representative Holland if
formally resigns and it's
confirmed is confirmed and then
resigned so we do need that
additional funding there I
counties the primary county of
course being brilliant County in
which to conduct that election
part of the the three million
dollar cost is of course it is
going to be a COVID election so
we still need to take a lot of
other professions and provide a
lot of the
the things necessary in order to
ensure eight COVID safe
environment for voters I'm
moving into our budget request
so thankfully I'm as of last
year we've moved away from
largely from the piecemeal
funding that was the norm for
office for many years since
you've been on the committee
while serve no no this whole
saga and I will not I trudged
through again if any of the new
members want to ask what I have
a virtual cocktail in in here
sad woes from years past we will
be happy but we do have some new
factors to consider for FY
twenty two so even fiscal years
as FY twenty two there will be
two elections the early regular
local election in November and
primary in June and then on
fiscal years we will always have
the general election
Moving on.
Our budget request therefore
looks a little different and is
significantly higher in FY
twenty two I'm so I've gone
through sort of this this little
lad graph with you all before
basically what what we requested
is in order to support
legislative mandates mandates
that we are currently under not
mandates that were predicting a
projecting but things that we
have to do so these are and
expect these are expansion
requests these are nice to have
these are we need these in order
to do what the current mandates
of the election code are.
I'm.
Fund this slide basically going
back to what I was just saying
about sort of the real costs as
as was mentioned by the analysts
the increase is a direct result
of legislative changes to the
election code in twenty eighteen
to twenty nineteen regular local
election and as mentioned the
status first well responsible
for that cost.
I'm.
We move on to the next slide
that's caution from House shift
from counties to the state is
about four point seven million
dollars and it includes poll
workers same day registration
clerks office supplies postage
costs of the election already
borne by the state such as
ballot on demand systems at
programming and support on
election day and of course you
can see here sort of a full hi
if you will of the various costs
that we undertake for election.
I'm as far as our administration
and operations of program
request because it's similar to
what has been previously as
Veronica mentioned we we
continue to request to fund our
vacant positions and given the
additional action and
Administration an election funds
we are in need of a filling
these positions as well as
eighteen finance to manage the
workload.
This.
Concerns with the current
recommendations and and madam
chair.
Thank you we can't hear you.
Thank you we can't we can't hear
you.
All right how about the your
assistant Maggie while you're
working on getting back and can
she pick up where you or your at
that point.
W. secretary of state sharing
Pino and I'm going to ask of
running out of print to cover
that flight yes thank you yeah I
apologize it's just money mind
boggling for us also so if we
could just go I have have her go
ahead and continue the.
Thank you.
Madam chair I am back I don't
know why that keeps happening if
it happens again I will ask
Sharon to pick up for me.
We'll do it that way if you are
okay go ahead.
At so so the concerns with the
budget recommendation and so
We understand that staff has
prepared our budget and intended
to get us as close to their car
request as we made we understand
it's a significant increase in a
time when budgets are being
reduced instead of increased we
we are fully aware of all the
challenges but there are some
specific concerns that we would
like to address.
First of all neither
recommendation supports the
status quo staffing and
administration program and it
doesn't again support filling
any vacant positions DFA has
recommended a nearly twenty
percent vacancy rate which we
have continually asked reduces
you know madam chair and so this
doesn't allow us to hire the
needed staff but more
importantly we can't afford to
pay the staff that we do have
through the end of the fiscal
year so that's a concern the
flat recommendation eliminates
about our budget for network
support for our business filing
support and for production of
the blue but we haven't been
able to produce a blue black in
the last several cycles and we
won't be able to again I doesn't
allow for published real rates
for audits and for at our our.
Do it costs that we incur.
We only have twelve positions in
the election program and we
operationally can't afford
imposed vacancies and the
election recommendation
currently only accounts for the
local election that was
mentioned by the analyst and
does not provide sufficient
budget for the shift of
classroom counties to the state
for the primary election as we
previously mentioned.
So these are things that I am
genuinely hoping we can work on
and catch up cleanup
because again we are going to
come back to probably next year
with hat in hand asking for
three million dollars and we're
going to go back to that
piecemeal funding problem that
we've had in the past which I
know madam chair you and your
team and DFA and LESC have
worked so hard to get us past
that so in summary you see the
summary there
We we expect to hear more from
the alleged election budget we
need dedicated funding it's not
expansion these are real
mandates these are things we
have to do now we're not asking
for nice to haves were asking
for we have to dues and we
really need that support and and
funding positions and again look
forward to working with LFC
slash at AGFC staff and DFA
staff to help close this gap and
thank you again and I'm sorry
again I literally have no idea
what's going on with zoom so
let's just say dams into the
dumpster for after okay.
What we're going to do then I do
have about.
Couple of folks that have some
questions we'll start out with
Maggie if she gets bumped off
again we'll go to the the other
person to just continue
answering the question so we
don't have to stop and start.
People that I have on the list
are Representative Crowder
Representative Castellano and
Representative Anderson at this
point so we could our
Representative Crowder.
Thank you.
Not because.
So.
Thank you for sorry Randy we
cannot hear you you're going to
have to speak right into that
computer.
Thank you ma'am I'll ask my
question later thank you.
Thank you Randy our.
Representative Ambrose go ahead
Sir.
Madam chair my question you
asked earlier.
Of the thank you they'll already
Representative Anderson thank
you madam chair I'll be
shortened to the point in the
presentation we talk about an
expansion item which is a both
recommendations for in for a
federally funded network
administrator is that a
permanent position or temporary
position.
Mr AG representative sorry.
If one is fully funded project
your it is.
Percent federally funded and to
is it permanent or temporary.
Thank you madam chair
representative for the question
it is a temporarily funded
position through federal funding
it is a term position but this's
addition that we anticipate
needing for the long term I
don't anticipate a point in
which cybersecurity is going to
be an issue that is no longer on
the table as you are probably
aware madam chair representative
elections are now considered
critical national infrastructure
by the federal government so
while we are going to continue
to work with Congress to
continue to receive additional
funding to continue our cyber
security programs we are
concerned that when the federal
funding runs out that we will be
left without that critical
position I and that's why we put
in the request and you know what
want to make sure that that
position continues moving
forward madam chair
representative.
Thank you and one follow up
question on that is the of
network administrator solely
responsible for cyber security
or will this individual have
broader duties than that.
Madam chair representative they
will have broader duties but we
do need that additional network
support I in eight oh it to help
provide that the stability for
the election system thank you
very much thank you madam chair.
Right do we have any other
questions for our secretary of
state I mean okay we have
Representative Garcia yes Sir
thank you madam chair madam
secretary the doctor asks a
question because I've been the
then not all school on your
funded vacancies what's
happening that money.
We're going to.
Madam chair representative I
will ask for running had to fill
in the details on that if you
don't mind but basically I I
don't think that we have taken
any money out of our personal
services and moved it anywhere
else so it's going to help
support our budget with an
personal services but Veronica
do you have anything else.
That are or do you have anything
else to add on that front.
Yes madam chair and
representative Garcia and
previously mentioned we did lose
some money at the end of last
fiscal year to help us cover the
match that was required for the
cares Act funding that we
received we had a match of about
seven hundred and seventy
thousand dollars so we've moved
a little over a hundred thousand
dollars to help cover that what
we're requesting now is in in
part to cover the positions that
we do have filled which at this
point is forty seven R. F. T. E.
in our admin program and we're
asking for three positions which
are not expansion positions us
specifically to provide funding
for those positions which have
been historically vacant close
to two years.
Thank you madam chair.
Then secretary is that common
practice to well we spend money
it was this is the first one for
one position or two positions
whatever.
And as someone else if you are
you should you refer the cures
act match okay say we wouldn't
have had a Kerr Jack matched
with that of money going to.
The hundred fifty one thousand
five hundred think.
Representative.
Yes that money would have
reverted back to the general
fund and we did have you know
discussion with the FAA and LFC
at the time that that was the
best use of the funds at the
time especially as we're going
into the session not being able
to request any additional funds
for that for that match many and
just leveraging leveraging that
that federal funding that we did
receive.
Thank you madam chair secretary
I appreciate that answer it just
kind of struck me funny that we
we use money.
Designated for one thing cover
something else on the budget.
Thank you madam secretary thank
you for reading thank
Representative Garcia I'm not
getting any messages of anyone
else on the list so I'm gonna go
to represent a small for the
motion thank you madam chair of
the LFC recommendation.
We have a motion we have a
second for the second.
Have a motion and a second
is there any opposition to that
motion saying that I just want
to assure the secretary of state
the was our first hearing it's
our base start and we will be
taking up the issues issues if
you mentioned every year we've
had trouble and making sure
there's adequate funding with
all these changes in election we
certainly recognize the we've
got to pay for some of the stuff
for goodness sake.
So thank you very much and sorry
for the.
For the telecommunications
issues here this evening I'm
sorry but thank you so much
madam chair members of the
committee have a good rest of
your evening your support.
Thank you very much and I am
remiss and jumping over the
state auditor so let's go back
to the state auditor agency
codes three eight.
Mr Cologne are you there Sir I
am indeed madam chair and I no
problem been happy to listen
into the secretary of state you
always.
Sorry about that let's let's go
to the analyst and then we'll go
to user so go ahead analysts.
Thank you madam chair members
the committee asked time and I
will briefly review the
different sheet for our state
auditor do executive LC
recommendations are very close
they differ by less than one
percent the executive
recommendation provides a slight
general fund budget in LFC
recommendation decreases the
general fund budget to present
the LFC recommendation also
provides sixty three thousand
more and budgets houses in the
executive recommendation.
recommendations provide greater
thousand in audit fee revenue
and that's a decrease from the
previous year recognizing that
in previous years some of the
revenue was was one time revenue
and also recognizing that.
It making office too reliant on
the revenue could be detrimental
and forcing them to prioritize
that wind when choosing audits
It'll affect on their
operations and their
independence in FY twenty they
collected a little over three
hundred thousand and on the
revenue for reference.
and
both recommendations provided
flat budget for personnel the
office has about five hundred
thousand dollars vacancy savings
and it's twenty one operating
budgets and the analysts have
reached consensus on performance
measures and targets and I'm and
I don't know if there's anything
else you want to add on that.
Madam chair members of the
committee I I don't have much
more to add these are two very
similar recommendations and
they're both about flat with
fiscal year twenty one so that's
all I have.
Right thank you let's go to the
state auditor go ahead Sir I'm
sorry for jumping over your
apologize.
No worries madam chair and
distinguished members of the
committee it is great to be back
with you.
We just start out by saying
we've got lots of members of the
office of the state orders team
stayed after hours to tune in
and I would never miss the
opportunity to tell my much
appreciate them their work their
commitment to the mission and
goals of the office of the state
auditor you know every chance I
get to say that I traveled the
state in a normal year and this
year I traveled the state zoom
and I will tell you that I'm
usually have the opportunity to
speak like today and it's
followed by applause or smiles
and things like that but the
people at the office of the
state auditor along with
thousands of civil servants
around the state of New Mexico
rarely get handed a microphone
and they're rarely offered
gratitude so I always try to
begin my presentations thank
thanks to our civil servants are
public servants like a hundred
and twelve members of our
legislature the last legislature
in the country to be a non paid
citizen legislature and I am a
huge advocate for changing that
but I see thank you today is day
pod a seven hundred and fifty
six of awesome at the office of
the state auditor and I want to
tell you about our vision and
mission of accountability
transparency and excellence in
government let me just start out
with some of the workings of the
office of the state auditor
we've got lots of folks who have
zoomed in and dialed into the
legislative website as you have
taken the roundhouse to the
world and a lot of people to
listen in and have a more
transparent and inclusive
process so look we have an audit
acted that every year we work
with our stakeholders to make
sure that we have an audit act
that governs the process of
oversee what will be a billion
dollar budget this year with our
small four million dollar budget
of the office of the state
auditor we do that every year we
allow the stakeholders to engage
in the audit act adoption and
make record the make
recommendations we make
adjustments each and every year
annually it's been revised every
year for almost twenty years now
in fact this year is the
twentieth year of the audit act
it is.
Is running and working very well
to protect and serve New
Mexico's taxpayers and families
we will update the auto rule in
March and it will be published
on March twenty third of twenty
twenty one we're required by
statute to do this and I want to
say thank you the team members
who focus on making sure that
happens each and every year
other current vacancy rates for
offices about sixteen percent of
the rate is calculated between
classified exempt and our
elected position it does not
include the two vacancies that
this committee has advocated for
the past in terms of filling and
that is our intern program we've
had great success of the office
of the state auditor with our
intern program when we've been
able to have it we've been able
to have staff members come on
through the internet program and
we hope to have it back in the
future but the divisions in our
office can consist of the ones
you see there on your screen the
administrative division the
financial audit division the
compliance and regulation which
includes a very very important
program that you instituted a
guardianship and conservatorship
oversight program with the
administrative office of the
courts we have are very high
profile special investigative
division and our government
accountability.
Office moving on to tell you the
highlights of each of those
office the potential audit
division has its highlights
there it really does ensure the
financial affairs of every
agency are thoroughly examined
and audited throughout the state
we've got about four hundred
fifty property dispositions are
reviewed annually before they're
approved and put in the books
and we support our local public
bodies with that work we provide
oversight and conduct between
five hundred and seven hundred
reviews annually and audit
procedures we oversee the firm
profiles that allow about
seventy independent public
accountants to be able to
provide audits and oversight for
the eight billion dollar budget
for the state of New Mexico so
what you're seeing here is a
governmental agency snapshot
from two thousand nineteen is
audit which of course we brought
out in twenty twenty and this
data is presented as a snapshot
in time but it captures the
reports they were released as of
January July second twenty
twenty the information in this
report covers about five hundred
agencies that receive full
financial audits as many of the
members are aware madam chair
members the committee you know
that not every agency and
department entity undergoes a
full financial audit some have
agreed upon procedures those are
not reflected in here what this
does in our annual report shows
the number of agencies that we
oversee.
Of audits are conducted.
We can go to the next slide I'm
very very proud of the slide.
Not to my office in this case
but proud of the state of New
Mexicos agencies and those that
we provide oversight for as you
are aware an opinion is issued
on everyone of the financial
audits and they can be on
modified or modified opinions
and they could even be
disclaimed opinions but in this
case what we're always seeking
is an unmodified opinion no one
modified opinion doesn't mean
that the office of the state
auditor says everything is going
great for a particular agency it
doesn't mean that the conduct
that we identified in that
particular agency is valid or
validated by our office in some
cases you can have an unmodified
opinion and findings that are of
quite concern to our office what
this means is that there are
financial houses in order that
the financial statements that
were presented by the particular
entity they are presented in a
way that they could be relied
upon and so that's what the
this shows here that ninety six
percent almost a full five
hundred of the agencies that we
conducted the audits on and
oversaw the audits for we're
unmodified opinions you'll see
just nineteen of those near five
hundred audits were modified
opinions moving to the next
slide I'd like to take you to
the other divisions in the
office of the state auditor talk
a little bit about them the
government accountability office
that's the office is good
writing very important
information over the course of
the last year to all of our
stakeholders and we just say
that when we say stakeholders
when we sent out a bulletin or
we send out a review or an
advisory whether it's about
cyber security whether it's
about special allocations during
emergency period like we've been
in now we're talking about three
thousand stakeholders they get
that notice and that information
the government accountability is
help me with all my presentation
Stephanie Davis's been
overseeing this division and
she's done a great job.
We in our office under the
leadership of our deputy state
auditor Natalie Cordova CPA
who's with us today on this on
this soon call.
This office conducted our audit
rule trainings which are
normally done in all corners of
the state you know madam chair
that we come out to your area
and conducted these trainings.
Yes we want to see is that
during this pandemic we realize
some great things and one of
those things and I know the one
your members is going to like
this is that we have been very
fiscally prudent and we've been
able to be miserly about our
resources as it relates to
trainings why because we haven't
had to have hundreds of people
travel from around the state to
get tore in person trainings if
you can believe this we had
about a thousand people join us
for our own time presentation
this year and that's just for
that one training that's tens of
thousands of dollars that were
saved for the state of New
Mexico and the agencies that
that attended our training
because they didn't have travel
they didn't have per diem they
do have all these things that
the state usually has to burden
the expense of and I'm very
pleased to say that thanks to my
team and working with the New
Mexico Society CPA's we were
able to provide practically
seamless training you know the
the audible secretary state she
had a little bit of trouble
there with our audio and we had
little glitches like that and I
don't think I handled them as
gracefully as the secretary of
state but we got through it and
all our stakeholders said that
it was a terrific training and
they were previous in the hope
that we do it again in the
future and I can assure you
madam chair members this
committee we will let me move on
to the yes I do division this is
the special investigation
division this is the one your
often most familiar about this
is the one where if you have a
concern with your constituents
have a concern they can file
anonymous complaints with our
office and there are whistle
blowers they provide two point
one million eyes and ears on the
ground in all thirty three
beautiful counties of New Mexico
to let us know when they've got
concerns about waste fraud or
abuse we get anywhere from three
to five hundred complaints
annually the special
investigation division reviews
those to make determinations as
to whether or not we have enough
of a concern that we send them.
Over to our independent of
public accounts for a deeper
dive during their normal agreed
upon audits or whether we
sometimes even designate special
audits and you see some graphic
there you see a graph graph
there or to I should say about
those referrals to IPA's to
mitigate the risk in the field
and then you've seen in the
press and you know about some of
the results of that work of our
special investigations division
let me move on to constituencies
when I became state auditor
seven hundred and fifty six
awesome days ago we established
a constituent services office
now let me be very clear we deal
with constituents are verses
each and every day at the office
of the state auditor my ideas
that I want to be the number one
plumber in the state of New
Mexico with a constituent has a
dream that's called we want them
to call me your red headed
freckle faced Palmer and I'm
gonna try to get it I'm caught
let me also say that I will do
that in the back and most
frequently if I can't solve the
problem and put them in the
hands of somebody I trust in
government I I rely on the
office of lieutenant governor
and robin and Missy the baka and
lieutenant governor Dr how we
what I was doing a phenomenal
job assisting us in this regard
so it's a one person shop that
constituent services that person
handles all my scheduling and
outreach and our direct contact
and constituent services we can
only do that with the support
I've got to say most frequently
of the office of lieutenant
governor so I want to offer some
gratitude there I will also say
that the cabinet secretaries.
Each and everyone of them have
been extremely responsive when
we reached out and asked for
their support let me just also a
point out the guardianship and
conservatorship program sits up
in our office and Lisa is a
great job with this we work
diligently to provide a
comprehensive program for review
for guardians and conservators
around the state administrative
office of the courts has worked
hand in hand with us on your
instruction to make sure that
the public has a process when
they have concern about those
who are most vulnerable in New
Mexico those who seek
conservatives and guardians and
we've really got a proper
banging on all cylinders out of
state and I'm grateful for my
leadership team for getting that
in place we do rely upon the
judges to make those referrals
but phase two or guardianship
conservatorship two point OO
we're hoping that the that we
will be able to do some random
testing so that we can add that
additional layer of security and
oversight for guardianships in
concert is now look last year
and the year before you all love
with these next two slides there
are less to this is a cool
little two page handout that
I've given you in the past this
is really a highlight of our
budget request now I want to say
thank you to both executive and
LFC and miss Nichols you did a
beautiful job presenting and
thank you for working with us
throughout the year as we
develop to request and that we
have our reviews for our
performance measures of the
state.
I appreciate you hearing us this
is my third presentation dear
Committee and this year you
heard us you and the executive
both made a change in the
recommendations you heard the
message is that what we rely
upon conducting audits to
generate our budget it provides
more risk to the public because
there are are audits are driven
by revenue as opposed to risk so
this year everybody's on the
same page our budget is in line
whether it's exec LFC or even a
request and I just want to say
thank you for that now the
executive budget recognizes more
appropriately the fact that we
can't continue to rely upon our
audit fund that we have been
protecting for the last several
years to make budget the other
one is the reserves that we have
in place right now they're about
a little less than one million
dollars but that point is going
to be gone if we don't change
our behavior within the next two
cycles.
and so I'm very very concerned
about that now executive
recognizes that and that's why
the general fund request is
slightly higher in the executive
budget overall the budgets are
about the same literally about
an eight thousand dollar
difference between the two
recommendations and the second
page of the slide shows that
shifts and changes in the two
hundred three hundred four
hundred categories now I know
that you're going with the yes
and I understand that but I
would really ask that this
committee consider the fact
that.
We can not rely upon that audit
fund that audits one should be
protected for the special
occasions audits thank you asked
me to do with us you do in times
that are of great need we have
honored the five percent
reduction or flow or budget
request is flat we are doing
everything we can to be fiscally
conservative and I know that
that may surprise some members
on the committee but I promise
you if you look at the way we
have behaved over the last seven
hundred fifty six days you will
see that in fact we have been
fiscally conservative and this
little chart the second page of
this little handout that each of
you love last year and the year
before madam chair members the
committee really does show that
we are asking for FY twenty two
that this committee adopts the
executive a request based on the
comments that I made prior look
I am happy to be here it's been
a beautiful run I'm grateful to
everyone of the members of this
committee it's believed to see
the returning members the
leadership as it is madam chair
you have spent time individually
with me and I'm grateful for
that and and I don't take that
lightly I know you can't afford
to do that with every agency and
I'm grateful that you've taken a
particular interest in hours and
we've been able to committee
your communities and hold
entities accountable and they've
adjusted their behavior we've
had good results and I'm
grateful for that as well but I
know that is because you're
behind me standing in the corner
and shaking your head in the
affirmative and I appreciate
that support for the office of
the state auditor we also love
to welcome people like the
audible representative Debbie
Siriano who's with us for the
first time on this committee a
wonderful educator who is
absolutely a joy to see out on
the zoom call so I stand ready
for questions as does my
leadership team they've all
dialed in here today to be with
you and it's great to see my
fellow constitutional officers
here like Jana wills Stephanie
Garcia Richard in the honorable
state treasurer to my commercial
thank you very much madam chair
members of the committee thank
you Mr auditor thank you Brian
I'm gonna ask before we go to
questions I'm gonna ask for.
Senator Siriano what she sees
with the person code here for
the state auditor can you tell
us what you see there
Representative.
I couldn't quite hear what you
said but.
About vacancy there's eight.
But he's not asking for much any
more funding for.
Okay Representative we usually
go through the chair when we're
responding and what we would
what we would do in my making
the presentation is on page four
if you could just identified the
column you're referring to and
then we can all follow along
could you do that please.
Once he.
And they can seize but he
doesn't ask for any additional
funding so.
All right okay let's go on to
the questions of the folks that
we have well we're gonna start
with Representative Anderson and
Representative Dicks Sen.
Representative.
Thank you madam chair of madam
chair real quick of I just want
to compliment the auditor on his
successful training I think that
was a great accomplishment and
certainly reduce costs to rural
New Mexico so I encourage you to
continue that we didn't talk
today about internships but I
know you are a big supporter of
that and I suspected COVID
climate didn't improve the
chances of that but I believe
strongly that in state
government these internships
give young men and women in New
Mexico remarkable opportunity
opportunity to gain work
experience of that is important
to them later in life last Mr
auditor I wanted a quick
question on is I'm gonna fight
ordered.
The same as it is on modified a
new word for qualified is there
a difference and if so what is
that difference thank you.
Madam chair honorable member I
and members of the committee
thank you let me start out
number one I appreciate you
highlighting the rule impact of
our virtual trainings indeed
having grown up in Valencia
County I understand the
difference between rural and
urban New Mexico and and I do
know that that these types of
opportunities really do have an
over representation of positive
impact on rural New Mexico and
as the Legislature continues to
expand its investment in
broadband to our rural parts of
our state I know it's going to
continue having increased high
quality impacts of thank you for
that I will also say thank you
for your continued advocacy for
intern program we were able to
this past year have an intern
for one of our quarters a very
small intern program and I will
tell you that she what she went
from our office are you you're
not you're gonna love this
number one I've got two people
on my team right now that we're
in terms of the office of the
state auditor been Romero is
doing a great job and and the
intern we had this last year to
work from our office she's at
Penn state and she work from our
office to another intern a
program right out of our office
with my letter of recommendation
which I was very proud to sign
she's now interning on Wall
Street and I just hope that she
brings all of that knowledge
back to New Mexico she's going
to be a phenomenal leader sees a
superstar from New Mexico
question thank you for that
third and final let me just say
that I'm qualified and.
I would say that in and my
deputy state auditor Natalie
court of a has the designation
in those beautiful letters after
her name CPA I only have C. you
know.
CFE which I got when I became
state orders after that exam but
I certainly haven't secretary
the CPA's exam but I will say
that unmodified and qualified
are interchangeable and modified
is the most common and most used
in the vernacular of CPA's so I
think that that would be
accurate Nelly Korda seem to be
if I get a thumbs up on that or
asked to speak I got double
thumbs up which always makes me
happy because if I'm pleasing
Natalie court of I'm doing a
good job.
Thank you Sir good luck and I'm
done madam chair.
Representative Dixon and then
Representative Garcia.
Thank you madam chair and
honorable state auditor it's
great to see you
I was wondering madam chair Mr
are or if you could.
as we're looking at the chart on
page four
Representative Sariñana did
highlight the number the eight
vacancies
and according to column and that
translates to about five hundred
and eighty thousand dollars.
My question madam chair and Mr
auditor is why is it so
difficult to fill those
positions are we sort of what
the issue is and getting those
positions filled and are we
continuing to fund at the same
level
that amount.
Thank you madam chair and
incredible Representative Dixon
members of this committee the
person we just say it is a joy
Representative Dixon to be able
to call you the honorable I have
watched your career I have seen
you serve New Mexicans and
beautiful style at the federal
level and to have your expertise
on this committee is super
helpful and your question is
absolutely fantastic madam
chair.
Representative Dixon let me just
say that.
You've highlighted something
that often doesn't need to be
said because I think.
Compression and being able to
attract individuals who can meet
minimum qualifications and
expertise for offices like the
office of the state auditor.
It's a perpetual challenge and I
understand that and I tried to
do the best I can under the
circumstances I feel very
fortunate to have the people on
my team with the designations
they have because they could
take those designations like CPA
and and many other designations
of my team has into the private
sector and do far better
financially especially in the
short run as they provide for
their families I have a young
staff and providing for families
is not easy when you are young
I've lived it I've been there
and I've done that and so for us
it's always about trying to
strike that balance of bringing
in highly qualified superstars
and attract them frankly with
some high energy and with some
true dedication from the core
team that we have at the office
of state auditor that shows that
you know at the end of the day.
Your bank accounts important but
it's also what you've
accomplished and serving New
Mexicans by protecting our
families taxpayer dollars.
That means something and that's
really who we end up with on our
team but we won't fill a
position most we got qualified
applicants and in this day and
age when the accountancy sector
is already trying to identify
individuals to serve in terms
both small and large it becomes
harder and harder for us to do
that we have put in white papers
we put in appeals and we've
gotten the smallest of increases
thank you to my team I'm Natalie
and others who have worked on
those Miranda to get those very
small
benefits for our team members
who decided to stay with us in
spite of private sector trying
to lure them away so it's a
perpetual challenge but it's
it's it's one that kind of went
on stated my appreciate you give
me an opportunity to remind
everybody what we deal with them
state government particularly in
agencies that require high
capacity highly credentialed
individuals to lead.
Thank you thank you madam chair.
All right Representative Garcia
Representative Herrera.
Thank you madam chair all Mr
state auditor but for the state
auditor
I was reading this thing is
amazing just a comment on this
part right now so maybe in that
the LFC and exec are less than
one percent apart from each
other so that means you must be
doing a good job someone.
Usually I you know I've been on
this committee for four years
now well for my fifth year you
hardly ever see that more that's
very rare.
And Representative all it's
in US aficionados G. asked
already but.
What what questions are during.
On that five hundred thousand
dollars you have to do they can
save and where is that money
going to work that we do.
Madam chair unable
Representative Garcia members of
the committee I'll just say that
we are budgeted for vacancies
and so it's not as though we
have a five hundred thousand
dollar float there so that's the
majority of those funds and we
have I think maybe.
A couple of slight bars that
would of allowed us to fill in
some of the gaps in our budget
again I would ask my deputy
state auditor step in but I'm
permitted response so far that I
haven't fallen off the track but
she has anything to add I'd be
happy to have her do that at
this time and with that madam
chair I would like to get the
microphone to deputies say our
record of a CPA.
Thank god that the auditor thank
you madam chair representative
Garcia that's correct in
addition any vacancy savings we
have at the end of a fiscal year
goes directly into our audit
funds to replenish if you will
our audit fund so we're able to
save those funds and apply them
to the next budget cycle.
The.
In other words at the end of the
day would you request for more
budgeting you take that into
consideration as money already
in the budget the correct.
Madam chair representative
Garcia members of the committee
that is that is correct and and
may I just say madam chair I
know we're trying not to be
verbose but it is important to
acknowledge Representative
Garcia is comment and that is
number one the executive has
been paying attention to our
requests and they have they have
been kind in acknowledging the
changes that we've asked in our
budget and and Allison and and
Mr Abby's team have done a
tremendous job of working very
closely with us to ensure that
we are being prudent with the
resources that were trusted with
and and I think that's what
speaks to that near eight
thousand dollar difference again
I know that it's lower wins the
day but in this particular case
please understand that while the
end result is the same the
reliance that the LFC is seeking
on our on our audit fund is
dangerous and that is why I'm
asking this committee to highly
consider the executive
recommendation and I sincerely
appreciate your knowledge and
the continuity between the
request and our request as well
thank you.
Thank you madam chair thank you
Mr Autechre good talking to you.
Our role under.
Already Representative Herrera.
Thank you madam chair thank you
Mr auditor I guess I I'm curious
about what happens what's the
process when somebody gets a
qualified audit or modify not.
Madam chair honorable
representative from the north
and and members of this
committee it's a great question
and essentially what I would say
is them up on a watch list and
they have a corrective action
and we have worked very closely
with some agencies that have had
some very substantial challenges
to come into compliance but
these are all red flags and
warnings for us which heightens
our sensitivity to any
complaints that are larger their
office for those particular
agencies so our special
investigation divisions you know
there there are on higher alert
but then we do try and provide
that again oversight to get them
into compliance I'm pleased to
say that we've been able to do
that with some agencies or
during my tenure and we will
continue to focus on those at
risk agencies we do have an at
risk list that we that we
maintain Madam chair on a
Representative members the
committee so that again our
entire team and the public which
all of this is a hundred percent
look let me just say when I say
we embrace accountability
transparency and excellence in
government in the excellence we
try and celebrate those who have
been doing great with their
financial house during my tenure
but we also make sure that the
public's aware of these things
and we put them all on our
portal if anybody says we you
know I'm enquiring about the
audit for a particular
governmental entity whether it
be in Rio Arriba county or any
of our the thirty two beautiful
counties in New Mexico we not
only directed to our portal but
we attach the audit and provide
the link so they can get in the
future if they want to look we
really do try and provide high
touch customer service at the
office of the state ordered this
is something that's very
important to me whether it's a
phone call or an email
constituent service or directly
in our school we really try and
provide that high contact and
high responsiveness from our
office because it's important
that if somebody has a
qualified.
Audit that the public knows
about it and they also assist us
in providing that oversight.
I thank you madam chair thank
you thank you Mr.
As the honorable Representative
Garcia said this but faces still
ready for more questions.
Here we go I'm still trying to
lobby for my Executive
recommendations I know it's
exceptional.
I'm just asking for a little
help here.
Don't send me to clean up to
catch up again I know that
that's where you guys look for
me to go we have to go.
Okay it is a like cleanup and
and catch up so committee of
what do you think.
In those we love.
Madam chair.
We're we're we're talking about
a difference of seventy one
thousand dollars out of a seven
point three billion dollar
budget.
One out four four four million
madam chair just because Sir I'm
talking about the entire budget
that we work on which is seven
billion dollars billion I.
Colleges madam chair I apologize
the committee works on a seven
billion dollar general fund
So I am looking around and and I
don't see anybody with any major
heartburn somebody go
Representative small for the
motion.
Thank you madam chair I would
move the executive.
Okay I do have a second that
manager all right we're talking
US seventy one thousand dollar
difference is there any
opposition to that motion.
All right thank you very much Mr
auditor thank you madam chair
members the committee I'm
telling you on the seven hundred
fifty six they have also in the
office the state are you could
have made my day any brighter I
I I sincerely appreciate it I
know the work you do is hard
seven billion seventy one
thousand but every dollar
matters so I know that you don't
do that without without good
cause and I'm I'm grateful you
heard my message today thank you
so much madam chair members of.
Ready thank you if we could
let's go to the Attorney General
HSD three oh five.
We'll go to the analyst first.
Afternoon madam chair members of
the committee my name is Amanda
Dick Hey I'm the fiscal analyst
for the legislative finance
committee I'm gonna go ahead and
do a review of a high level
review of the differentiate and
then I'll turn it over to Brian
Chavis the FAA to review the
legal services program.
Before I start I do want to
point members to page fifty four
under volume three documents.
Each fifty four has a sources
and uses chart for the consumer
settlement fund.
Both the DFA and LFC
recommendations mentioned
consumer settlement fund
frequently so it's a good
resource to track how much money
is in that fund and how much
money is being appropriated
fund.
Okay so for the Attorney General
that agency three zero five.
Over all the LFC recommend six
hundred ninety two thousand four
four percent last general fund
revenue that you exactly.
The overall recommendation for
federal funds and other state
funds is identical in both
recommendations however the LFC
budgets revenue for the consumer
settlement fund in both of
NMED's programs well the
executive recommendation only
uses Madam revenue in the legal
services program.
The New Mexico Attorney General
requested a five percent
decrease in general fund
revenue.
Restraining from the consumer
settlement fund by nearly twenty
percent to the plants that
revenue lost and to support the
new initiatives the LFC
recommendations supports the
agency request where the
executive recommendation the
general fund revenue black with
white twenty one.
Language there is some
recommended language and that's
just language appropriating the.
Right now we're settlement fund
to the agency budget.
Brian if you want to go ahead
and review legal services you
can do that.
Good evening madam chair members
of the committee and branch this
DFA analyst will be going over
P. code sixty five legal
services.
The LFC recommendation reduces
general fund revenue to legal
services program by five hundred
fifty thousand more than the
executive recommendation.
The LFC recommendation budgets a
hundred forty two thousand
lesson consumer settlement fund
revenue in legal services and
executive recommendation.
for the base the LFC
recommendation includes four new
FTE for the agency as part of
compliance terms of a recent
settlement.
The executive keep C. F. T. flat
with the FY twenty one operating
budget.
And
We reach a consenus consensus on
all performance measures and
targets thank you madam.
Okay so we're he six twenty six
in Medicaid fraud program.
Both recommendations increase
revenue to the Medicaid fraud
program by a hundred forty two
thousand and that amount is to
meet the federal match
requirement for additional
federal funding.
The LFC recommendation budgets
consumer settlement fund to meet
this requirement well the
executive recommendation of
budget general fund revenue.
Thanks LFC recommendation
includes one U. F. T. E. which
will be funded with federal
funds completely and the
executive recommendation does
not include any additional FTE.
Work performance LFC needs act
have consequences on performance
measures and targets.
Thanks for the differentiate to
be want to turn it over to you
you know before I ask you are
honorable Attorney General to
same thing I'm gonna ask
Representative day Hoffman to
tell us what she stays on page
five with personal services
employee benefits calculation
worksheet.
I.
Madam chair I apologize I am in
having to get back into the
the folder if you can come back
to me on that.
All right let's go to
Representative ray Lara what do
you see Representative on page
five person services and
employee benefits calculation
worksheet.
Thank you madam chair a.
What I'm seeing here is a call
and see I'm seeing that there's
there there are thirty two of
vacancies.
for both legal services in
Medicaid fraud combined in in
the notes Emrick it's it's
states that the policy
recommends that
Of the increase in the personal
services and benefits by five
hundred sixteen thousand.
And my question is is this five
hundred and sixteen K. to build
vacancies or or or is it for
then we classification of the
stop or is it it or if it's a
combination of both.
What we're going to do
Representative Roybal speed
tourney General to talk about
that but I'm going to ask
everybody to look at column as.
And then we'll cut will come
back so let's go to the Attorney
General place and well I have
done Mr ball there us.
Thank you madam chair and the
honorable members and welcomes
and congratulations to your new
members as well I want to just
express
some deep gratitude I think the
overall landscape of both our
recommendations
are are generous in these very
difficult times I will maybe
just highlight a couple of
priority areas that I think your
budget decisions will impact but
want to highlight them because
these are some of the kind of
real time issues that are going
on in your all your respective
districts
the best way I can describe our
legal service programs it's
become more family centric over
the five year period and that's
basically a of a blessed fancy
way to say that we try to take
on some of the most difficult
civil and criminal matters some
through legacy some of these
matters have never been
addressed in the state of New
Mexico and and often times we
tried to also generate revenue
for the state of New Mexico and
so we consider you not only
fiduciaries but financial
partners were one of the few
agencies that generates.
Have any of which allow your
collective body to reinvest that
money and so as far as the
staffing levels and the question
all address that I think those
are temporary positions that
might have a different
classification then the
permanent positions and and all
hello my staff to redo that
accounting to make sure that
we're speaking apples to apples
I was informed that we had
closer to a ten percent vacancy
which we're very proud of we
worked
very hard on trying to use the
money that you provide us but I
will have a clarification by the
end of my remarks.
as we consider this budget
of the COVID of crisis has
dramatically impacted us at
which we ask for about a five
hundred thousand or supplement.
We'll get a good example we now
take up about twenty seven
hundred calls per month.
that deal with pandemic or
advocacy issues that is
something that was not planned
and we've never institutionally
of you're more funding for that
but I can assure you that we
have leveraged our resources
very well and twenty seven
hundred per calls per month has
also led and that's in addition
to the five hundred of calls we
get on consumer protection
issues every month and so we and
the last since coach since COVID
have
taken up out of.
Five thousand consumer
protection calls and
And also increased COVID
responses as well that were
never planned in the
institutional budget
we do not we're not asking
necessarily for a lot of money
in that but what those calls
have generated
in that is tied to the five
hundred thousand request we are
asking that you could help us
with it is led to increased
litigation and to take some of
those bottles into the courtroom
for example twenty two cases
which were not planned what
we're to defend the executive on
the health order and we partner
or took some of the lead on
those cases which then takes
resources away from your vote
government complaints some of
your other matters that that
legislators often common
referred to our office another
area was also eleven cases not
counting the statewide
litigation.
In the Supreme Court or in
various courts but eleven new
cases where we defended the
department of health in
enforcing those health orders as
you know there was considerable
debate and try online each of
these communities often times we
were given the file to to deal
with some of those complex legal
matters in balancing everyone's
rights.
Well another area that you all
we all have followed and debated
aids we have seen an increase in
habeas.
Corpus actions where prison
inmates are now litigating some
of the COVID impact right a
COVID issues that are impacting
the rights so long way of just
saying any medical you can throw
my way we would.
Greatly appreciate and as you
all know when you're dealing
with this issue as you're
planning forward we don't
believe COVID will be going away
anytime soon but we will
continue to answer the legal
call but would anticipate that
these issues we don't have a
choice we have to go to court
and litigate we find ways to do
it but any any dollar nickel you
can center way would be greatly
appreciated in addition to the
COVID
but trauma and crisis that we're
asking for you to continually
invest in I want to share that
somebody US legislators have
seen our criminal litigation in
your own communities I continue
to encourage the legislature not
in this committee but in others
that protecting children safety
in public schools continually
becomes is continually not only
a social issue on the front
lines of every legislator but it
is now becoming a fiscal up
problem and that we cannot
maintain of the sustainability
of payout these large large
child abuse lawsuits that are
creating public schools and we
are trying to be proactive we
recently had one in northern New
Mexico with the resource officer
and I can assure you that is
going to result in millions and
millions of dollars being paid
out on behalf of the school
districts and MCO I only
highlight that because I'm very
proud of the litigators the the
state prosecutors that we send
in these communities when we get
a call usually it's because a
case is not being handled by
district attorney's office or
not being thoroughly
investigated by a local police
department and we during the
COVID are aggressively
prosecuting those issues as well
another case it recently in
Albuquerque a defendant was
charged with fifty four counts
and this one is very tragic like
the one a student in Las Vegas
was an eighth grader this one is
very concerning because it has
multiple victims for and I
children are named in these in
these priority complaints and
every dollar that you invest in
our office we're kind of the
backstop it when the DA's office
chooses not take action or local
law enforcement agency asks for
assistance we are doing that in
a what I would call it budget
neutral matter which is the.
The savings account you give us
that's what we have to make do
with when these crisis
situations
begin a couple others that I
want to highlight for the new
members
not only will we respond like a
special unit where we try to
intervene in communities like
Las Vegas or Gallup we are also
the division and the office that
defends the appeals so once you
finally get some justice in your
community we then have to defend
that appeal and
I'm very proud because last year
we defended fourteen.
valid first degree murder
convictions in the state of New
Mexico and a lot of times those
lawyers don't get the headlines
but
Every investment that you make
in our office we're very
grateful because there's a lot
of personal pride in litigating
these cases for these families
and so these families and become
re infected minds when they
think they want the jury trial
then they have to go to the
court of appeals and many of
these cases are in rural New
Mexico so we're grateful for
your best.
I.
I
would also like to maybe just
close with the thank you not
only do we try to create a
revenue for this body.
We think we're gonna had a
banner year in revenue for you
for you all
I hate to throw run numbers
because they they come in at
different times but I think
we'll probably surpassed a
record.
In third over about close to
what thirty don't hold me to
this but close because we're
still signing some final
documents maybe over thirty
million dollars in revenue
against bad actors companies and
so we we really work hard to try
to pay as much for our operation
in addition if you invest so
this year even though budgets
are are difficult we want you to
know that we think we're gonna
had a banner year and revenue.
And and we are grateful some of
the examples of for litigation
purposes
of force for information some
your legislators who for
instance a car company that
installed that error backs of
the Takata airbag cases a case
that harm to many consumers
across this country what we
believe we've collected several
millions of dollars of for
consumer protection violations
in New Mexico.
One Santo for environmental
damage in New Mexico we think
will be closing that case are
very soon so just some
highlights
I'm my staff going to get mad at
me I would madam chair be
grateful for any recommendation
you make both sides have been
very I believe Sarah I would
only highlight where there is
one particular area in in the
budget that that it's going to
keep me up at night and that's
in the special appropriations
and I understand that that's a
different analysis but any any
areas where we we think we could
be harmed we would ask you to to
consider
and that's the Texas V. New
Mexico litigation and the only
reason I raise that now is for
the members.
Up.
We are in the final phase where
we are litigating against Texas
and we're also mediate and what
I've offered and I and madam
chair woman I have
requested that my staff and I a
provide your committee when you
have time and I know you're very
busy
on attorney client executive
session where my office can
brief of your your lawmakers and
and any confidential questions
you have about the strategy the
litigation we'd be honored to
provide that I'm excited because
when I took over this case five
years ago
the federal government had
basically taken Texas's side on
one of the largest water cases
in history in New Mexico I did
not start this litigation when I
got here I inherited it but what
I will share with all my members
here is there were estimates
that this case was going to be a
two billion dollar hit on the
state of New Mexico and I was
honestly ridiculed but there was
a lot of doubt in my litigation
approach and I I have the
litigation just the way we
handle all our criminal civil
lawsuits whether it's our
corruption cases or other
matters we go on offense we
build the trial team we try to
build the strongest legal team
so that we believe that we're in
a better settlement posture when
we're ready to prove that Texas
is exaggerating what is owed and
I feel like I was given a two
billion dollar bill and I can
assure you that New Mexico's
stronger litigation position but
for every dollar I am asking.
I believe it's better to spend
the money now and ensure that we
are in a strong bargaining
position with Texas and we're
talking about a case that could
impact the the entire economy of
New Mexico and I think what we
usually need now there's been
good questions
why do we need six million
versus three million one we
survived on
is consistent appropriations
well the court hi.
The court.
Is that me.
I'm sorry what was that was in
the right now I am sorry I think
it was on our end okay I'll
close chair I I can I can.
I would just ask this committee
third looks that the special
appropriation very closely the
court has we are now mediation
confidential mediation with
taxes.
We're preparing for trial this
summer and any cut it was a it
was a good question why would we
need money for mediating well in
federal court with the this is a
United States Supreme Court case
we are not a blessing and we are
building a case to be successful
at trial to show that Texas has
also been groundwater pumping
stealing water and we want to
make sure that we drive those
damages much lower than the two
billion dollar estimate that was
that was the first first
predicted five years ago and
then I will close with this I'm
very proud of the litigation
because I sued Texas and we are
also alleging claims that they
need to credit.
New Mexico for some of the on on
on on regulated groundwater
pumping that's occurring so
we're really at the closed right
now and all all
all right defer to questions at
this time thank you madam chair.
All right thank you
Mr AJ I appreciate your
presentation today I'm going to
look for our race tens I don't
Senator said Representative
small as identified any for me.
Okay he doesn't see any
questions either but I I am
going to ask mass representative
for a a motion Representative
small for the motion
but I want I want to ask also
that.
We have
Recommendation when it comes to
the special I wanted to ask if
there be for legislators I'd
like to ask to actually get that
briefing on the Texas verses New
Mexico lawsuit you know I get
that in in LFC when you when you
come forward but it's usually at
a you know pretty high level and
these are these are all
legislators to come from the
south in particular and there
always seems to be a lot of
interest from those folks and
I'd like to ask Representative
Sweetser brown Lara and Anderson
if you all would sit in on that.
On on the committee's behalf and
the come back then and if
there's others that would like
to volunteer to do that that's
great but I I need some eyes and
ears on that when we get into
the looking at the specials
piece
What ends up happening is that
it's such a broad category you
get an AG request and then
you've got a state engineer
request and sometimes the titles
sound the same everybody's
fighting Texas to you know I've
always looked at it that the
agent should be responsible for
the legal pace within the
technical piece comes from the
from the state engineers office
we need to understand how that
all works together also I think
for the benefit of the rest of
the committee so back to ****
for southern members if they
would thank take the OAG up on
his offer and sit in on
something like that and have
some information back to us I
see a thumbs up from
Representative Anderson.
Round Sweetser and Lara I need a
thumbs up from our and then we
got our group very good so I
represent a small and you know
the motion for this for this
agency thank you madam chair and
move the LFC.
Okay we have a motion to have a
second for the LFC.
I'll second that motion and Jr
okay we have a motion and a
second is there any opposition
to that motion.
Okay the motion passes and I
don't see any opposition to that
but for catch up clean up I'm
gonna ask that same group of
four come back and and work with
the analysts something that
brings us closer together that's
pretty good
wait there so if you all would
the work with our analysts and
the agency staff on that let's
get a little closer so with that
thank you Mr Agee and thank you
for being with us tonight thank
you good night already.
Okay next we have our state
treasurer.
The man with the money so go
ahead analyst and then we'll go
to our state treasurer thank you
madam chair as you mentioned
this is HSD three zero five the
state treasurer my name is mile
tore as I'm one of your state
one of your staff the continents
and also the analyst for the
state treasurer we also have Mr
Simon Miller the executive
analyst for the treasure and of
course our state treasurer Mr
Tim I can very I understand that
this may be a difficult decision
for you all because the LFC and
Executive recommendations are
exactly the same at you'll
notice that both the LFC and
exec recommendations maintain
funding levels for FY twenty two
flat with the FY twenty one
operating budget and I'm happy
to answer any questions but with
that I'll hand it over to Mr
Miller for his comments before
the treasury gets has.
Mr Miller thanks as well madam
chair members of the committee
like this miles said the
recommendations are the same and
are flat to this current fiscal
year so I I don't really have
any additional comments.
All right let's go to the state
treasurer places direct number
thank you madam chair let me
first of all thank all of you
for their work that you're doing
especially during this pandemic
I know how difficult it is for
you
just because I.
The goings on in the state of
New Mexico Senator let me just
say thank you I'd also like to
thank missional to our and also
what Simon Miller
we don't always agree and we
certainly are green on what I
think the recommendation should
be but I would certainly love to
have both of them working for me
because they are truly hard
working professionals that I
have great respect for.
I would also like to read and
just reaching out and share
introduced by deputy treasurer
Sam callers on is on tonight I'm
our chief financial officer
David Rowe Hootie and our chief
cash manager for the state of
New Mexico in Sherman cook yeah
and I want to thank them for
their participation as well.
I'm just to talk about a little
better about the highlights in
the our our twenty twenty fiscal
year.
I'm proud to say that we managed
all of our debt service all of
our cash management and all of
our investments in exemplary
fashion
stores core core business has
been pre nobody managed and our
assets our fiduciary assets
we're exceeding seven billion
dollars currently and we had
investment earnings last year of
a hundred and seventy eight
million dollars to be put back
into the general fund.
Our local government investment
pooled and for some of that new
legislators and I know that you
have several new legislators
more with all your experienced
ones your madam chair for some
of your new legislators are
local government investment pool
is
what we do for counties
municipalities and some of our
tribal entities we invest their
excess cash with them so that
they are interest on yeah that
this year exceeded one billion
dollars for other people's
investment opportunities.
We also created an online portal
we implemented that just last
year so that the L. G. I. P.
participants have access to
those accounts at any time if
they want.
Some of the most important
things that I think they were
doing was cheating a better life
experience and that's our able
program and we launch that in
twenty eighteen matter of fact
that was on January eighteenth
so we just celebrated our third
anniversary from.
We have sixty six hundred and
fifty four accounts for people
that have a tax free savings
account for those individuals.
And we're hoping to have the
inner start later this some this
next quarter from New Mexico
highlands university that will
work with John.
Yes and in a small dinners you
are able program.
We had no findings for fiscal
twenty independent audit Clifton
Larson and so much of that work
goes to again and again who do
our chief financial officer
that's a second year your
competitor finds.
And for some of you more
experience legislators you know
that for many many years we have
one finding that came up back in
I think the nineteen hundred
still nineteen ninety seven or
that hung around for fifteen
years so we're glad to see that
that's all taken care.
Last year you gave us for the
passage of the work and save act
and that's some that was a
triple to sixty seven percent of
New Mexico working secretary has
no retirement savings and so
we're happy to see that that was
launched this year our late last
year going into this year and we
set up that committee and it's
already had several reasons I'm.
We also have.
In our general fund
appropriation madam chair I know
that you're all getting tired
and I celebrated tonight my my
son's birthday representative
I'd celebrate the same birthday
that was last week he was in
quarantine and so we had a
dinner set for tonight because
we thought you'd start on time
and finish on time so I snuck
out during our auditor colognes
presentation part of our
attorney general's and had
dinner in the kitchen with my
son in my life so I'm just fat
and happy and sassy back here
and I know you guys retired and
ready for your dinner so let me
just again say that our general
fund appropriation
recommendations are equal LFC in
the executive branch with that I
would ask that you approved.
This executive's request of the
four point two million dollars
and I would stand for any
questions thank you madam chair
thank you madam chair just
quickly to Representative
Trujillo
I didn't even ask for the one
page exhibit that we.
College is going to put up
but it's in black and white.
Representative sure here.
Thank you madam chair.
Thank you Mr treasure for the
report today
I am very interested in this New
Mexico work to say program I
know we had a lot of discussion
about this last year the
committee they have a lot of
review and what have you I'm not
completely convinced on the
recommendation here that we can
utilize current vacancies
savings
And I want to I want to put that
out there so.
Questions first let's go to the
questions of the committee and
and see if we've got anybody
they look to see if
Representative small sentiments
across.
Okay currently we.
Okay representative Armstrong.
Thank you madam chair I
was part of helping carry that
work and save act and one of the
questions that I have for the
state auditor is I've been
receiving information that they
want to do a lot of catch up
clean up or clean up on that
bill and I'm a little bit
concerned that.
The committee that was formed.
Is taking the legislative branch
out of the rulemaking can you
elaborate on that if this is the
appropriate time madam chair go
ahead.
Thank you madam chair I have to
apologize to representative
Armstrong I didn't know they
were check out the legislative
branch I know that we are back
before you this year senator Tom
is is
during a.
A correction bill because of
COVID we have to change some of
the time lines that we were
asked to meet because of COVID
we will not be able to meet.
And so I know they were asking
for extensions and I have to
apologize.
Representative Armstrong will
get back with you tomorrow by
texting and by telephone as to
what's going on here because I'm
not aware they were trying to
check out the legislative.
Thank you madam chair thank you.
I just.
Received a copy of the bill and
it was thirty one pages.
So it's concerning to me and I
would like some updates
I just I'm not specific that
they're taking out the Legisla-
legislative branch but they are
leaving a lot to be decided by
the committee so it is
concerning so I would appreciate
an update on that thank you
madam chair.
Thank you representative.
Thank you very much
Representative I was not aware
of that either that's not a good
thing
And certainly I would have a lot
of us myself
and see if we've got anybody
else that has questions.
I don't have anybody else on
the.
And let's check the chat here.
Now we don't
So I know I'm gonna ask for a
motion from Representative small
that I've got another
recommendation so Representative
small.
Thank you madam chair I would
move the LFC.
All righty we have a motion for
the LFC do we have a second.
Second.
Okay we have a motion and a
second is there any opposition
to that motion.
Okay I don't see any opposition
so we do have approve motion but
what I'd like to ask is all on
that particular issue of
New Mexico work to save.
I ask that because I'm not
convinced that we are the years
they can see savings on that to
to make up those priority
positions but I also don't want
the legislature cut out of this
so I'm gonna ask representative
Armstrong and and
Representative
Anthony excuse me Anthony
Allison if they could get
together and work with the state
treasurer on that and then come
back and let us know because.
It does make a difference we
don't want to take vacancy
positions that are intended for
something else especially when
this is a kind of a regulatory
office and then turn it into
another position and what
they're coming back next year to
ask for the same thing so I'm
gonna ask you representative
Armstrong and Representative out
Allison you get together with
the treasure and the analysts to
see if we can't get that.
That New Mexico work to save
situation resolved I I dot.
I I don't really like the idea
of us moving vacancy savings
into that to pay for it so we
have a motion we got some
direction now on this we want to
thank the treasure for you for
your presentation tonight.
Thank you madam chair thank you
Sir.
All righty we have one more
presentation this evening at
that start commissioner of
public lands we'll start with
the two analysts and then we'll
go to the commissioners so if we
could have the analyst.
Thank you madam chair of the
committee this is Caitlyn one
analyst department.
Many staff who joined me to
present budget recommendations
for the state land office our
doctor Andrew Miner DFA analyst
and commissioner of public lands
Stephanie Garcia Richard I'm
happy to tell you that this last
different she at the evening is
very brief so I'm just going to
present it myself and then we'll
see if interest anything to.
I'm.
First I'll start with the note
on revenue the state land office
is funded solely from land
maintenance fund and that.
Money from that fund in excess
of the agencies budgetary needs
are transferred to beneficiaries
both the LFC and Executive
recommendations reduced revenue
by two hundred and one point
three thousand dollars based on
HSD revenue projections both
recommendations also re
prioritized funds from
contractual services and other
costs to personal services and
employee benefits.
There is one minor difference on
language the executive
recommendation includes language
not recommended by LESC and that
is because that language is
addressed in another section of
house bill two and on
performance the analysts reached
consensus on all performance
measures and targets that's all
I have injury did you have
anything else you wanted to say.
Thank you.
The madam chair members of the
committee no I don't have much
else to add other than to say
that just reminder this is a non
general fund budget and as you
can see the recommendations are
the same so thank you.
Thank you very much let's go to
our commissioner of public
lands.
Thank you madam chair can
everyone hear me okay what we
can hear you so thank you to
miss wanted doctor minor for
their great work always on our
budget recommendation
and in the interest of time
madam chair I do have a
presentation but I think I'm
gonna hold off on that and just
maybe make that available to you
all a tronic Lee we can even
send it out to your eight emails
if if that's desirable madam
chair that would be a good idea
thank you very much so I did
just want to make a couple of
comments brag on the hundred
seventy members of the State
Land Office that even in this
tough economic time even in the
pandemic even a shut down
business has not not slow down
for us at all and all of our
our revenue projections even
though they have taken you know
the slightest it has has not
been what we anticipated coming
into this pandemic and and.
So we are on track
This fiscal year again to raise
another billion dollars we're
very proud of that and for the
members of the committee who are
not familiar with the State Land
Office we did the money that we
raise on for State Land on our
State Land actually saves the
average New Mexican tax paying
household approximately fifteen
hundred dollars a year in taxes
and we provide of funds for such
important institutions of public
schools universities hospitals
and other state institutions we
did have when I came into office
two years ago we did want to
start straight away on things
like building up our renewable
energy portfolio and proud to
announce that we signed for
major leases in the past two
years which will generate over
the life of these places eighty
million dollars additional
revenue for New Mexico's public
school children diversifying our
revenue ensuring that we are
holding folks accountable for
using your state trust land and
that when they return it it is
returned to the scene state that
went out
and ensuring that we are
Holding the line on enforcement
and accountability on use of
state trust land as well
I am joined on this call by some
of my staff that are here to
answer questions but then we
have some of our other
leadership team that's also
listening in and so answers your
questions I just have to wait
but I'm joined by deputy
commissioner Nix of public
affairs deputy commissioner
Stewart of operations assistant
commissioner of administrative
services leader Romero and our
assistant commissioner of
commercial Steve Eric and also
are directors of both accounting
and royalty market segment in
nineteen.
Madam chair as you heard from
the analysts
Both of.
Conditions from the committee
and from DFA come in at the same
so we are are happy with that we
did request a reduction in our
budget this year just due to the
state of the economy
we are not going to skimp on
services though we are going to
run the streamlined ship
well not skipping under the the
public services that we provide
for our lessees and protecting
our lands so with that madam
chair I did I did want to
address that the difference in
language
As you know madam chair we do
have a five percent of our
authority that is provided to
the state land office
for instances in which we we do
have to move money around this
additional language madam chair
would allow us to not use the
bonding money as part of the
five percent bar forty so that
would be above and beyond what
the committee has already
allowed us to do so I would
request chair the committee go
back and take another language
and another look at that
language and.
See if it's within your
Desire to to include that with
that Madam I think I'm going to
stand for questions thank you.
All right thank you very much
let's go we've got some
questions will start with
Representative Anderson and then
Representative Sweetser so go
ahead Representative Vander.
Thank you thank you madam chair
this short commissioner
appreciate the good work you've
done under these COVID
circumstances and that pleased
to hear that it's had
not the destruction that that we
might have all feared I have two
questions one is one on the
language in if you exclude the
bonding from the five percent
calculation as it is right now
what is roughly the impact of
the that of that would make it.
Five percent of the bigger
number in my mind and I'm just
trying to understand what kind
of growth in that number would
result if you could remove
bonding from the five percent
calculation.
I have the deputy commissioner
on of Madam chair representative
do you know that number.
Madam chair representative
we we haven't at this point is
tens of thousands of dollars on
this language is anticipation of
more bonds being pulled in the
future this is an area.
Land Office historically has not
focused on so this is it may be
a little bit smaller now in the
future
you know depending on the state
of the industry it may be
necessary to pull more bombs and
utilize at five percent to be
able to pull that into our
budget to perform remediation
service ten thousand right now
thank you very much for we're
back on vacation and I
understand that it's a moving
target then my second question
is commissioner you indicated I
I had an audio problem when you
spoke about the economic benefit
to New Mexico of these next four
wind plants and I believe you
said over the life of the
project that's eighty million
dollars in the US right that's
correct madam chair thank you
very much for that at the the
number I hope we can also of
report and given some focus to
is what the annual what this
year or last year last year's
contribution we seem to hold of
the oil and gas community to.
To annual sort of number of what
the benefit is to the citizens
of New Mexico and I think it
would be a good idea to start
that process now on the
renewables even though it's a
it's a much smaller number I
still think it would be a better
measure of growth rather than
necessarily just lifetime
project lifetime of in terms of
economic benefit in commissioner
appreciate the work you do and
madam chair that's my last up
Madam thank you.
Right Sir.
Thank you madam chair and good
to see you madam commissioner I
was just noticing in your person
that you were moving money from
contracts to person usually we
see the opposite because unable
to fill their positions so I
just wanted you to give up that
kind of a feel of what's
happening over there thank you
so much for letting me brag on
my team madam chair
representative we came into the
land office with a twenty five
percent vacancy rate and we
prioritize getting those
positions filled and then
I'm my assistant commissioner of
of administrative services on
here she was formally my HR
director and she took that
mandate alright she started
processing paperwork to so I'm
sure they were sick of us by you
know by the time the first year
of the administration and it but
we managed to get that they can
see rate at one point I think
when we submitted this
recommendation we were actually
down
down on your six percent so in
order to pay for all of those
salaries and benefits madam
chair we actually had to do the
opposite you're right most of
what most agencies do we didn't
go into contracts we actually do
the opposite money from
contracts and put it into PS and
be paid for those permanent
position.
Thank you for that madam chair
madam commissioner so does this
budget level you out in your
opinion.
Madam chair thank you for that
question Representative
I I I will say that it does we
like every other agency you're
gonna have to tighten our belt
in this tough economic times but
we still have a priority
of you know hiring folks that
particularly those.
Positions that prioritized
public safety and health of the
land and raising revenue we have
prioritize those positions so
we're still going out you know
we're we're still trying to get
that agency right down
but we're going to we're going
to do so with with a little
slimmer of the budget.
All right thank you I actually
appreciate that thank you madam
commissioner thank you madam
chair.
Okay.
Do we have any body else that
has any questions.
I just want to remind the
committee that the language is
put in here actually bar belongs
in the bar discussion so what we
talk about the commissioner of
public lands may expand bond
recovery proceeds held in
suspense as is necessary that's
all about bar language that's
something that we're gonna take
up later in the process so I'm
gonna look for a motion now
Representative small the manager
I would move the LFC please okay
we have a motion and we have a
second.
Madam chair and we have a motion
and a second is there any
opposition to that motion.
Saying none of we have a lot to
prove motion and I'd like to
thank our
commissioner of public lands and
all of her staff for being with
us here at seven about seven
thirty tonight
and for waiting patiently we
apologize it was longer floor
session and we had anticipated
today so again thank you all for
