Here.
President vodka here.
Here.
Here.
Montoya here.
Excellent. Thank you very much,
Jackie. Uh okay. So coming back
the what? We're going to be
going through here members.
These are the specials,
supplementals and deficiencies.
We saw these the first week and
of course we come in a week
early. Our initial cut was that
first week. During that time we
heard presentations from the
DFA.
And the LFC on requested special
appropriations. What was or was
not included into what level and
some of why. Within the LFC
recommendation, which, of
course, is what we brought in
At that time we asked members to
definitely to make flags to
highlight concerns and to
recommend potential changes.
That's what a lot of will be
going through as we go through
now, Um
Is based upon that work.
Secondly, members as we know
we've chosen to hear our
specials in conjunction with the
recurring agency budgets. So for
every agency that they're
recurring budget we've also had
a bit of we've heard and
included the page about their
special appropriation. Inquests.
um, so that those were also for
each agency. We were considering
what these specials were.
You'll also see some changes in
here because of that. Um so it
third we're gonna ask for a vote
to approve the this special
supplemental and efficiency
appropriation changes. We will
be taking a vote on that.
Uh, here at the hearing today.
Any additional changes, of which
there will necessarily be few,
but there are still for any
additional changes. Those would
go on, catch up clean up
tomorrow.
So just to walk through that
really quickly for folks, um,
with that.
I will go to Joey and we'll go
from there.
Any questions?
Okay?
Thanks. Go ahead. Thank you, Mr
Chairman. Members of the
committee. Uh, so very quickly.
You should in front of you have
a packet that says special
supplemental in deficiency
appropriations. Looks like this.
I mean, actually, just very
quickly going to get you to turn
to page 30 of that packet.
And to take a look at the, um at
the totals.
So the HFC scenario columns that
you have has a total. Uh, reckon
Total scenario of 2.587 billion
that's made up of 1.131 billion
in Section five special
appropriations 126 million in
Section six supplemental and
deficiency appropriations.
Uh, at 1.23 billion in fund
transfers and 100 million in
transportation appropriations.
Uh, so just going back to go
through this sheet back to page
one, Mr. Chair, you'll notice
right next to the HCFC scenario,
You'll have a General fund plus
and a general fund minus plus
columns are all additions. The
minus columns are all
subtractions from the LFC wreck
and I'll just start off by by
going over some of those
changes.
So beginning on Page one. You
can see online six. There we
have a $1.5 million
appropriation for the
administrative office of the
courts. That's to replace some
discontinued court fee revenue.
Moving down to line 11, you'll
see there's 125,000 for the
district attorney fund that, um,
that amount aligns with the
executive recommendation for the
District Attorney fund.
Really sorry. Just for members
is a flag. Um, I was going to
try and flag where some of these
came from. And so that 1.5
million to the administrative
office of the Court for
Replacement fee revenue. That
was a big flag from you all
during the administrative office
of the court's hearing. So this
is one way we're going to
address that concern from
members.
Moving on to Page two. Mr
Chairman Online 16, You'll see,
uh, Tobacco Master settlement
litigation that $600,000 in the
HFC scenario aligns with the
executive recommendation.
Additionally, you all heard in
your last specials. Uh, a
presentation from the Department
of Finance and Administration.
You know it's line. 18 did not
have an executive recommendation
because the agency received
those funds from the board of
Finance. So that is that is
taken out of the HFC scenario.
Ah, Finally, on page two on line
number 20. You can see there was
a million dollars, added, um,
for the taxation and revenue
department to enhance and
maintain their system system of
record. There was some thought
that maybe that was that item
was a little short and and
should be added to
Page three. Mr Chairman.
On line 29. There's been a lot
of, um There's been a lot of
talk about matching assistance,
And so you see $50 million
online 29 that's you'll notice
the language there contingent on
passage of House Bill 177, or
similar legislation that creates
the New Mexico Match fund.
So there is that item there?
You wanna go over 30? Sure.
Okay?
Yeah, And as we have any
questions, we'll members will
try to pause every couple of
pages and see if anybody else
questions. Any questions from
some Montoya and then
representative
Uh, thank you, Mr Chair. Um, did
we address the the jury trials?
The money for jury trials is
that further in or was this
should have been this on the
front page? Thank thank you
Represent Montoya, many of the
any recurring changes will be
for ketchup clean up tomorrow,
and that's where that will be
great question. Representative
Han
So
Thank you, Mr Chair. Um
So when we're adding
So understanding how this is
organized, Um
In the plus field, and I guess
I'll go to line 29 so we added
$30 million to this to the
already
$20 million or the AM I looking?
Where is the total? That's
correct? Yeah, representing
Luhan. The LFC recommended $20
million for matching assistance
to local entities and, uh, this
and this adds 30 to that which
is half of the executive
request.
Thank you. Thank you, Mr Chair,
okay, And But if the bill
passes, there's a bill is asking
for 100. Million. Mr. Chair. Can
we? Is there clarification on
that? Uh,
The thank you representative
were
This bill will HB two will go
next to the Senate, and we want
our Senate colleagues have space
to do additional work.
Thank you, Mr
Thank you, Mr Chair, Absolutely
Representing Chatfield and
representative earned it, Wowie.
Thank you, Mr Chair, Mr Chair
When we reviewed the the courts
budget, the
Supreme Court.
The appeals court.
And the administrative office of
the court. They were walking out
together, they were afraid they
would have to lay off 35
employees not have, uh, security
for their
Justices, which I in today's
environment is of extreme
importance to me.
And I said, What do you guys all
together? Need to
Start to get move forward, they
said about 10 million. So I'm
looking with that be it not in
the administrative officer of
the court, since it's the also
the the Supreme Court and the
Court of Appeals. Where would
that be? I don't because there's
nothing here.
For them and the
Administrative Office of the
courts,
Mr Chairman, Representative
Chatfield, Um, again, This is
just the one time funding
appropriation recommendation.
Um, there is and there's hard
copies now in the back some
workgroup information. We've
worked really closely with the
administrative office of the
courts to get to a number where
they won't have to lay off
folks. This year. We can still
use some fee funding and again.
There's some commitment in this
Senate to help there, too. So
that is in a different section
of the bill. It's not in this
one line that you're seeing, but
we can go over it tonight. Thank
you, Amanda. That makes me
happy.
That makes us happy field. Thank
you, Uh, Vice Chair Dixon. Oh,
iPod Representative Herndon.
Thank you, Mr Chair, and, um
Mr. Chair in presenters. Can you
tell me when the
When the administrative offices
of the courts were here. We
talked about a
Members of modest means program,
and they said it felt under the
Department of Finance and
administration. So that's the
organization that helps when New
Mexico legal aid has. They don't
have the ability to take the
case because there is either, um
and usually they don't either
have the capacity.
Are there is a reason that would
cause an objection for
To them to take the case. My
question is, Is it included in
here? I can't tell based upon
what's written and was that part
of the conversation.
Mr Chairman, Representative
Herndon that is not included in
here at the time.
At this time.
So thank you very much, man. I'm
presenter, I I feel I'm very
concerned about people.
Who will not be will not have
access to representation.
In the court and then the
judicial system when our largest
legal system can take the case,
and that being the
Legal aid offices. So thank you,
Mr Chair. Thank you, madam.
Thank you very much represents
Herndon.
Okay?
All right.
And and I actually briefly, um
Mr Simon, Amanda. We see here.
There's a reduction with the the
regional recreation centers.
It's our understanding and my
understanding that many projects
would have been previously
funded A requesting
reauthorization that is that
they have not spent funds
already allocated through that
program. Is that the case?
So, Mr Chairman, I do know that
the D F A does still have some a
lot of those projects in the
pipeline. That's correct. Okay.
Thanks, Mr Chair
representatives. I would also
add that that wasn't an original
executive request. So that was
part of it to to get kind of
closer to the executive
recommendation. Thank you.
Great. Thank you very much. OK,
let's keep going. So Mr
Chairman, moving on with the D f
to items you see online's 34 to
37 Several ads. Um, so there is
$2 million for DFA for an audit
of the statewide human
resources accounting and
management reporting system
that's basically
The States accounting system,
which is ending the the usable
life of that system. Online. 35
There's $200 million for the
Opportunity Enterprise Revolving
fund at the New Mexico Finance
Authority. 120 25 of that would
be for commercial enterprise
development, and, uh, 75 for
housing development projects,
and that would be contingent on
legislation. Um
To expand the use of that fund.
Um
Online 36 You see money for DFA
to create a new infrastructure
division again contingent on
legislation setting that
division up and online 37 You
see $100 million there for water
projects authorized by the
Legislature. I'll just note Mr
Chairman on that water projects
fund appropriation.
The LFC recommendation had $100
million transferred to the Water
Trust fund. This moves that
transfer into the water project
funded so that projects that are
authorized this year can can be
funded.
Okay. Great. Any questions on
these?
Okay, representing the Han.
Mr Chair on the line 35 for the
Opportunity Enterprise Revolving
fund for the New Mexico Finance
Authority. This is
This is contingent on
legislation as well. Is that
correct?
Mr Chairman represented that is
correct.
Okay, so
Thank you, Mr Chair. Thank you
Represent 120.
Thank you, Mr Mr. Chair. Um
As well on line.
39
The expenses related to
establishing the Office of
Housing.
Is that, um, is that
I haven't seen a bill that was
introduced for that. Is that
coming from the Senate or um,
there's there's an amount here,
but, yeah, I don't see any
legislative. I haven't seen any
legislation for that. Mr
Chairman, Representative online
39. Yes. So there is nothing in
the HFC scenario. I don't Yeah.
Okay. Okay. Thank you.
Thank you, Mr Chair. Absolutely.
Thank you, Uh, represent
Chatfield, please.
So
Go back to the line. 3737. I'm
sorry.
Uh,
Tell me what happened there
again because I have a bill that
transfers $100 million into the
water.
Into the water Trust fund, not
the water project, but but the
water trust fund.
Uh, is that money still in the
budget, or did it leave? So Mr
Chairman and representative Noh,
the $100 million transfer that
was in the LFC recommendation
was moved into this line for to
be able to fund current
projects.
So the money that was in my bill
is gone. Is that what you're
saying? Mr Mr Chairman and
representative? I think that is
what I'm saying.
And I might add the
The that this would make these
funds available for communities
to apply for, as opposed to
raising the, uh slightly the
distribution from the water
Trust fund, so this would make a
very large amount of money
available for water projects.
Should we choose to go this
route?
Percent pedigree. Thank you, Mr
Chair. I'm now confused.
Okay?
I believe Mr Chair, or Joey say
that.
The transfer.
Yeah.
$100 million just for existing
projects, not for things that we
can go apply for, and
It is separate from the
Legislation that was originally
in supplementals.
Consistent with representative
Chatfield Bill.
And that money is now gone. So
What's that Mr Chair with your
statement that this is money
that can be applied for with new
grants. I'm confused thinking.
thank you for the represent
pedigree. It's going through the
water Trust board, based upon
the projects that they have
already, so I
I expanded a bit beyond what the
intent is. It's for the
increased capacity and increase
desire and demand that they've
seen.
Okay. Any other questions with
notes on the housing again? This
is, uh, a significant amount,
although still below what has
been proposed by legislative
colleagues and requested by the
executive.
So
Moving on to Page four. Mr Chair
members of the committee we have
on line 45, a small reduction,
um to the transfer for
healthcare to the appropriation
for healthcare costs that simply
aligns that with the what's
available from those ARPA
dollars on
In addition, um on line 46 we
have a grants for the under the
Crime Reduction Grant Act that
aligns with the executive
recommendation for that
appropriation as well on line.
49 we see, uh $5.5 Million
addition for cybersecurity
initiatives.
Amended. You won't talk about
that.
Sure, Joey, um so online five.
This was a executive
recommendation for $1.5 million
for cybersecurity and that would
expand do its ability to provide
cybersecurity for other
entities, including the
judiciary, including higher, Ed.
um and really expand, do its
capacity.
The thinking was you all heard a
lot of requests for cyber
security throughout your Section
four hearings throughout your
separate agency hearings. Um,
this was a late request by the
department. But we've been in
conversations with the
department and with this $5.5
million, they could provide a
lot of those services and
centralized that. Thank you.
Oh, present pedigree. Yes, thank
you. Chair.
Um
Find 49 is good news.
I just Mr Chair with respect to
that. Are we pulling this 5.5
from the from those very
departments the portions and are
we given the autonomy to do it,
which would make sense to me?
If we need a million dollars
take care of higher Ed and
higher. Ed had a million dollar
ash for that.
This 5.41 million of this 5.5
would be from higher Ed. Is that
how your math is working on
this?
Mr. Chair, Representative
Pettigrew, Um, there weren't
necessarily reductions, but
there was a request from higher
ed for around. Oh, I can't
recall the number around $10
million and that wasn't funded
originally in the LFC, and it's
not funded now, so we didn't
necessarily pull anything back.
But by fully funding this
initiative, it will be taken
care of.
Absolutely thank you very much
present. Figueroa, please.
Thank you, Mr Chair on that
point, I meant, uh and Mr Chair.
Um, the higher ed request was
11.5 million. We're funding 5.5.
Can they get the job done for
5.5, Mr. Chair representative.
We have had some discussions
with higher ed. And I think
Not to speak out of turn and I
can, you know, touch back touch
back with higher ed. But part of
the reason that that 11 was so
high is because there's a lot of
new things happening, whereas
the ideas that do it can do it
for a lot less because of their
existing infrastructure. This
body has invested a lot into
cyber security and the
department so far.
Thank you, Mr Chair. Thank you
very much for a present for you
to, uh any other questions?
Let's keep on going. So moving
on Mr. Chair, the bottom of the
page for secretary of State,
You'll see a $500,000
appropriation there. That's
really just a change of section
that was originally in the
section seven. It requests but
is moved to the special
appropriations.
On Page five, You'll see an
additional million dollars in
the tourism Department for
national marketing and
Advertising.
Um and also some new language
They're related to, um, the pre
previous language had not
specified dollar amounts for
those two for route 66 or is
this Cobra? But that was
something that came up and so
their dollar amounts that the
department's allowed to use up
to that amount.
Um And I believe that's the only
change on Page five. Mr Chair.
Great. Thank you very much. Any
questions here?
I don't see any. Let's keep
going.
So, Mr Chair at the top of page
six, you'll see a $13 million
appropriation for the local
Economic Development Act Fund,
and Amanda can go over. Sure,
Joey thank you, Mr Chairman,
members of the committee.
This, Uh, $13 million gets us,
you know, a little more than
halfway to what the executive
recommended we heard from many
members. That leader was a high
priority. Um, we know that these
dollars go a long way in your
committee or in your
communities, and it was also a
high priority for the agency. So
that's why you see that $13
million edition there.
Moving on on Page six. Mr. Chair
Online, 69. There's 150,000 for
the construction industry
divisions of the regulation and
licensing department. That's for
start up costs and other costs
related to the Elevator Safety
Act.
Yes and
Yes, Thank you, Joey. And just
to add to that, um, because I
know we're passing around a lot
of paper. Um, this 150 this
additional 15 $50,000 is also
something that came directly out
of one of the ad hoc committees
we had on our L D. That was a
big concern for the agency for
DFA and for our members, So
that's where that comes from.
Line. 76. Mr. Chairman, you see
for the office of Superintendent
of Insurance, uh, Patient
compensation fund surcharges for
rural hospitals on that line
that aligns to the executive
recommendation.
Moving on to Page seven.
Uh, you'll see on
Ah, Go ahead, Rip Sandhurst
Herndon, please. Thank you, Mr
Chair and just looking at the
office of Superintendent
Um
Of insurance with respect to the
pharmacy Transparency Act and
the request that was made and
the
For that amount. It was
$100,000. Is that included in
one of these lines I'm looking
at with respect to the office of
the superintendent.
So, um, Miss Mr Chairman and
representative. I don't see
anything for the pharmacy
Transparency Act.
Act here.
Mr. Chair, Representative
Herndon. I don't see it on this
page either, And that might be
because it was not recommended
by either the executive or lfc.
So right now, this, um this
doesn't reflect what an agency
may have requested. It just has
won the executive comparison.
The lfc comparison and our HFC
scenario.
So just for clarification, Mr
Chair and presenters. So the
executive there was a message
down from the governor's office
regarding the Transparency Act.
And so I am a little confused at
the widely funding wasn't there.
Because it came down with them
approving that and asking that
that be put on the agenda for us
to look at. You represented
Hernan. I think we can follow up
with the officer, superintendent
of insurance They haven't
requested through the specials
for it.
But thank you for flagging on
the legislation. Thank you, Mr
Chair. Absolutely.
Uh, okay. Any. I don't see any
other questions. Let's keep turn
to page seven, please. Page
seven. Mr. Chair Online 83,
You'll see the Rural Library
Endowment fund. That's $2.5
million appropriation to that
line and amended. You want to
talk about that?
Yes, Mr Chair members. Um, this
was obviously a big priority for
a lot of you all. Um and we've
been talking a lot with the
Cultural Affairs Department
about their distribution for
this and budgeting some of this
in current years. This is a good
really good starting number. The
2.5 million. This came from you
all.
We are still telling up the
member allocations that you all
have been working on all week.
And we believe that, um some of
that funding might go here, too.
So we'll keep you updated as to
where this number lands.
Yeah, Mr Chairman, uh, online
85, also for the Cultural
Affairs Department. There's
$500,000 for women's historical
markers. Amanda, Of course.
Thanks, Joey. This is another.
Um, This is another thing we've
heard from D. C A and it's been
a member of priority. So that's
what that edition is. This was a
bill that was passed either last
year or the year before.
Um, for historical markers on,
you know, historic women in New
Mexico. It's a very popular
program, so that's where that
comes from
Um, for historical markers on,
you know, historic women in New
Mexico. It's a very popular
program, so that's where that ad
comes from.
Mr Chairman, Moving on to Page
eight.
On line 95. There's a $10
million edition of for the
Indian Water rights settlement.
so that was initially
recommended at 5 Million, but
now is stands at 15 million.
Uh And then then, um, Amanda,
did you want to
Yeah, I think you all know this
was something that was flagged.
Uh, not only the first time we
heard this specials request,
but, um, you know, throughout
throughout our meetings, and so
this 10 million, um, gets us,
you know.
A little less closer to halfway
and we know that this was a big
priority for you all. Thank you
very much. Representative
Garcia then Representative
Sauvignon. Thank you. Mr
Chairman and Joey. I'm online
95.
And that Indian were water
settlement. I thought we had
that conversation there was
gonna be an add on 15 million,
not 10.
Because it was stated started at
35 and 1 to 5. And then we have
conversation of reason it up.
1520 were, uh, which is
represent? That's what this
reflects We. We came in with
five. We added another 10.
So, Yeah, we're are. We added
another, uh, 1010 german dot
conversation. We're gonna have
15 to make it a nut 20 on it.
Yeah, the thank you for
flagging. This is we've
substantially increased it but
appreciate your flagging Mr
Chairman, well, due respect
Substantial, but it's not
enough, you know, because it
started 35 hour we went to 10. I
mean to five now. Work, 15.
Thank you Represent Garcia, this
pre funds three years of what
OSC is testified they can spend
per year They've testified that
they can spend 5 million per
year. This pre funds at least
that three years, but we I think
Very well noted that there's
still needs to increase here.
But Mr Chairman, what I'm afraid
of is, uh
In three years from now, If you
don't have the funding, we're
gonna come back and say we just
don't have the money now, and we
have the fund now and I don't
see why you can have a
conversation about adding 15,
and we drop it back down to town
That didn't make sense to me,
and I'm pretty sure somebody
else gonna put their intake on
that too. Thank you. Mr Progress
to observe Sanchez. Mr. I
thought they said that they were
going to be able to spend that
infrastructure money.
In the next year.
If we did increase it so
Ah, that's that's the statement
they made made to me that the
money could be spent on the
state engineer says they can
only spend 5 million per year.
I heard otherwise. Thank you, Mr
Chair. Thank you Represent
Garcia or and Roberto Garcia and
represents Sanchez. Ah, we'll go
back and well, I see the state
engineers here will ask for a
little bit more clarification
and follow up.
We, um
And we'll keep on going
upstate brown, please.
Thank you, Mr Chairman. And, um
We appreciate it.
Other work that's gone into
these spreadsheets. I know it's
been tremendous, Mr Chairman,
I'm looking at line 101101.
And this is regarding, um
Purchasing consumer education
software to provide families
with awareness of where to find
early childhood services.
Across the state and Mr
Chairman. Glad to see it went
down from the recommendation of
33.5 million down to 1.75
million.
But honestly, Mr Chair in the
age of cell phones and just
communications everywhere. I
really don't know why we would
have to spend
Even 1.75 million on this
information. It's not that hard
to find childcare services, if
you know
Phonebook, cellphone, word of
mouth all those things.
Community assistance agencies
all that so I just want to go on
record as I think I'm not
convinced we need this. Mr.
Chair. Thank you.
Thank you very much represented.
Brown represented seven unit,
please.
Thank you, Mr Chairman. So
there's nothing for um, the
ender I thought we were doing
some for imminent is that part
of the natural resources
workgroup?
Especially the inspections and
complaint you very much for
representatives on IANA there
are in the recurring scenario as
well as it's not part of these
specials.
Um
But there is, uh
Most of these were funded. There
is a total of
Hmm. 700 or 825,000, I think or
slightly more that's not funded
here. That hasn't been added to
Any other questions.
Let's keep going
So I think we're on Page nine.
Mr Chairman.
Ah, so
Online 108. That's another area
where the
The amount was aligned to the
executive recommendation, and
that's the only one on this
page.
Uh, online. 117 Mr. Chairman on
page 10.
You'll notice. There's uh
Reduction of $40 million for the
rural regional hospital health
clinics and providers to expand
services. I will just note Mr
Chairman, there's additional
money in Section nine in the in
the growth fund, $20 million. So
with that 20 million it would
align with the executive
recommendation.
Moving on to page and, uh,
representing Chatfield. I think
on aging and long term care,
Yes, Thank you, Mr Chair Line.
106. The Kiki surveyed refund.
Uh,
We brought nothing to take care
of our older older folks.
Executive recommendation is 5
million into that fun.
It provides services for people
with food insecurity for pilot
projects. It helps take care of
the are older folks, We have
nothing in there.
Mr Chairman, representative
There is in Section nine in the
Growth fund for the aging and
long term services. Um
There's there's an appropriation
there for New Mexico. But you're
you're right. There's not an
appropriation, I read an
addition for aging and long term
services here, Mr Chair. Why is
that? We don't care about our
old folks or Yeah.
Mr Mr Chair, Representative,
Chatfield. Um, this This is a
priority, and I'll make a note
that, um to look back at it.
We didn't know if growth funding
would go towards this and we
still don't know. So I will look
and I will write that down as a
note. Thank you. Thank you, Mr
Chair. Thank thank you Represent
Chatfield and we'll ask for the
current fundamentals in there,
and we'll get that for you. And
for us represent pedigree,
please.
Thank you, Mr Chair on that
point, and I'm thankful that
representative Chatfield caught
that because
Mr Chair right now.
There is a lack of funding with
respect to food at our senior
centers and you can sign up and
you can go in and have a free
meal and and and for delivery to
home.
So don't think you're hot lunch
and they'll take you.
A dinner that that you can
Do that night, but we have
several different communities
where
They have drive through.
And they can pick it up.
But interesting.
If you go to the issue, go to
the center.
You can use your food, Your
lunches, funded and take home
dinner is funded.
If it's delivered to you.
The same thing.
For people that are able to come
through or for people that go
through and pick up for, um
For our seniors that's not
funded.
And this is a piece of that pie,
and it is critical. Thank you.
Thank you, Mr Pettigrew. Garcia,
please. Thank you, Mr Chairman
back to the same issue that both
representatives mentioned under
senior citizen You know, we're
taking care of our kids are
veterans were so so, but we
really need to get receive
citizens, you know, and, uh
There's a senior centers out
there don't have vehicles
anymore because they are so
outdated and stuff and this
funding is just not gonna cut
it.
Thank you. Thank you, Mr Chair.
Thank thank you very much for
the same Garcia.
We're gonna go quickly to
represent Hernan for a question
And then director silly. We're
going to ask you how much is in
currently in the Kiki Saavedra
fund.
Please. Mr. Chair. Thank you
very much. This isn't with
respect to the Kiki surveyed
refund, but it does have to do
with food. And so we had, uh,
quite a bit of testimony about
the
Need for students who were in
college and other places for
food care assistance. And then
if we look at line 110 under the
health for the Health care
authority on Page nine, and it
there was 5 million there for
continued assistance to food
banks throughout New Mexico. But
with the comment that
The emergency assistance is
over, so we don't need it.
So is this funding for food
assistance that was definitely
testified about included
someplace else.
Oh, Mr Chairman. Thank you. John
Courtney Deputy Deputy Director.
Lfc. Um, Mr Chairman on on the
previous question regarding food
in the aging workgroup that are
the sorry the health and human
services work group that met
this morning We went over some
recurring general fund increases
occurring rather than non
recurring.
To the aging program for that
specific purpose. Um, that Kiki
Fund I I know that, um, was
seated with $7 million in 2020
working on getting the updated
fund balance for that. And, um,
manager heard, Uh, Mr Chair,
Representative Herndon. Um, In
addition to that recurring
amount from aging, I believe
we'll see some additional food
money.
Specifically for, um
Um students and public education
at a little bit later in the in
the specialist
Thank you, Mr Chair. Thank you
very much. Thank you very much
upset. Hernan.
Okay, let's keep on going.
Ah. So, Mr Chairman, I believe
we were, um on page 11.
So at the top of the page 11,
you'll see a million dollars.
therefore, behavioral health
services for low income
individuals who don't otherwise
qualify for these services.
Amanda, Mr Chair members. This
was a flag when we were talking
about healthcare. Um, this is
for behavioral health services
for folks that might not be
eligible for federal funding.
And thats why thats there.
Great. Thank you very much
ranking member Armstrong
question painted 11, please.
Okay, let's keep on going. Yeah.
So, Mr Chair and members online
121. There is a $30 million
for apprenticeships in
compliance with the prevailing
wage wage law and that's
contingent on passage of House
Bill five.
Thank you for that, Um
Ah, Mr Chairman.
Um
30 million for apprenticeship
programs. Sounds really, really
good. And we all love that and
we have all been touting that
unfortunately, um, the bill that
it's tied to, uh
Is creating a fund, but it also
has a lot of other language in
it.
That is holding apprenticeships.
um, accountable for what
contractors are doing.
And so I really feel that this
is a nonstarter for a lot of
people, and, uh and it's
actually it's just a bill that's
disguised the fund that's
disguised with negative language
in it.
Ah, that's that's not applicable
for all new Mexicans just want
to flag that and state that and
I've talked to the person that
has that bill and we'll keep
working with him. But I do need
Language that is harmful.
Thank you, Mr Chairman. Thank
you very much. Ranking member
Armstrong.
Okay?
Let's keep going.
So, Mr Chairman, the other one
on this page online one
thirties, another example of
where the recommendation was
adjusted to align to the
Executive recommendation. Uh, um
on page 12. Mr. Chairman. There
is one item so 250,000 to the
Department of military Affairs
for the job.
I'm sorry. It's a total of a
million. It's only 250,000 in
general fund with $750,000 in
federal funds that's for the Job
Challenge Academy. You want to
talk about that one? Sure, sure.
Thank you, Joey. Um yeah line
part 1 44 4 Department of
Military Affairs for the Job
Challenge Academy. This is
something else that came out of
One of the ad hoc groups that
you all were. A part of this was
a big flag from members in that
group, and this $250,000 will
result in a million total in
federal match dollars so really
good program for the agency and
a good match rating.
Okay, Uh Representative Garcia,
and then we'll go down the line.
So, Garcia, please join and
9144.
What was that Ask from the
department Put 250,000.
And then 750,000 match.
And then it's got 250,000 of
them from General fund.
So, Mr Chairman and
representative. My understanding
from our analyst is that they
asked for it in their recurring
budget in Section four at
250,000, and it's funded here in
a special at 250,000.
Thank you
very important.
That you challenged. I've been
there a couple of times, and
it's very important that they
have a lot of kids. There are
savings from going the wrong
direction and you know that's a
very important operation Honor.
And I appreciate that, Mr. Jim,
I appreciate it.
Thank you, representative. We're
going to go. I think represent
Figueroa. We've got you on
Represent you, Mr Chair line.
117 Page 10.
Either we went so fast. I missed
it or we skipped page 10.
Could you explain the 14 million
decrease their Yes, certainly Mr
Chairman and Representative, so
that $40 million decrease when,
when, coupled with a $20 million
amount in the growth fund aligns
with the executive
recommendation of 100 Million.
So if there's funding in a
couple of different places in
the specials
$80 million here and then $20
million elsewhere for a total of
100 million, which was the
executive recommendation.
Great representative Brown. Did
you have a question? Yes, Mr
Chair, just a quick one on
Line 140 for this is Department
of Military Affairs for the Job
Challenge Academy. Just a
question. Mr Chair is that the
one in Roswell?
Is this a different one? Believe
the one in Mr Chair
representative being told
Albuquerque. I'm being told
Albuquerque. Okay, Thank you.
Thank you, Representative Brown.
Any other questions? K seeing
none. Let's keep going onto page
13. So on page 13, Mr Chairman
Lines 149 through 151. You'll
see several items for the crime
Victims Reparation commission,
So to start with there's an
additional 500,000. The original
recommendation was 1.5 million.
Up to 2 million for, uh,
contracts that supplement
federal grants under the victims
of Crime Act. Then, In addition,
there is $2.5 million for
advocates. For those who have
been victims of homicide or
other violent crimes.
And then on line 151 to support
victims of sexual assault.
Amanda, did you want to
highlight
Sure. Thank you, Joey.
Mr Chairman representatives.
This also came directly from the
ad hoc group that was assigned
for CBRC. So these were
initiatives that were important
to all that we increased.
Uh,
Representative John, please, and
then
I don't. I didn't have a
question that thank you. Oh,
great. Thank you, representing
Luhan. Uh, Representative
Montoya, please. Thank you. Mr
Chair on line. 149. I'm looking
at the reason for the increase,
it says HF the out of 500,000,
The agency could
Syria reduction and federal
grants doesn't sound
As if we're positive that those
dollars are going down. What?
What is the justification?
Uh, for the reason that we think
that those dollars are gonna go
away, Mr Chairman,
Representative Toya. Good
question of when when you all
heard CBRC? Um
Uh, gosh, I think it was earlier
this week or last week at all
kind of blends together now,
last week, uh, they mentioned
that they anticipated to lose
that federal funding this year.
But there is the possibility to
get it back, Um, in the future,
and so the I believe the
strategy was to back so that was
non recurring in the hopes that
they can replace that federal
funding in the future, Mr
Chairman.
So thank you. Is that uh, if
those dollars are not used, or
if it money is replaced?
Would we see those dollars back
into the General fund or those
non? Uh non, uh,
What's the word? I'm looking for
The day Just Mr Chairman
represented Monterey that that
money if it's not used, would
would revert. I believe in and
we have seen such a versions
from that agency in the past.
Thank you, Mr Chair. Just a
question, Mr Chair.
How long has this been an
agency? I didn't realize we had
a
A crime victims reparations.
Commission. I think that's an
unfortunate name as it sounds
like a state is paying
reparations for these things.
Represent Montoya. I'll I don't
I'll ask the analyst if we know
when this was created.
But the, uh part of their
function is to support victims
of crime across many different
as we all know across many
different areas of, um
You know life after that that
happens, And so this represents
an increased investment in a few
key areas to support better
folks across the state. I don't
and I don't know Mr Simon. Mr.
Courtney, do we know when so,
According to, um so the law was
created in 1981, Mr Chairman,
the law was created in 1981.
Okay. Thank you. I have never
seen this small agency before.
and I once again I just believe
that's an unfortunate
Name. Thank you, Mr Chair. Thank
you very much of San Montoya.
Any other questions, Okay. I
don't see any others. Let's keep
on going down to, um 154. Yes,
Mr Chairman on line 154. There's
$3.5 million for the Department
of Public Safety to purchase law
enforcement vehicles.
Sure.
Um, Mr Chair? Yes. This was also
a big point that came up during
the agency hearing for the
Department of Public Safety. You
all expressed a lot of concern
over that vehicle number, So we
did put it here in the Section
five recommendation vehicles or
a one time request. We've been
working with lfc really closely
to look at how much the agency
has built in recurring to do
replacement of vehicles because
we know that's important as
well. But this was a big flag
for you. So that's why you see
here today.
Okay?
Thank you any other question?
Any questions there?
Okay, let's keep going. So, Mr
Chairman on page 14.
So you can see online 158. It's
a little tricky because there's
no there's not general fund
involved here. But I'll just
point out line 158 for career
technical education programs,
you'll notice the other state
funds recommendation from the
Public Education Reform Fund was
11 million. In the HFC scenario,
It is $40 million.
Um the, um, also online, 159 the
5 million in there for, um,
schools that were not eligible
for K 12. Plus program units,
uh, went from 5 million to zero.
And I think that's all on this
page. Amanda, did you did you
wanna talk about public at all
together? Should I go through
public had entirety or
let's uh I've got some questions
here and then we'll wrap up the
rest of the public head
specials. We're going to go
first to represent Baca, please.
Thank you, Mr Chairman and thank
you, disregarding one line 158.
I do greatly appreciate and I
know that our school districts
and other communities the $40
million increase that will help
with our CT, So I just want to
highlight that that is something
that we heard.
Throughout the interim and
through the HFC, So I think the
chair and I think the committee
for that recommendation
Thank you very much for a
setback. It represent pedigree,
please. Thank you. Chair and
just Seco represented Bubka's
words. I think several of the
sketch to see a whole bunch of
as high school kids here with
skills USA and promoting, um, to
get that money back, and, uh, I
appreciate that effort.
Excellent. Thank you very much.
Rep. Sam Pettigrew.
Um, just briefly. You know, this
committee set the bar last year
when we got to 40 million for
career technical education
because of everybody in here,
committee members and advocates,
so it's great to see that were
Um, just briefly. You know, this
committee set the bar last year
when we got to 40 million for
career technical education
because of everybody in here,
committee members and advocates,
So it's great to see that we're
there again, okay?
Let's uh oh, representative
Field, please. I just want to
add a thank you under that that
CTE is suddenly very important
to me worked really hard and I
appreciate it.
Thank you.
Okay. Now let's uh let's go
through the the remainder of the
public education specials and
members will hold our questions
and go through them once we go
through those, Okay, so Mr
Chairman Online 171, you'll see
a little more than 1.1 million
for PD and the Learning
Management system.
That was a priority of the
department. Um, online 178. So
the lfc recommendation, um, had
initially had $3 million for
structured literacy that number
in the HFC scenario goes up to
15 million, an increase of $12
million
And, uh, online on page 16.
There is online 183 amount to
recruit and retain educator
fellows at the P D. There's $10
million in that line.
Um
And on line 195 on that page
$200,000 from the Public School
Capital Outlay Fund for regional
and statewide school safety
summits.
So moving on to page number 17.
There's a 2,000,002 and a half
million dollar appropriation
from the public education reform
funds. So this is another area
where the plus and minus doesn't
work because it's not general
fun, but $2.5 million to train
secondary educators in the
science of reading.
Um and on line 202 $5 Million
General fund increase for summer
internship opportunities for
high school students.
Moving on to line 205. There is
a million dollar increase for
special education Initiative
initiatives at PD.
And on line 208 you were talking
about money before for, um,
First food for students. The $10
million there to implement the
healthy Hunger Free Students
Bill of Rights Act, and it's
And on page 18, Mr Chairman.
I
I think there's just one more as
far as I can see for PT Online
209 Mr Chairman $20 Million for
K 12, Plus program units, um
Online 209.
And with that I will hand it to
Amanda if she has any comments
or open up for questions,
mandating comments. Please just
comment quickly. I know that was
a lot of pages. We just went
through and we can spend some
time on them. But these editions
have been in close consultation
with ped is you all recall the
public school support budgets
that you heard also, you know,
early January
We're very far apart. And so
this reflects work with our
chair of L. E s C work with the
director of L. E. S. C. Worked
with the department to get
closer to those understanding
that there will still be
capacity in the Senate. Thank
you, Mr Chair. Thank you very
much. Okay, We're gonna have a
number of questions here. We're
going to go first to upset Baca
than to represent Sanchez and
we'll make sure
We get you sent vodka first.
Thank you, Mr Chairman. Thank
you. Amanda. This was line 183.
This is regarding the
Bedfellows. Um and I do see that
there was a $10 million. We made
an adjustment Do we have what
was the recommendation from ped
as far as to support that
program?
Uh, So, Mr Chairman,
representative, I'm not sure of
the PD amount I can look that
up. The executive recommendation
was 23 million. Uh, that's not
necessary. We can get back with
that.
Mr Chairman, and Amanda. The
question also is teacher
residencies. Those are the
teachers.
In their fourth year or like
would be their student teaching
is that
That I'm decided words that
addressed in this in these, uh
And these line items,
doctors
Mr. Chair representative. I'm
going to let direct deputy
Director Courtney do some
research for me, but I believe
there's funding and Section nine
that that's right. If we can ask
and in Section nine in the
growth, Uh, if you can pull that
up, Dr Courtney will come back.
Get that answer for us.
Uh, okay. And we'll come back
once you have the answer. Dr
Courtney for represent Baca.
Just let us know. Um Okay. Now
we're gonna go to any other
questions from some vodka.
Okay, Representative Sanchez,
then represent pedigree that
represent Luhan and we'll keep
going. Thank you. Mr Charles is
going to ask about I didn't want
77 for the panic buttons. I know
the analysis says, uh,
Lacking on data, but we see that
banks and other similar
institutions
Use these all the time. Why
wouldn't they be effective for
schools and when we have
situations where there's
emergencies?
Thank thank you for the flag. If
there's uh thank you for the
flight.
Representative pedigree, please.
Thank you chair, um,
specific to line 208 to $10
million. Add on to that.
Hmm. Mr Chair does this spring
Asshole with
Meal service from breakfast
through dinner.
Is that what this piece is
supposed to do?
Mr. Chair, Representative
Pettigrew, could you repeat the
last word You said? Does this
make us whole with with respect
to the deficiencies are the
amount lost within 89 school
districts and charter schools
and
Mr Chair Representative, there
is a deficiency request that
will get to a little later on in
the spreadsheet. But this
addresses some of the
department's concerns that the,
um at the recurring number is
higher than what was in the
The LFC s initial recommendation
in discussions with the
department. Um there's some
questions and we can get the LFC
analyst who knows much, much
more about this than I do.
There's some questions about the
reimbursement rates and how that
will all shake out. So the idea
is to put this $10 million here
for this year.
See how much is spent, and then
you always about it can come
back and figure out the right
recurring number for this
program.
Thank you, Chairman. So it's my
understanding that there is no
federal reimbursement right now
and that this is a decision that
was made by the Legislature.
Statutory that we're going to
provide mills for all of our
students.
Is that not correct? I'll jump
in briefly rips Pettigrew, It is
absolutely correct that the
Legislature took that decision.
Think one of the pieces that
Amanda was alluding to there
were differentials for quality
reimbursements contained in that
legislation. Some of the
projections in the highest
amounts that were projected sort
of from the deficiency side.
Were based upon even before
we've done the rulemaking to
decide what means that quality
level we may have been
reimbursing fully at that
quality level is my
understanding, which is why
there's um until that rulemaking
is done and some of the
components of the legislation or
settled there was the decision
to not
Fully go to that initial number.
the what the executive asked for
at the beginning. Thank you,
Chairman and thank you, Um
I guess.
Just clarify this for me and hit
me in the middle of the head
with this one.
It's the school's cost is X. Are
we gonna reimburse X because
that's the legislation that was
passed.
Are you saying that now ped is
going in and making another set
of rules.
That are different than our
legislation, and it's gonna put
a formula to whether or not they
think we're cooking the right
food.
Thank you Represent pedigree. If
there's director or deputy
director Courtney wants to add
anything. Uh, Mr Chairman
representing Pettigrew, so so
the amount will get us
reimbursing at the full rate of
meals. Um, the what I understand
from RPG analysts. Sonny Liew,
Is that this amount? Um, that
that you all have done gets us
halfway there.
Um, with storeroom to go in the
Senate.
Okay, Mr. Chair. I write. I
understand the conversation. I
think I understand the
conversation we're having at the
end of the day we legislated
something.
Why do we need the Senate to get
us the other half of the way
there?
From at the end of its if the
cost is $10, why aren't we
funding $10?
Thank thank you, Representative
Pettigrew again. We don't
I think there are a number of
areas where our Senate
colleagues share some of the
work with during this budgeting
process. My diplomatic answer
where we don't want to ascribe
anything that they will do, nor
and I think this is very
important. Do we want to remove
their ability to respond to, uh,
to do their work is the best
answer, which is where
Represent category I think we
often
If we end up sort of halfway on
some of these important the
items that represents a little
bit of that thinking. Thank you.
Chairman. I'm just going to
close with this comment we made
There is a piece of legislation
whether you voted for it or
against it. It's out there. It's
statutory now.
Our schools provide
Three meals a day.
Two. We should be reimbursing
those costs.
Shouldn't be that hard to figure
it out. Last year, we put $30
million into it. We had a whole
list of schools and how much he
school is going to have to pay
if they didn't get that, that
money, I'm relatively confident.
We probably have that same thing
now.
And forgive us, sir. The ability
to come in and and add their
piece in. That's great and
wonderful, but by the time this
gets for final consensus
We should be funding
Exactly what each school
district needs, so it's not
coming out with their fun.
Thank you.
Thank. Thank you very much for
upset Pettigrew. Next, we're
going to go to representative
Luhan, and then we'll go to
representative Carignane.
Percent.
Thank you.
Thank you, Mr Chair. I think I'm
going to be redundant here in
in, uh,
Leave my support to line 177
with the
The safety statewide deployment
of mobile panic buttons. I think
that's something that came out
of a summit that was here in the
state and Mr Chair, I think, um,
representative pedigree you if
I'm not mistaken, because I was
reading you were discussing line
item 208.
Is that correct? Mr Chair?
Okay. I learned my support. I
mean,
I thought it was at a higher
number. I just do it. Maybe need
some clarification. If there's
if it's not that it was at 19
million rather than the 10, But
if I need clarification on that
you can give that to me. If it
is at the higher amount, that's
what I would support. Thank you,
Mr Chair.
Thank you very much for
presenting the hunt. Next, we're
gonna go to rip suicide.
Indiana.
Thank you, Mr Chairman. I just
have a question on 199.
so it's stem as far as the item.
But then this isn't the
initiatives duplicate of CTE
programs because those are two
different.
Programs explain that
Uh so I'm looking for my one
with 199. I apologize. Um So, um
You know, Mr Chairman and
represents heaven, Yana. I might
have to follow up with our PD
analyst. He wrote that comment.
I'm not. I'm not sure about it.
All right. Thank you.
Thank you very much represents
Sanjana, I believe represents
Garrett. And then we're gonna go
to represent Brown.
Thank you, Mr Chair. Just I want
to make sure I understand line
159. The 5000 is that for
rulemaking brings about 180 Day
mandate.
So you missed Mr Chairman and
representative, you said line
159159.
So, um, no. Uh, I Mr Chairman
and representative that's not
related to PD Rulemaking.
Perhaps planning was taken and
that funding was taken out in
the HFC scenario. Okay, Thank
you, Mr Chair and then
Um, line 168, which is the pilot
residency programs for
principals, school counselors
and social workers. So we're
lumping that with teacher
residencies in the expendable
thank category is that correct?
Mr Chair, representative Gary
and that That's a I know that
you are one of the to come back
to that.
Um, section. We're skipping
ahead a bit here. But if you go
to, um
Line 311. I believe you'll see
the appropriation in that fund
for educator, clinical practice
programs.
Okay? I'm Mr Chairman. I'm
concerned about that. Because
teacher residencies are already
proven and studied.
Um, And so that's just something
I'm gonna flag once again.
Uh, to put all those things
together.
Just flagging that and I think
oh, number 178 the summer
reading program.
I think the PDS for 30,000. I'm
actually happy to see the money
result. I'm happy to see it
Lower. So thank you for whoever
did that.
And let's see, I do believe
That is it for now. Thank you.
Thank you very much represented.
Garrett represent brown, please.
Thank you, Mr Chairman and just
a couple items on one line. 178
Garrett just referred to that
one.
Mr Kerrigan is for summer
reading intervention program for
students based in the science of
reading. My question. Is Mr
Chair. Will this funding reach
into all school districts in the
state?
Mr Chairman of ahead.
Okay, Mr. Chairman. I can Mr
Chairman, Representative. I can
take a stab at this. Um, can you
remind me the line number? Just
so I have the numbers in front
of me, Mr Chair and Amanda. It's
178. Okay. Um yes, Mr. Chair,
representative. The I think in
talks with the department on
this
It was emphasized that this
would be for the entire state.
Um, this would not
This would not this language
would not cover something like a
centralized building. If that's
the question.
Mr Chair and Amanda. So just a
little bit more on that, So in
other words, it will reach into
all school districts in the
state. Do we know that, or is it
do they apply for it? If they
want it? How does that work, Mr
Chair?
Go ahead, Dr Courtney and then
I'll add a few things.
I've Mr Chairman, um and, um
Ah, Representative Brown. Our
understanding is that it's
supposed to support
approximately 10,000 students,
and there's that would be a any
any public school. Um, as far as
how that's administered, that
would likely be up to the public
Education Department. Mr Cheng
Represent Brown. I would only
add that the department has said
there with federal funds working
to have that ready for this
summer. So I think with some
dialogue and questions to the
department, uh, contingent on
funding we can members can
absolutely ask them about what
their plans are for specific
regions of the state, but they
are actively engaged in planning
for this.
With federal funds, Mr. Chair, I
think we have to start
somewhere. But with our reading
proficiency scores being solo.
I'm sure there are more than
10,000 students who need this
help.
And then Mr Chair. I would like
to go to 1201.
Hmm. This is a P D.
And it says it's to train
secondary educators and evidence
based reading instruction.
Mr Chairman, I guess before I
have seen this before, but I
guess I did not key on the words
Secondary. So we're training. I
take it high school teachers.
In the science of breeding with
that be correct, Mr. Chair,
Joey. Mr. Chairman represented
Brown. Yes, The purpose of this
program would be for secondary
teachers.
Mr Chair. That's a little late
in the process, in my opinion,
but if we need to do it, we need
to do it. Um, prepare them to
graduate, Mr. Chair, comment
from Joey. Just Mr Chair and
representative there has been
money in in past years budget
for, um, the same type of
training at the elementary
school level, so it's not
excluding the elementary.
There's been funding for that in
the past. This is adding for
secondary
Okay?
Thank you.
Thank you very much upset, Brown
said. Figure out just sorry, Mr
Chair on that point secondary
also includes middle school and
I think the intent of some of
this funding is that middle
school age gap. Thank you, Mr
Chair. Mr Chair represented
Figaro that that's absolutely
right.
Excellent. Thank you very much.
Are there any additional
questions with the ped specials?
Kate once going twice. Let's
continue on then onto, um,
higher education. Yes, Mr
Chairman. Higher education. I
think the first one will you
will see is not until 200 line
page 20 line 228 0. I'm sorry. I
apologize.
I have to staple my pages next
time, Mr Chairman. So on, um
There's nothing there.
Oh, yeah. So so that so, I Mr
Chairman, when I met before his
by going down, Um
So only looking at the changes.
So Amanda was pointing me. Yes.
line to 11 is the start of the
higher Education department but
looking only at the changes we
go to page 29 228.
Uh um.
So on that line, Mr Chairman,
There's $2.5 million for the
Board of Regions at MSU for the
New Mexico reforestation center
That funding will be authorized
through fiscal year. 2029 also
add Mr Chairman in the in the
reauthorization section, there's
a $10 million reauthorization
request from an MSU.
They've asked us to extend that
for an additional year, um, to
continue work on the
reforestation center, and that
is in the HFC scenario.
Excellent. Thank you. Any
questions here? Oh, yes. Sorry.
Reserved Chatfield and represent
of Sanchez.
Thank you, Mr Chair. I guess my
original question probably was
answered.
And that is this money is just
for
For operation and Management.
It's not for the construction of
the new reforestation center in
so then it which leads to my
second question, and I hope that
we're gonna discuss later on
today. Some funding
To build a new reforestation
center. Mr Chairman,
Representative Chatfield. Um,
this is just for operations.
That's correct. I think lfc
analysis thinks are found that
it might be more appropriate to
have the building money in
capital outlay, which we will
not see. So I can't speak to
what's in there right now, But I
do know that we have signaled
that that's a priority as well.
So we can follow up on that for
you.
Thank you, Mr Chair.
Thank you very much upset.
Chatfield represents Sanchez,
please. Thank you, Mr Chair. I
know.
They just mentioned that that 10
million was the reauthorization.
I thought somewhere someone
mentioned that there was an
additional 10 million going
towards the construction.
Is this the same 10 million
they're talking about, Or is
that somewhere else?
So so, Mr Chairman know that So
the 10 million I was referencing
before was the reauthorization
of last year's appropriation. I
think the other 10 million is
else is was what Amanda was
talking about, possibly
elsewhere.
Thank you, Mr Chair. Thank you
very much. Representative
Sanchez. We're gonna go now to
represent Luhan and represent
Herndon.
Thank you, Mr Chair. I'm looking
at line item to 2400 for
behavioral and mental health
initiatives at higher education
institutions in the note says
Alexey. Recommendations include
additional funding for this
purpose. Can you explain? So, Mr
Chair and representative, So my
understanding on this is there
is some, um, money in the I N G.
Base for, uh, student support
services. I'm not remembering if
that's the exact term, but it's
in. That's right represent
Mohannad. There's 3 Million
student support services that is
part of our lfc recommendation.
Thank you very much dedicated to
this purpose. Thank you.
Appreciate it. Thank you
Absolutely represent Herndon.
Thank you, Mr Chair.
Um
And presenters. I direct your
attention to line 216 and the
sun page 18 and I'm asking for
clarification. So on that line,
there was a request for a $10
million appropriation to
increase the graduation in the
nursing programs primarily
focused, Um and I heard
education institutions.
But now in your comments, you
say that there was 15 million
appropriated. So now it's been,
um
It's been converted to
recurring. So that includes the
10 million that was asked there
It's a little unclear What your
note references because there
was an additional 6500 seats. I
understand offered in the in the
school of nursing, and thank you
for your explanation. So, Mr
Chairman and represent and
representatives. I believe this
comment means that that $15
million was what was
What was converted into
recurring, but we can double
check with our higher ed
analysts and make sure that's
accurate. All right. Thank you,
Mr Chair. Thank you. Presenters.
Excellent. Thank you very much
represents Herndon. Any other
questions up through the bottom
of page 20?
Seeing none. Let's keep going,
Miss Mr Chairman, Deputy
director reminded me I did miss
one because it's not in. It's
another one of those not in the
plus or minus column because
it's other state funds online to
21 Page 19. There's an
additional $15 million
From the Technology Enhancement
Fund for distributions to higher
education institution for
research projects so that $15
million is other state funds.
Um and moving on.
To the next page, Mr Chairman,
So we see some additional items
here on lines 232 to 34, so
there's a million and a half
foreign MSU to partner with the
College of Osteopathic Medicine.
There's 250. There's a couple of
appropriations for the
Department of Agriculture at
MSU, one for trailers for their
equipment, and then another for
a cloud seeding program.
Others.
Um, sure, Mr. Chairman members
all comment on a couple of
these, Um on page 21 so line to
30, you see a negative 10
million there for the Creative
Media Institute in Las Cruces.
This is another one that flagged
would be more appropriate for
capital outlay. So that's why
that negative is there. Um, and
then for the 234 for cloud
seeding. There is a bill
attached to that That's been a
priority for several members.
And we've
Done programs like this before,
So that's why that's there.
Great. Thank you Any represent
figured out, please.
Thank you, Mr Chair like 233.
Why wouldn't trailers be part of
capital outlay?
So, Mr Chairman and
Representative, uh, generally,
you know the vehicles and and
those kinds of things to
typically come in Section five.
We talked a little earlier about
law enforcement vehicles.
There's also we didn't talk
about it today, but there's also
money for the General Services
Department to purchase vehicles
in Section five. It's not
unusual for vehicles or those
kinds of equipment type things
to be in this section. Thank
you, Mr Chair there, often also
on our capital outlay list. So
how do we destroy
English when we put them which
place
Mr. Chair, representative. I can
take a stab at this. Um, there
are published by LFC Some really
good capital Outlay guidelines.
Um, capital outlays typically
really useful for projects that
will be long term, Um, and those
would not be something like
vehicles.
Sometimes member allocations or
state allocations for capital
outlay are pretty small. So I
think that's part of the reason
that you all have seen vehicles
in the past and you know as a
residual in the present.
Thank you.
Thank you very much for seven
figures represent Montoya,
please.
Thank you. Thank you, Mr Chair.
Online to 32.
That
Partnership with the College of
Osteopathic Medicine to develop
comprehensive outreach program.
Uh, through New Mexico State
University, and then it looks
like we recommended one point.
5 million and then we added 1.5
million. Am I reading that
incorrectly?
Um, Mr Chair. Sorry. This We
know the spreadsheets are very
large. Um, no. So, what you're
seeing is, um, 101.5 million in
General fund and then the total
and then these last two columns
are just plus or minus. So this
is just showing you from LFC in
addition or subtraction.
So the total is 1.5 million, and
so real quick that
I hadn't. I don't believe I
heard. This must have been a
subcommittee. Um, for what is
that advertising? What? What is
it? Comprehensive outreach
program.
Um, Mr Chair Representative
Montoya, as I understand it.
This is part of an initiative to
get more folks into the health
care field. Um, and there's some
various initiatives that the
college has. And I can follow up
on that documentation for you. I
have it in front of me. Okay.
Thank you. Mr Mr Try. I look
forward to that follow up from
what I understood they
We're at near capacity.
Um, the last
Presentation I had so I'm
Trying to figure out what the
purpose of spending more money.
And that outreach Thank you, Mr
Chair.
Thank you very much for seven
months.
Okay. Uh, let's keep going.
So Mr Chairman and members of
the Committee of the last item
for Section five is, um, online
to 38. That's the computer
system Enhancement fund. This a
lot. This aligns to your I T
scenario, So there was just
there was some changes, and this
just brings the general fund
portion of that.
When you discuss your computer
systems work group.
With that we have moved on to
Section six, which is your
supplemental and deficiency
appropriations. There's a
handful of items to, um
To look at here. So on page 22
line, 245 DF a requested a
supplemental for shortfalls in
personal services and employee
benefits. As you'll note the
executive recommendation was
lower so that amount in the HFC
scenario aligns to the executive
recommendation. It's the same
issue for line 248.
For the General Services
Department and the shortfall in
the group Health benefits
program. That amount was aligned
to the numbers that the that the
executive had based on the
department's audit.
Moving on Mr Chairman Line to
65. There was some conversation
about this. At our last meeting
on specials. You may recall, um,
that particular deficiency
appropriation on online to 65
was not. The LFC got that
request late, So it was not
included in that, but this would
enable the Indian Affairs
Department to make those
reimbursements to the tribal
governments that had those
capital outlay expenses.
Um uh. And on page 24, Mr.
Chairman, we moved to the
Department of Health. There was
a request for a deficiency. This
is another area where the
request from the agency. Um, had
some was a little bit higher
than the executive amount. There
was additional information
received. And so this aligns to
the executive amount.
Finally on line 281. There was
some some work over the past
week with the Department of
Health and the Facilities
Management program to identify a
need for a supplemental this
year, and that amount is
included. 3.5 million online
number 281.
Thank you, Mr Simon. Can we take
questions? Certainly. Okay. So
representatives Armstrong Garcia
and then Pettigrew. Thank you.
Madam Chair. Can you touch
really quickly because I don't
know that I heard you correctly
online to 65.
Mine to 65.
Mr Madam chair and members of
Indian affairs. So, yeah. Um, um
Madam Chair Representative
Armstrong. So the issue with
that it was not in the LFC wreck
because the LFC did not get the
agency request. It was in the
executive record. What happened?
There was capital outlay.
Funding reverted. There weren't
timely payments from the Indian
Affairs department to the tribal
governments who had expended
those dollars.
This appropriation would allow
the Indian Affairs Department to
make those reimbursements. Thank
you, Madam chair. Thank you,
Representative Garcia.
Thank you, Madam. Chair, Joy and
Ryan. Uh
282 and the veteran service. It
is on the right side there did
not recommend
Mhm recurring fund balance.
Do that It was a bad audit on
their on their behalf there, and
I have a texture.
And this reads a deficiency in
the amount of 800 to $1400 TVs
in Cumbre when transferring
veterans home back to the
Department of Health in 2019.
Yeah, And that's the same amount
you have on the right. That's
one of the 140. Yeah. So, um, Mr
Mr Chairman and represented
Garcia. I think the issue there
is we haven't seen, uh,
deficiency in the audit. And so
that was why this this
particular item was not
recommended.
Of joy and and you know, this
has been going on since 2019.
You know what? Maybe
I'm not blaming you for it. But
who oversees these audits
because you know it's a six year
old added. There's a six year
finding on him and then very
clear what happened and yet.
You don't have no answer to how
to fix it. Yeah. So, Mr Mr Chair
and representatives, So just
just in speaking with our
analysts, the we haven't
received any projections from
the department on this
particular item again. That's
why it wasn't in the LFC
recommendation.
So that I know there's sit
Few conversations, Mr Simon, if
you can go and then rips of
Garcia open, stay with you.
Let's get an answer. Garcia,
please. So I'm Mr Chairman and
representative Garcia, So I just
didn't in hearing from our
analysts. We have not received a
projection from the department
for this particular item. That's
why it wasn't in the
recommendation.
Thank you, Mr Kimber, Brazil
joyous.
You know they're gonna have a
big shortfall over this audit
has been a six year old lauded
and you know, you're what you're
telling me. Is that making me
any symptom? Why? This hasn't
been taken care of six years.
It's an old daughter Building
Green or the Department of
Veterans Affairs.
So at the end of the day here,
we're gonna have a big old
shortfall that they can't
It's gonna be too late, you
know, in the next year, you know
this is a 2019 audit when the
Department of Health took over
the veterans services, and the
reason that came up was
It's been a mature finding in
our audits since 2019 as a
result of unpaid, federally
funded payroll medical for
medical providers.
And you know
When do we take care of Les? My
question, Mr Chairman.
Mr. Chair, Representative Garcia
will touch base with the
department and get you some more
information.
Representative Garcia will touch
base with the department and get
you some more information.
Thank you.
Thank you. Thank you, Mr
Chairman.
Thank you very much. Mr Garcia
Represent pedigree, please.
Thank you. Chairman and
I'm sorry to do this, But can we
go back to 265 for a minute? Mr
Chairman, Representative, I'd be
happy to if I can find it. It's
okay. That's the Indian affairs.
One. Yes, Mr Chairman,
Representative Mr Chairman Jo
had really like to hear the
answer you or
The response that you gave
earlier with respect to how we
got to this and then I think I
have some follow up questions
Chairman.
So, Mr Mr Chairman and
representative my understanding
of the situation here was the
Indian Affairs Department was
not able to make timely
reimbursements for capital
outlay projects at for some
tribal governments, right. So
when those reimbursements didn't
go through, there was a that
money reverted right so
They could no longer make that
reimbursement. This
appropriation would allow them
to make that reimbursement based
on those expenditures.
So it was. It was essentially Mr
Chairman and representative a.
There was an internal control
issue that the department had.
Chairman. If I can restate what
I think the problem is
It would be like me.
Doing work for a client client
failing to build the client and
then having the client closed
the project out and not having
access to
Receiving revenue for what work?
I did.
Would that be accurate analogy,
So just to clarify Mr Chairman
and representative might my
understand It is not my
understanding that the tribal
governments that submitted those
reimbursements did not do so on
time.
But they did not receive the
reimbursement on time.
Our analysts might have some
more information on this as
well. Mr Chair, Representative.
My name is Rachel Garcia in the
LLC, analyst for Indian Affairs
and essentially, the tribal
governments submitted the
reimbursements and Indian
affairs did not accrue the the
liability. And so then the funds
reverted, and they did not make
the payments to the tribal
governments. So in this case,
the tribes did submit, um and
the agency missed them
deadlines. And then the funds
reverted. And so this is
essential.
Early, providing them the
funding to make those payments
that they owe to the tribal
governments.
Thank you, Chairman and thank
you for trying to get me down
this rabbit hole. Um, So while
I guess I would ask if
Any other entity in the state of
New Mexico was in the same boat.
Would we be doing the same
thing?
It. I don't think you represent
Pettigrew. I think maybe the
question are there other
examples? I think it's our sort
of our decision. If I think if
there's a question of are there
other examples where this has
happened? I think maybe as a
way, because the our staff sort
of works for us.
Um
Does think the Yeah. I don't
know how they can answer that.
necessarily looking forward, but
a good It's a fair question. And
maybe we can see if there are
past examples where there were,
um
Payments that were Yeah, I would
ask if there's past examples Go
back to you for further
questions on it.
Hmm. Mr Chairman and
representative, I would just
point out there are a total of
there were total executive
recommendations for 78 million
in deficiency appropriations.
Um, that's that's a lot. Um
So what was so where's most of
that is is for the General
Services Department for the for
the Health insurance fund
issues, but we are seeing it
across a number of departments.
Uh, some areas where they're
coming back and saying we need
We need money from the
Legislature today to take care
of this prior issue that we've
been having that we had in our
department. So there there are a
number of areas that are being
that.
Where this is happening.
Okay. I think one last question
in the rest are going to go
offline. With respect to this.
So
Every year.
This is my, um
Fourth session every year
whether I allocated the money or
not my predecessor dead. My
responsibility is to keep that
fund authorized.
Until the until the project
spent.
It's it's goes beyond six years
and I have to go through a
little bit more defense with
respect to that. So with respect
to this, would that mean that
The funds weren't reauthorized,
and that's the reason why they
reverted back
So, um, Mr Chairman and
representative
I don't know the answer on the
Capitol outlay particular one,
But in some cases, these were
just operating budget
deficiencies. Thank you very
much for helping me go down the
rabbit hole and pulling me back
out. Thank you.
Thank you very much Represent
pedigree are there rep said
Freeman, please. And then we'll
go to represent Luhan. Thank
you. Thank you, Mr Chair. Um, Mr
Chan presenters. I'm looking at
line 264 on page 24, where it
talks about the to correct the
deficit in the childcare
account, it says of the fund
should have moved to
E z E C D. Was it moved or not?
It's unclear what happened.
Uh, so Mr Chairman represented.
My understanding is that funding
did move. But what happened
there was, the agency continued
to to spend out of it after that
fun had moved, And that's what
the $1.2 Million is for.
So, Mr Tear, uh,
Simon, so it doesn't have a
deficit anymore. I'm just asking
for clarification.
Yeah. No. Um So, Mr Chairman and
representative, it does have a
deficit and we've been able to
verify that that's why it's why
it's on here.
Okay, So does the fund is good
to use now. It's unclear what
you're saying. I'm sorry, Mr
Chair.
Yeah. Um, thank you for being
doctor. Garcia, please. Yes, Mr.
Chair, Representative Herndon.
Um, it is my interesting what
happened? This is a fund that
was at sea Wave D that should
have moved to the early
childhood care department and
the fund closed out and
See where he continued to charge
expenses to that fund, and so it
created a deficiency. And so it
is our understanding from the
FAA that in order to close out
the fund and fully move it over
to East E C D. We need to
address the deficiency and it
was a finding in their audit.
And that is what that funding
does. It. Corrects the
deficiency in that fund so it
can be closed and addresses the
finding. Okay, Thank you and Mr
Chair and presenters if I could
just direct your attention to
page 20.
Nine for a moment lines 322 and
323 So looking at this trust
Fund. I am trying to get
clarification. The civil legal
services had their trust fund at
the Department of Finance and
Administration.
Does do either one of these
lines refer to that Civil legal
services fund.
It's
Maybe you could explain with
that is Mr Chair presenters. So,
Mr Chairman and representative
lines 322 and 323 do not relate
to the Civil Legal Services
Trust fund, it would be for the
Government Accountability Trust.
So, Mr Chair and in Simon just
for clarification.
Was there any funding in here at
all for civil legal services?
Touch the mic while it's on Mr
Chair, representative Herndon.
There is not going to be funding
in this spreadsheet for civil
legal services. But the ad hoc
committee that looked at D F A
and in that looked at the FAA,
where civil legal services lives
increased recurring funding to
civil legal services by
$250,000. This is one that we
have kept really close eye on
growth funding for
And it looks as though um, the
civil legal services, uh,
division at the FAA will have
perhaps more than they
requested. Even so, they're in.
They're in good shape to our
understanding right now, but
I'll get you updated numbers.
Thank you very much, Mr Chair
and
And Amanda.
Thank you very much Represent
Herndon represented Johan,
please.
Thank you, Mr Chair. Um, I'm
just gonna go back to two line
and I think we're I guess we're
all over the place. But I think
we got to page 25. Is that
correct?
Okay, Mr. Chair Representative
on page 25. Perfect. Thank you
for a line to 92 Public
education department. Um
For the short hole, uh, for
providing you Universal free
school lunch. I was confused
with this in a previous line
item. I think.
So this is the one I was, um,
wanted to focus on so we were
told during
During, um
There are hearing with PT that
we needed to get it up to the 19
million. We're recommending.
And then 99.9.
And the agency still is
developing meal quality
requirements. So can you run me
through that little bit, Mr
Chair?
So, Mr Chair and representative,
So as I mentioned before, so
there was 10 million in special
appropriations, that's that
covers FY, 24 and 25 so it can
be used in in either of those
years. This amount would be
specific to 24 so the sort of
$19 million is split up into two
buckets. Thought. Thank you, Mr
Chair. Appreciate it.
Thank you very much represented.
Johann. Are there any other
questions here?
Thank you. Hey, I don't see any.
Let's keep going on.
So, um, just to to finish out
the supplemental appropriations
Mr. Chair on, uh, page 26. There
are a couple of items one for
the New Mexico school for the
blind and visually impaired
$600,000 and on line 299 250,000
for the school for the death.
Um, for for salary shortfall
issues at those agencies.
Yeah. Uh, Justin flags,
remembers Mr Chair and
representatives. This is also
something that you all flagged
in your subcommittees our first
week, so that's addressed here.
Excellent. Thank you, Amanda.
Okay. Represent Chatfield,
please.
Thank you, Mr Chair. Uh, I want
to just drop back to line 296,
New Mexico Military Institute.
And, uh,
Executive had a million 321,000.
We had nothing in
Sesno General fund Revenue from
land Affirmative fund. Can you
talk to me a little bit about
that?
So, Mr Chairman and
representatives, So that was the
New Mexico Million Military
Institute. When we looked at
their at their financial
reserves that was determined
that they did have money in
those reserves, and that's why
that that item was not
recommended.
Thank you, Mr Chair.
Thank you very much.
Representing Chatfield Represent
pedigree, please. Thank you,
Chairman on the point that it,
representative Chatfield just
made so go through these
supplementals and we go through.
Budget shortfalls in budget
shortfalls, so on and so forth
all the way through
Did we make that same analysis
with respect to what's in the
reserves and can they pay for
it?
So, Mr Chairman, representative
that That's my understanding of
why the items for the school for
the blind and school for the
deaf were recommended was an
analysis of those reserves
reserve levels.
Mr Chairman. I understand that
answer. I was checking to make
sure we went through that same
analysis all the way through the
30 pages. Pages. Mr Chairman,
Representative. Yes, so, and
that's why you'll see that in
some cases I'll use the
Department of Health as an
example the facilities
management division. There
wasn't a recommendation in the
LFC because we didn't have that
analysis.
From the department. But over
the last week we've been working
with the department on that, and
that's why it ended up in this
scenario was because that
analysis was done.
Thank you, champion.
And thank you, Joey. For that
answer, I was and well, thanks a
little bit.
Representative Chatfield has a
keen eye because this was an
issue when they presented the
other day. It was an issue
afterwards when I talked with
General with respect to this
And he has a huge concern over
this, and so there may be a
discrepancy between what we
think we have and what they
think they have.
And I would I would ask that
maybe somebody from
From the review side.
Get back in touch with me just
to make sure that we're all on
the same page.
Thank you.
Thank you very much for obsessed
pedigree.
Okay. I don't see any other
questions. Let's keep on going.
So, Mr Chairman, we are now on
line 300 on page 26. So, Mr
Chairman, this is the growth
fund as we've been talking
about, you'll notice again. This
is an area where there's no plus
or minus General fund because
it's all other state funds, But
you'll notice each of these
numbers in these lines is
smaller. That's because of
A change in the structure, so
previously we were looking at
four years of funding. This
would would look at three years
of funding for each of these
items. There was also a couple
of additions that I wanted to
flag for you, Um Mr Chair, um,
on line number 309.
So this, um recruitment,
training and support for, um,
uh, foster care providers for
hard to place Children. That is
a new item in this scenario.
And amended. Did you want to
Talk about girl.
Um, it's your job, Mr. Chair.
members of the committee. Joey
touched on it very well. The new
item from for for foster care
came out of some conversations
that we've had with the C I F D
Department and with others and
that being one of the structural
needs that they have. So that's
why that edition is as far as
the reduction in numbers of
years.
For the growth of fund that
comes from some concerns from
members and other stakeholders
about the four year period and
the evaluation length so that
number was changed to
accommodate those concerns.
Thank you.
Representative Garrett Mr
Winkler clarification. So when
you're saying growth fund that's
with the gate fun, Okay, because
we just didn't grow with that
other money and then we're
changing it just 3/3 years. Is
that correct The change,
correct, uh, representing
Garrett. Instead of four years.
We're going to three years.
And is it called? What? Just so
we have it's still it's the
entirety is the grow.
The
Okay. It's just we just let me
let me ask Dr Courtney
Mr. Chair. Question. The name of
Section nine. That's your chair
representative. At this point,
the bill? Um, that, uh, that
would create the fund is still
called the Government
Accountability Trust Fund or or
the gate. There has been
conversation about changing that
name.
To the grow, which I believe
stands for the government
Recurring Opportunity Fund.
I and my understanding is
meaning, you know, opportunity
to get recurring funds if you
prove that this works
Okay, cause what's true Sharing
joy yesterday we all had to get
our throw money. And so it's
like trying to keep things
straight. Thank you.
Thank thank you very much
represent Garrett.
Ah represented pedigree. Did you
have a question? Great. Thank
you, Chairman. Uh
Thank you for this with respect
to
Mr. Chairman, I'm going to pull
that one off line. I'm not gonna
I'm not gonna throw somebody
under the bus right now. Okay,
conversation later.
Thank you very much represent
pedigree.
Uh, are there any other
Don't see any other questions or
yeah, representing the hand,
please.
Thank you, Mr Chair, Madam 310.
$12 million HFC scenario re
prioritized funds for career
technical education. Can you
explain that?
Yeah, Mr Chairman and
representatives. So as as we
discussed, uh, before in Section
five, there was a large increase
in the amount for career
technical education from the
public aid Reform Fund. And so
it can. It came out of here.
Perfect. Thank you.
Thank you very much represents
the Han represent please.
Thank you, Mr Chairman around
line 311, the educator, clinical
practice programs for lumping
together. Principal residencies
paid student teaching teacher
residencies and putting them in
this gate slash row Section
nine.
Like 311.
And I think
I have concerns about that
because teacher residencies
Residency programs are not pilot
programs.
That we fund for three years and
see if they get good data and
then put them in recurring.
They've been in our recurring
budget for a while, and there
are best shot at recruiting and
retaining teachers. So I'm not
sure why this money is in this
section.
Mr Chairman, Representative, Um
Those clinical practice programs
have not been part of the
recurring budget. They've been
on an annual basis. This would
provide three years worth of
funding as well as more
performance. Information on
which ones are working. Better
do we want to have all three
strategies one or two? To get
that information back to both?
L. E s C and lfc, but it would
basically guarantee that funding
for the next three years rather
than having to come back and get
a special
Thank you, Mr Chairman. And
thank you Then. Then my question
changes to I don't think it's
sufficient. If, um
I think it needs to be closer to
40 per year.
That's kind of where we are, and
this is 20 per year.
Mr Chairman, if I look at the
specialist that we've been doing
The amount is basically flat.
It's just carrying forward for
The next three years at the same
amount at the same annual event.
And then the edge fellows is not
part of that, Um, pilot project
and that would be funded
separately with the $10 million
special that you saw.
Okay. Thank you. Mr Chair. I'll
continue offline.
Thank you very much represent
Figueroa.
Any other questions. Ranking
member Armstrong, please.
Just a quick question I've been
trying to find for New Mexico
Tech.
The funding for
Ah, Kelly Hall. The Kelly
building. Is that in this or
would it be somewhere else? Does
anybody know where it is? Mr.
Chair? Representative Armstrong.
I don't recall having think
we're gonna ask Director Salad
to come on up, please.
Mr Chairman. That's a capital
project that would not be in
this bill. Thank you so much. I
just didn't want to miss it.
Thank you. Appreciate it. Thank
you very much. Ranking member.
Armstrong seven brown, please.
Uh, Mr Chairman, I move on to
line item 313, please. Are we
there? Okay. Thank you. Thank
you.
Mr Chairman and sorry, I think,
Can you name the line again,
please? Just 3 1313. So, um,
this is page 28. Mr. Chair. This
deals with higher Ed department
funding.
And, um
I'm a little disappointed to see
that the total lfc wreck was 80
million, and it's now down.
Under the HFC scenario to 60
million. There's an analyst
comment. Sorry if I could just,
uh, represent Brown. This is
only because instead of four
years of funding, the decision
was to go to three. Thank you,
Mr Chair, and that's why I'm
questioning. The analyst comment
where it says it will provide 20
million per year for four years,
and we just heard it's three
Miss Mr Chairman and
representative. Apologies for
that. That was one that comment
that didn't get updated would be
for three years now and so we'll
make sure Okay, Mr Chair. I have
a little bit more on this one.
So when we met, it seems like
eons ago and we were talking
about
The language here on this item.
Um, I had a little proposal to,
um make the language more
flexible for the benefit of
students. And, um, you asked me
to defer that until I guess
today to bring it up, so I do
have some language revision. I
would like I have copies of like
to pass out again. If I may, Mr
Chair.
And have the committee consider
a little bit different language.
Yeah, please, we can let's we'll
keep going through questions,
but again, Okay, please.
If we can. We will ask, uh, can
we have a staff member
distribute the language
proposal? If somebody yeah, make
if you wouldn't mind grabbing
the language proposals from
percent Brown, please. Thank
you.
So, Mr Chair. Well, that's being
passed out. I know everybody
wants to read it very closely.
Um, but I can just explain
briefly what? What the language
would do so.
We've had a theme I think in
this legislative session that we
want to boost workforce
training.
Career tech
Um, getting people certificates
to go from school to work and,
um
And so what? This language I
think would do is help that, um
we know that the expendable
trust money is meant for pilot
projects, and that would be the
nature of this language.
And I have had feedback Mr Chair
and members from higher Ed.
Organizations who have told me
they like this new language, and
they're supportive of it.
So, um, it's there in front of
you, Mr Chair and members. Um,
what it and here here's kind of
where it's changing things up a
bit.
So it would allow New Mexico
community colleges and regional
universities.
To provide to pay up to the full
cost of student tuition and fees
for workforce training courses,
not eligible for the state
financial aid, and that result
in an industry recognized
credential or endorsement.
Um, the opportunity Scholarship
doesn't cover all students, and
this would help bring some into
the fold. I believe, And then,
Mr Chair. The funding, um, could
be used and it's very clear Now
I think with the new language
that it could be used for
tuition fees and program
development
There are some institutions
higher ed institutions, Mr Chair
that have programs already in
existence and for them the pilot
Aspect of it might be how they
get more students into these
programs. And by offering this
assistance I think it would do
that, so I'm just trying to make
it as flexible as possible.
Um, And as I said earlier, Mr
Chair, it would exclude award
awards to students eligible for
other state aid programs. So
this is really targeted at
Workforce development.
And so that's the reason for the
change. I think it helps more
students.
And I would really like to
consider committee to consider
adopting this language, Mr.
Chair. Thank you very much
represented Brown. Thank you for
sharing explaining Committee.
Uh, want us to consider this any
additional changes that aren't
part of our package today will
have would be part of ketchup
cleanup, and so just explain
that we can't take action on it
today.
But thank you. It's very timely
for you sharing it with us now
and we'll work with higher
education director silly and
others to work on this very
quickly because we know that
Time is clock is ticking. Thank
you represent Brown.
Okay, We're gonna go next to
representative aka
Thank you, Mr Chairman. And
thank you.
Joey my questions online, 3112.
I think that line 3 12 33 12 and
I guess my only question is not
or my is a the for hard to fill
positions, Special education.
But I do believe that through
our conversations, there were
opportunity for other hard to
fill positions.
Not just for special education
teachers, is that
Has that changed or is that
312
Directions to leave.
The
Money in the growth fund for
the, UM hard to staff positions
is targeted at a pilot for
special education teachers.
In the self contained classrooms
that are where you get the most
vacancies that is a that amount
has been reduced considerably
from the LFC recommendations.
And thank you, Mr Chairman and
as a special teacher myself, I
I just think that in other areas
we have addressed special
education initiatives.
And I do think this we're
talking about teacher pipeline.
It would be my
My preference and for hard
hearted propositions could be
mouth and CT, but I just want to
highlight that I want to flag
it. Thank you, Mr Chairman.
On on that point, Mr Chair?
Absolutely, Charles. You just
said it was self contained
classroom because so many of our
special education teachers
Our inclusion classrooms and
often are handling three
classrooms. So why would we
limit it?
And is there a idea to put
language too limited?
Mr. Um,
sleep you them, I know. Yeah.
Thank you. That's where we have
been observing some of the
biggest gaps in terms of
staffing, and it's not for lack
of license special education
teachers. We see that there's
lots
Special education teachers out
there. They're just not for
whatever reason wanting to teach
in the special end and then
these are the hardest of the
hard placements for getting
those classrooms filled with our
most needy students. And so that
that was let's do a pilot to
figure out which strategy might
be the best. Maybe that's
additional compensation. It
could be something else, but
then to evaluate which strategy
is best to inform.
Whether or not a bigger policy
recommendation needs to be made
or financial investment needs to
be made. It's also not for lack
of
Resources within the special
education component of funding
formula where we see their
districts generate far in excess
of what they actually spend. But
this would be a very targeted
approach to figure out how to
get that at that one particular
issue, knowing there's other
hard to staff positions within
schools, and we can't ignore
that as well.
K Mr Chair. I just don't want us
to so narrowly define it that we
define ourselves out of. Thank
you.
Uh, thank you Represent Garrett
and thank you represent Baca for
flagging the language. Um
I want to go. I think now we're
gonna go to represent Mahan.
Thank you, Mr Chair. I don't
know if I'm jumping ahead again,
but I'm looking at line 321.
Ah!
To the affordable housing
interest funding mystery by the
New Mexico Mortgage Finance
Authority. FY 24
Why did we, um
Cut that funding Mr Chair.
Mr. Chair, Representative.
Luhan. Um, this this, uh 37
million that you see is is still
doubling the amount that, um
animate Fay has had in the past
for these types of initiatives.
um, in in discussions with
trying to fit in some of these
other member priorities as well
as discussions.
With the executive and other
members involved in some of
these housing conversations. The
idea was that the funding in the
opportunity enterprise housing
portion, um could be used in a
little bit more of an innovative
way, and this is still doubling
the capacity for an M F A. So
that's why that reductions
there, Mr Chair, so this
This this amount and I brought
this up on her first day of like
trying to understand the
housings everything and we still
haven't gotten a fool like
overview of all that.
Funding and where everything's
moving and all that sort of
thing. So we're following it now
through this through what we're
doing, and I understand that,
but
So
Where is that $13 million going,
Mr Chair.
I think they represent, uh,
Rob's, um, um hunt, in part that
there's 100 or over 200 million
new dollars going towards
housing.
Between the infrastructure and
other parts of the opportunity
Enterprise zone and the direct
housing So that's where that's
where this some of that money.
Is going
Is to help build the
infrastructure.
Big uh, yeah to address and
build the infrastructure needed
for more housing in the state.
Mr J. Understood. But isn't that
how much of that is contingent
upon legislation? Legislation?
Mr Chair?
Thank you, Um, represent
manhunt. They believe those
lines are contingent on
legislation. MF A is getting as
a man that said, this will bring
essentially up to 80 million
this year. Is that correct? And
I'll ask directors to lead to
come up as members recalled. We
dedicated 2.5% of the STB
capacity.
So there's gonna be director
Slee. If you could get what
we're expect to go into the
mortgage finance authority into
their trust fund. This would be
on top of that.
Yes, your you would be
effectively doubling it to about
74 million in this room. This
recommendation getting pretty
close to the kind of maximum
threshold that they testified
before you that they could
realistically push up. Thank you
for how to find but represented
behind your correct the other
that the other housing money is
contingent upon legislation. Mr.
Chair. I have I have a concern
with that, and we have mortgage
finance authority already in
place in the fund for them.
That is
Completely.
Use or, you know, they explained
to us with a new and then we're
putting a whole other pot
towards legislation that hasn't
even passed.
I have a. I have a bit of
concern with that, so I'd like
to entertain that we infused the
fund that already exists. The
already has the proof of
Of working before we
We move, uh, moving around to
fund it. We haven't even it's
contingent upon passing and Mr
Chair. I just have some concern
about that.
Maybe this is this is to develop
it further conversation, but
that's not making complete sense
to me, Mr Chair.
I'm sorry. I and I know that's
okay. Thank you very much for
sharing and thank you for the
conversation.
Ah, other questions here.
Representing Montoya, please.
Thank you, Mr Chair. That's this
whole. Um uh
Project that's moving forward.
Has has been
Very unclear from the very
beginning.
And
It's it's hard to to as we see
these dollars go forward and
duplication taking place.
It is concerning, um, in
particular since we know
The UM M F a mortgage Finance
authority.
The duplication. The
multiplication of effect that
takes place there. The dollars
are
17
To one for every dollar we
invest out of this legislature.
There are $17 that
Is a match either through grants
or through federal dollars.
And
Putting this
Money in here like this to
divert that will have
essentially divert money away.
From a proven program.
Is has been very, very
disconcerting.
Um, we have
For for what is potentially a
pilot project in the dollars
Our throughout the budget here
and there.
And they kind of don't match. I
understand how they could not
fit in a single bill. But the
plan
That has
That there have been, I think
attempts to explain to this
legislature
I don't believe we know enough
about it.
To move forward. But yet we're
put dollars in here to go to in
advance of the legislation
passing
And and Mr Chair. The problem
with this is it's kind of like
the statement that was made
several years ago. We've got to
fund this so we can see the
details of it. I have a I have a
very hard time.
Funding, something that it
appears is being hidden from us.
In the budget.
And it's there. But it is
There's no direct line.
There is no complete plan.
And it's been a Hodge project
appears that we're just going to
try and shove some dollars in to
get this started.
And
And I don't think this is the
way we should be doing the
budgeting process, so I have I
have some major problems with
not with the individual
initiatives per se.
But the way this is coming
together, I have I have a real
hard time with that. So thank
you, Mr Chair.
Okay. Thank you. Any other
questions? Okay. I don't see
anything. So let's keep going.
So
Mr Chair and members. We had
sort of moved on to talking
about the fund transfers that
are noted there in section 10.
So there's a couple of changes
online 318 to 320 so some fun
transfers that were removed. We
talked about line 320 earlier
moving the money into Section
five for water projects for the
Water Project fund.
And, um, moving to page 29
looking at the fund transfers
for, um, the government
accountability Trust. We've got
a little bit of a of a decrease
to the to the trust fund. Um,
and a little bit small increase
to the program fund to account
for additional spending.
In that fund, and those were the
changes in the in the fund
transfers, Mr Chair.
Okay. And Amanda's got something
real quick. I would just note
for members because as as we've
seen, there's a lot of money
going in different places for
line 322 that additional
spending is the member
allocation. So that's what that
is.
Great. Thank you very much for
that, Amanda, Okay, said
pedigree, please. Thank you.
Chair and oh, we're getting
closer to them to
Chairman. This is with respect
to something that does not have
a plus and minus on line 328.
After my good friends and
Lfc.
So, Section nine from
transportation. Yeah.
We We we talked. And I say that
in just I understand why
everything happened that way.
But now in section 11 we have an
executive requests of 200
million
LSC is original was 40 million,
and then h. A F. C scenarios
back up to 100 million.
Historically, our old Section
nine would be 200 million plus
And chairman. Um
100 million doesn't get it. Get
us anywhere.
Divide that by six
And we'll build a couple of
miles of road and each and in
each district
And and I'm not.
Over exaggerating when I say
that so
I'm curious, Um
Chairman.
Are. We only have 100 million
because once again, we're going
to give flexibility to the
Senate to maybe double that.
Um or triple it.
Because that's where we need to
be.
Even with the the amendment and
the changes that were made
within house Bill three as we
continue to look at this
The needs within the
departments. We spent all summer
long listening to every district
engineer.
Where they're at on all their
spending.
And what their what their focus
was going to be with with
upcoming projects. Trip report.
We have a stiff report. We have
a tamper for it. We have all
these needs $3.5 billion surplus
right now.
Now I understand we have people
on the Senate side wanting to
take
Some billion dollar bond out.
When this is the worst time in
the world.
To be bonding money.
And not saying it's gonna get
even better, but it's darn sure
not where we when we made the
decision in 2021.
To to bond under then Secretary
Sandoval.
The conditions were right for
that. The conditions are not
right now, but we have
We have the money.
To be able to put in the
infrastructure.
I don't think I ever anything
anything from any representative
or any senator out there saying
No. You know what? I don't need
a road in my district.
I don't need something fixed
where we're at with House Bill
three.
Where we came to a consensus at
on House Bill three.
And we're needs are across the
state from the Southeast.
To the northwest northeast to
the southwest.
Where we're at. This doesn't
touch it.
And Mr Chair. I You know, I'm
not saying anything negative
against all the other lines in
inside of here that it's not all
important.
We have $3.5 billion
This is the time when we do
this, we don't go borrow money
astronomical rate.
Especially when the state said
what a B plus
Rating right now.
This is frustrating for me.
I don't know. Chairman if you
would like to add to that if
anybody within LSC in and like
you said
Section nine to me has always
been roads.
I say what I said in jest
earlier.
Yeah, and I don't want anybody
to take offense with that. But
at the end of the day, we still
need the money.
Thank you.
Your episode pedigree. I don't.
Uh, we're very pleased and
excited to have chair Hochman V
Hill here. We've been proud to
support her, and the committee's
work. Think it's a point of
pride that we came in with
recommending some funding here
and more than doubled with that
funding is
And I've asked Director Sally to
come up. We don't need to go to
long into this. It is important
to point out for the record,
there's over $500 million
unencumbered of previous Section
nine transportation.
Allocations made by the
Legislature. So that, um
So there is a significant amount
of funding remaining to be
income bird, much less spent
from password.
Um, anything to add to that
Director sleep? No, sir. Mr.
Chairman. Thank you. Okay, we're
gonna go to episode Chatfield.
Thank you, Mr Chair.
I just would like to talk about
what happened a little bit. We
went through a period of time.
When we had very little funding
for road projects.
So, Mr Chair During that time we
lost a lot of our contractors.
We lost engineers. We lost the
people that it takes to put that
money on the ground. Then we
went through Covid. And that was
a
Sharp slap in the face for all
of us.
Uh huh.
Now we're ramping. Back up.
We're gearing back up. We were
hiring engineers were hiring
contractors. There's people
coming out of out of state to
work in our great state to bring
skilled folks to be come here
and work and, uh
Some of them working up in my
part of the world.
We need those contractors. We
need those engineers. I believe
last year we appropriated
double this is that correct?
Just
I'm just guessing at it. Just
tell me if we Mr Chair
representative, I believe the
General fund appropriation was
around 200 million last year 200
million. So to 40, Okay, a
little more than double so if we
start cutting it back
Maybe all these folks are would
go home. You know, they might
not want to stay in our state. I
would like to see a balance
there so that they know there's
going to be working next year
and next year and the next year.
And in a time when we have
3.4 billion, not million $3.4
billion.
I would like to see some of it
invested in roads there will be
here 30 years from now, when I'm
long gone, my grandkids will be
driving on good roads.
And the state will reap the
benefit of the
Of the trade that we have come
in on those roads. So I thank
you, Mr Chair for your time.
And I would hope to see us
continue to fund our roads. You
know, we need to. We need to
take care of our road. That's
something that will be there
when they oil boom is gone.
Thank you, sir. Absolutely.
Thank you very much represented
Chatfield represented a group.
Thank you chair and and I
appreciate your comment earlier
on the 500 million
With respect to that, and I
wanted to make sure I had my
facts right before I said
something
The reality of that 500 million.
There's 320 of it. The DLT
didn't receive the funding for
until July, 1st.
And it is in process.
Sorry.
So 320 million of that they just
received in July
and currently focused to be
encumbered by July of this year.
147 of that milk of that money
is Arkan funds that will
definitely be encumbered by July
this year so by by July worst
case scenario end or beginning
of 2024, beginning of 2025.
All of that money will be
encumbered.
With respect to that, how long
it takes to put budgets
together? How long it takes to
get design work done, how long
it takes to get everything else
done.
There's no bank now.
There's nothing for them to
encumber.
If we don't act now, Thank you.
Sure. Thank thank you very much
represented pedigree.
Represent brown, please.
Thank you, Mr Chair. I go the
sentiments that have just been
expressed. We cannot do road
projects just in time.
When money shows up in every
budget. It has to be forward
looking with, um, consideration
given to keeping the contractors
here in my part of the state, Mr
Chair, the contractors say they
have capacity to do more if they
could just get the funds. So, um
Bottom line. We have all this
incredible extra $3.5 billion.
We had about the same amount
last year.
And we're still just treading
water. I believe with our road
projects, So I need to see my my
wishes that we step it up a lot.
So thank you.
Thank you very much represented
Brown.
Okay. Are there any other
questions and that component?
Oh, yes. Please represent
Garcia. Mr. Chairman. You know,
I'm I'm gonna really echo with,
uh, both reps just finishing on
road projects, and I was in the
city, Mexico.
You know?
Like I said of four or five
times we had an accident up by
grants that involved 10 semis.
In one place at one time, and
that's really uncalled for, and
it's hard on people who live
there.
You know, I was shut down we
have on the interstate, It
becomes a parking lot.
Have been up there, Mr Chairman.
With a 10 mile backup on
traffic.
And you know this. It's
completely young golfer, and we
really need to support
The department so they can
function the way it's supposed
to function and the they need
equipment. They need more money,
and we really need to do that.
You know, Mr Chairman, we, uh
Fun schools, which is good.
Very important before I wasn't
the only Mexico Thank you, Mr.
Thank you very much for
obsessive. Garcia Upset vodka,
please.
Thank you, Mr Chairman. Thank
you. I'm not going to be
repetitive and redundant, but I
also support us looking at our
roads, making an investment into
this infrastructure with this
money that we have
You know that's not reoccurring,
and we need to make sure that
we're taking care of this
infrastructure. And I do think
and I urge us to just take a
look at that. Thank you, Mr
Chairman. Thank you very much.
Representative. Vodka represent
Montoya. Please, Mr Chair.
Unfortunately, I am going to be
a little redundant. Um
This budget. There are a lot of
good things in this budget.
And prior to getting on house
appropriations.
Um, very critical of the process
of how the budget comes
together. I don't think that's a
shock to anyone.
Um, now that I've been here I
see to some degree how
We get out kind of out over our
skis.
To some degree because there's a
lot of good projects.
There are a lot of very, very,
very worthy projects.
And
That being said.
Beginning of the year or
beginning of this session.
Um, we were told that there was
going to be no junior money.
And everyone was somewhat up in
arms because of the surplus that
we had, and we were told We
could not do this because
D s a could not handle the work.
So we found a workaround.
It wasn't perfect, but it was
able. We were able to find
things that were important to us
and each of our districts to be
able to fund things that were
important to each one of us.
To some degree, the same
sentiment.
Is being expressed across the
board throughout the building in
both chambers concerning roads.
The reality. Mr Chair is
Roads are more important to us
than many of these new projects
that are in here.
In part because
Dollars that are spent on roads
very much like the way FAA does
things. It causes further
growth.
There. There's an exponential
factor to it that we not quite
determined able, sometimes maybe
a little interminable.
But
I've seen that the budget that
is going to be coming out of
transportation. I appreciate
that. They worked hard to
increase the numbers, but it
doesn't get anywhere near
Where we need to be and
I just think that I'm gonna have
a hard time voting for this, Uh,
special supplementals, because I
don't think we're spending on a
lot of really good, shiny
objects and the real things that
are going to help with our
overall.
Uh huh. Infrastructure we're
gonna kick that can down the
road until we don't have the
money to do anything about it.
And so this is not to be
disparaging to the work that
came out of transportation.
I believe you. You had one. I
think that that group had one
hand tied behind their back.
We haven't voted on this yet.
And I think there's an
opportunity to to to
Reinstitute. What are our
priorities?
And I think what what this
budget represents is
All of the everything in the
administration.
Everything.
That the governor's office wants
and we get these two budgets are
budgets, which which which we
try to show some level of
restraint and then the
governor's budget. I don't know
how Mr Chair at this point that
this can be salvaged, but
The roads are important across
the board to each one of us, and
I would like to see us take the
time to maybe, uh,
Maybe a rejection of this bill
today might
Cause us to refocus on things
that we really care about in
each of our districts, which is
the infrastructure. Thank you.
Okay, We're gonna go to
representative Delacruz and then
represent girl.
Thank you, Mr Chairman.
You know, I
I have a deep appreciation for
the need for quality roads in
our in our communities and our
statement, I will tell you,
Frankly, that is the number one
thing that I hear from my
constituents is the
Condition of our roads and not
just the major thoroughfares,
but the small roads as well,
which indicates to me that it
matters to them, so it matters
to them. It matters to me and I
suspected matters to everybody
at this day as today, you know.
I don't want to.
You're gonna have to pardon the
pun, but the reality is that
when it comes to taxpayers and
the use of their dollars roads
are where the rubber meets the
road.
They will not gauge anything
more than that. Because as you
heard me say before, not
everybody goes to a library. Not
everybody is in prison. Not
everybody's in a variety of
State sponsored activities, but
everyone
Yeah, absolutely. Everyone
traverse Traverse is those
roads.
So we must take
The expenditure of tax dollars
citizen tax dollars on roads
seriously, Mr Chairman. Thank
you.
Thank you very much for daily
Cruise represented Garrett,
please Mr. Chair, practical
questions, so I'll talk through.
I think if it's a question with
regard to Rhodes about sexually
11, okay, and, uh, will also as
a note there, we're gonna have
Chairwoman Hochman vehicle up.
In in, You know, I maybe could
have done the order a little bit
differently, which, uh, I
appreciate your woman and and
secretary and members. Uh,
Going through HDFC with us, but
My my question is have these
number 11 spin shared with sheer
Hoffman. Be Hill yet, Or is your
first time hearing about it?
Mr. Represent Garrett. We're
following chair Hochman V Hill,
And this is actually a great
segue. We're following chair
Hochman V Hills leadership here.
There was because of her
leadership. There was General
fund in the LFC recommendation.
when that was and feel safe and
saying it was not going to be
part of that. Also because of
her leadership, there's been
more than double that funding
allocated in this committee. So
I think we we hear very clearly
what members are saying.
In responding to that through
and with the leadership of chair
Hawkman Be Hill is why there's
100 million and we're setting a
continuing to set the bar for
our Senate colleagues. Thank you
for the clarification.
Absolutely. Thank you.
Okay. Are there any other
questions? I don't see any other
questions. We went through.
We like to do the hard things
First and House Appropriations
and Finance Committee members of
that again. I want to bring us
back to sort of the beginning
We've gone through. These are
the special supplemental and
deficiency appropriations.
This is something we've seen,
several times now just by
itself.
Um
And we've seen for each agency.
there special supplemental and
deficiency appropriations,
including the Section nine
Expendable Trust, which we've
done. We've we've made some
significant changes to. Ah,
we've seen that as part of a
every agency. I'm very proud and
grateful to you as members.
We've done all of that in open
committee, which has led to I
think more questions more time.
but frankly, a much better
discussion and reflective of you
all's incredible commitment.
Third. We, uh we do. We will
take a vote on this now.
There are as there are
additional changes, and I think
we've heard some suggestions
across a number of areas from
language to others.
Any additional changes will be
covered in ketchup cleanup. We
can't take up those changes sort
of on the fly today. Other
additions. Um, so that's just
announce again here and with
everybody that any final changes
with regards to the special,
supplemental and deficiencies
that aren't on these sheets.
Will be part of our catch up,
clean up, and so there is a
additional work to be done and
additional work will ask you all
to do.
Ah, any questions on that?
Any. I don't any questions.
If I just talked to knows, Okay.
I don't see any other questions.
Their members. Thank you for
that. Now we're gonna go to a
motion to accept the HFC. Ah,
changes for the 2024 special
supplemental and deficiency
appropriations.
Mr. Chair. I would move the
committee except
Uh, the
KFC special supplemental and
Deficiency.
Recommendations recommendations.
Is there a second? Okay. It's
been moved by Vice Chair Dixon
second by representative dela
Cruz. Can we go? Can we ask for
the vote?
Hmm.
Yes.
Yes.
Yes, but we'll continue to be
open to changes.
Yes.
Yes.
Yes. Explain my vote.
No.
No. And I'd like to explain my
vote.
Rooms at Brown and represent
Luhan and represent pedigree.
Brown, please.
Thank you, Mr Chairman. Um
You know, Putting together a
budget is like solving a 3000
piece puzzle. Maybe it's even a
bigger puzzle than that. But
There's so much here that that's
going to just and there is truly
something for everybody and in
these spreadsheets
But I cannot get past the fact
Mr Chair that what we're doing
for
Or highways and roads is just
not sufficient in light of all
this extra revenue, and I just
don't believe my constituents
would be happy if I voted for
this, knowing that
At the end of the day when we
finished the session, regardless
of what the Senate does, and I'm
not extremely hopeful there.
I hope I'm wrong, but I just
don't think we're getting enough
for where the needs are are so
great. So for that reason I
voted no, thank you for 700.
Thank you, Mr Chair. Um, explain
me, but first, just want to say
Uh, gracious. Thank you. For all
the work that our staff has
done. I mean, this is
incredible, incredible work and
keeping up with all of us, and
keeping up with everything was
like
Thank you. Um, but I just want
to say I vote Yes. And I I
believe that this is a healthy
way of doing our budget are
looking at it and making sure
we're going through it. But
there's so many things that
They're moving very fast,
especially through its 30 Day
session.
And I just hope we have some
reforms for our for our
Legislature, Mr Chair so that we
can have even more time to
really look at everything that's
going on and how fast everything
is moving. Um, there's a lot of
reforms to be done, but I
understand the process. I
respect it. And I really respect
our staff. Thank you, Mr Chair.
Thank you very much.
Percent pedigree.
Thank you. Chair.
I, too appreciate the work and,
uh
The willingness to stand up
there and and go line by line
and the ability to be able to
Mhm rattled stuff off, and
that's that's that's, um
A testament to how you how hard
you all work.
I would say Mr care that this is
the first time in house
appropriations for me.
That I wanted to stop the
process.
Honestly wanted to make a motion
to table today.
And just stop the entire
process. I don't care how much
longer we're here. How much
harder we work on it.
I just wanted to stop the
process. There's things in here.
I said there.
And one of the representatives
said that you know, a lot of
this is look at the shiny thing
over here while we're and we're
not taking care of something
that truly needs to be talked
about. We talked about public
safety.
But the one critical thing
With respect to public safety is
our roads.
And we're not investing in that.
We talked about public safety
and so many other areas that
could go line by line on things
that that I see in here and and
I don't want to take away for
all the hard work that's
happening and everybody's input.
Um from 112 people and then
staff. This just
I? Yes. So disappointed with
that.
Um
That was my first gut was to
make a motion to table.
And hope that we can get to a
point where we could all agree.
We need to sit down and go
through this again.
Thank you. Thank you. Okay,
members. We're going to move
now, quickly to our next packet.
Mr. Chairman. Are we going to
look at the language only
recommendations at the at the
back of the packet, Please.
Sorry about that problem, Mr
Chair. So on these sheets, you
have three lines one through the
language only appropriations
that were recommended by the
executive. Then you see lfc
recommendations and then an HFC
scenario.
Uh, there's a lot of overlap, so
these language only items are
the reauthorization of prior
year appropriations. For the
most part, I'm going to go
through a couple of these that
are a little different. Um, and
just point out some some high
level differences you can see
online, too. There was item in
the lfc that was not recommended
by the executive. That is for
AOC two. Sorry. Uh, Mr Joe, can
you refer so we're starting on
page 30?
We won in our big in these
The packets. Uh, yeah. Yeah,
well, let's take a breath there,
so we're starting on page 31.
And then Yep, no, no sorry on
our previous packet. Yep.
Yep.
That packet only thought we were
done with it. We're back. Uh so
we're on page 31 members.
On the top special language only
appropriations.
And then Joey, can you go back
and start? Uh, we'll go by line
number, so I was just pointing
out online, too. There was there
was a special, um, that was not
in the lfc wreck That was in the
lfc wreck. Um, there's a lot of
overlap Mr Chair Between these
where there's differences, it's
generally grammatical and or
changes like that.
Um
I did want to point out on
Ah, items where the lfc was, Um
there was a change from the lfc.
So on page 34, Mr Chair, there
is an item for the Department of
Information Technology, so that
item has been removed based on
discussions with the department.
They believe they're going to be
able to expend that money in the
current fiscal year, and thus
there would be no money
available to reauthorize.
Um
Um, keeping going. Other changes
from the lfc on, uh, page 36
line 36.
There was a request request from
the Indian Affairs Department.
That was a little bit similar to
that deficiency request we had
earlier we didn't get that in
time to put it in the LFC
recommendation, But it's in your
scenario here. This would
reauthorize $25 million from an
appropriation that was made last
year.
Ah!
And, um
Mr Chair. Uh,
I believe those were the only
changes from the LFC
recommendation.
Okay. Thank you for that, Mr
Simond.
Oh, I'm sorry. I I see another.
I see another one. Mr Chair. I
apologize, Um
Age. Uh, page 54. I'm sorry Page
38 line 54.
Actually, it's not like 54. It's
line 52 Page 38 line 52.
Uh,
Actually know that this is
there's a mistake here. We'll
have to deal with that later.
Apologies, Mr Share on Page 39.
Line 55. There's an addition for
the public education Department.
Uh, so this relates to a
deficiency or a supplemental
request from the department. LFC
staff think there's sufficient
statutory authorization and
there's $10 million in the State
Support Reserve fund the
department is able to use that
to support the program unit
value. So this
Line 55 here would, um
Would, uh, just put that in in
House Bill two. In addition,
there's a couple of ad
additional reauthorization items
for the Public Education
Department line 56 for tribal
libraries line 57, which relates
to the development of bilingual
education. Uh
Proficiency exam and a line 58,
which is for tribal and rural
community based extended
learning programs. Um, line 59,
Mr Chair.
Should the what's in the LFC
recommendation should be over it
just unfortunately, didn't get
copied in this scenario, but
it's that that line item should
be, um
Moved over but we can. We can
bring that to you in ketchup
cleanup to correct that that
error.
Thank you very much, Mr Simon
And great to see that so that,
um, this is the 10 million
existing for the reforestation
center That were, um
And it should have been copied
over Mr Chair. But it is a fixed
mentioned frequently. Okay. Uh,
let's go to represent vodka,
please. Thank you. Mr Chairman.
And thank you. My question is
on.
Like 55, and I just want to make
sure that I understand that's
regarding the unit value. Mr.
Chairman, Um Joe, is that saying
that we're keeping the unit
value the same as it was.
Um, Mr Chairman, and there is
legislation that talks about the
salaries.
Of certain categories of workers
support staff for schools. Um
Based upon this what? I do know
if that if that bill those
passed house Bill 199.
It would be an unpadded funded
mandate.
Tourist school district. So is
that something that Mr Chairman
that we would go back and take a
look at and adjust the unit
value based upon the passage of
the legislation?
Mr Chairman. The unit value
issue is the
Um
Public Health Department had
higher take up rates for the
extended school programs.
Um and
And the projections and we think
we came to a consensus with them
was that it would. It might be
short by about $10 million when
they go and set the final unit
value.
The state Support reserve, which
is an account within the general
fund reserves is there to help
in case
There's a shortfall in the unit
values. So this language simply
reaffirms that they can access
the money that's already there
to keep the unit value flat and
not reduce it. As for the adding
new spending requirements, um to
the SCG.
If you wanted to pay for those,
those who need to be
appropriated through House Bill
two.
And thank you, Mr Chairman and
really appreciate clarification,
I guess.
I know that if there is a change
to the personnel costs or any
district, it could be quite
burdensome. And so I just wanted
to make sure that we're not
Passing something that later on
when we pass to the district.
And that they make cuts or
They have to move money from
other functions. So
I appreciate the clarification.
Thank you, Mr Chairman.
Absolutely. Thank you. Very
much. Present bucket Represent
Herndon, please.
Thank you, Mr Chair. And as
thank you, Simon, would I'm
directing your attention to page
36 into line 36. Some asking for
an explanation is does this have
Any reference with respect to
the 25 million expenditure for
the tribal health councils.
For the expenditure there. Is it
included in that
It is.
Mistake is so, um, Mr Chairman
and representative, I'm not sure
if that is for the tribal Health
council. I have to go back and
look at what? That
appropriation. Yeah, Represent
Herndon. There is we'll see in
catch up cleanup work with
tribal health councils. In
addition to a lot of the grow
funding, this is
It's on the tip of my tongue
What this was for, but it is it
is not for health councils.
Anger is more education related.
This, um
You're correct, Mr Chairman.
Yes. So, Yeah. In answer to your
question. This is not related to
health councils. This year, we
will see in ketchup cleanup
additional work that's been
recommended by the subcommittee
for tribal health.
Thank you, Mr Chair. Thank you.
Represent Chatfield, please
thing several times, but I just
I want to understand online. 59
New Mexico State University and
their LFC recommended
Extending the time for
expenditure of the 10 million
appropriated.
Which is actually 8.5 to the
reforestation center and the
rest to the X science centers or
production of grasses, etcetera.
So does that mean this money is
going to revert since we didn't
get the language or not heard
there, You know, maybe there's
some just trying to follow that
process, and, uh
In my head. Okay, Mr. Chair,
Representative Chatfield, This
is this is a typo. It should be
copied over and Mr Chair. You
can make that technical
correction to adopt that. Now,
if you'd like, or you can see
that language and catch up clean
up tomorrow for the language
only just the language.
I am at peace. Thanks. Thank you
very much. Thank you represented
Chatfield. Well, I I've asked
for sort of taking it up
tomorrow. So I think we'll
include it tomorrow. But thank
you for flagging. Thank you,
Amanda.
Okay? I don't see any other
questions. Uh, can we have a
motion to adopt the special
language only appropriations
HFC. Mr. Chair. I moved that the
committee adopt the H A. F C
recommendations for special
language only appropriations.
Hey, it's been moved by Vice
Chair Dixon, second by
representative Chatfield. Is
there any opposition to adopting
that motion?
Okay. I don't see any
Um okay, uh, members if it's
okay.
Yeah.
Well, let's we'll stay up there.
We want sort of change it up.
We'll go quickly through our sex
and seven it appropriations and
then Madam chair will go to you.
Yeah, well, we're gonna change,
Madam chair. Let's go. Let's go
ahead and do the Department of
Transportation. You wouldn't
mind coming up in presenting
House Bill three.
We look out the window. We see
the snow falling and we know
that road crews are working,
probably as we
As we speak having to pack a lot
because they don't have anybody,
But yeah.
Yeah, we've been deputized to go
out there.
It's a great
Members members. We've got it,
Thanks to the vice chair. We're
on R and m d O T budget, Madam
chair, hiking video. It's great
to see you. W secretary Great to
see you. Um, we're gonna turn it
over to, uh,
Whomever wants to kick us off
and
May, Uh, madam chair. Let's just
we'll go ahead and start with
you. Please. That's all right.
Very good. Mr Chair. Good
evening. Almost Mr Chair.
Members of the committee. Thanks
for having us here at H A. F. C,
uh, makes me miss the old days.
It's a great committee to be on.
Um, I'm representative Hawkman v
Hill. I share the House
transportation.
Public works in Capital
Improvements Committee and we
are here to talk about House
Bill three.
So, um, House Bill three is
amended for your consideration
for the fiscal year, 25, which
is the operating budget of the
New Mexico Department of
Transportation.
I'd like to take this
opportunity to thank members of
the Transportation and Public
Works Committee, the interim
transportation subcommittee and
then in Mexico Department of
Transportation and their staff
for their tremendous support and
amount of working time and
maritime work they have crafted
in this budget and also to
remind members that this is the
first fiscal year of 25
operating budget and any other
discussions and decisions
concerning special
appropriations and are major
transportation projects will be
held at a later date.
The revenue for the department
consists primarily of gasoline
and diesel fuel tax, weight
distance vehicle registration
fees, petroleum loading fees,
motor vehicle excise tax and
several other income streams. In
addition, and I'm duty receives
its federal apportionment
funding, which comes with an and
within identified obligation
limit and a 20% non federal
funding match.
I'd like to mention that for the
last five years and M D O T has
been awarded redistribution
funding as a result of
obligating all of its federal
friends in a timely manner. Um,
that's that's a big deal.
The Department of Transportation
is budgeted into four program
areas will speak briefly to all
four areas of the operational
budget and then stand for
questions.
The first area is the project
design and construction
monetarily. This is the largest
program in the agency. Federal
Highway Funds coming into New
Mexico supported highlight
construction program that is
very robust.
How are you operations? This is
the largest program personal and
personnel representing over 1800
hard working women and men who
keep the roadway safe, clearing
snow keeping trash and litter
off of our roadways, replacing
guardrails, traffic science and
maintaining pavement, then we
also have programs support
support.
And then
Going to the project Design and
construction program, which
consists of state and federal
funds that will support the
highway construction program of
$808 million for the upcoming
year.
Yes, these numbers are big The
House Bill. Three Amendment
includes 9 million additional
funding for project design and
an additional 18.75 million for
state funded road projects.
The appropriation recommendation
for this program includes 32.7
million in salaries and
benefits, $568 million in
contractual services and 208
million in other costs for a
total working, mended
appropriation for this program
of $808 million. The highway
operations program represents
transportation districts across
the state.
In the hard working women and
men who keep the roadways safer.
The traveling public by
maintaining pavement, clearing
snow doing all the stuff that we
talked about before as a never
ending task, and we thank them
for all of their hard work them
into House Bill three includes
additional funding for
maintenance projects, including
to purchase field supplies. The
appropriation includes one point
I'm sorry, 100 and $36.4 million
in salaries and benefits.
$69.8 million in contractual
services and 110.4 million and
other costs for total working
and recommended appropriation
for the program of $316 million.
Business support program
includes the Office of the
secretary, human resources,
finance and information
technology and other various
services Amendment. House Bill
three ads funds to allow the
department to address facilities
and information technology needs
The business support program
recommendation is 30.9 million
in salaries and benefits 4.5
million in contractual services
and 17.8 million other costs.
For a total recommendation at
$50.2 million. The model program
includes transit and rail
aviation traffic, safety
programs and importance of entry
programs Beginning in fiscal
year 25. The model program will
gain the motor carrier
regulation function from the
Public Regulation Commission
Hospital three as amended
includes $4 million for that
function.
The model program appropriate to
quit and probation includes 16.1
million salaries, 35.8 million
million and contractual
services 45.5 million another
cost for a total appropriation
recommendation. 97.4 million in
that area, the total agency
appropriation for the Mexico
Department of Transportation's
fiscal year 25 operating budget
consists of $216 million in
salaries.
$678 million in contractual
services, 38.1 million and other
costs for a total appropriation
recommendation of $1.275
billion, which is a total
increase of 0.4% over the fiscal
York fiscal year 24 operating
budget. Additionally, House Bill
Three is a minute contains
consensus performance measures
for the Department of
Transportation as well as
recommendations for budget
adjustment requests and rollover
language. This language is
typical from year to year.
Finally, the amendment includes
a recommendation to
Into 2019 special appropriation,
which the department has
outstanding project projects to
complete as requested additional
time to do so.
Ah, this recommendation is the
House Transportation Public
works in Capital Improvement
Committee Working committee's
recommendation for the
department. Transportation
appropriation, Active 2024, and
it is respectfully submitted to
House Appropriations and finance
Committee and we now stand for
questions. Thank you very much,
madam Chair.
Okay, members, questions.
Yeah. Yeah, we've we have
represent Montoya and will be
brief. Yeah. Go ahead, please.
Thank you, Mr Chair. Um,
actually, not a question, and
I'll be brief. Just a further
statement. I appreciate the
work, Madam chair that you did
in your committee.
I'm not going to be able to
support your bill today.
I just don't believe it's it's
adequate.
Hmm. I don't believe this is
what
The members of the legislature
want
Um further than that. I've I've
kind of heard.
That we need to leave some room.
For the Senate.
To do this, But Mr Chair, the
reality is House Bill three.
Begins in the house.
To deal with roads.
I don't believe that we're
supposed to handle it that way
For whatever reason. Throughout
the years, it's become kind of a
practice that we don't do too
much over here because they're
going to do things over there.
Um, I think that has become
The practice.
I don't think that's proper.
I believe the same thing with
the appropriations bill. It
begins in the house for a
reason.
Um, I think we've forgotten all
of that.
The reality is
We work through the interim.
We hear the needs.
And then what happened this year
was surprised all of us, which
was
What appeared at the time to be
a complete defunding.
Of
Department of Transportation.
Um
To even have to fight to get to
$100 million.
On this side.
Uh, I think is a is had Santa
dereliction of duty on our part.
So, um, not once again, Mr.
Chair, not to disparage the work
done in that and your committee
Madam chair, but I cannot in
good conscience support a bill
that falls far short.
Of the needs.
Of New Mexicans.
We believe the requests of our
districts.
And I'm
I wish we could just start all
over. Let you do it all over
again. But Mr Chair rather than
have you asked, answered some
questions. Why? I already know
the answers to
I just want to let you know,
Madam Chair.
Ah!
I feel your pain.
Thank you, Garcia. Thank you, Mr
Chairman.
Madam chair.
No, there's there's a lot of
needs in the highway department.
First I wanna thank you for what
you did.
It's a heart full, you know with
you and it's not not easy and
not everybody's happy.
But at the end of the day, we
really need to look at what's
better for the people in New
Mexico, You know, we know that
we're a little bit short on that
was supposed to be doing but we
can work on that.
And and make it better.
Because, you know, we can't sit
here and say, Well, we're too
short on with 100 million. Of
course we want 200 million.
Everybody does, And I hope to
send it comes through on the
promise. We'll have to see.
But if they didn't work together
You have a good committee and we
will work through it and we will
come out ahead at the end of the
day.
And like I said, You know,
everybody wants everything but
sometimes you don't happen that
way. You know, it's an honor
working with you as your vice
chair.
You know, and it's tough. It
really is tough. You know you
get into discussions, Mr Chair.
People don't like this and like
that.
But at the end of the day we
need to keep in mind Mexico
wrote or for New Mexicans.
And it's for the economy.
Those are the most important
things. You know our Children
writing down school Busses
through this road, so we need to
keep on moving ahead. What?
What's under the water that went
under the bridges? It's gone. We
can't bring that back.
But by working together we can
will succeed. Thank you,
Manager.
Thank you. Absolutely. Thank
you. Representative Garcia
represent Garrett then represent
Dale Cruz. Thanks so much, Mr
Chair.
Um Madam chair, a couple of
questions, and some of its
refers to funds that we've done
over the last three years, so I
missed the General fund request
for what was it as it relates to
the transfer of the PRC
functions? Can you explain that?
I thank you very much, Mr Chair
and and Representative Garrett.
I believe there was a $4 Million
general fund request to help
assist
With some of those transfers and
salaries for the PRC, Please
correct me if I'm if I'm wrong.
Right?
Okay, so salaries that are
leaving or coming.
Mr. Chair, Representative
Garrett coming their functions
of the PRC that were moved over
to d, O T. And so those those
functions, um they asked for
additional general fund money to
help cover some of the costs of
those functions. Thank you very
much, Mr to my next question is
Um
Was any statewide capital
outlay. Money allocated in LFC
for E. V. At some point today we
heard something about Evie and
I'm getting lots in the budget,
but for the E V charging
infrastructures after the
governor's rollout, Where was it
Or where is it? Mr Chairman,
Representative Garrett Joey
Simon is checking for us.
Mr Chairman represent Garrett,
That is 10 million in the LFC
Capital Outlay framework for EV
charging stations for the
Department of Transportation.
And Mr Chair and Madam
chairwoman was the request
originally larger than 10
million Mr. Chair,
Representative Garrett. The
original request was $55
million.
Thank you.
Then, um, another question. I
have Mr Chair is, uh How is the
O T supposed to come up with the
additional formula? Um, raises
for the statewide employees like
what's the source of funds that
should be used for that?
Uh, Mr Chairman and
representative Garrett. So one
of the things that makes D O t
special as they operate. What's
called the State Road Fund and
the road fund is a combination
of a number of revenue sources
that the department utilizes for
a number of things. Um, and it's
kind of kept abroad for a
reason. And so at this time, I
believe that BOT is utilizing
the road fund to make up for
those salary increases.
Thank you for that. Um, and then
we've also been talking Mr Chair
about the wildlife quarter
project.
And $50 million towards that.
What is the source of that?
Mr Chairman, Representative
Garrett. I'm I'm happy to report
to you at first. That, too, was
expected to come out of the
State road fund. However, there
was another fund established
prior to the this wildlife
corridor. And so we have made
the correction that that funding
will be coming will be going
through that fund and coming
from that fund so that we no
longer have to take it from the
broad fund.
Okay, That's good news.
Um
Then I mean, a big question for
all of us have been on
transportation. Mr Chair is
We now have Section nine, which
has been transferred over to the
gate Fun.
And so what has happened to the
line item road projects that
normally are in Section nine?
Um I think of the song Where
have all the flowers gone? Where
have all of the project Nine
road friends go, which there was
one and I will sing it.
Um, representative favor group.
Um, what happened to them?
Because I think every district
had at least a major multi
million projects that needed
that beyond Capitol outlay
distributions that
Don't takes years to get them up
to their what happened to the
project night, Section nine.
Road projects. Mr Chairman,
Representative Garrett. So, um
I believe what happened is we
now have a new section number. I
think we're calling it section
11 for these types of a
numerator and road projects.
Please correct me if I'm like
sectional section Nice to call
it section 999. It is now
section 11. And so it is still
in the budget just with a new
Number
So with the new number, Mr Chair
and quite a significantly
reduced amount.
Yeah, it's 100 million now.
Um, um Mr Chairman,
Representative Garrett. I
believe the total number we had
for Section nine allocations
last year was around $237
million. I believe that was on
both sides. I think we have to
split that between the house and
the Senate. So it was a little
bit more money. Yeah, definitely
than what we're looking at right
now at this moment, but I do
want to take this opportunity to
thank every single person who's
Expressed. You know, concern on
this committee and believes in
transportation and
infrastructure as the backbone
in our state, and, um, we have
some incredible leadership
running these committees and
running our caucuses. And, um,
you know, I'm looking at my vice
chair. We're not going to stop
This fight is just beginning.
The house is showing up. The
house is doing its part to, um
you know, bring money where
money is due, and now it is up
for the other chamber to meet
us and, um and we're not going
to stop until until we're
successful in that fight.
The shows have one more question
because every single one of us
hears about road maintenance and
I don't know anybody else
driving around. Santa faith
needs a lot of road bent, and
that's local roads. What is D O
T s current funding shortage in
terms of maintenance projects on
the current state of road
infrastructure?
Um, Mr Chairman, Representative
Garrett. I think I have an old
number. Does anybody have a
current number? Mister Dodge? No
joke.
Looking to be about $400 million
short, only 400 million. Okay,
thank you very much. And thank
you for introducing now. The new
section 11. Thank you so much
for everybody's work. Thank you,
Mr Chair. Thank you very much.
Representative Garrett. Next,
we're gonna go to
representative, uh,
There are crews or we vote,
please. Thank you, Mr Chairman
and that don't fit the
appropriate. Mr Chairman and
Madam Chair. I see the secretary
of Frankfurt. Jesus sitting
right there in the possible I
would love for him to come up
and just say a few words and the
big problem we're having. You
know, maybe the committee might
want to ask you something. Mr.
Chairman. Is that possible?
Thanks. Represent Garcia. Mr.
Secretary, Come on up.
We, uh we appreciate you being
here for for this afternoon.
If you want to sort of give you
an overview or a summary, and
then if they're committee
questions will go to that. We
will move to take actions
quickly, but great
opportunities, Mr. Secretary.
Thank you, Mr Chair members and
and if I may, and I wanna do
this with as much respect as
possible, Mr Chairman is based
on some of the questions that
we're hearing some of the
Things that are being provided
by lfc. What one of the things
that I like to respectfully ask
for the committee is the
opportunity for dot to have a
budget hearing before members, I
think, um, the work that's done
in house transportation is is
proper as it relates to the
consensus building around our
state funds and our federal
formulaic funds.
But as you're well aware over
the course of since 2019 nm
Beauty is also received $1.7
billion in non recurring general
funds, and that's tremendous as
respectful or as as appreciative
as we are about slowly growing
are non recurring general fund
in this legislative session. I
want to point something out.
D O. T currently spends $110
million a month.
A month. It's a remarkable
accomplishment. And when we talk
about the non returning general
fund that we received since 2019
and an unencumbered balance of
$500 million, I think a budget
hearing would give us an
opportunity to dive deeper into
the fact that over 100 million
of that funding is being flowed
through the local governments on
non Dottie infrastructure
projects.
Some of that funding are
designated projects with strict
timelines for when it will be
under contract and forming with
federal deadlines and both
obligation and spending.
And so we are appreciative of
the work the committee has done
and what you all are doing to
increase our non recurring
general fund. But I think again,
Mr Chair from the questions and
some of the figures being
provided a budget hearing to
understand where we are relative
to our gap in maintenance and
stipp priorities, um, might be
fruitful for sake of time now.
Thank you. Thank you, Secretary.
Great again. Thank you for the
suggestion. Go to you for any
questions and see if members
have brief questions. I think
we'll take you up on that offer.
Mr Chair that I just wanted to
say thank you for
Getting some input on what we're
having here can imagine the
chairwoman. Appreciate that. And
everybody listening to this
room appreciate it because
there's nothing like knowing
what's going on. And I
appreciate you being here today,
Madam Chair present you a bunch,
Mr Chairman. Thank you. Thank
you Represent Garcia represent
daylight, Cruz. Thank you, Mr
Chairman.
You know, I'm a proud member of
the Transportation
Infrastructure Committee and
I've seen the hard work that
goes into place for
For getting to this point and
chairwoman. I wanna thank you
for your hard work.
Um, there was a lot of work that
was done recently to make sure
that we shored up the D O T
budget.
And, uh, with that being said,
Mr Secretary, Can you expand a
little bit on that million 400
million?
Go. Go ahead. Thank you
Represent. Go ahead. This is I
think the unencumbered uh,
funding that I noted earlier. Is
that correct? Correct?
Um, Mr Chair Representative.
Thank you for the question and
so again, if we have the
opportunity to provide you with
the slides and the information
of that 498 again
Be mindful that going back to
2019 some of that funding over
$100 million is going to non BOT
projects What we would refer to
as your marks local
infrastructure and in some cases
that funding is going directly
to them.
And so our role, then is to
support them to get those
projects off the ground. If you
look just back to laws of 2023
non recurring general fund last
year, 70 million of that is
going to non duty priority or
mark projects. In some cases,
local infrastructure.
Of that 4 98 192 million was
appropriate in 2023, which means
that we've had that money for
about six months.
Again, one of the larger
balances of 102 million right
now are for the art projects,
and we reported out to center
Finance Committee this morning
that that fund those contracts
will be executed by, um July of
this year, with all expenditures
occurring by March of 26. And so
those that's that's a lot of
bulk for you there and and we
can dive deeper into
Where all those projects are. We
also have a significant amount
of that funding dedicated to
what's going to become our large
our largest single project again
to put in perspective, the
amount of resources that we
need. We are going to begin work
on the Montgomery Comanche
project, which will cost more
than $250 million in its own.
Thank you, Secretary. Miss
German, one of the things that
I'm very proud of on via
Transportation committee is that
we worked bipartisan,
nonpartisan to try to do things
for new Mexicans. That was a
furnished days meeting as an
example. I think most of the
members on that committee would
agree.
One of the things I want to
emphasize, and I'm done. Mr
Sherman is that
The House Transportation
Committee has done its work.
It has made a recommendation.
It's here today.
The Senate has to do its work.
And they have to meet us.
So I just hope that it works out
to everyone's benefit. I believe
that it will. I am changed,
Colonel Optimist, But we've done
our work, Madam chair. Thank
you. Thank you. Thank you very
much for daily Cruise
representative Allyson represent
Brown. Thank you, Mr Chair. Um,
I'm sorry. I missed your
meeting. Um, Mr Serna.
Hmm. Please tell me that with
all the cuts everywhere and
other agencies that Meyer 64
million for 64 was not bothered
in any way, Mr. Chair,
Mr. Chair, Representative. Thank
you, Um, the funding that we
have for that project is
fiscally constraining That
project, including the New Grant
award for just over 59 million
that we received.
Okay?
Thank you. I'm glad to hear
that. Mr Chair and one last
comment. That's a sharp jacket.
You're wearing
the same. Good. Thank you, Mr.
Thank you, Representative
Allyson, we're gonna go to
represent Brown.
Thank you, Mr Chairman. Mr.
Secretary. Good to see you. I am
truly grateful for what you're
doing for District two, and in
particular, my my Eddy and Lea
counties you have done I think
what you could do.
Mr Chair. I'm a spokesman for my
constituents, and they honestly
I just can't wait any longer for
some of these roads to be fixed.
And so I don't find Mr Chair
and, uh, representative Hawkman
v. Hill and Mr Secretary.
I have roads in my district. We
We can't really In my opinion
celebrate $100 million as we
just discussed in or hearing for
roads.
I have roads that need
650,000,400 million, and there
They're dangerous. And so, um
When I go back home, Mr Chair, I
All I can say is I did my best
to plead our case.
And, um, I believe that
I believe this is a tough
situation. I commend Chairwoman
Hawkman D Hill, Mr Chair for all
Very intelligent lady. She does
the job well.
Um and we have some realities
and constraints. We know that
the dot budget is based on
Certain sources of revenue.
Mr Chair, and then we have some
federal money that comes in and
that's it, But it's the extra
revenue that we're looking at.
Right now is the Legislature.
That I believe my constituents
believe we should see some of
that come back because
More than 50%. Now of our state
revenue was coming out of Eddie
and Li San Juan.
Lion's share.
And our infrastructure needs
help.
So I had the privilege of
chairing the House
Transportation Committee a few
years ago, Mr Chairman.
And I love your agency. Um
I think you're one of the best
run agencies in the state of New
Mexico and your work is vital.
But in committee Transportation
Committee I did vote against the
budget, not because I wanted to,
but because I want to send a
message to anybody who's
listening, and I hope to the
Senate.
This is just not enough given
especially in the face of all
the extra revenue that we have.
So, um, I won't vote for it
again. I wish I could.
And again, that's nothing
against our chairwoman. The
committee and all the effort of
D O T.
Somehow I have to draw the line,
though, because my constituents
matter to me, So thank you.
Thank you for setting Brown
representative Montoya.
Thank you, Mr Chair. Thank you,
Um, Secretary for being here
today.
Um
If I heard you correct? Um,
Besides the shortfall in the new
Section 11.
For the projects that
You're projecting out to
hopefully be able to complete
In each of the six districts.
Um, did I also hear you say that
we're talking about 400.
Million dollars shortfall in in
road maintenance.
Mr. Chair representative. We're
waiting for the exact number of
what we have are two reports
that show gaps for duty. The
first is called the Temp report
and that report estimates what's
needed for maintenance and
preservation of existing
infrastructure, And we're
waiting for that exact number.
The second report is the trip
report, which essentially is our
major construction projects,
which could include, um
increased capacity and new
structures, and that's a
different gap on its own report
we submit and is presented over
the House transportation
annually as well, too. But
you're correct our our sixth
district priority projects were
just over 300 million, um, for
our transportation districts.
So, Mr Chair. I know it's
getting late. No, we don't want
to be in here forever. So I
would just submit
I don't think we've met the
Senate halfway
If we're $400 million short
Approximately plus your minus.
And then there's another. From
what I understood. The 100
million. Plus, I guess we got
the 50 million put back in that
was going to be designated for
wildlife crossing.
Um so we're still 100 and $50
million ish short from what the
agency was needing to get for
the projects in the system. Six
districts.
Plus $400 million short.
In what would be just
maintenance of the roads we have
now.
I don't think we've done our
job.
I don't think we've met them
halfway. I think what we're
doing here is passing a budget
where we are falling way short.
Of what?
Is the minimum expected, uh from
our constituents.
Um, Mr Secretary this last year,
and we're gonna move pretty
quickly. We spent probably two
hours on transportation. I want
to be very clear that we need to
move effectively in quick, quick
question on this, Mr Chair.
Last year during
What was a really wet year.
The roads across New Mexico had
tremendous parcels.
Took probably six months.
Just to after after the winter
to to get that replaced.
I travel that road back and
forth to Farmington quite a bit.
And we've just done a
rudimentary patch job. I know
there's more work to come back
to it.
I I really do Think, Mr Chair.
I hope the Senate doesn't just
come in with 150 million for the
projects.
I hope that they come in and do
the work We should have done
over here and get that money for
repairs. Thank you, Mr Chair.
Thank you. Next, we're going to
go to represent Chatfield.
Thank you, Mr Chair, Mr. Chair.
I just really want to do think
the madam chair for taking on a
really hard job that I wouldn't
want. It's it's not easy to set
up here and vote one way or the
other with and you know you're
gonna
Have your feet held to the fire
for it.
And I appreciate you taking on
the task that you did. And and
from what I've been told you
didn't extremely good job. I'm
going to vote against this bill
because I don't think it's
enough.
But I appreciate the work you've
done.
And I thank you. Thank you, Mr
Chair. Thank you Represent
Chatfield represent Pettigrew,
please.
Thank you, Chairman. Thank you,
Representatives. Thank you,
Secretary. Um
To the committee. I just want to
make a comment with respect to
what maintenance means.
Last time I did a complete road
study for
County.
My study gaze if nobody drove
the road for 10 years. This is
how long it would take me to fix
every road you have.
The important part of that
statement is if nobody drove on
them because traffic maintains
continues to go.
On our roads. So what we
estimate for maintenance today?
If we don't touch it for two
years is a whole different
number.
So every year we don't do our
road maintenance. We add more
costs.
When we do get to go do
maintenance.
Mr Chairman, I have a study it
that I would be happy to share.
Hmm. From a road safety
coalition.
It shows that $100 million
invested in in southeastern New
Mexico roads has his return on
investment of $1.5 billion to
our general fund.
Kind of makes sense with respect
to
I'm not sure how many other
investments we can make.
For
$100 million in within 3 to 4
years Get 1.5 billion out of it.
If I know if you know of one
call me because we'll find a way
to do that. But with respect to
this
I appreciate the effort.
Chair woman put into this.
I voted no on it as well because
it doesn't go far enough.
Has no
There's no way an indication of
the lack of effort.
In attempts.
From chairwoman Debbie Hoffman v
From Chairwoman Day Hartman
vehicle to get us to this point.
At the end of the day. I don't
It doesn't go far enough for me.
And
Like representative Brown said.
I can't go back to my
constituents.
I have one road That's a two
lane road. If you take one lane,
and you do that the average
daily traffic on that and the
accidents
This is comparable to I 40
between farming tonight and
Albuquerque.
And that's the same road that if
we built it now would have a
$1.5 billion return on
investment.
Thank you, Chairwoman for for
the effort that you put into
this Unfortunately again today,
my vote is no, It's not because
of the effort that you put into
this
It's because it doesn't go far
enough for the state of New
Mexico and for public safety.
Thank you. Thank you. Okay. I
don't see any further questions.
We're going to go to the vice
chair for a motion to adopt
House Bill three.
As thank you, Mr Chair. I moved
the committee adopt. Uh, do we
Move a do pass. Sorry. Yeah. Do
not pass on house, build three
and do pass on house.
Transportation.
And
Public Works committee
substitute for house.
Hmm. Hmm. As amended. Okay, we
should have moved the
substitutes beginning which I
apologize for that.
Ah!
So moved. There's a
Motion from Vice Chair. Dixon Do
not pass on House Bill three and
a do pass on House Bill three as
On the House Taxation and
House Transportation and
Infrastructure Committee
Substitute for House Bill three,
Seconded by represented Garcia
just to shut me up. There you
go. Okay. Can we please call the
vote on that?
Hmm.
Uh, we're gonna
Rooms.
Okay?
Members. Let me let me go back
and
Uh um. Let me ask for what?
We're going to get a quick We
want to be very clear on what
we're adopting.
Mr Simon, if you could come on
up, thanks for bearing with and
taking extra time.
Mhm.
So okay.
Great. Thank you very much to Mr
Simon, who's clarified that
we're going to adopt the house
trends. The House Transportation
Infrastructure Committee report.
For House Bill three.
Can you make the motion one more
time Vice chair.
As amended.
Mr Chair. Um, I moved the
committee adopt.
Except
The
Committee report.
From the House, transportation,
capital and public works.
Many
As amended as amended. Is there
a 2nd 2nd by representing
Garcia? Okay, let's
Go ahead and go to the vote.
Yes, please. Representative
Allyson? Yes.
Representative are strong, No
for all the reasons stated
previously.
Representative Brown.
Sadly, no for the reasons
expressed earlier field. Nope,
happily, Yes.
Representative figure out
Yes.
Garcia? Yes.
Representative Carrot
Yes, and anticipating more.
Yes.
Representative Luhan Yes.
If Montoya no.
Representative pedigree.
Sanchez. Sorry, Indiana. Yes.
Nice chair, Dixon.
Yes.
Cheers. Small. Yes.
We have 12 in the affirmative.
Okay. Thank you very much We've
adopted that. Thank you all very
much. Okay, members, we're going
to move quickly to Section
seven.
We need to do anything with
partner
We have a
One.
Well, we did this special.
Okay, Mr. Please go ahead.
Good afternoon, Mr Chair. Good
evening. Depends on how you look
at it. Um, I'm I will pass it
over to Emily to introduce us
and sorry I forget about the
mix, Mr. Chair representatives.
I'm Emily with the LFC, the
analyst for the Department of
Information Technology and with
me is Cecilia. I've never
Mattis, the D. F, a analyst for
the Department of Information
Technology.
Today. Hopefully, we can quickly
just go through Section seven. I
know this is the first time um
you are seeing it here at HFC so
we can go over that. But before
going over the requests, I do
want to turn over to Cecilia to
talk a little bit more about
Section seven in the whole city
to process and what it entails.
Thank you. Emily. Mr. Chair. I
just will briefly go over what?
Section Seven. And I t requests
are I know we have some folks
that are in the room behind us
that are specialists in this
field, so if there are questions
about particular projects I
really encourage that we either
get with them afterwards or we
call them up because we are not
myself, Emily.
Um, we don't work in I t We work
in finance, so we'll do our
best.
Um okay. So Section seven and
the project certification
committee process are governed
by stipulations referenced in
the New Mexico administrative
Code, all terms and conditions,
meeting Section seven requests
and guidelines for certification
from the committee are available
to all agencies here.
Official information technology
funding requests for new
projects for the betterment of
an existing IT system. Utilizing
computer systems enhancement
funds. Money is another type of
general fund.
I d projects that are less than
$100,000 or considered a
hardware Do not constitute
Section seven. Which is why
sometimes you will see an I T
request that is found in Section
five and not in Section seven.
This is part of a process that
we work with do it to iron out
in the interim.
Request for Section seven. New
appropriations begin in July. So
the start of this fiscal year
Oh, what Handout are you Mr
Chair? Do you know what handout
you're on? They did they provide
you perfect. I'm just have okay.
Everybody has the handout.
Sorry. We've had good memory.
Everybody's ahead. It's good to
to make sure Mr Chair I'm almost
done. Almost there, so request
for Section seven is begin in
July with training from the
Enterprise Project Management
office. The intent to begin a
new project to submitted via one
page business case in July. 2
DS.
Lfc and do it for review.
Um, review of the project.
Deliverables and feedback
continue through August
September 1st along with the
agencies future fiscal year,
appropriations. Two items are
submitted to US strategic plans
for re authorizations, which is
something that you will have
right now in front of you, Um,
and the final full business
cases, which are things that you
don't have right now. But those
are the new requests that we're
talking about.
This concludes the agency's
involvement in requesting re
authorizations. However, this
leads into a series of
presentations for the committee
through the months of September
and October for the new projects
that are on your other packet.
Um so you have two packets one
for the old stuff. One for the
new stuff. Um, this committee
consists of members from do it.
O F C and D F A along with other
members.
And I, I'm sure we can talk
about that another time between
October and November. Do it
review these projects, provide
assessments and risk scores as
determined by the professionals
that do it? Um, and by statute
do it has to provide two DF a
November 14th their
recommendation for these it
projects and upon that we build
the executive recommendation,
which is then given to lfc by
November, 21st.
Um And then, if this is funded,
it's in Section seven.
Agencies do not get this bulk of
money upfront, so we see an
appropriation for I t it might
look like $50 Million agencies
have to go before the project
Certification Committee to
release the funds based on the
phase of that I t project. Um I
just wanted to make sure that
that is fully you are all fully
aware of that, Mr Chair Just
because sometimes
Three authorizations can take a
few years because their
multimillion dollar projects
that also include the federal
government. So with that I will
let Emily speak to the re
authorizations because
reauthorization requests by the
executive recommendations are
always approved because it's
just allowing the agency a
little more time for the
accessibility to those already
approved funding sources. It's
not any new money.
So I will pass it over to Emily
and I will let you take care of
that.
Thank Cecilia. I'm Mr Chair. Um,
rather than going with three
authorizations. First. I just
want to go through the new
project's. If that's okay with
you and then get to the
reauthorization requests, so
we're gonna start here. Line one
on our front page. Yes, correct.
And it looks like this year's is
yes. So the in general the LFC
recommendation for all of these
sections. Seven requests totals.
52.3 million, including 28
million in general fund
revenues, 13.6 Million and other
avenues and 10.4 million and
federal funds and the executive
recommendation for these Section
seven requests. 11 are sorry 112
million, including 58.2 million
in General fund revenues, 11.2
Million and other revenues in
42.6 million and federal
funding.
I do want to emphasize that the
main difference coming between
these two recommendations is
from the Medicaid Management
Information System Project as
well as the child's enforcement
system project with the Health
Care Authority Department,
formerly known as the, UM
Mhm Services, Human Services
Department. Um, so with that
being said that is the main
difference between the two
recommendations and so starting
off on line one and the exact
recommended 848,000 for the
administrative courts to
purchase and deploy new storage
solution for their storage
attached network solution.
Moving to number two, the
administrating hearing office,
um
Recommendations include this
recommendation to continue and
expand to the development of the
case management and electronic
filing system.
For line number three for the
Department of Finance and
Administration. This was
originally requested by the
agency as a Section seven and it
was recommended as a sex. Sorry
It was requested as a Section
five, and it was recommended as
a Section seven for statewide
capital outlay tracking
software.
For secretary of state. This was
originally requested in Section
five, FC put it in Section seven
agency.
Requests for it to be back in
Section five for their automated
voter registration system. Um, H
I f C
Um, they did accept the transfer
from sorry. That's why the
negative 500,000 for HFC because
it moves it from Section seven
to Section five.
For
Line number five for the
regulation licensing department.
Uh, this was included in all of
the recommendations only
partially supported, Um, by, you
know, sorry.
I'm going to fast. Um
For line number five. This was
fully recommended by
All three recommendations for
the executive, LFC and HFC to
continue their modernization
regulation.
Software inspection and for the
Department of Cultural Affairs.
This was not recommended in, uh,
lfc HFC or the executive for
their cyber security upgrades
and compliance. I know that the
executive kind of tied
cybersecurity and to one and
then I also addresses how Amanda
and Joey were talking about with
Section five. That 5.5 Million
addition for the Department of
Information Technology.
And so moving on to line number
seven for the state land ahead.
Thank you. I think members, can
we, uh, let's look through these
go through the first page.
Let's flag if there's any
questions.
Um
Thank you for talking to
through, and we see so far the
only one proposed change.
That we went through in the
specials. Any questions on Page
one? Okay. See you then.
Going order Page two.
Are there any highlights on page
two analysts that you want to
highlight
Um, Mr Chair. There are no
particular highlights from the
HFC Add backs. However, there
are there is one item here. Item
number 14 for DWS. This was not
recommended by either. However,
the executive recommendation has
put that in as a section five to
the office of Cybersecurity,
along with two other
appropriations that I will speak
to when we get to him.
Great. Thank you. Any questions
on this page scene and let's go
forward. Okay, here on Page
three. First analyst Is there
any Are there any here that you
want to highlight?
Um Mr Chair, just looking at
item number 19 for DOHC
comprehensive security That is
another cybersecurity initiative
that has lumped into the Section
five appropriation for the
Office of Cybersecurity. Um,
both the executive and the LFC
did not recommend that, And
that's a thank you. That's the 5
5.5 million that we've reckon or
differently.
Um uh, no, Mr Chair. I have not
been able to see the $5.5
million. However, the executive
did recommend a $1.5 million
after the Section seven.
Wrap up that we did so there was
no 1.5 from Lfc. However, lfc
does have a 5.5. I think it's to
kind of for the same thing. Not
really the same thing, though.
Understood. Thank you.
Okay, Members. Any questions,
Page three.
Seeing none.
Over here, Uh, analysts,
anything that we'd like to do,
you'd like to highlight here.
Yes, Mr Chair, Online number 28.
There was the jfc change of not
recommending the document
digitalization for the public
Education department.
Reasoning agency has not been
able to move other it projects
but in turn instead of the
document digitalization, which
was not sorry for the Nova based
management project that was not
included in the LFC
recommendation, it is included
in the HFC recommendation
because ped it's a top priority
for them for their data
collection, and so that will
help them get did a lot faster a
lot quicker, a lot cleaner.
Thank thank you. Ranking member
Armstrong, please.
Thank you, Mr Chairman. Um I
find it kind of amazing that we
don't fund them in one because
they haven't been able to move
the it but we're funding them in
another.
Knowing they haven't been able
to move the I T.
So that's a that's a huge
concern for me, even if it is a
priority for them, Um
Not sure that that's
That's the wisest choice and
then on the number 31, the
shared services Enterprise
Resource. Can you explain that a
little bit to me, please?
Um, Mr Chair? Um, Representative
Armstrong. Um, let me see if
maybe someone from H G D. Yes.
We have the chess team here to
speak on that.
Chairman, representative
Armstrong. The shared services
project is for the collaborative
for higher education's shared
services. It is a collaboration
of six colleges. Those colleges
are going through a major
implementation of the workday
product, or six have now
completed the first phases of
the project.
They are all live on finance
human capital management and
payroll.
Our funding request is for the
remaining phase. It is a four
year project. We requested 28
million for those four years to
support the implementation of
the workday student product at
those same six institutions.
Thank you, Mr Chairman and which
six institutions are they? Thank
you, Mr Chairman, Representative
Armstrong Clovis Community
College.
Central New Mexico Community
College Luna Community College,
Northern New Mexico College.
Santa Fe Community College and
San Juan College. Thank you so
much, ma'am.
I believe Mr Chairman I've seen
and heard of this before, and I
had had sparked a light bulb
before And so I'm I'm just
curious what the total cost of
this is going to be, And is
there an end or recurring? Mr
Chairman, Representative
Armstrong. There is a total
project cost of 84.87 $0.4
million.
Colleges have funded 50% of
that.
$28 million gets us to the
finish line with no more asks to
this committee or to the
Legislature at all.
Thank you, ma'am for that. Thank
you, Mr Chairman. It will
probably be outdated by the time
it gets implemented. So thank
you, Mr Chairman.
Thank you. Very remember
Armstrong. Ah, additional
questions.
Kay, let's go now to the
reauthorization.
Mr. Did you? Was there another
question? Okay.
Mr Chair representatives for the
re authorizations for
All of these requests the
executive fully
Supported reauthorizing all of
these requests. CNH FC supported
reauthorizing all the requests
but three and if you would turn
to page number
There's no page numbers just
starting with item number 23 and
ending with 27, whichever is
easier.
Are we There? Okay. Remembers,
are we? There were online 23 for
us. It's page nine in our
packets. I believe. Okay.
Perfect. Okay, Mr Chan, Uh,
these three were not included in
reauthorizing for the LFC
recommendation or HFC. That is
because as you can see for the
Department of Health for those
three reauthorization requests
online, 23
Ah, they have reauthorized this
money in the past, and they
still have 100% left in
unexpended amounts. That is the
same thing with line number 24
Line number 25. This is money
from 2017, and there is still a
good amount of that remaining
And so with that the LFC and HFC
do not recommend these re
authorizations because they have
not been expended. There's been
little to no movement on those
Mr Chair just to add to that,
Um, we do have the C I O for D O
H here present to answer any
additional questions to those
projects. They are multimillion
dollar federal projects so I
can't do it. Justice.
Like he can. Thank you. Thank
you both for that members. Are
there any questions here?
Okay. I don't see any questions.
And that's gonna take us to the
end of our Section seven. It
appropriation.
Um
Okay. Can we ask for a motion to
adopt the HFC Section seven.
Thank you. Mr Chair. I move. We
adapt the HFC recommendations
for Section seven. Okay. It's
been moved by vice chair Dixon
second by groups of Sanyuan and
Garcia. Is there any opposition
to adopting that motion?
Well, Yeah. Okay. Um, Chatfield,
you came in, right? We're taking
him up.
Okay. Okay. There is no
opposition to adopting that
motion.
Thank you both very much. Thank
you, Mr. Thank you.
Now we're onto our budget
adjustment request language.
Do we
Okay?
Debut director. Thank you for
Coming on up there.
Thank you, Mr Chairman, Deputy
Director John Courtney for the
lfc. You should all have in
front of you A set of bullets,
um, along with spreadsheet of
bar language.
Um, House Bill two typically
authorizes all agencies, um
With the following authority to
submit budget adjustment request
in the General Appropriation
Act. You all know that during
the year LFC will receive these
review them Flag any, um, that
there are concerning, um, L C
has the option. The LFC director
has the option to object to a
budget adjustment request, which
would trigger hearing
Um, typically, if we have a
concern about a bar, um uh, D f
a works really well with us,
actually. And that hasn't
happened. And I think a couple
of years um
So Mr Chairman and members
Um so Budget address Mint
Correct Request authority that
will be looking at, uh, this
evening is for, um fy 24 and f y
25.
Um, you can see we'll start on
page three of the bar language.
Um, and whether a whether you
all are, uh, will be
recommending is in that middle
column. Their hcfc, uh,
recommended or not recommended
along with, um with
justification. Um, I would point
out. Um, just a few of these.
Um, for
For your review.
For FY 24.
Let's go to page.
Uh um.
Five.
You'll see that some of these,
um requests, um have adjusted a
bit in terms of amount from last
year. Analysts have looked over
that language. Um and
recommended all of these or if,
um, an agency has the same.
Authorization is a previous
year.
That is also recommended, and a
good example of that is
Um
See here.
Page five line 15 same
authorization as last year. Um
I draw your attention to
Ah, um
A few that
We're, uh, that aren't
recommended at this time. Uh,
lines 17 and 18, for example,
um, line 17. This language is
already included in House Bill.
two covering FY 24, therefore,
including it in this year would
be duplicative. The same is true
of, uh, line 18.
Okay. Thank you very much.
Deputy Director Courtney
We're going through Deputy
Director Courtney is bringing
focusing on any recommended
language members. We got this
last night. Um
So I think what I'd asked
Director Courtney Flag any
additional, uh, new language
recommendations for this year
that have changed from last
year.
Members will go for any
questions and then we'll sort of
decide how to proceed.
Absolutely the structure. So, um
With that. Let's uh let's go
back to page um
Three.
So there is, um, our language
for the ninth Judicial District
Court.
Um for GSD.
For the personnel board. Um
By and large these these, uh,
for the most part repeated from
last year. Um, again, the big
Okay. I appreciate that. And I
know there are other things
that, uh
So I think members, let's go
ahead and do this. When asked
for we we were we pass these out
yesterday and asked members to
take these home. We're going to
take action on these tomorrow. I
think we can so that way we take
a little bit of time. Um and
Please ask it. Yes, clarifying
question. And I know we're all
tired, Mr Chair. So what? What
we're looking at when we're
reviewing this about borrow
language. We're looking for new
language.
Based upon the act 5% that's
permissible. So during
During the process, there are
budgetary process agencies will
come and ask for new bar
language through their budget
requests. Correct and then we
decide whether we're it's
allowable or not, And that's
what we're looking at. That's
representative John, That's
exactly right. Thank you, sir.
Absolutely. Thank you. Okay,
let's go. So, uh
We're gonna take a vote on this
tomorrow.
Have them tonight again to
review
Represent Luhan very well
described in terms of what we're
looking at here.
Okay, members. We do want to try
to get through one more item.
This is actually a few more
items.
We have our
These are are going back to our
subcommittees that reviewed our
many of our smaller state
agencies.
You should all have these
subcommittee packets.
Thank you very much. Good to see
you. Thank you, Mr Rodriguez.
Thanks. Great to see you.
I think I think you came members
is rigor. Call you We were
divided up into subcommittees to
review smaller agencies We
review every single agency in
this committee every single year
in our packet here represented
Sardinian A is going to take us
through a very quick summary of
what the sub sub committee
aided.
And then, um, we'll ask for
Representative Allyson If
there's anything he wants to
add, there are any brief
questions. Obviously, we make
time for questions here and then
we'll go to a motion to adopt
the subcommittee, a
Ah! Ah! Report.
And
Representative, Please kick us
off and Mr Rodriguez thank you
for being there as well. Um, Mr
Chairman she's gonna do she's
gonna do real quick and then
I'll do the last part. Okay. Mr
Chairman of the committee. This
is Sub Committee, A subcommittee
make a met on January. 9th. Um,
so for the board of Examiners
for architects, the subcommittee
adopted the LFC recommendation.
For the Border Authority
subcommittee adopted the LFC
recommendation.
For the State Fair Commission.
the LFC. The subcommittee
adopted the LFC recommendation.
First Spaceport subcommittee
adopted the LFC recommendation.
For the Commission of the Status
of Women. The subcommittee
adopted the LFC recommendation.
For the Office of African
American Affairs. The
subcommittee adopted the LFC
recommendation.
For the commission for Deaf and
Hard of hearing Persons.
The subcommittee adopted the LFC
recommendation, but also went
into a working group where the
subcommittee added 402,000 and
fund balances and language
specifying for the use of
contractual services for deaf
and deaf blind services.
Martin Luther King Jr Commission
subcommittee adopted the LFC
recommendation.
The Governor's Commission on
disability. The subcommittee
adopted the LFC recommendation.
And for the developmental
Disabilities Planning Council.
the subcommittee adopted the LFC
recommendation and then finally
for the office of Family
Representation and Advocacy.
This subcommittee adopted the
LFC recommendation across the
board. Um, the L C
recommendations were adopted
with the one change for the
commission for the Deaf and hard
of hearing persons.
Mr Chairman, We did have one,
the commission on status of
women. They wanted seven. They
They were an entity. Then they
they dropped off. And then they
came back. There were 75,000
left in their budget. They
wanted that back. We did put
20,000 back, and I noticed in
the last thing we went through,
so that was the only major big
big step up. Okay. Excellent.
Thank you. Both. Thank you very
much.
Anything to add representative
Allyson
Yeah, I apologize. Thank you
very much upset. Herndon.
No, Mr Terra, I don't have
anything to add. Okay. Thank
you, Um
Okay with that, Uh,
representative will go to Vice
chair. Dixon for emotion. Mr.
Terror. I'm of the committee
Adopt the Subcommittee B report.
Wait, I'm sorry. Report.
Alpha. My apologies. Okay. It's
been moved by Vice Chair Dixon,
second by representative ranking
member Armstrong the opposition
to adopting
Oh, same represent Allison. Is
there any opposition to adopting
that motion seeing none.
Okay, Now we're gonna ask the
vice chair to head down.
And you're ready to go.
All right, Mr Chairman, members
of the committee. My name is
Eric senior. Um, the analyst
working through subcommittee be
tonight.
Go through this pretty quick
subcommittee be met on January
9th 2024 going to go over the
regulation licensing department
for 20. You should see this in
your subcommittee be packets. I
think you have them in front of
you.
The subcommittee adopted the LFC
recommendation, including
consensus performance measures
and targets and move to assign
and ad hoc workgroup for further
review of the agencies.
Uh huh. Budget for construction
industries and cannabis control
The HFC at heart recommendation
included.
Um and additional 175,000 and
General fund revenue and seven f
T E for the construction
industry's program and and an
additional 125,000 in General
Fund for cannabis compliance
enforcement.
Moving on to the board of
Medical Examiners. The
subcommittee adopted the LFC
recommendation, including
consensus, poor performance
measures and targets.
Ah for 49, the board of nursing.
The subcommittee adopted the LFC
recommendation, including
performance measures and
targets.
Uh, State Board of licensor for
engineers and land surveyors.
The executive recommendation was
adopted, and analysts reached
consensus and all performance
measures and targets.
Gaming Control board. The
subcommittee adopted the LFC
recommendation included
consensus performance measures
and targets.
On the Racing Commission
subcommittee adopted the LFC
recommendation, including
performance measures and
targets.
Um
On the board of Veterinary
Medicine. The subcommittee
adopted the executive
recommendation, including
consort consensus performance
measures and targets.
Livestock Board. Uh,
subcommittee adopted the LFC
recommendation.
Miners Hospital, The
subcommittee adopted the LFC
recommendation and the
performance measures and targets
but requested the analysts to
reach consensus on funding needs
for the hospital, and this was
done through expanding the use
of the language and Section
five.
For the natural resources
trustee. The subcommittee
adopted the LFC recommendation,
including consensus performance
measures and targets, but
requested the analysts reach a
consensus.
On funding needs for the
agencies Personnel budget.
Um And then, Lastly, on this
report, the parole board, the
subcommittee adopted the LFC
recommendation and performance
measures and targets.
With that I'll pass it over to,
uh, Vice Chair, Dixon. Thank
you, Mr Chair. I think Eric did
a fabulous summary.
We agree. Uh okay. Is there
anything to add?
Um, for any questions for
Subcommittee B.
Uh, we're so, Garrett. Thank
you, Mr Chair. And maybe
representative Armstrong. You
know about this. We asked about
the meat inspection program
because I think that involved
increasing the funding for the
Livestock board and my correct
Uh, thank you, Mr Chair and
Representative Garrett? Yes. For
the livestock board. We did it
up The LFC recommendation,
including the consensus
performance measures and
targets.
Did we need more funding? That
was my question. Statutory
authority, you know, because
they don't have statutory
authority.
Okay. Thank you.
Thanks for explaining that.
Thank you very much for
representative Garrett.
Okay. Any other questions?
Kate was motion. Yes.
Mr Chairman Commotion that we
adopt Subcommittee B.
Working.
Committee.
Okay. It's been moved by
breaking member Armstrong saying
by representative at Indiana any
opposition to adopting that
thing? None
Okay Subcommittee, see
All right. Good evening, Mr
Chair. Um, some committees see
met on January 10th and 11th.
And I'm going to go through this
pretty quickly. Subcommittee C
adopted the LFC recommendations,
including consensus performance
and measures and targets without
changes for the following
agencies. The Mexico Sentencing
Commission, the Commission of
Public Records, the Office of
Military Base, planning the
Department of Game and Fish.
They use Conservation Corps
affairs division and the
division of Vocational
rehabilitation.
Subcommittee C adopted the LFC
recommendation for all
performance measures and
targets but referred the
following agencies to work
groups for additional review to
address differences between the
recommendations or to make
specific changes after hearing
from agencies that was the
Department of Information
Technology, the Workers
Compensation Administration, the
Department of Military Affairs.
The crime Victims, Reparation
Commission and the Department of
Homeland Security Emergency
Management Representative. Thank
you very much. Mr Sanchez
represented Johann. Mr Chair. I
think we've we've addressed. Uh,
most of the issues that came
about in those concerns from
those
Brought forward by some of those
ad hoc, um
Yep.
Groups, and they have been
reflected in some of the work
that we've we've covered
tonight and we'll see another
parts of the budget.
Great. Thank you very much.
Representative Han, and that's a
great flag. Because the number
of these areas both department
information Technology Crime
victims, Reparation Commission
and others are reflected
additional investments from your
committee's work. So thank you.
Any questions when it comes to
anything to add represent dela
Cruz.
No, it's true. Okay. Uh, any
questions?
Saying none will go for a motion
on subcommittee seat.
Okay. Uh, it's ah. Been moved.
Moved by represent Chatfield
saying my represents Sanchez. Is
there any opposition to adopting
that motion, saying none.
It was like
Mr Chair. Can I ask a quick
question? Please do the work
group on do it and obey Officer
Broadband access and expansion.
Wasn't there workgroup on that?
No, there was there was not a
workgroup on the office of
Broadband. We did. There has
been extensive work with
department information
technology would do it. Thank
you. Thank you.
Okay?
Please go ahead. Ms. However,
you want to proceed.
Thank you. Mr Chairman. I'll go
this I'll go through this rather
than quick. Um or 337, the state
investment counsel. The
subcommittee adopted the LFC
recommendation.
Um, for 344 of the
administrative hearing office,
The LFC recommendation was
adopted, but an ad hoc working
group was going to review the
agency's budget for personnel
and employee benefits. And what
was proposed was having
available funding and Section
eight for salary increases. Um,
342 for the public school
Insurance authority, the
subcommittee adopted the
executive recommendation.
Um, for 343, the retiree
Healthcare authority, the
subcommittee adopted the LFC
recommendation.
For 35 to the educational
Retirement Retirement board. The
subcommittee adopted the LFC
recommendation for 366 Public
Employee Retirement Association.
The subcommittee adopted the LFC
recommendation for 378 for the
State Personnel board. The
subcommittee adopted the LFC
recommendation for 379 public
Employee Labor Relations Board.
The subcommittee adopted LFC
recommendation.
For 410 Ethics Commission. The
subcommittee adopted the
executive recommendation and,
lastly for 490 for the ComRes
and told it or Toltec Scenic
Railroad Commission. The
subcommittee adopted the LLC
recommendations. Thank you, Mr
Chair.
Thank you very much of civil
Garcia anything, please. Thank
you. Mr. I have nothing to add
the analysts pretty well covered
it all I don't know about my
vice try think he wants to say
something?
Sanchez on the spot. Okay,
seeing any questions.
Okay, we'll go for a motion,
then for subcommittee, Devers.
Que has been moved by
represented Sanchez any second
by represents Sardinia.
Any objections.
Any questions?
Any comment, Okay. That motion
is adopted. Okay, members that
brings us concludes our work. Um
Hmm. For today. We're gonna come
when we meet tomorrow will be
taking up clean up. Excuse me. I
apologize. Also, we're going to
be looking at the budget
adjustment. Request language,
the bar language.
We'll be taking that up
tomorrow and thank you for a
very productive day today,
Thanks to all of the staff for
your excellent work. Um, And
with that we're adjourned.
