Yeah.
Which
It was, it was.
Right. Let's go and get started.
So I want to read a little bit
to you first before we begin.
Um, we will be taking the lower
General Fund recommendation
today knowing that we are
constrained in recurring general
funds.
We do this to make sure we have
room to adjust the budget for um
HAFC.
We know that there will be
budgets that need further
general adjustments.
And we will be working with our
staff to look at these proposals
throughout the next couple of
weeks.
We will give LFC and ATFC staff
specific directions to bring
back for us for budget
adjustments. So as we listen to
you and we, we see something
that we absolutely need to fix
our our, our staff is with us
and we will try to get that
fixed, OK? Right, so just to let
you know, it's not that we don't
like you, it's just we have to
do what we're told, OK, as far
as the lower.
Right, um,
Let's go ahead and go with our
first agency, um.
Orderor authority, or 17.
Thank you, Madam Chair and
members of the committee.
Uh, my name is Julisa Rodriguez
and I'm the LFC analyst for the
Border Authority.
Uh, just to get you all situated
first off, um, you're gonna be
behind tab 4.
That's agency code 417 and we
were hearing the border
authority's budget.
Um, so I'm joined today by the
DFA budget analyst Joshua
Martinez, um, as well as the
executive director of the Border
Authority, Gerardo Fierro.
me and Joshua are gonna go over
some of the key differences
between the two recommendations,
and then we're gonna pass it
over to the director for his
remarks.
Um, so if you guys are all on
The different sheets.
And behind tab 4.
Um, starting off with the rear,
the operating budget.
Um, there's not a huge
difference between the LFC.
The executive recommended
7.6,000 more. That's a
difference between the executive
recommending a 3% increase while
the LFC recommended a 1.6%
increase, so it's not a huge
amount.
Um
As far as the uses, uh, the
executive recommended both.
committed more both her
personnel and in the other cost
category.
Um, for personal, it's a slight
increase for um staffing while
the LSC recommended a flat
budget and that was due to the
funded vacancy savings when the
recommendation was drafted.
Um, and then the other cost
category, the executive
recommended a slight increase,
and that's for items such as
mileage, IT, telecommunications,
um, and the LFC did a flat
budget in that category again,
that was based on FY 24 actuals
where we were just looking at
the actuals.
um, actual budget.
next to Joshua was gonna talk
about some differences, rules,
um, and just a reminder that.
The specials are purely
informational, um, there's
hearings.
future hearings on specials
where you all will be taken.
Thank you.
Afternoon, Madam Chair and
members of the committee.
for the specials for uh New
Mexico.
authority, they had 2 of them
totaling 278.6,000.
Uh, one of them is for 78.6 for
the New Mexico Chihuahua
commission and New Mexico Sonora
Commission.
They also requested 200,000 for
uh for special program managers
for capital outlay projects.
And LLC did not recommend any,
while the executive.
Madam Chair and members of the
committee, my name is Gerardo
Fierro. I'm the executive
director for the New Mexico
Border Authority, um.
I provided a presentation. I
don't know if you have the
handouts with you.
Um, I would like to start just
with a uh brief presentation on,
on, on the
When the border authority and
its board members.
So, the board has made great uh,
great, a great job of.
Including all the border of of
New Mexico. It's, it is well
represented by Hidalgo Hidalgo
County, Luna County, Donana
County, and theming um Columbus,
Larsburg, uh, obviously Sunland
Park.
Uh, Las Cruces and Santa Teresa.
Um, the chair Joseph de la Rosa,
he, he has been working hard
with New Mexico Department of
Transportation and New Mexico
Economic Development department.
And we, we, we made a big steps
on, on our mission.
Um, I would like to share some
of the statistics for the border
and everything that is happening
in in the New Mexico border.
So on, on the first, um, on the
on the on the 2nd slide, you
will see that on a year to day
basis, the, the trade at Santa
Teresa border crossing was
valued at 37.3 billion, an
increase of 46%.
through November.
And compared to
27.7 billion in in 2023, so we
are already.
10 billion above of 2023 and we
don't, we will have the numbers
for December.
Next month
Um, exports total, uh 15
billion, that's uh an increase
of 66%.
And uh the imports were valued
at 2022 billion and uh and they
were up 35%.
Uh, Santa Teresa port of entry
accounts for 28%.
Of the trade of El Paso's three
main port of entry, so Santa
Teresa, Bridge of the Americas,
and his letter
together Santa Teresa accounts
for 28% of of of that
metropolitan area, uh, total
trade value.
And
It has increased around 70% in
the last 10 years.
Or for the, for the, for the
port of Columbus.
Um, on a year to day basis, the
trade at Columbus, uh, New
Mexico, uh, it was valued at 3.
360 million, an increase of 24%.
through November compared to 313
million for the whole year of
2023.
Uh, exports total, 190 million.
And they were up 36% while
imports were valued at 170
million, which were up 12%.
Uh, good fact about Columbus is
the surplus at that at that
border crossing, that's
something you don't see in
basically any other port of
entry and there's a surplus of
19 million in, in, in Colombos.
So we, we're exporting more to
Mexico that we're importing from
Mexico in that port of entry.
So it's something to, to, to
look at and.
And that we can use as an
example for
For Santa Teresa.
We, um, the, the NBA has
established key relationships
with Ciudad Juarez the state of
Chihuahua and the Mexican
federal government to align on
infrastructure priorities.
Projects as such, uh,
cross-border highways, port of
entry expansions, and logistics
hub for the border plex.
Um, we have partnered with US
and Mexican customs and trade
organizations to streamline
cross-border commerce, resulting
beneficial for New Mexican
businesses and consumers due to
this exports to the port of
entry.
Yes. We don't have Zoom up so we
can't go any farther, I'm sorry,
you have to just wait until they
get. Thank you.
Are you going through this?
OK, thank you. OK.
I didn't see this. Thank you.
All right, go ahead and
continue. Thank you. Apologize.
Thank you.
So
Currently we are on the, on the
strategic initiatives uh slide.
Um, and as I was saying, we have
partnered with US and Mexican
customs and trade organizations
to streamline cross-border
commerce resulting beneficial
for New Mexican.
Uh, businesses and consumers due
to these exports to or port of
entries have grown more than 50%
from 2023 to 2024.
Um, we have collected trade data
and economic impact studies, uh,
we have submitted formal capital
request to support critical
infrastructure initiatives.
Uh, we have promoted job
creation through infrastructure
development and industrial park
growth.
NMBA address uh critical
infrastructure deficiencies that
promote long term job creation
and economic development for the
border region. We have hosted
and participated in round tables
with bation businesses
organization and municipalities
to identify pressing
infrastructure needs and unified
support for the border
priorities.
On the New Mexico border I
authority project updates.
We have the, the projects that
that we currently have at the at
the border authority.
Uh, the Santa Teresa port of
entry expansion. The study was
finalized and, and currently
working with USA to start the
next phases. No state funding
was allocated to this project
and we need to work with our
senators and House
representatives to get the
federal funding for, for this
project for the Santa Teresa,
uh, port of entry.
Uh, both the water tank and, and
the berm in Columbus Phase one
have awarded contracts to start
construction, so they will be
breaking breaking ground, um, in
the, in the month of March.
Uh, the wastewater pond has all
the IGAs and POs in place.
And they're currently in talks
with their contractor and, and
construction management to to to
start the project.
On to the 2nd page.
Um, the border have connector
faces C and D are to be
completed next month and Bohan
Houston, who is the, the, the
contractor doing the study is
ready to start it uh on the
final design, and it will be
finalized, uh, late, late summer
2025.
After that, NMUT will be leading
the construction of the of the
border highway connector.
For what Harri connector phase 2
study, the NMBA uh entered into
a funding agreement with El Paso
Metropolitan Planning
Organization to partner in
conducting the study.
Or the parking lots on the, on
the for the New Mexico Border
Authority, um, the NBA, it's,
it's currently in talks with uh
contractor and, and construction
management consultant to start
construction on the, on the POV
parking lot.
And for the commercial parking
lot, we're final finalizing
budget and project schedule.
For the infrastructure capital
improvement plan for fiscal year
2026, we
have requested the Lunar County
Natural gas visibility study,
the damning drug bypass
feasibility study and the
Columbus water storage tank.
Now that our justification for
the 3% budget increase, um.
The MBA requested a 3% increase
to the budget following the
executive guidance.
While we understand that the,
the legislative uh finance
committee recommendation for a
1.6% increase. This amount does
not adequately reflect an MBA's
scoring circumstances or
agencies is now fully staffed
with personnel whose experience
and expertise are essential for
managing high impact projects
like the Crua water tank, the
Luna County erm, that is a port
of entry expansion and the
border highway connector.
To attract and retain this
talent and NMBA has, has had to
offer competitive salaries.
Which are higher than those for
previous staff members.
In addition, operational costs
have risen due to the increased
scope of responsibilities,
including critical stakeholder
engagement, project planning and
interagency collaboration
efforts without proper funding
or ability to sustain this
operations at their current
standard.
At their career standard will be
significantly impacted.
The NBA plays a vital role in
fostering economic growth
through by national trade and
infrastructure development.
For example, Santa Teresa border
crossing trade rose 46% like I
already mentioned.
Um, the same for, for Columbus,
the trade rose 20 27% in just in
the past year, the Mexico where
authority has successfully
advanced large scale
infrastructure initiatives
positioning New Mexico as a
leader in cross-border trade.
The requested budget increase is
modest compared to the potential
economic gains it will support
ensuring adequate funding will
allow us to continue this
trajectory without interruption
or agencies work directly
supports New Mexico broader
goals of infrastructure
improvement, economic
development, and cross-border
collaboration by fully funding
or budget requests the state
reinforces reinforces its
commitment to to these
priorities.
We respectfully request
reconsideration of the proposed
budget and approval of the 3%
increase. This investment will
not only address current
operational challenges but also
ensure the continued success of
our critical initiatives.
And with this, Madam Chair, I'm
open for questions.
Thank you. Thank you for your
presentation. First we'll be
Representative Chatfield.
Thank you, Madam Chair. I
apologize profusely for being
late. I just couldn't make it
any faster. I was trying.
So,
Still making the gummy bears.
How many million pounds?
Madam chair, Representative
Chatterfield.
So the gummy bears are just one
part of what we do at Santa
Teresa, um, we.
We, I don't have the number
currently, but I can tell you
that Santa Teresa port of entry
is the number one.
in North America for for
Catalin.
to the US, so.
We import to that for 300,000
heads of cattle daily from
Monday to Friday and we're
number one.
In the whole nation.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Thank
you, sir. I, I'm aware of that.
In fact, I know some of the
folks that are down there
importing them.
And uh I know you uh import
cattle, I know you do gummy
bears, I know you have a
computer, uh, manufacturing
plant just on the other side of
the border and you import them
across, you manufacture the
cords on this side, and awesome
operation. What I want to ask
you about.
I, uh, hoof and mouth disease.
Uh, there were 3 cases in
southern Mexico this year. It
closed the, the, the imports
completely at the border. There
were like 320,000, uh, tell me
the number of cattle backed up
waiting to come through, uh,
they got the
situation under control, reopen
the border.
I assume it's um I assume it's
still open.
How long will it take to rectify
the backlog.
How fast are they coming across?
Any information that you know
about that.
Madam Chapresentative Chad Peel,
um, currently the Unionganadera
uh with USDA and Cenacia which
is the
The counterpart of USDA and for
the Mexican federal government.
So they, they approved the
protocol to
bring back the import
Of, of the cattle, um, the union
naira has passed the USDA um.
Inspection of their facilities
in, in San Geronimo, which is a
counterpart of Santa Teresa and
they're looking to open.
seen
It's not, they haven't
confirmed, but uh they also are
already looking at the
facilities in in the other port
which is Okinaga Presidio, which
is on the Texas side and we.
We, we, we're in constant talks
to also bring the so they can
inspect also Colombus so it can,
Columbus, New Mexico can reopen
again. Santa Teres Sonora has
already started importing in
Santa Teresa is the next one to
to start uh bring it reopen the
the border for the cattle
crossing.
So Madam Chair, just let me get
it clear. Santa Teresa is still
closed. It is closed right now.
They, they have the protocol is
in place for both federal
governments. They have passed
inspection and they're about to
open. So they, so since they
approve and everything they have
to uh reinspect all the cattle
at their origin, and that takes
about, about 2 weeks, which
ports are open?
I
I'm not really sure, uh,
representative, but I, the, the
first uh port of entry that was
approved.
reopen was Nogales Sonora in
Arizona
but I, I, I don't have
information that they're open
and working right now.
So second question, when them
cattle come up, you know, if
they stay in Mexico for 60 days
and they're Mexican cattle they
might come from Guatemala, they
might come from Southern Central
America, they may come from
South America, once they're in
Mexico a certain amount of time
they become Mexican cattle,
they're ready for import those
cattle and Mexican cattle are
required to undergo a
quarantine.
You know, once they pass that
quarantine, then they're allowed
to come into the, into the
United States.
Now
Those cattle that have came to
the border, asked to quarantine.
And then they, uh,
They closed the border, right?
So that quarantine period is
only valid.
Or alone.
Madam Chair Representative
Jacksville, um, I.
If I may correct on, on, on what
you're stating. So there's right
now there's only 5 Mexican
states that are, that can import
cattle.
US, which is Sonora, Chihuahua,
Durango, Tamaulipas, and I think
Coahuila got reinstated as as
another state, so.
If you have cattle in the
state of uh Hidalgo.
You cannot bring that, that
cattle to Chihuahua or Durango
and then bring it to the US. It
has to be cattle that is born in
those states, they get inspected
at on their origin or their
ranches and then
They, they get tested for
tuberculosis. And then they get,
they get an approval from from
Cenascia and and the state that
they're
Where they're from, and then
they, they
They get an appointment to come
to the border.
And, and then they're gonna be
reinspected or for the, for the
fight that is affecting the
southern part of Central America
most.
And then he will stay around.
2 days
At the San Geronimo, uh,
quarantine pans.
So Madam Chair, here's where I'm
going with that.
Uh
When that border reopens.
Is there an expiration date on
all that inspection process that
you just went through, do all
these cattle have to, we like
Mexican cows they live forever.
They're good and strong because
they've been inspected, uh, we
bring them up in northeastern
New Mexico. They're, they
haven't had a lot of groceries.
They've been down there in the
desert, they gain fast. I'm not
a yearli operator, but those
folks up there like him, but I
want to know.
is when that border opens, is
there gonna be just trade loads
of cattle coming across it, or
do they have to go through this
same process again, probably.
Or does it, is it?
Uh, once they go through it,
it's good forever for the rest
of their life.
Madam chair, Representative
Chatfield, um.
Let me see if I understood your
question.
So, the new protocol is in
place.
That protocol, it's been
approved by USDA.
And
Uh, right now, all the cattle
that was backed up has to go
through the process all over
again. There you go.
Thank you. All that talk was
that's what I was going for.
Thank you.
All right, next is
Representative Herrera.
this.
Madam Chair. Uh, thank you very
much. I'm
I am so impressed with Santa
Teresa, you know, I went there.
I think 20 years ago when they
just built it.
And it was
It was just a vacant.
Place with white bills.
And when you go back today, it's
just, it's just amazing the
growth that that has, that has.
has created a southern part of
the state. It's actually
incredible. Uh, I'm, I'm just
very impressed. I'm always a
little embarrassed. Thank you
for these, these charts, uh, I'm
always a little embarrassed
that.
You do all this work.
And you do it so well.
And then we
you, uh, you know, a half an
hour of time to listen to your
story. I, I just want to say
that it's a little embarrassing
on this side of that.
That too, but um
I really don't have any
questions. I'm just telling you.
I'm amazed at kind of group that
has.
And our all of our
And for the uh revenue it brings
in. Thank you, madam.
Thank you, Representative is
Representative Hernandez.
Thank you, Madam Chair. I, I
also, uh, concur with my
colleagues on uh on, on, on this
and again thank you for the
presentation. I'm learning a lot
here.
Um, I've never been there, and
I'm looking forward.
to visiting uh the, the
facilities, um, my district is
in northwest New Mexico, San
Juan County.
Um
First question I have is, um,
What's the average wait time for
trucks?
Going in and and coming out, you
know, cause I I know there's a.
I don't know, again, please help
me. I don't know if there's a uh
approval for.
To get, to get to cross the
borders.
And and how long do they have to
wait for that approval?
Madaer and representative
Hernandez, so the current wait
time for commercial traffic and
this is data that that we just
received yesterday.
Right now it's
Between 30 to 40 minutes for
commercial trucks, um, obviously
this depends.
On the situation on on the
isleta uh bridge which is in El
Paso and uh.
breach of the Americas, which is
also in El Paso. So an important
thing to mention is Santa Teresa
has been a key port of entry
for, for that metropolitan area.
Because we are known for, for
being one of the most efficient
ports of entry in that area.
So, if you look, um, so we're
number one in the cattle doesn't
use that port of entry. It has
its own, um.
Or a day at the, at, at, at, at
the, at the border, if you can
call it like that.
Um, but we're not, not just
number one in cattle, we're also
number one in computer chips,
imports and exports and
computers.
In the whole US, not just port
of entries, but I mean all port
of entries counting seaports and
airports as well.
So, we have Foxconn there which
uh builds a Dell computers and
they're, they're one of the, I
mean.
They're building
Mostly all the computers that
are being uh delivered here in
the in the United States for the
for the POV vehicles, so private
vehicles, the, the wait times,
they vary a lot depending on
the, on the time you get to uh
which hour you get to the the
port of entry.
Going southbound, the wait times
are 0. Obviously, when it's uh
the
Paisano season so all the, the,
the Mexican nationals that are
going back to Mexico to visit
their families, waiting times
increased, but it's all all over
the, all over the, the, the
border, southern border. You can
get up to 1 hour or 2 hours.
Thank you, presenter and and
madam chair, um,
My, my district.
Borders, the state of Colorado.
The state of Arizona and the
state of Utah.
Madam Chair
Um
I
I have seen the economic impact
of the Santa Teresa port of
entry, or I mean of the of the
facility only because, uh, just
before I came down here, uh,
Madam Chair, there, there were.
Three large.
Semis
With the wind.
Oh, turbine.
Waiting for approval from the
state of Utah.
And they parked their um their
trucks.
At the Shiprock Fairgrounds.
And the crew that they had with
them, Madam Chair.
How
Each truck had madam chair, at
least 6 people uh with the
pilots and um and they spent.
Money in our community waiting 5
days for the state of Utah,
Madam Chair. Are you, uh, is a
Port Authority tracking uh
routes that, uh, these trucks
are going when they trip travel
through New Mexico, uh, man, I'm
sure that's my last question.
Madam Chair and Representative
Hernandez, um, so those, uh,
wind blades come through Santa
Teresa port of entry since we're
the only um oversized and
overweight uh entry of the El
Paso metropolitan area, those
wind blades are, uh, built in
Ciudad Juarez and they come to
our portal of entry.
Then they get stationed
uh around the Santa Teresa
industrial parks. Some of those
winbbles go east, west, uh,
north.
Uh, even on, on, on by rail and,
and by semis.
We
Don't have control on the
routes.
For for which they take um
But uh
All the information that I can
give you Representative
Hernandez is that they use that,
that port of entry.
Thank you, man, that concludes
my questions.
Representative.
Um, I just have a few questions.
So as far as your or your your
difference between the executive
and, and the LFC, so you had to
raise the rate, the pay in order
to get this specialty people
that you need, is that how you
put part of it too, is that what
you said?
Ma, I'm sure.
So I started uh in August.
And so that created a a vacancy.
Uh, of 2.
months on the fiscal year and
once I came in, uh, my financial
coordinator resigned.
So
Within 2 weeks and then I had to
hire uh um.
And a new financial coordinator,
uh, luckily, uh, I think.
We got the best person for the
job.
He, he used to work for, I mean,
he was working for the state at
the corrections department in
Las Cruces. He got right up the
street.
Um, and then,
A month later, um,
I lost my deputy director and
then I hire a new deputy
director who
I also think it's the best, was
the best candidate for the job.
And
Now it's fully staffed.
To
If you
ask me right now, I will tell
you that I, I will.
I would like to have an extra
person we we just we just for
FTE so that.
The deputy, me, the financial
coordinator, and a uh and the,
and the commission's uh
coordinator.
We don't have a secretary. We
don't have anyone for
With background on, on
engineering for, for all the
capital infrastructure projects
that we're doing. So that's why.
We think that or request of the
3% is really modest for what
we're doing at the border.
And, um, increase to the others.
Madam Chair, those costs are
for.
Just regular expenses for for
the office trips, so we, we,
we've been really reaching out
to the state of Chihuahua.
Uh, iudad Juarez and the Mexican
federal government and not so
the border authority is not just
Santa Teresa it is Columbus, it
is Antelopes it is it is Hidalgo
County, this Grant County, it is
Luna County and Donana County.
So we have to travel on the
southern part of the state. We
also have to come.
To Santa Fe for.
During the session, so most of
of those uh other costs will be
incurred in traveling expenses
as well.
All right, um, I get a motion
from
the LFC.
Madam Chair, I'll move the LFC.
Madam Char 2nd
Um
I move, um, the LFC
recommendation.
OK
Right, we have the LFC
recommendation.
But we'll be looking into your,
uh, we have staff that will look
into specifically. Next up is
The board of Professional
Engineers and land, 464 in your
books.
Good afternoon, Mr. Chair, Madam
Chair, members of the committee,
uh, you stole my line, your
to be looking for a different
sheet that looks like this
behind tab 4 in your binders.
agency
64
Also, if you look in the top
right corner of that different
sheet, you'll see a reference to
the volume 2 pages, and that's
gonna be more expanded
information about the budget
request and then the LFC's
budget recommendation.
Ah
My name is Austin Davidson. I'm
the LFC's Natural Resource
analyst.
joining me today for our
discussion of the State Board of
licensure for Professional
Engineers and land surveyors is
going to be the director of the
board, Perry, and then my DFA
counterpart Joshua Martinez.
Now going to the differences.
Between the LFC and the
executive recommendation.
The LFC recommendation increased
revenues.
by 36.1,000 or 3.1%.
The executive recommendation
increased other revenues by
124.3 000 or
10.8%.
A little more detail on that is
that both recommendations
increase the other revenues for
the administrative costs, IT and
GST rate increases that the
agency requested, and then the
executive recommendation
increased the personnel by 82
88.2,000 or 11.5% and this is
for salary increases for FTE.
I'll not turn it over to my DFA
counterpart to go over some
performance.
Sharon members of the committee,
so for the performance for um.
The board of licensers of
Engineers and uh.
performance measures for FY 26.
Good afternoon, madam.
Madam Chair and members of the
committee, my name is Perry
Valdez. I'm the executive
director for the board of uh
with me today are board staff,
Crystal Bustamante, Randy
Gonzales, our board was created
in 1935 and is an enterprise
agency, we are self-funded with
revenue derived from licensing
and renewal fees and do not
require any.
Appropriation from the general
uh with you
provided a bullet point summary
of our achievements and
licensing statistics.
Uh, as of January 28, 2025.
We have a total of 11,394 and on
the sheet it provides our FY 26
appropriation requests includes
an increase in the personnel.
Category
Or borderproof staff salary
increases and in the contractual
services category for additional
IT services.
With that, I'm open to any
questions you may have. I didn't
I move the LSC and uh.
The opposition need a second.
You
Thank you.
Thank you
All right. Next up is Office of
the Military Base Planning.
41.
Madam Chair
the committee
Uh, so it's gonna be behind.
and it's agency code 491.
We're gonna be talking about the
reoccurring budget for the
Office of Military Base.
I'm joined today by 2 by Joshua
Martinez, who's a DFA budget
analyst for the office, um, as
well as Megan Cor Cornet. She is
the new director of the um
office.
on the job.
Um, so I'm gonna go over the
differences on the reoccurring
budgets.
Uh, so the executive
recommended.
234,000 more general fund
revenue than the LFC.
Um, so that's roughly a
difference between the executive
recommending a 75.7% increase
while the LFC recommended a flat
budget for the um for the
office.
Uh, the main differences you can
see in your tip sheet are for
contractual services, um, and
that's because the.
Executive recommended an
increase of roughly 284%, 284%
um for the commission to enter
into intergovernmental
agreements.
to support quality of life
improvements.
You want me to, Madam Chair,
should I pause?
Madam Chair
So I don't think we have a, a
As she, but we have a budget
here that does have a LF 009.
Can you tell us what the
Executive recommendation. Yes. I
can, oh, Madam Chair.
Uh
I met I'm sure if really quickly
and.
come back if that's OK.
days.
Congratulations, by the way.
All right, we're gonna go ahead
and go on to the
Natural Resources trustee.
OK, yeah.
That is
Uh, Madam Chair, members of the
committee, right back to it, uh,
once again I'm.
What is the number
666
668
Behind tab 6 in your binders
agency code 668.
last.
Be have it.
Madam Chair, members of the
committee, uh, I'll just, uh,
introduce who's going to be up
here, the Natural Resource
trustee, Maggie Ahart Stebbins,
and then my DSA colleague Joshua
Martinez, and
still Austin Davidson, uh.
So going over the differences
between the offices of natural.
Truste ED LFC recommendation in
the executive, the LFC
recommendation increased the
fund balance usage by 170,000 or
7%, the executive recommendation
increased the general fund
revenue by 170,000 or 21.3%.
So to break that down a little
bit, the LFC's recommendation
increased to the agency's
personnel budget through
increased assessment fund usage
by 170,000.
Or an additional FTE, the
executive recommendation
increased it through general
fund usage or 170,000, so it's
just a difference of funding.
I'm not turned over to my DFA
counterpart to continue, Madam.
the committee
Uh, for the expansion LSC
expansion for a program
coordinator.
Good afternoon, Madam Chair,
members of the committee. My
name is Maggie Hart Stebbins.
I'm in New Mexico's Natural
Resources trustee, and I thank
you for this opportunity to, uh,
present our budget today.
OK.
are horrible. I'll tell you.
Sorry about that, um, so anyway,
thank you very much for the
opportunity to present our
budget, um, on slide two, we
have just a brief slide Owen
RT's mission, which is to
restore natural resources when
they've been injured by hazard
by releases of hazardous
substances. Um, slide number 3
is our work chart. We are fully
staffed at this point in time
with um with 5 employees.
Yes.
I provided them yesterday.
Blue.
Um
Again, slide 3 is our work
chart. We are fully staffed, um,
with 5 employees. Um, slide
number 4, our special
appropriation request was
$10,470,000 as the analysts have
pointed out, um, that is a
combination of general fund
money and fund balance. So the
fund balance requests are from
the trustee fund. Those are
dollars that ONRT already has,
uh, we are asking for authority
to spend them. Um, the big part
of
Our request is a request for a
special appropriation to fund
the assessment fund. The
assessment fund is what we use
to bring our claims against
polluters.
The next slide, um, as again the
analysts have pointed out the
DFA recommendation is um an LFC
recommendations are very, very
similar, and I wanna say, um,
how grateful I am for LFC's
recognition of the work that we
do and for, um, for the budget
that you have recommended for
us, um, I appreciate the vote of
confidence in our work. Um, the
next slide slide number 6, so
the natural resources Trust Act
has created the natural
resources Trustee fund that is a
non-reverting fund, um, that
again was created, created by
our statute, and it includes two
parts. It includes the
assessment fund, which again is
the the money, the dollars that
we use to bring our claims. It's
the research. It's the technical
expertise, it's now includes
legal fees, um, that we are
going to need to spend in order
to bring claims against.
Polluters, um.
We have and I have a another
slide that.
Details what we anticipate doing
as natural as natural resource
damage assessments in the coming
years, but they, um, the natural
resource damage assessments tend
to be multi-year and very
costly. Um, the restoration fund
is the other the other part of
the natural resources trustee
fund that that the.
Restoration fund contains
dollars that we have been um.
provided through settlements or
litigation and both federal law
and state law say that we cannot
use restoration fund dollars for
any other purpose other than
restoration projects.
And this is a non-reverting
fund. Um, slide number 7. So,
I'm sure you recognize that our
request for a special
appropriation was significant,
um, and this slide.
Details what we expect to be
demands on the assessment fund
in the coming years.
Los Alamos National
Laboratories. We have an ongoing
natural resource damage
assessment there, um, White
Sands test facility, it's the
NASA facility outside of Las
Cruces. We are engaged now
natural resource damage
assessment there, um, we are
looking at a grants mining
district wide strategic plan to
determine how we bring natural
resource damage claims for
injuries to groundwater,
wildlife soils, um, the, the
impacts of uranium.
and milling and mining in that
area, um, and of course PFOS
which um as of July of last
year, we are part of the state's
litigation against um.
Eos, um,
Releasers, um, here in the state
of New Mexico, um, and I have
included slide 7.
Sorry, 89, and 10, that
hopefully will um ref give you
an.
Idea of how very complex these
cases are.
And I said, they can be very
costly and multi-year. So when
we make a request for dollars
into the assessment fund. It's
with the anticipation of having
the dollars available to us for
the length of the case. We are
often, um,
In conversations with very, um,
well funded and powerful
entities, and so we need to have
the dollar so we can go toe to
toe if we have to.
Um, so slide number.
I miss one,
Slide number 8 is just a brief
slide about um the contamination
of Los Alamos National
Laboratories.
Slide number 9 is um the POS
releases around the state, um,
I'm wondering it well.
You may have seen a press
release that went out last um I
believe on Tuesday that showed
the research at Holeman Lake,
um, is revealing concentrations
of PFOS in wildlife and
waterfowl and plants that are
the highest anywhere in the
world.
World record for contamination
and a salt cedar, um, plant and
in mouse tissue, the highest um
concentration of PFOS.
Of any
Wild animal in the world.
So this is a serious problem for
the state of New Mexico and um.
We are working on our damage
assessment, slide number 10.
Just a brief slide about again
the complexity of bringing
claims in um the grants mining
district and the San Mateo Creek
area.
And I think one thing that's
important that um.
The principle of
Our offices of the polluter
pays.
So when um entities release
hazardous substance into the
environment, the Super Fund Act
does require them to compensate
communities.
The contamination has to be
cleaned up.
That is the responsibility of
either the Mexico Environment
department or the EPA. What we
are able to do is ask for
funding to make communities
whole.
And um,
There's a lot that goes into our
work and working with
communities to make sure that
they feel compensated for their
losses.
Slide number 11. So that's the
assessment side. Now I'd like to
talk a little bit about the
restoration side, um, side
number 11, the Office of the
Natural Resources Trustee.
Would, would it be OK if I
didn't use this? Feels like it's
going in and out.
OK. Um,
help.
Um
Anyway,
The Office of the Natural
Resources Trustee was part of
the state of New Mexico's claim,
um, claims for the Gold King
mine, um, contamination we
received $13 million and slide
number 11 details, um, the uses
to which those settlement
dollars.
are going.
Um, and it's important to
understand we're not just about
natural resources. We're also
about the communities that rely
on natural resources for quality
of life, life for economic
activity and and for livelihoods
and as you can see in this list
of projects, there are some that
are very focused on restoring
groundwater and surface water.
That's clearly part of our
mission, but several of these
are also targeted at the
industries and the businesses
that were.
Harmed by the Gold King mine
release. So that's agriculture,
um, outdoor recreation, um, so
we're very proud of these
projects we um did reach out to
them. We have an extensive
process of reaching out to the
communities, um, to understand
what they want.
Um
The next slide number 12, if you
have time to read it, talks
about the economic impact, um,
of the work we do and just the
next ones are just pictures of
some of the projects that we've
been able to complete and um
with that I will.
Answer any questions. There's
some supplemental information um
for.
Um, about what we do.
And I'm happy to answer
questions about that too.
We get two questions. Can you go
more detail on the PAS. How
close is it to the Air Force
Base or.
And give me more information on
how and light. So, um, Madam
Chair, members of the committee,
Hoffman Lake, um, was a um a
pond into which a wastewater
from Halman Air Force Base was
discharged. I can't tell you
exactly the distance between the
base and the lake, but um a lot
of the PO that was being used on
base was discharged there, um,
and then
A lot of the water evaporated,
so the water, the concentrations
are quite high and the study
that I referenced really looked
at the impact on wildlife and
biota in that.
Thank you Madam Chair.
Uh,
I, I, I would like to.
hear the trustee talk just a
little.
One of the uh
Appropriations that was given to
your office.
For restoration
And, and it
Has that been restored or?
Um, Madam Chair Representative
Chatfield, um.
Are you referring to the nat the
claim for injury to natural
resources that was filed by the
Attorney General for PCB
contamination.
Probably.
So,
um,
so a few years ago, um, the
Attorney General brought a claim
for injury to natural resources
that was caused by um PCB
contamination and that claim was
brought under state law.
And not, uh, and the trustee was
not notified of that claim, and
we were not included in that,
um, that claim against it was
against Monsanto.
And the claim settled um for a
significant amount of money
again for injury to natural
resources, but because it was
not brought by the trustee, the
funding did not go into the
trustee fund for restoration.
It went into the, um, I believe
the AG's consumer settlement
fund.
So out of chair, uh, who is, uh,
Do doing reparation to the
injured parties, who's fixing
it? Who's taking care of the
folks that were harmed by that.
Um,
Madam Chair Representative
Chatfield, I, I do not know
what.
Uses, um.
To what uses that money has been
put, um, again, that, that I
believe it's money that the
legislature that the LFC
appropriates, but, um, again, it
did not come to the trustee
fund, so I do not have specific
knowledge about how it's used.
Madam Sher, does that affect
your budget now?
Uh oh, I'm sorry
I didn't, it's a good question,
representative, so.
Consumer settlement fund is
broken up between restricted and
non-restricted funds, so there's
areas that the legislature can
appropriate funds out of it to
different entities, and then
there's restricted portions that
are then apportioned to very
specific things, depending on
the lawsuit. So depending on the
lawsuit that you and the trust
you're discussing, that would
then be the class.
So that determines the landing
spot for that funding.
Yes, makes that decision?
Now we can go back and pull.
some information
Uh, I would love that.
Certainly
Yeah
So
I think that's it.
Thank you, ma'am.
Thank you, madam
And thank you all for the
presentation. I have a few
questions.
And I'm starting to ask this
more and more.
Of different departments of put
things out for work.
Uh
the opportunity to meet with
Several different engineering
groups.
And
quiz based on who they knew was
talking here today.
On how
Uh, RFPs.
Lashed out
In different organizations.
For companies that do DOT work.
DOT puts
List that if you're on if if
you're an approved supplier, you
automatically get that.
If you're on the state's APL.
You get a list of projects that
are either out for construction
or out for RFP out for study.
You name it.
Attorneys watch it. Engineers
watch it, consultants watch it,
everybody watched it.
How does this work within
Um
Within the office of natural.
Rusty
Madam Chair, Representative
Pettigrew, thank you for that
question. So when we received
settlement dollars, and I will
use school Keine as an example,
uh, we have $13 million. We
reached out to the community
through every um media every um
strategy that we could identify
to let people in the community
know this money was available
and for what reason? For what
purposes. Again, federal law,
um, gives us guidance on how.
Restoration dollars can be used
and so we notified the public
that we would be asking for
project proposals. It was not a
formal RFP. It was a request for
project proposals, and I think
we received 15 or 16 we had um.
Webinars to to explain to
anybody who had questions, um,
how our process would work, we,
um, with the public with the
public notice, we were very
clear about what the criteria
would be both for screening
projects and then ranking
projects and um we are covered
by the um state procurement code
and so if um.
But most of the
Right
Almost all of the project, um.
Uh, proposals came from local
governments. And so we can
contract directly. We can do
MOAs with local governments, and
so, um, we actually were able to
fund almost all of the projects
that were proposed to us. Um, we
reached out to the Navajo Nation
we did, um.
Um
Video clips in, in Navajo
language that went to chapter
houses and out on on local radio
and so we try to cast as wide a
net and we um evaluated the the
proposals we received according
to the criteria that we had
published.
Thank you, Madam Chair and thank
you for, for your response.
Your response to my question and
and probably because I don't
know how to ask the right
question the right way.
So
Part of your response may have
may have helped lead to what I
was diving at.
You, you go, you go to the local
communities, OK, we have
damages.
What we have, these are the
types of projects that that we
can build to help you build back
up economic development.
I would assume all reflects it
fix problems well.
And so since
Projects come from
The uh
Political subdivision is it's
safe to assume that most of
those already have
The uh projects middle from
An engineer consultant that
provides services that political
subdivision.
That a safe assumption, Madam
Chair, Madam Chair, uh,
Representative Pettigrew, yes,
so some of the projects came to
us fairly well fleshed out, San
Juan County, um, provided us
with 3 projects for which they
had most of the engineering
already completed, they just
needed additional dollars so the
local governments will do the
RFPs. We do not, um, and so once
we make a commitment that we
will fund a project uh.
San Juan County, for example,
they would then go through the
procurement process.
Thank you, Madam Chair, and
thank you for that answer that.
Helps me to be able to give them
an answer.
Um
The
Pardon me, um.
And may, may I just add to that,
I apologize, madam chair, um, we
also in, in some projects were
less fleshed out and so we do
have um a contractor that helps
local governments with
engineering support, different,
um, steps that they may need to
bring their project to
completion.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Thank
you for that answer. That was
part of the question originally.
How did you
Select that contractor.
What procurement process.
That it goes through a request.
did it.
Is, is a
Or your, or 4 year long contract
can be renewed annually and
Somebody was interested. They
somebody that say a company that
does a lot of.
Um
What's to wants to get on that.
Distribution
For the RFQ.
How do we get them on?
Or, obviously.
How do we tell them?
Where to go
Mm
Get the notification that RFQ is
coming out.
So that they can
Madam Chair represented
Pettigrew. I would like to give
you a more complete answer to
that, and I'll be happy to
follow up in writing, um.
The engineering contractor that
we use, we use through a
statewide price agreement.
So the state has
has this firm on contract, we
are able to um to utilize that.
And um,
For our larger technical, um,
assistance. We do a formal RFP
and so we go through the
Department of Finance
Administration and um
We actually have the benefit of
a roving procurement specialist,
um, who's been provided by GSD.
So we actually are in that
process for our technical
consultant, um, so for large
contracts we do um that are
specialized um for the services
we need, we do, um, a formal RFP
that will generally be for 4
years.
Thank you very much, Madam
Chair. I mean, for one off.
Like that
Permit code allows you to, to
To hire somebody off the the
list.
As long as it doesn't exceed 6.
So, I, I understand all that.
Like 4 hours ago, I had no clue
I was gonna be asking.
And I just did it in the hallway
with the border guys, and so,
but those are the questions I
get asked so I'm asking so if
you can give me more details so
I can pass it on to.
The engineering groups.
They can disperse it how they
want.
That would be wonderful.
Uh, Madam Chair and um
My next question.
I
Ultimately, do I understand it
correctly? Ultimately, the
lawsuit determines how much
money.
There is
Madam
Yes.
Madam Chair and uh presenters
so.
The natural resource Trust
office of the Natural Resource
Trustee doesn't actually follow
the.
Right.
Madam Chair Representative.
We do so.
The Attorney General by statute
provides us with legal
representation and so we would
bring a claim, um.
With the Attorney General's
office, but it would be ONRT
that would uh be prepared, be
doing the preparation work.
Thank you very much for that. So
diving into that just a little
bit deeper.
So if you take it to the
Attorney General's office.
Or the the trusty natural
resources trustees, they get
there, um.
That means that you've that
Somebody has assessed the
damages.
And made picked a number.
Who does that?
Um, Madam Chair, represent
Pettigrew, that is actually part
of our process. So with every,
uh, release of contamination, we
will do an evaluation. There are
some that we can dismiss just
out of hand when we learn
because we realize that they're
not applicable or they're not
covered by the law that governs
our work, um, but we will, if,
if it, if it's clear that it is
a.
Uh, spell a release that might
be covered by um.
Um, by our cause, um, we would
do a preliminary estimate of
damages. So first we do a
pre-assessment screen to make
sure that it meets the
requirements of federal law and
then we would do a preliminary
estimate of damages, and that is
something that our technical
consultants generally do for us
so we can make a determination
to whether or not to bring a
claim, whether it's worth the
investment.
Thank you, Madam Chair and thank
you for that answer. So.
The next question was a question
that part of those same
conversations.
How does somebody get on an APL
the technical consultant.
office
It depends on how I vote on the
budget, but yeah.
I said it depends on how I vote
on a budget.
I'm good, Fernandez.
Thank you, Madam Chair, um.
Presenters, it means a lot to
me, the work you guys are doing.
I know there's a lot of time.
To travel up in northwest New
Mexico and in, in my uh area.
My area has, has been referred
to as a sacrifice zone.
Because of the impacts.
Of energy
And
And for that, madam chair, my,
my question is, um, my
grandfather was a uranium miner.
I see on slide 10, Madam Chair,
my, my, my question is there's
85 uranium mines. How many
uranium mines are in New Mexico?
Madam Chair Representative
Hernandez.
I think that that 85 number may
refer just to the San Mateo
Creek Basin area, so that would,
those would be in New Mexico. I
can get back to you with with
the exact number of how many
mines and mills are located in
the state of New Mexico.
Thank you, um, uh, presenter
Madam Chair, my next question is
on the next page.
The, uh, gold gold King mind
spill.
Uh, this, this was very
devastating to to my community.
Um
Following the years, nobody
wanted to buy produce from any
of the farmers, Madam chair, um.
To many people in my community.
He felt
That compensation wasn't just.
To only get
From the
And Madam Chair, I understand
that there's other compensations
that took place and that this
was just one form of
compensation, um.
On, on, um.
Would, would, would there be any
opportunities for um.
Like
I I understand that you have
some contractors to help local
governments come to those
compliance because Madam Chair,
we, we struggle with the
technical assistance with with
your contractors still be
available to, to seek.
I'll, I'll alternative ways of
of of of getting uh assistance
from your office.
Madam Chair Representative
Hernandez, I would be happy to
discuss that with you, you know,
we have been through the process
for Gold King mine, but that
doesn't mean that that is our
last response to the spill and I
am aware I have um spent time
in.
Um, your district. I am well
aware of the stigma that was
attached to uh agricultural
products, um, how, uh, farmers
were not willing to.
Continue their operations having
been contaminated by this water,
so, um, that's why some of the
projects that um that we funded
are focused on agriculture, um,
we did have, um, we do have a
couple of partnerships with the
Navajo Nation, um, to, to serve
the, the Navajo farmers. So, um,
I'd be happy to follow up with
you on that.
Thank you, my last question is,
uh, last session, we, uh, this
body of our government, we
proved a study to look at coal
ways.
Uh, Madam Chair, is, is this
something that your office is
also paying attention to as far
as a just compensation to uh.
Communities impacted by coal
waste.
Madam Chair, Representative
Fernandez, yes, that is one that
we have been looking at again to
see if it meets the criteria.
Again, we are guided by federal
law by the Super Fund Act and
the Federal Oil Pollution Act.
And so we are looking to see if
there is a way to bring a
natural resource damage claim in
addition to the work that the
rest of the state of New Mexico
is doing.
Thank you, man, that concludes
my question.
Thank you.
Thank you, Madam Chair, and
thank you for the presentation.
Could you, uh, elaborate a
little bit about the Amigos
pros. Um, Madam Chair
representerrera, um, so.
to my coming to this office, the
office of the Natural Resources
Trustee reached a settlement
with Chevron or the uh lived in
my mind, um, at Questa and um
actually part of the process is
to develop a restoration plan
with public input to identify
the specific projects that will
address the injuries caused by
whatever the release was. So
there was funds for both
groundwater injuries and funds
for um habitat. So, um, the
Amigos Pravos, um.
Uh, Midnight Meadows Project was
one that was chosen. I believe
we just closed out the funding,
um, this year, um, so it was to,
if you look at the pictures,
there were some um.
Some, um,
Changes caused, I believe, by,
by overgrazing that had changed
the watercourse there in the
fens and um.
There was um that was completed
with ONRT dollars, but also with
a lot of, uh, volunteer
contributions from the um.
Um
Amigos Bravos, uh, community.
So, um, and what that has done
is, um, reduce, reduce
sedimentation, um.
That that is that
Uh, moves downstream and just uh
improves the recharge.
For that area, groundwater
recharge.
Um, madam Chair, I just want to
say we, we toured.
Oh, we did. We toured that
summer.
They were all involved.
I just want to say there are a
lot of agent.
Quite a
Everybody.
Everybody
Madam Chair Representative,
forgive me if I left out the
names of all of the partners in
that project. I do recognize it
was a huge community.
Effort. So
That's fine. Thank you.
Madam Chair, thank you.
So I was looking at the list, so
we have vanyl with chromium 6
and then groundwater
contamination and groundwater,
so.
How much urgency do you put
towards all of these?
How quickly can they get done?
Madam Chair
I feel like a great sense of
urgency.
Um, in our work, particularly
when it relates to groundwater
and surface water projects. Most
of our um claims do involve
groundwater and.
So again, the environment
department is responsible for
making the poll.
clean up the resource, um.
Hopefully within a timely period
of time to whatever the EPA
determines is a health-based
standard, um, we are responsible
for.
Um, compensating communities,
and that means the loss of use
of that water as well and as we
are experiencing these drier
years.
The options for addressing
groundwater loss, get fewer and
fewer.
Just because they're the water's
not there and I'll give an
example, um, you know, we are
in, we are part of the state's
litigation against the
Department of Defense for um
PFOS releases at Cannon Air
Force Base. And um.
The um
Prognosis for the Ogallala
Aquifer on which that um the the
both cannon Air Force Base in
those communities, the prognosis
is not great, you know, it is a
declining aquifer and what we
would what we are encourage, we
encourage all of our, um,
potentially responsible parties,
um, with whom we are in, in
conversations to act quickly to
address restoration as quickly
as possible because
at Cannon, there are strategies
for um conserving.
That groundwater
And that's to benefit and and in
doing that.
The Department of Defense can
address some of its uh natural
resource damage liabilities, but
also benefit the communities at
a time when it's still possible.
Because we will get to a point
where there are not.
Options.
So we do feel
Um, a great sense of urgency
that we.
Get working on this wall, there
are still, um.
Options for making a difference.
So who would, who
it
So you said ED would be doing
the clean, Madam Chair, the
Environment department is
working with the Department of
Defense on the actual pump and
treat clean up of the
groundwater that's been
contaminated with PFOS. We, um,
are part of that litigation on
natural resource damage side,
looking for strategies, how can
DOD make the community whole. So
there was a certain amount of
groundwater that was
contaminated with PFOS farmers,
the communities can't use that
water.
So we are working both with um
people in the community to
solicit ideas and hope and
hoping to encourage the
Department of Defense to act
quickly, um.
To work with us to um.
Hopefully you.
Right.
Questions? No?
Um, can I get a message to my
vice chair, Madam Chair, I move
the LFC and that.
And with that we move the LFC.
Welcome back and I apologize for
us not having what we needed,
but does everybody have it?
Thank you, Madam Chair, members
of the committee, and apologies.
I should have checked with you
all before starting, so thank
you for letting us come back up.
Um, just to recap, I'm gonna go
through a dip sheet again since
now you all have it in front of
you, um, so introductions um.
I have with me Joshua Martinez,
budget analyst.
Um, and the new director of the
Office of Military Base
planning, um, and she is.
So looking at the different
sheet, um, the.
Executive recommended 234,000
more than the LFC, um, that
reflects in increase that the
executive recommended an
increase of 75.7%, while the LFC
recommended a flat budget for
this agency.
Uh, the main difference in the
uses is in the contractual
services.
Um, while the LFC recommended
flat budgets across all
categories.
The executive recommended
increasing contractual services
by 284%, um, and that's to allow
the commission to enter into um
intergovernmental agreements to
support quality of life with
communities that have a military
base.
Um, you also see that the
executive recommended a small
increase in the other cost
category, and that's for
additional mileage, um, meals
and supplies.
I will note that the LFC
recommendation took into account
actuals for FI24 across all
categories.
And um I've just finished that,
oh, the analyst reached
consensus on all performance
performance measures and
targets.
Um, and I'll pass it over to
Megan.
Good afternoon, Madam Chair,
members of the committee, uh,
thank you for this opportunity
to come before you and supported
the budget for the Office of
Miller and for the
commissioners.
Um, as was mentioned, I am very
new in the job. I, uh, recently
retired at the start of the year
from the Air Force and in my
last 3 years of active duty
service, I had the honor of
serving at Kirtland Air Force
Base and providing mission
supports and quality of life
services to the missions there,
um, and then I had a year at the
defense threat reduction agency
doing some of the same work but
both at Cannon and White Sands
Missile Range.
Um, in both of those capacities,
I had a strong background in in
what our state military missions
need and what the military-based
planning commission has been
working on, but with only a few
weeks under my belt in my
current job, I know there is a
lot that I need to learn on the
budget and governance side at
the state level.
Um, so you have my commitment up
front that anything I can't
answer for you today, I will
take back, provide you a timely
and thorough response, um, and I
will do my best uh to.
To talk about the budget
increase that was requested. So
for the past few years, um, the,
the military base planning and
support office operated on uh
what was a relatively flat
budget with just a couple modest
increases and so I don't
disagree that a fourfold
increase is a lot to be
requesting.
Um
And as Julissa from the LFC went
through what those were
specifically for, um, I, I
acknowledge that to.
And there's a mismatch in the
statute and where the commission
has evolved uh to be doing a lot
of their work and so that is
something that I wanna address.
I also am not coming to you with
satisfactory current year
execution rates. Um, so that
puts it the office in a bit of a
quandary.
Um, but I'm confident that in
the next few months I will be
able to deliver what is a
comprehensive strategy on behalf
of the commission, um, that
supports these requested
increases either now or in the
future, um, and those
investments will do more than
just improve military base
resiliency and quality of life
for military members and their
families, but also deliver the
same benefits to to New Mexico.
Um, and so with that, I'd like
to highlight just a few points
in the presentation that you
have uh so on slide 2 is this uh
statutory description of the
military base planning
commission and the associated
office.
Um, and it was focused really to
understand the federal
government's plans for base
realignment and closure,
providing advice to the governor
and lieutenant governor on the 4
military installations and
working closely with the
community groups to ensure that
the state and local initiatives
are complementary for the
community and address state
level issues which could
contribute to the long term
viability of our military
installations.
However, base.
Realignment and closure is a
specific and cumbersome federal
process that has not been
politically feasible in almost
two decades. So together with
the evolution of the departments
of defenses, military-based
decision process, the Office of
Military-based Planning Support
and the commission have evolved
their mission to ensure New
Mexico's military bases remain
valuable and attractive for the
mission that we already.
have in this state.
But also competitive to attract
new mission.
And so this has meant a shift uh
to focus in those quality of
life initiatives, um, as well as
early identification and
prevention of encroachment.
And investments in critical
infrastructure, um.
And as a side note, a better
alignment with.
The economic development
department to enhance economic
growth, but in emerging defense
industry.
And so slides 4 and 5, I believe
have been presented to the
committee.
In prior years, but they provide
the justification for the office
and the commission shift.
To those quality of life
programs, um, and they were
identified as challenges
previously.
That were uncovered in the Air
Forces, um, facing decision
process.
And I would like to say that
they've been identified as
challenges for military
installations, but it might be
better to call them
opportunities for New Mexico.
Housing, education.
Medical care, childcare and
employment of all members of the
household, those are things that
touch everyone in every industry
in every community.
Um, so on slide 4 are the
details of the DOD value process
and the Air Force's report card.
Um, they largely focus on what I
call soft military value
criteria, which are your quality
of life programs.
Um, and the hard military value
categories are encroachment and
that's not just physical
encroachment, but also
encroachment uh in um and in
light.
There's also those measures of
um utility and IT infrastructure
resiliencies and other critical
infrastructure that at times are
not uh provided publicly because
they have a risk that is
classified to a military
mission.
On slide 5 is the list of the
Department of Defense's
legislative priorities, which
are largely in the soft
category.
Um
And New Mexico has already
increased.
Our value to the Department of
Defense and our annual report
card on a lot of those
legislative priorities is very
good.
So that is good news.
Um
In fact, New Mexico has either
already fulfilled, has partially
fulfilled or has bills currently
filed to address every single
one of those policy. There is an
increased pressure from the
Department of Defense for the
adoption of professional
interstate compacts, and those
will offer tremendous
opportunity to not only grow the
workforce in education and a
variety of medical specialties,
um, that goes beyond just
providing.
A priority or license
reciprocity to military spouses.
New Mexico is also in a great
position to continue addressing
the challenges around those hard
military values.
Um
Particularly with the
introduction of Madam
Chairwoman's house bills 158 and
159.
Um, and it's in these.
Efforts that I see the potential
need for the increased funding
that was requested by the office
for a contractual services uh
that would support and oversee
the intergovernment
intergovernmental agreements
with our defense communities
that would be.
The military base planning
commission would need to
formalize processes and
reporting procedures for project
evaluation and the expenditure
of those funds, um, and it would
also drive an in increased
engagement with local
governmental agencies uh which
would be reflected in that
increase in the travel budget.
I'm just not in a position today
to tell you how much of an
increase is actually appropriate
for the fiscal year under
consideration.
And so, um, it is my approach
moving forward to continue to do
the great work of the office and
the commission and identifying
what installations and
communities need.
Then build a strategy that can
be provided to you that is
synchronized across all the
stakeholders, local, state, but
also federal.
And in that collaboration, I'm
confident that we could identify
precisely the ways in which the
office would execute increased
resources.
Um, and put in place procedures
and frameworks that would be
necessary to report to this
committee.
In closing, I just appreciate
the opportunity to work together
with you, um, the elected
officials and the staff across
the state agencies to support
New Mexico's military
installations and communities,
the Department of Defense
remains it just an incredible
economic engine for the state of
New Mexico, um, but there are
outcomes there for all of New
Mexico that I think are very
valuable. I'm happy to answer
any questions you have.
Thank you.
Kind of
Just one question.
Can you give me the 2 house bill
numbers.
Uh, yes, Madam Chair and
Representative Pettigrew, those
are House Bill 158 and 159.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Thank
you.
Congratulations on your new
position. I know everyone's very
and coming from right from
coming the area, you know,
different things about us, um.
I'm carrying two of the bills.
I'm carrying the bills for this.
I'm the only veteran left in
the, in the house, but um, it's
also very important to me that
we keep our bases going, this is
really important, I, I, the, the
amount is, is, is pretty high. I
would like us to look.
Better fund it if we can fund
some of it, um.
We do have to, I'm gonna read
you our statements. We will be
taking the lower general fund
recommendation today knowing
that we are constrained, we do
this to make sure we have rooms,
know that there will be budgets
that need further general fund
adjustments, probably yours, and
we will be working with the
staff to look at those proposals
throughout the next couple of
weeks. We will give LFC and HAFC
staff specific budget
adjustments. So,
I recommend that we uh move the
LFC recommend.
You want to make a
Madam Chairwoman, I just wanted
to say thank you and I
appreciate the the look.
Right, um, we got a
recommendation, LFC
recommendation. Do I have a
second? Madam a second.
I can by a representative Baca.
I'll accept the motion for the
LFC recommendation. Thank you
for your presentation.
