Some of this is a pretty not a
very difficult budget so I think
I'll go ahead and Representative
no agency it's minutes here
sorry there you are just could
go ahead okay it's the
commission of public records and
the our folks.
We'll be presenting art Mr hits
then and miss Miller yeah my
saying it correctly.
And Mr Miller however we have
Cindy Montoya here from DFA
filling in for for Mr Miller but
pretty.
Testing you.
Sounds good doesn't it.
Okay go ahead ms Smith thank you
madam chair members of the
committee of joint here within
the month way up from DFA for
the state commission of public
records again agency code three
six nine a joint with me or from
the agency I have Rick Hendrick
state records administrator
Georgette Chavis a deputy state
records administrator and I
believe revenge Rubin is also on
here of Ruben Rivera and I
believe he is with the of
finance and administration
division.
so we'll start with the revenue
overall for the agency and this
can also be found in your volume
two documents on pages one
twenty two and one through one
twenty four.
I'm starting with the revenue
differences the legislative and
executive recommendation support
the same total revenue amount
for the agency which reflects a
nearly flat budget with FY
twenty two however the executive
recommendation funds an
additional forty nine point five
thousand dollars in general fund
revenues whereas the LFC
recommendations walks this
revenue with fund balance.
When looking at the base of both
the legislative and executive
recommendation support the
requested budget for all
categories well the person flat
with a nearly flat with FY
twenty two and both
recommendations support the
agencies requested increase for
contractual services cost which
was about US six point six
percent excuse me and this
includes increases for things
like rent as well as a contract
with a full time security guard
for the state records center and
archives facility here in Santa
Fe analysts have also come to
consensus on all performance
measures and targets and I'll go
ahead and handed over to sandy
Montoya for any additional
comments before we headed to the
agency thank you go ahead and
the thank you madam chair
members of the committee Jessica
did a really good job and cover
all of the changes I don't have
any additional comments and I
can turn it over to the records
administrator for the
presentation.
Go ahead.
The members of the committee my
name is Dr Kendrick some state
records administrator the state
records center and archives and
I appreciate the opportunity to
present our fiscal year twenty
twenty three budget
appropriation request and for
your continued support support
of our agency I would like to.
Make some introductions before
begin George this deputy state
representative straighter and
Ruben Rivera is our chief
financial officer they're part
of our highly qualified team
which recently completed its
fifth consecutive audit with no
findings.
Out of their work on behalf of
the people of New Mexico and
grateful for their attendance
and support today madam chair
members of the committee you all
appreciate the importance of
accurate record keeping and
providing access to the records
of state government in the
interest of public awareness and
open government I also know that
you appreciate the important
records that constitute the
historical patrimony of New
Mexico which we are privileged
to safeguard and make available
to the public.
Madam chair members of the
committee are FY twenty three
general fund appropriation quit
request just two million six
hundred and thirty six thousand
eight hundred dollars which is a
one hundred and ninety four
thousand two hundred dollar
increase over the FY twenty two
operating budget.
LFC DFA state budget division
and this committee have
instructed us to cover the cost
of our operating expenses.
Out of the agencies revolving
fund which has reduced fund
balance significantly the large
number of emergency rule filings
created by the public health
emergency have made it possible
for us to sustain our revenue in
our revolving fund as the COVID
nineteen pandemic recedes we
anticipate a sharp decrease in
the number of emergency filings.
The resulting reduction in
revenue all adversely affect our
ability to cover fixed costs not
only in FY twenty three but also
in future years therefore we
respectfully request that our
general fund appropriation
reflect the requested base
budget increased in order to
effectively operate the agency.
Madam chair members of the
committee this concludes our
presentation by staff and are
happy to answer your questions.
Thank you so much doctor
Hendricks before I begin to
quick housekeeping message
please make sure that your mikes
are are muted that I'm in David
Abbey I won't mention any names
but
Sometimes your your Mike is open
so go ahead and we'll get
started with the Representative
Brown and I'm being really
cognisant of raised hands now so
make sure you raise your hand on
the computer rather than raising
it in physically because I've
been chastised for not paying
attention.
Go ahead.
Thank you madam chair and this
question I believe is for for
doctor Hendricks I see here that
part of your budget includes
ranch and that there's there's
some programming here for seven
increases in rent and I'm just I
guess that what that means is
you're not entirely in the state
owned building but are you
renting space for records
storage somewhere.
Madam chair members of the
commission I'm I'm going to ask
a.
My W. that to respond to that
question.
Madam chair members of the
committee are we currently rents
space in Albuquerque fire
Albuquerque record center.
Okay thank you very much.
Madam chair and and then whoever
wants to take this what I I'm
looking at the performance
measures for your agency and I'm
specifically looking at is the
first item on page three sixty
nine and it talks about the
number of trainings offered to
state employees on the proper
management of from a public
records and that would be to be
in compliance with the public
records act.
So over the last several years
we've seen a decline in the
number of trainings and FY
twenty the actual number of
trainings I I guess the
performance measure was forty
five that decline the next year
to thirty one.
Over if we were in a pandemic
situation at the time FY twenty
two puts it twenty four
trainings and that it would
continue it twenty four for our
FY twenty three and that is the
recommendation so are we losing
anything in terms of compliance
with
making sure people are educated
or do you think this is
sufficient to have fewer
trainings.
madam chair members of the
commission the.
The I I think that we're
providing the adequate number of
training so of course that part
of the decline is a function of
the fact that we like to have
the trainings in person and we
haven't been able to do that
over the last two years we have
developed various ways of doing
it virtually but we have also.
Just recently well we had this
with all Makran we had to stop
again but we were actually
having some in person trainings
again and we will try to step
that back up when we when the
opportunity presents itself.
Okay.
Madam chair right I know that.
Trainings are really important
and I know people want to be are
compliant and I suppose if the
need arose for some impromptu
training or whatever that could
be made to happen that one
employees to be very comfortable
with their duties so that
concludes my questions thank you
madam chair.
Thank you Representative Brown I
don't see any other hands up and
so but madam chair yes ma'am
well you have the I was testing
you.
I snuck it up.
Thank you madam chair I do have
a question for.
Mr Hendricks and that relates to
revenue and I was wondering if
there's any discussion about
efforts to increase revenue for
the commission and I apologize
if you already addressed that.
madam chair members of the
commission I committee I am.
We don't really have any way to
increase revenue the revenue is
a function of
the money that comes in to pay
for of.
Items that are in the register
so that that's really how it
functions the when rules are
listed in in the register
there's a fee associated with
that so we don't have any way
I think I mentioned that because
of the very large number of
emergency rules there were a lot
of rule filings that happened
and so revenue increased when
that happened
There's also another thing that
happens is that is over the
course of an administration
you can actually chart the
number of rules that will be
created early in administration
in late in administration and
then if there's a second term so
the revenue is going to go up
and down based on basically roll
filings the other all only other
source of revenue that we have
is if if you are storing records
that are not permanent and will
never be transferred archives
there.
Records that have reached their
retention and.
You choose to waive them stored
with us then there is a session
id fe with that additional
storage beyond retention
it's fairly minimal
and then we do have the
opportunity to provide
archival quality material to
agencies that want to save
purchased boxes so but none of
those are really very elastic
the only one that really changes
in that produces signet
significant revenue is the
listing of rules in the register
so we don't really have any way
to end to increase that.
I have Jessica hit someone who'd
like to live.
Respond.
Madam chair members of the
committee thank you I just
wanted to speak on that for a
second Representative Dixon you
would be able to find
information about the amounts
charged of that that the
commission charges agencies for
publishing in the register on I
believe on page one twenty three
of your of all you to and this
notes that the amount that's
been charged has not changed
since two thousand seventeen and
currently stands at about three
dollars per column inch for
publishing and Register so those
rates are something that has not
been increased since two
thousand seventeen and and could
potentially be
could potentially be increased
at the commission well as though
they needed to increase their
revenue through that.
At thank you miss hits then I'm
and thank you chair that was my
only question.
Thank you and this goes not to
you Representative Dixon for
the.
Recommendation.
I thank you madam chair I would
recommend that to subcommittee
C. recommend the LFC our budget
recommendations.
Is there a secondary.
That manager.
Thank you is there any
opposition.
I don't see any opposition so
that motion carries thank you
very much.
Our next
of.
Committee is going to be number
three fifty four New Mexico's
sentencing commission with miss
raven and Mr Chavis I think.
Thank you madam chair okay thank
you who is the who is the person
that's going to be presenting
from the cut from the
Thank sentencing commission just
I don't know who that is Linda
Freeman executive director
should be on the on the year I
need to have some other staff
members with we want to present
but I'm sure she'll uh
introduced her when she gets
her.
Okay thank you go ahead and
okay.
As noted element LOC fiscal
analyst and my counterpart Ryan
Chavez from the executive are
here to present the differences
in the budget recommendations
for the sentencing commission I
would also like to direct you to
LFC is volume two pages one of
seven to one oh nine provisional
information on the LFC
recommendation.
I also like to note that the
this year LFC volume one did
include a section on cooperation
and coordination among criminal
justice partners and this
includes some work that's been
done by the commission or item
is currently being done by the
commission on data integration
this starts on page sixty one of
all you want if that's something
you're interested in taking a
look at thanks again now handed
over and let Brian do the rest
of this presentation thank you.
Right.
Madam chair and members of the
committee branch of this here
with DFA I'm gonna go over HSD
three fifty four.
The sentencing commission is
almost entirely funded through
general fund revenue the
executive recommendation
provided a flat base budget for
FY twenty three as well as an
expansion of a hundred twenty
two thousand point crime
reduction grant program
legislative recommendation
includes a fifty thousand dollar
increase in the base and fund a
hundred fifty thousand dollars
of the expansion.
I New Mexico's sentencing
commission has no FTE because
it's a four part time staff
members are employees of the
university of New Mexico.
The HSD contracts with you for
fiscal services NET equal to
nine percent of its budget or
administration and supplement
staff research with help from
students because of the
structure the agency's
operational costs are entirely
contained within the contractual
service category with this grant
funding accounted for in the
other categories.
for our performance analysts
have come to consensus on all
performance measures and targets
and now I'd like to turn it over
to John for more in marks.
Welcome mistreatment.
Elon I knew that if you don't
mind just just a couple more
comments as as Brian noted the
executive recommended in eight
hundred and twenty two thousand
dollar expansion for crime
reduction grant program that
would be recurring while the
legislative recommendation
included a hundred and fifty
thousand recurring for this
purpose but I wanted to make a
brief note about a special
appropriation request the
commission made they also
requested this expansion four
eight hundred twenty two
thousand dollars as a
nonrecurring special
appropriation and the executive
recommendation does support this
so that's a hundred and twenty
two thousand recurring in this
base budget in the eight hundred
twenty two thousand nonrecurring
as a special the LFC
recommendation actually includes
two million dollars nonrecurring
in special appropriations but
that's contingent on legislation
that expands the allowable usage
of the grants and would include
either expanding to either I
include developing and improving
coordination of services between
law enforcement agencies and
treatment programs or
establishing law enforcement
crisis intervention teams or
providing access to transitional
or reentry homes for individuals
recently released I or
developing or expanding data
driven policing program.
I'm that's all for me I'll hand
it over to Linda to make her
presentation thank you madam
chair thank you for Linda goes
forward I just want you all to
know that they occasionally will
call on somebody thinking it
somebody else just to test you
go ahead Linda.
Thank you madam chair members of
the committee.
I I do have a couple of slides
on that if I can share my screen
I will go over with you guys and
I'll keep it brief.
This.
State okay I believe you should
be able to see my screen now but
you have a.
Is the the title page
is everybody able to see the
screen before I proceed.
It's on okay sounds good so
just quickly there's been a lot
of discussion about the
statewide data integration
project and these are just some
of the things that we're working
on now one of the key elements
of the statewide data
integration project is getting
the state identification number
that is generated at the point
of arrests of biometric number
so one of the challenges we have
in the criminal justice system
is often times people have
various names they use various
aliases and dates of birth one
of the challenges as without a
biometric identifier when we
want to look at data across the
system it's very challenging
locally the department of public
safety and H. as the storm which
is an automated fingerprint
training process that happens
whenever rast assigns a number
and has historically assigned a
number that's called a state
identification number that
corresponds with the federal an
FBI number that allows us to
know that individual is that
individual process system what
we're focusing on now is getting
that the usage of that number
throughout the system so in this
current fiscal year we are
working with the administrative
office of the district attorneys
and the judicial information
division in terms of integrating
and matching the state education
members and past data
additionally we're working on
data quality assessment of the
information that NMSC has in our
historical internal database
which goes back well over twenty
years now.
We're continuing to work on
integrating on data from several
detention centers we have an MO
you with Roosevelt County and we
also have another partnership
that we haven't yet signed the
ammo you want but will I think
in the next couple weeks we
should have some kind of
agreement in place.
We're meeting bi weekly with a
judicial information division
and The New Mexico
yes I costs a teen who is who is
providing technical services to
the commission on this project.
and we did talk about the crime
reduction requests and I and you
can look at these later but
basically in FY twenty two and I
believe that missed right inside
comments also address this for
grants were funded with dates
misting hundred and seventy
seventy eight thousand dollars
and available the two that I
would just probably the
detention to our in in the
eighth district that's a new
problem solving court that is a
very data driven program that is
directed at
addressing domestic violence
that jurisdiction.
And then the fourth it's an
expansion of other specially
Courts to provide some physical
activity and gardening
enhancements to those projects
so that individuals can pick
activities that they would like
to do like exercise as well as
gardening when the weather is
nice like those are two of the
the things as well as some
hygiene products and various
things for for all program
participants.
So I'm just quickly in in
developing you know the
commission is working very
closely with the though it just
as Courtney councils to help
them develop programs that and
making application for a grant
for programs that address
specific concerns in their
communities in the instance of
the eight what they did was they
looked at the nine one one calls
their protective orders cases
filed just dismissals and
conviction data for a three year
period of time and they
determined that there was an
overall low conviction rate
relative to the number of
filings and I'm what one calls
and they identified that unit
domestic violence perpetrators
need a prompt response after
rest and an opportunity for
intervention after an immediate
crisis was needed in the
community so they prepare an
application and they were
awarded funding that created
this new domestic violence
treatment court that's aligned
with New Mexico treatment court
standards we do work very
closely with the administrative
office of the courts to make
sure the proper the types of
programs that we're finding our
in line with
With the treatment centers are
set by the courts I was
partially funded by the prime
I'm reduction grant act party
because of the of the limited
funding that we have available
but they were able to get house
County to also provide
additional funding.
So just a couple of some
articles that appeared in in the
town's newspaper about the
project
For FY twenty three in addition
to the expansion of the grant I
just want to briefly mention
that we are also working with
Representative Hochman Vigil for
a bill to introduce a bill that
would create a fund should crime
reduction grant at that would
allow us to separate our
operating budget from the monies
that are intended for the crime
reduction grant act and we feel
that creating separate from
would improve transparency and
ensure accountability for the
money that's appropriated would
also streamline our audit
process and we are asking for
non reverting fund and I realize
that you know that that
oftentimes that's that's
problematic or not popular but
what we feel is that it would
allow us greater flexibility for
the funded projects encounter
difficulties thank you continue
past the end of fiscal year.
We've already discussed our
expansion request and
mistreatment Mr Chavis to
explain the differences in the
two recommendations as well as
the the special appropriation
and I just want to say that we
did request the the special
appropriation because of their
one time appropriation because
what we wanted to make sure that
have both bases covered if it
was not in our base budget so it
wasn't that we were trying to
actually ask for it an increase
of like one point seven million
it's just
we were just kind of covering
both of but basically.
I do have some slides just about
ongoing commission work but I
know in the interest of time you
guys have lots of others to hear
so those are being in your
packet if your trance and the
last thing I do want to bring up
is we did receive a
appropriation last year that we
ask for the special language to
extend into FY twenty three
off for the criminal code update
at this point we've set up seven
subcommittees and I I have those
or working groups that are
outlined here and if you have
any particular questions I have
are deputy director Douglas
cover on the on on the the
weapon are with me as well as
our CFO and then Armstrong with
that I'll stand for questions.
Thank you so much miss Freeman
Freeman and that we get back
into the.
Main page and see if I have any
hands up for questions right now
let me look doesn't seem like I
have any questions Meredith you
do.
We can't hear you you are muted.
Thank you.
Thank you madam chair and thank
you is Freeman for The
presentation I my question was
actually about something that
you just mentioned and that was
the language to request
extending the appropriation.
and I just wasn't sure if that
language was in you know if we
have that language on our pages
if it's an H. B. to how that
works and so that might be a
question for just right and.
Thank you madam chan
Representative Dixon I believe
that language should be included
LFC is recommendation for a
special appropriations and that
should be outlined in.
One I don't know which pages on
at the moment but if you'd like
I can I can tell you.
That's it thank you thank you Mr
Evan at and that is sufficient I
just wanted to make sure that I
knew where it was I can look it
up so thank you and madam chair
I don't have any other questions
can I don't see any other hands
up so go ahead and do your your
thank you.
Representative Dixon.
Thank you madam chair I
Would move that the committee of
take the LFC recommendation.
Is there a second to that.
Also in at all Harry okay
is there any opposition to that
I don't see any opposition okay
you have a recommendation to go
to the full committee our next
item on the agenda is number
three six one the department of
information technology.
Ms Hickman and Mr Miller.
Thank you madam chair members of
the committee I'm again joined
by sending Montoya in place of
Simon Miller today from DFA but
will be covering the department
of information technology this
is the state your business unit
three six one apologies of your
volume two of the budget
recommendation pages are listed
in the pages one of fourteen
through one eighteen and then do
it also has some I. T. report
cards that are published in
volume one and these are pages
one sixty six or one seventy
five I'm and those cover both I.
T. projects housed at do it as
well as I do projects from other
state
I'm I'm joined today by Rajastan
pandemic the secretary we've
also got our CFO for the
department Andrea Martinez a
project manager Brenda president
and I believe we have a match
with the new broadband advisor
on as well for questions we'll
go ahead and start with the HSD
rollup page so this is covering
of the roll up of all the P.
codes.
And I will start by discussing
the revenue and base and then US
Indian I will trade off I'll
cover the first Pico chilled to
the next one and so on okay.
Also for revenue madam chair
members of the committee the
executive recommendation for
revenues for the department of
I. T. exceeds the legislative
recommendation by one point four
million dollars this includes
one point one million dollars in
general fund one hundred twenty
nine point four thousand and
other revenues and almost two
hundred fifty thousand and fund
balances these differences are
primarily due to personnel
differences as well as
recommended operating costs for
the office of broadband access
and expansion a new Pico that
was added this year.
I'm for the base the executive
recommendation exceeded the LFC
record by one point one million
for person on this is primarily
and the compliance of project
management program and the
office across.
The executive recommendation
also includes an additional two
hundred thousand dollars for
contractual services and a
hundred thousand dollars for
other costs within the office of
broadband on the LC did not
include these because they were
not included in the agency
request.
both recommendations support the
agencies requested other
financing uses of these are for
transfers to the agency's
appointment replacement fund
totaling eight point three
million.
and then if you look at the FTEs
count for the overall agency
you'll see that the LFC
recommended I your F. T. even
the executive and this is three
fewer than the request with the
executive did with F. TES they
funded the requested F. T. as
well as to additional that we're
not requests and then so this is
these are for the office of
broadband excuse me and then the
LFC recommendation re purposes
three existing FTE from another
program for the office.
And we'll talk a little bit more
about this FTE change when we
get to those peak hours.
Analysts have also come to
consensus on performance
measures and targets and looking
at the expansion request there
was an executive recommendation
for the request expansion that
exceeds the LFC wrecked by six
hundred eighty seven thousand
and this actually exceeds the
agency requests by five hundred
thousand to the executive funded
five hundred thousand more than
the agency asked for for the
office of broadband for
additional FTE in operating
costs.
I will go ahead and go to the
next P. pope which is program
support at P. seven seven one on
the next page and handed over to
Cindy for to go over the
speaker.
Okay thank you thank you madam
chair members of the committee
and Jessica I will briefly just
go over the changes I'm in
program support P. five P. seven
seven one there's no general
fund in this program and there
is a slight difference where the
LFC is under the executive
recommendation by nineteen
thousand and fund ballots.
In regards to the base the
executive recommendation is
slightly higher personal
services employee benefits and
that the nineteen thousand both
recommendations support the
agency requests and contractual
services and the other
categories and as well in
regards to performance measures
the analysts have both come to
consensus on all performance
measures and targets.
I will turn it back to Jessica
for the next program.
Thank you thank you madam chair
members of the committee will go
ahead and move to of P. seven
seven to the compliance and
project management program.
So for this program you can see
there are general fund revenues
as well as other revenue and the
executive recommendation for
general fund exceeded LFC by
three hundred and sixty five
point two thousand this is all
due to differences in funding
for personnel both
recommendations support the
people revenues from other
revenue sources looking at the
base.
Basically what the LFC
recommendation doesn't that
ships three general fund it up
to you from this program and
move them into the office of
broadband access and expansion
whereas with the executive does
is they funds the total requests
I've T. as well as of.
I apologize there of the
executive recommendation hold
person flat from FY twenty two
so they're not moving any
positions are not having any
positions here and this is
attributed to that three hundred
sixty five thousand both
recommendations reflect flat
budgets for all other
expenditure category so there
were no increases for contracts
other or other financing uses
and again we've come to a
consensus on performance
measures I'll just have to send
you for any additional comments
on this P. code and then to move
it on to enterprise services.
Thank you madam chair members
the committee just a brief no on
at this P. code the executive
did supporting agency requests
to keep the number of FTE flax
the agency has previously
reduced the F. T. E. in FY
twenty one from this program and
we believe that that reducing
the F. T. and the general fund
may have some sort of negative
impact on
the program itself by reducing
the cyber security support and
the project management office
supports.
Okay.
I'm moving on to the next P.
code which is enterprise
services that's P. seven seven
three again there is no general
fund in this program and the
executive recommendation is
higher than the LFC
recommendation by three hundred
and fifty nine thousand four
hundred and applies I'm sorry
excuse me in other revenues and
fund balance in the base the
legislative recommendation
increases the funding by five
hundred thousand for personal
services employee benefits and
the executive increases that
signing by higher amount of
eight hundred and fifty nine
thousand and applies a slightly
lower program vacancy rate all
of the LFC and the executive
recommendation support the
agency requests in the other
category and in regards to
performance measures the
analysts have both come to
consensus on consensus on all
performance measures and
targets.
Thank you thank you we'll go
ahead and move on to the next
key code this is the a and R.
I'm sorry equipment replacement
fund so this is P. seven eighty
four
the you can see that the
executive and the legislative
recommendations have no
differences both the LFC and
executive support the agencies
requested uses for the equipment
replacement fund and this
reflects a twenty three point
eight percent increase from FY
twenty two and this is because
the agency is increasing their
use the fund balance to fund
priority projects for the
equipment replacement fund.
And then we'll go ahead and move
on to the broadband access and
expansion P. code P. seven
eighty nine I'll just talk a
second about this P. code and
then handed over to CNB for
additional comments as well as
you can see it in a P. X. seven
eighty nine this is a new code
of Pico that was requested by
the agency to support the
operations of the office of
broadband of the executive
recommendation for general fund
revenues exceeds LFC by six
hundred eighty seven thousand
and it also exceeds agency
requests by five hundred
thousand to support additional
FTE so the HSD only requested a
million dollars for this the
executive funded one point five
million where is the LFC for
purpose some of those F. T. for
a total budget of eight hundred
thirteen thousand and general
fund on the executive
recommendation is higher than
LFC by three hundred eighty
seven thousand and this reflects
the difference in FTE executive
recommend seven F. T. E. which
is two more than requests where
is the LFC re purposes three
from the other program and the
executive just adds all new
positions over the LFC wrecked
three of these are re purposed
two of them are new whereas for
the executive all of them are
new positions.
the executive recommendation
also exceeds LFC for contractual
services by two hundred thousand
this is for additional
consultation and I. T. services
and then is also over the LFC by
a hundred thousand and other
costs to support other operating
initiatives and this is part of
the five hundred thousand that
was above the agency requests
although had handed over to do
for additional comments for
officer broadband.
You madam chair and members of
the committee I just wanted to
make a quick note on the
additional FTE the executive
added did adds to additional FTE
in funding to assist then you
division and then you the bureau
in achieving its goals quickly
in regards to broadband access
across the state of New Mexico
that's why you'll see that
difference between the agency
request and the executive
recommendation that
And then the executive did not
move three FTE from one of the
programs to this so you that's
where the seven total in U. S.
T. E. comes from.
I will go ahead and handed over
to the cabinet secretary for his
presentation and any comments.
Go ahead Sir thank you madam
chair and members of the
committee thank you Jessica and
Cindy.
madam chair thank you for the
support and the opportunity for
us to be here I would like to
start with a brief introduction
of my team
the have
match Schmidt who is our new
broadband advisor for the state
we have Andrea who's our CFO for
department of information
technology and we have
Representative is schools or
special projects manager so with
that team
Roger that's B. the cabinet
secretary will continue with the
presentation and Andrea would be
shutting her screen with a
presentation back and we will
continue with the presentation.
And next slide please Andrea.
Sorry I'm not used to sharing
with Sam just need one moment to
get it situated here.
Thank you yes.
Okay everybody can see just The
presentation.
Thank you thank you.
So what does the next slide.
Okay so in this presentation
back for that audience here we
have of the twenty twenty to
legislative session agency will
review and budget priorities
followed by agency goals of
rarities FY twenty budget
overview are we want to talk a
little bit more about the
complaints and project
management program and the
general fund that related to
that
followed by office of broadband
access and expansion yeah the
difference between LESC of
course is the executive
recommendation this the
broadband access and expansion
what were you.
Followed by FY twenty two
sources and uses for Office of
rabbit and after that we'll
stand for any questions.
So I can be more want to slide
three thank you so here are FY
twenty one through FY twenty for
the strategic goals for the
department of information
technology right off the top you
would see a we are focusing on
cyber security capabilities
specifically we want to make
sure that are out to the best
practice Oct to exceed the best
practices out there when it
comes to cyber security
capabilities and practices
following that B. one A. and
hands state broadband
technologies and support
capabilities and that as you can
see we have a new broadband
director use dirty do get this
process started so you will add
more insight into that as we
move through the presentation.
Following that we have.
Okay.
thank you.
What is the next slide our
agency Brad HBs aligned with our
strategic goals so be focused on
cyber security public safety
radio communication system and
brought back next slide please.
Okay so here's our FY twenty
budget will review so as a.
Jessica and Cindy indicated be
listed them by peacoat the seven
seven one is our program support
that is the HSD and other and
years of work functions
and the need that the seven
seven two is the complaints and
project management function for
our for everybody's I've been is
the project management function
and the compliance aspect
associated with that does are
provided the complaints what
we're safe will work any capital
projects on any projects were
certain dollar value that can
have a impact on the state and
in addition to that
cybersecurity is far off that be
part following that is gonna be
seven seven three ****
enterprise services they provide
enterprise level services they
that it be network services our
office leases office three sixty
five things of that nature so
those are the ones that come out
of the seven seven three seven
eight four is the equipment
replace fund one that typically
funds that enterprise and
shatter along with it B. seven
eight nine as we talk about is
the new people that was
established for office of
broadband and we have the
numbers there for your reference
can be moved to slide six
please.
So the company project
management program be seven
seven do will that's the one the
general fund funded option for
the department of information
technology
the phone number operation as
you should be statically funded
enterprise project management
office and followed by cyber
security all EPM opposition
which Representative and rice
project management are currently
filled audit in that group then
process ask the speed of the LFC
recommendation are would be hard
on as it uses the personal
services and then why benefit by
the end of the sixty five
thousand I handed away the three
FTE position so we'll be really
hurting their if we went to pull
that that recommendation the LFC
report was those three position
from do with the office of
broadband access and expansion
however given the nature of the
business that we do with them
that people out it will
significantly value our
effectiveness over the program
compliance and cyber security so
when we are next to I it also
reduces the general fund in the
IBM all would rates has the
potential to increase because of
some because of these production
we need to move those are
indirect costs to for a coverage
elsewhere UBM all is our the
only for the general fund and as
I indicated that some of these
are not included and that the
what's right structures so I
just want to present the general
impact analysis on you know what
would happen if you let go of
this.
So moving on to slide number
seven.
Here is a detailed overview of
you know what the.
staff is for peace seven seven
two which is the complaints and
project management program as
you can see what are we had
eighteen that and they can see
is our I am going to wait and
see if it is forty seven point
eight for FY twenty two of the
budget and vacancy rate is
twelve point four so based on
that we are supposed to hold to
all from and currently to level
is three so what regarding that
three we already have one
position advertised and the
other one is being taken in doc
coming a rapid higher which is
tomorrow and
Followed by cyber security we
have we have to use of that
include
the cyber security personnel
including the chief
information security officer and
followed by geospatial **** that
we do with the GIS mapping that
is potentially being used by
this agency including office of
the broadband and that are
project we don't know project
management function to test
seven and out of that seven
other project management staff
there's one dedicated project
manager will currently working
and providing the services
for broadband.
So can we go to the number eight
please thank you so this are at
this point I would like to
transition this to mac rose our
broadband advisor to the state
Matt.
Thank you Secretary in thank you
chairman members it's a pleasure
to join you today I'm management
on the broadband advisor helping
I established the office of
broadband access expansion and
the slide before you'll see the
P. seventy nine comparison with
the LFC recommendation versus
the executive recommendation let
me just review quickly the
executive recommendation one
point five million dollars to
help stand up our office of
broadband access expansion with
nearly a million dollars I'm
going to payroll and employee
benefits additional three
hundred and twenty five thousand
dollars going towards
contractual services will speak
to and I in specific detail in a
moment and then nearly a hundred
eighty thousand dollars for
other expenses whether it's a
local committee planning
capacity building or other
requests that value to our local
communities and so that's the
the one point five million
dollar budget you'll see a
difference over LFC
recommendations of six hundred
eighty seven thousand on the
next slide will bring to life
what we anticipate with a a
fully functioning office of
broadband in for the past decade
or so I've been involved in at
the state level in helping
establish state offices of
broadband I truly we are in a
moment where funding from the
federal and state levels as well
as a programmatic support and in
public interest is at a peak and
so we're looking forward to
standing up an office it's
commensurate with the challenges
in the the capital funding on
the the related programming that
will be coming to us and so when
you look at that the person
break down we have a million
dollars to go to this in a
recommendation a director
position and assistant director
position in additional staff I'm
dealing with grants
administration requests
reporting and compliance with
the a lot of federal funding
coming down to the state level
on there will be a lot of
reporting in requests compliance
work from in state level officer
broadband networks in two
directions one reporting to the
federal government and also
making sure that our grantees
are in compliance with what.
State and federal requirements
so we want to make sure that
we've got the requests in the in
the compliance capacity
established in addition to that
GIS and mapping central to the
question of broadband is where
it is and where it is not in
mapping is incredibly important
the better the mapping on the
better the outcomes when it
comes to broadband investment so
we want to invest in that with
our staff in addition digital
equity inclusion on the federal
infrastructure investment jobs
act included almost two point
seven billion dollars for
digital equity inclusion on this
is a first ever in an
opportunity for for state
governments to stand up digital
equity and inclusion capacity so
we like to put some resources
behind that to prepare for the
arrival of those funds likewise
region technical assistance for
our communities these last two
examples the digital equity
inclusion the outreach technical
assistance those should be the
first to be cut for an office of
broadband they can be ramped up
to provide additional value to
community stakeholders I can't
tell you how much we value that
from a holistic approach to an
office of broadband having the
ability to invest in staff
committed to digital equity
inclusion and outreach to the
communities to make sure that
they're in a position to get the
most out of capital grant
programming or related program
it adds value to that investment
so in addition to the staff
which I I just spoke to
professional services accounts
for five hundred thousand
dollars this one point five
million dollar budget request
all right we work I don't into
Senator.
Areas of of of complementary
contribution first technology
integration a lot of the federal
funding has a a preference or a
for for fiber integration across
the state with its last mile or
middle mile but in addition to
that there are emerging
technologies all around the
state that we want to take full
stock of incorporate them into
our investment into our our
broadband programming and in our
vision for how do you connect
all homes businesses community
anchor institutions around the
state of New Mexico so investing
in that capacity that subject
matter expertise and technology
integration is really important
in addition middle Mylan back
call it sick clear need for the
state of New Mexico if you look
at that the middle Mylan back
call assets in our neighboring
states around the country we
like to invest in this both with
the technology integration and
the middle mile back called a
peace offering support to other
agencies and departments is
something that we would like to
get out of that investment let
alone making sure that we've got
an office of broadband that is a
fully functioning in both spaces
and offering support not only to
our fellow departments but to
local governments and
communities around the state and
then in addition to that it's
really important again the
mapping Kamal component and as
we say it feel validation when
we start investing in broadband
deployment making sure that the
work that we are granting our
grantees to do.
It is getting an up spec you can
do that internally and you can
do that for professional
services contracts in my
experience I think it's good to
have a capacity in both ways in
its accounted for here both
through staff and professional
services contracts and then
finally external communication
and outreach I as I mentioned
earlier I think that I state
office of broadband can take a
top down approach to drive
investment committees or we can
flip that script in really
empower local communities in our
tribes to take an active role in
establishing a broadband rations
and making a reality in order to
get the most out of that we need
to invest in that in the office
of broadband in so you'll see
that accounted for both in terms
of staff and professional
services making sure we're doing
everything we can to empower
local communities to take
advantage of this truly historic
moment in the final point oh
point I'll mention is planning
capacity building grants not
accounted for in this budget
request nonetheless it's
something that we take you know
great pride in doing well at the
state level we think it has a
lot of value to to getting the
most out of a capital investment
for broadband expansion in
something we like to do more of
in the future and so I was
looking for opportunities to to
work with our local communities
to build that capacity the local
level to help them planned to
put the local and regional
levels but we do not have a room
in this budget request for that
at this time certainly something
that you might hear from just
down the road so the next slide
we'll speak to our expenditures
to date you can see a five
hundred thousand dollar
operating budget for fiscal
twenty two of that we have
nearly twenty thousand dollars a
hundred ninety two thousand
committed to our payroll and
employee benefits we have to
contracts in the work force for
professional services accounting
for an estimated a hundred and
twenty thousand we certainly
could see more contracts in a
short is a the next several
weeks as we build out our team
and certainly would like to add
some some staff as we can and so
we're in a position right now
where we do expect to have a
budget rolling over from fiscal
twenty two to fiscal twenty.
Three nonetheless the office of
broadband is poised to grow to
meet the needs of both in terms
of the capital investment that
we're seeing coming from the
federal government the state
resources that can put into
place here and also meeting the
needs of our communities and
this time it's incredibly
important as we all now I to
expand connectivity around the
state in order to do that we
want to put it a team together
at the asa broadband to rise to
that level so with that said I I
think the last slides are our
final slide.
What.
If there are any questions for
the secretary of myself would be
happy to address them thank you
Matt thank you madam.
So.
go ahead Sir madam chair and
members of the committee be
stand by for questions thank you
so much
I am looking for hands up for
questions from anyone and I see
Representative Anderson.
I don't see on the other hand
but that could go okay then
Representative Brown.
Go ahead Representative Anderson
I'll follow I'll keep looking
thank you madam.
Madam chairman can you hear me I
sure can okay well my of having
a bit of technical difficulty so
of I don't can you see me we can
see you
but I can't see you okay
I have a question and that the
was to the secretary of.
And that is I I appreciate your.
Presentation but none the less I
continue to hear some concepts
that I didn't understand and one
of the first question much I
think go to the LFC analyst and
say that I didn't hear the
Presentation on how this agency
is funded for its seventy six
million dollars question.
Madam chair representative
Anderson I apologize for not
specifying so the HSD is funded
through general fund revenues of
and is also funded through of
the rates that it charges
agencies for services and so
those would be enterprise rates
and those would be counted in
your other revenues column I
don't know if CFO Andrea
Martinez has anything to add
about the that the agency is
funded I I think that sufficient
it it The presentation I'm
looking at is your sheet and
that it it shows up LFC general
fund it a million for thirty six
and and I realize that maybe a
whole lot of the sixty three
million other funds.
could be general fund as well is
that correct.
In other words it's general fund
because that's the agents that's
where the agency that's paying
it got it from.
Madam chair representative I
don't believe that's correct I
but I believe the CFO might have
some more clarity on that I
apologize okay.
Good afternoon madam chair
members of the committee I'm so
the only
Program in the department that
is general fund it is P. seven
seven two
current fleet we are requesting
an expansion for the office of
broadband the remaining funds
come from the enterprise and is
generated through our rates.
for operating funds is that is.
You it's on you're keeping the
answer sample and I'm trying to
ask the question is simple and
it's just wanted to clarify in
my mind how much general fund
money is in here and let's take
a state agency we heard again
out like game and fish yes well
shoot their bad example of let's
think of a general fund agency.
It that derive a whole bunch of
their budget general fund and if
they come to you to do up
services.
It would be indirectly General
Fund from that to that agency
coming over to you as other
revenues that's what is yes
member madam chair members of
the committee representative
Anderson so yes each agency you
know it depends on their funding
structure and so we don't
generally track we know which
agencies have general fund which
agencies have federal funds but
I think that each agency would
have to specifically answer that
question.
Okay thank you thank you that
the perfect answer up I just got
a message on my screen up my
batteries running low and it's
been plugged in all day so if I
disappear you must move on
without me there was a term use
middle of middle middle mile
back all in and I didn't
understand the context that that
Khan will one I didn't
understand what the cons what it
means but to I didn't understand
how that is in your purview of
so little additional information
please on middle mile back fall
madam chair and members of the
committee I'm gonna request
match maybe speak to that.
Go ahead.
Madam chair and members great
question in sorry I threw some
jargon at you today but it's
important targets in so when you
think of the internet which
connects homes businesses
community anchor institutions
around the state around the
country it's really a series of
connecting local networks in so
when you expand the internet to
to include new homes businesses
communities it's an expansion
those local networks but when
you think of the internet the
World Wide Web what what
connects us to the rest of the
world is making sure that those
local networks are connected
everybody else in so there's a
couple of terms the really
important for this conversation
last mile refers to that
connective itty to those
physical locations like the
homes the businesses the
community anchor institutions
the capital for instance for
your all joining us from today
that's a last mile connection to
a local network connecting your
local network to the broader
world the World Wide Web the
internet requires middle mile
infrastructure.
You so an analogy that's apt is
if you think of our
transportation system you've got
interstate highways you've got
state highways you've got local
roads in so they all connect
together to help us get from
point a to point B. or CD any
the point here is we've got to
invest in both in order to make
sure that we can connect the
World Wide Web to the internet
to the rest of the world in so
it's a balance between investing
in middle mile infrastructure
and last mile connectivity it's
going to put New Mexico in a
position to again achieve our
goals connecting homes
businesses community anchor
institutions with the rest of
the world and with each other
thank you for that answer
because I did understand it my
next question follow up to that
is how this is tied to this
expensive brought broadband
application.
That we're moving forward with
at a rapid speed I mean how does
that tie into that road system
you describe sure when you when
you think of the the challenge
of getting connectivity's every
last home in us any state
because this truly is a a
challenge that you know presents
itself really never state of the
country it's important that you
make that investment efficient
and effective and there's a
couple.
Who.
One is to be subsidizing or
funding that last mile
connection to the actual homes
on the businesses the committee
anchors in addition to that or
alternatively you can also find
those connections between the
World Wide Web in that local
network which can in turn make
the last mile connection more
efficient more effective for
perhaps a little broadband
provider to make in so it's that
it's that compliment that really
makes a lot of sense for state
office of broadband to try to to
balance and strike investing
that last mile connection to the
homes the businesses we want to
serve but also making sure that
those local networks are above
the reach out to the broader
internet in a relatively
efficient effective manner to
there are costs from broadband
providers in extending that that
connectivity to the last you
know location on a given street
in also in connecting their
local networks to the broader
internet in so because of these
challenges that have plagued you
know communities in states our
country for the past two decades
in achieving universal
connectivity it's really
important that the state the
federal government our local
communities invest in the
broadband infrastructure with
our broadband provider community
so that we're able to extend
this network on these networks
to homes businesses community
anchor institutions quite simply
it's not getting done alone we
have to have with their public
private partnerships or
collaboration or public subsidy
of some kind to drive this
investment in that some that's
what's brought about this
historic investment through the
American rescue plan act in the
infrastructure investment jobs
act nationally nearly a hundred
million that I'm sure nearly a
hundred billion dollars invested
in broadband in the last year
and so it's it's a historic
opportunity for states for
communities around the state to
take advantage of in in actually
solving challenge me to goal in
move forward on to the next
challenge is ubiquitous reversal
connectivity that's something we
can.
Chief together.
Thank you for that answer when
we talk about this historic
opportunity I think to myself
well broadband is a historic
opportunity either do it right
or do it wrong and I know that
something use are much stuff
think about all the time but it
did of taking it back to a New
Mexico employer there is a New
Mexico employer who has I
believe the idea of low orbital.
connection of putting
objects in the lower but then
using that to bring broadband
to.
Unserved underserved locations
it M. I. sort of on the right
track here and it really gets
into.
Is broadband provider a simple
one type of technology being
being offered by Senator or is
it a maze of technologies being
offered by providers for.
You're on to the answer there
are a variety of different
providers that offer
connectivity to the internet and
this is in every evolving your
space in it used to be just like
you have with your work rural
telephone you know cooperatives
are or the Anna are is that it
that investment in in copper
wire to your homes to have
connectivity for your telephone
well it is is technology
involves you could you could
connect to the internet using
you know that medium well as
band with needs increased
focus shifted towards perhaps
coaxial cable or fiber fiber
optics but it decisional no
interest real technologies such
as low earth orbit satellites in
others are part of the
conversation today in in without
getting into the weeds too much
because I think I'm probably are
giving you more more than you're
asking for the point is there
are a lot of funding streams for
different kinds of technologies
in the point that I would make
for this group or in any
audience is that it's going to
take an all hands on deck
approach for the state of New
Mexico to meet its goals there's
not one single approach is going
to work everywhere for everyone
and for that reason we have to
be open minded and going to
strike the right balance between
technologies in I think you know
parent our our state based
approach with the communities
you know vision for its own
broadband connectivity the local
providers that are in the area
in in what sort of solution
works well at that local level
in so you probably hear me
saying this a lot in the in the
months and years ahead but
that's the balance that we want
to strike again it's an all
hands on deck approach when it
comes to technology and we
welcome all kinds of investment
in the state of New Mexico.
Well Sir I thank you very much
for that answer I wish you the
very best I looked to the
further reports and of where we
what is the status of New
Mexicos broadband plan with the
federal government.
Yeah.
I would another pointed all
stresses because of this
historic investment that we saw
last year federally we are
awaiting all states are awaiting
guidance interim role in final
rule for the administration of
those funds in so we we just
last week receive funding in
this applies to all states
around the country final word
from the US department of
treasury regarding its American
rescue plan act investment in
broadband in so the point is
these conversations are starting
we can anticipate where the
dollars are going to go and how
but it's important for us also
to I think you strike the right
balance again it's balance
between making investments that
we know we can make now but also
awaiting final Elise guidance if
not the final rule from our
federal funders in so when it
comes down to a plan there is a
requirement for a five year plan
for through and the
infrastructure investment jobs
act for all states in order to
leverage their full share of
federal funding in so whether
it's a three year plan for the
state of New Mexico on debt
operates on its own or part of a
broader five year plan that's in
response to federal funding
requirements we want to make
sure that we're doing that work
I think that the challenge for
us right now though is again
that balance how detailed we get
right now knowing that there's
still a lot of unknowns
regarding the federal funding
we're in balancing that with I
think everyone's interest of
setting up a framework for how
we're going to proceed and I'll
just mention folks in in
compliments to the legislature
for creating the connection New
Mexico council last year we're
holding our first meeting
tomorrow in is directed by
statute that council is is going
to servant instrumental role in
making sure that everything that
the officer broadband access and
expansion does is open to the
public fully transparent in that
counts is going to help us not
only stand up on the framework
for the connect New Mexico
broadband grant program but also
get specific with regards to how
that fund is gonna work in how
it fits into a very specific
three or.
Five year plan in meeting our
state goals of universal
broadband access thank you Mr
Schmidt we have several other
people waiting to ask questions
madam chair that concluded my
question I wish that then great
luck as well as a secretary
thank you very much thank you.
Thank you and I lost my original
list but this is what I have now
Sariñana yeah brown and Garcia
is that correct.
Okay go ahead.
Thank you madam chair and thank
you for the presentation
gentleman it to me to see you
again Mister Smith and secretary
some of them okay you can I
heard from you and I committee
during the interment and right
now hearing about everything so
couple questions as far as the
FTEs so I'm the Legisla- biggest
LFC wants to re purpose some
FTEs from another from
compliance and project
management is that correct yeah
so this compliance in project
management deal with cyber
security do they deal with that
within that cybersecurity is
part of compliance and project
management functions yes it is
located so if we take it from
there if LFC took it from there
wouldn't be hurting our
compliance I mean right now we
have a whole school district
down and the kids are in school
because of cyber security so or
that is so definitely it will
diminish in terms of what what
we can find it will reduce our
capabilities are you in the over
arching complaints specter right
either V. project management our
cybersecurity RGS mapping out
anything under the so definitely
our ask would be to our support
is in providing the best
possible cyber security measures
and project management and
compliance measures are not only
just for us but for the state as
a whole because this function is
the enterprise function and when
we do certain things the impact
as way to be honest it saw Milo
that would be our request so we
person is probably not a good
idea at this point in time that
is correct.
Members of the chair do you mind
if I ask you to that for just a
second go ahead thank you so
much of Madam chair
representative Sarinana thank
you for your question I just
wanted to point you to the the
PS help for the agency which
should be the last piece of the
last page of your packet and you
know what that from the LFC is
perspective you know we're not
budgeting.
The specific FTE you know we
don't budget at the FTE level
we're budgeting at the overall
kind of category level and so
we're not you know we're not
stating that they should you
know take out of that
cybersecurity fund but if you
look in called let's see column
Hey your of PS coke for the
compliance project management
program you'll see a funded
vacancy of about nine hundred
thirty eight thousand and this
is however I do want to note
this doesn't include the the new
hire that the CFO mentioned that
was recently of brought on but
what the LFC recommendation
basically would do would be to
reduce that funded vacancy by
about three hundred and fifty
six thousand I'm sorry three
hundred sixty five thousand for
that re purposing of FTP and so
it would be radically the the
agency would have the discretion
to decide what to do would be re
purposed they would be able to
you know request additional
positions with DFA but for the
most part were you know we're
looking at that funded vacancy
and that would really be reduced
by a little less than half based
on this re purposing so I just
wanted to mention so madam chair
and members of the committee
just to add to that so that body
and have a general context
around that I'm coming from
that do it is comparatively
speaking it's a smaller a
midsize function and compared to
other state agencies our last
year we took such a significant
at once again I'm gonna repeat
this multiple times not one not
two but the last you give away
thirty seven positions thirty
seven position out of the two
hundred some employees funds
right that took a significant
hit for us we are having
difficulty in hiring resources
because technical resources are
are become by that is a huge
wave of resignations and and
people moving away from what
they're what whatever job they
want to do so all those
constraints taking away the more
research.
And but significantly affect not
just the project management
functions but that impact of
that would be felt across the
table system with the department
of information technology and
the state ID ecosystem so I I
cannot over emphasise anymore.
Thank you.
I'm sorry what do you have
anything else to do I do
so so the exact but what's madam
chair so the executive wants to
give you three and that the
legislative wants to repurpose
right that but what's happening
so basically all I am saying is
we want to keep what we have
earlier right maintain status
quo on the side of the house but
then find Office of the
broadband my a that that
division connected at the
administrative support level
whatever they need brand new net
new so that way there's no
confusion from taking from one
pot and putting it in a
different spot.
So just keeping the separation
whatever we had yeah can we want
to continue with what the status
quo as far as doing this concern
and net new for this of
Representative.
Thank you thank you I'm madam
chairman madam chair the other
thing was I think I heard
executive person say that
Broadband at they wanted to the
goal as quickly as possible we
want to get our broadband out as
quickly as possible we and and
the when you think about that as
a teacher there were sixty six
thousand kids who students who
didn't have internet so we need
to move this as quickly as
possible we need to give Mr
Smith and and the whole do it as
much support as we can because
our kids need to have what they
need to be successful and the
internet plays a huge part of
that so I'm hoping we can
provide you as much as we can to
get that out there because our
kids are suffering are ready and
we we have to help them so thank
you thank you both thank you
madam chair.
Thank you and now.
Representative Brown followed by
Representative Garcia yes thank
you madam chairman so I I think
I'm coming from the same
perspective as Representative
Sariñana who just spoke about a
concern that possibly re
purposing those three FTEs would
be detrimental to do it as a
department
I'm I'm all for creative
solutions and pitching pennies
but I think when we're starting
up this basically this brand new
office and the need is great for
that we don't want to short
change the the staff that we're
working on it so I I would like
us to look at that maybe a
little closer I want to ask and
I guess this would be for Mr
chair Schmidt madam chair
during the special session that
we just concluded there was a a
list of shovel ready I guess
you'd call last mile connection
projects that need to happen for
parts of the state that are
either not yet served or under
served.
I know some legislators sent a
letter to to your office asking
for our money to like I guess
and that was in place at the
time to be to be used for
completing that west.
Does your current budget request
included
taking care of those needs.
Representative night chair
members thank you for the
question and I I the answer
would be yes and I think while
the state were having a meeting
and and trying to to put that
recommendation to accent your
later today and so it's a very
timely question and you that I
think there are just a point
it's worth making sure we're
there is funding streams and
also programs for expanding
broadband access the reference
one we want to make sure that
we're we're in sync with all the
investments being made and so
that's on my radar and it's
something that that that we're
considering seriously.
Okay.
And then just it just kind of a
clarification for my sake madam
chair Mr Schmidt so the art of
money that we dealt with during
the special session
that is basically was put into
the general fund and that's what
we were saying for your budget
for twenty three is that correct
that's correct for the capital
side moving forward okay thank
you thank you madam chair.
You're welcome and
Representative Garcia.
Thank you madam chair thanks for
the presentation.
Of both representative round
representative are not about
touched on how much we need go
but but for kids.
It is you know I represent the
rural iglesias district in the
state of New Mexico thank.
What are your plans for reaching
out to these people that don't
even have running water in their
houses what the plan and what we
gonna do.
Chairman members great question
and I think when you when you
look at that the dire need and
the most rural of rural areas
around the state around the
country there's not there's not
one single approach that that
that this gonna work everywhere
and so I think being open minded
to the technology I think
working very hard to engage
local communities in folks in
these areas that are are truly
underserved.
It's important in I I think to
the point about community
engagement we don't want to
assume that there's a technology
there's approach that's going to
work or be preferential for
communities are are least server
completely uninsured in so
working on that engagement again
trying to strike that balance
between a a very specific state
driven plan and also giving our
local communities the
opportunity to weigh in with
their own visions you make the
those broadband versions of
reality that's that balance that
we want to strike in so I I I
truly mean this if there are any
suggestions from from members on
communities that would welcome
you gauge it with the office of
robin I would really welcome
that that you know that that
conversation in that as we move
forward I think it's engaging
both communities are broadband
provider community and those
providing the service in many
cases in trying to to think of
innovative approaches that can
leverage well public funds with
the federal or state to partner
with local or private funds to
drive out the expansion.
Madam chair Mister Smith what do
respect I've heard that over and
over and then try to do it but
it's not happening we're giving
these people these rural
communities lip service they
don't need of services they need
actual things done and I've
heard this of the secretary
presented in front of us madam
chair couple months ago and it
just Santo Domingo asking what
his plan was and at that point
he did have a plan was federal
money.
What plan do we have to use
federal money so all people are
sure be cool the not just urban
New Mexico sure I just rural New
Mexico or front to New Mexico is
being completely left out of
this picture and we need a plan.
To move ahead with these things
your question.
The sentiment behind at because
I know that for the last twenty
years unserved communities
around the country have have
failed to see the level of
service that they do they
deserve for the basic access
that they deserve what's changed
we've gotten off to broadband
we've got historic federal
funding we've got the
expectation that we're going to
solve this connectivity
challenge that's what's changed
we've never been in a position
the state of New Mexico or any
others where the funding is
materializing to solve the
challenge in to meet our goals
of universal connectivity so
that's what's changed I think in
terms of the plan I just want to
reiterate this temp to my
thinking it's incredibly
important that we strike that
balance between the state
directing we're dollars go in we
empower local communities in the
for broadband providers that are
out there operating investing in
their own networks to have a say
in the in the conversation to
and so as we wait for federal
guidance on the use of capital
projects fund dollars which is
putting the final rule last week
or the use of the infrastructure
investment job act fund sixty
five billion dollars right there
as we wait for that federal
grants for that detail
engagement is something we
definitely can do and that's why
I I think it's important for us
all to work together on and.
In those countries.
For which their voices have not
been heard I'm
allergy is suitable for.
Yeah I'm sorry you've been
fading in and out the sly
apologize for that well the
broadband technology.
Are not immune from these
challenges.
in any event I I I take that
sentiment to heart
Representative and in we'll do
everything that we can do well.
Make the most of this moment and
I think that starts with
engagement the committee level
and in in putting the resources
in place to make that engagement
turned into running connectivity
for all madam chair and Mr Smith
and Mr secretary.
You see what you're saying.
We're not have this conversation
next year.
And with the same outcome.
Do keep in mind on your plan.
Do not leave urban New Mexico
all of your plans is it time I
hear anything about anything
madam chair the presenters is
always Albuquerque Santa Fe Los
crucis.
Else kinda has you know gets put
on second plate or well the back
burner Schlueter Representative
rule board considers a money you
know because of my constituents
are just as important and then
the conditions in the state
thank you you madam chair I have
one more person now and that's
Representative Dixon.
I thank you madam chair my
question is about the the money
that was allocated last session
you know I I think that it was
in the range of a hundred
million dollars for broadband
expansion and I'm just wondering
what
can you share a little bit of
the progress on how that money
has been spent.
Sure the same legislation or
legislation it moved last year
in the twenty twenty one session
also included the establishment
of the to connect Mexico council
and be connecting Mexico
broadband grant program in so
I'll tell you just in the last
month we've seen the answer
broadband move with excuse move
with that contracts we have our
first meeting of the connecting
Mexico council tomorrow I'll
additional folks I think in the
in the in the next several
months ahead what you see out of
the office of robin is going to
change dramatically in so I I
think it's important from my
perspective.
Recently entering this
conversation on that we we do
give in all respects that to the
connect New Mexico council allow
the council to convene I think
through the the aspects of the
connect New Mexico running grant
program they're important to
them and then with that
structure start moving dollars
in so I know we're all eager to
get these dollars moving I have
full faith that that that will
be making a lot of progress in
the next Senate district gets
together to talk about broadband
we'll have some projects to
point to.
Madam chair do you mind if I
speak on that as well this call.
Thank you Representative Dixon I
would just like to point you to
our volume one documents the
report cards on page one seventy
five there is a report card for
the last quarter of FY twenty
one on the state broadband
program where you can find some
additional details I'm at that
time you know more of a
management mentioned the recent
US spending of the appropriation
for staffing however before that
there was no spending currently
for that about a hundred eleven
million that was appropriated
and then there was an additional
five hundred thousand that do it
received specifically for
staffing for the office of
broadband we had you know
recommended holding off until we
actually have staff for the
office of broadband however as
secretary seven down and
management mentioned and I
believe in their presentation
they noted that some of their
current employees are currently
doing kind of double duty and so
they went and used part of that
funding I believe the heart of
the new I I apologize I don't
have the amount on the but they
use some of that to spend four
person that is forty currently
working on the office of
broadband just so you're aware
so they do have a little bit
more about five hundred thousand
available and then a majority of
the appropriation state last
session.
Okay.
Okay Representative any further
questions no thank you madam
chair.
Okay I don't see any other so I
am looking forward to your
recommendation.
Thank you madam chair I'm it it
appears from the discussion that
there is sick there was a good
bit of discussion about
The re purposing of staff and
Some of the.
Differences between the
executive and LFC and so I
thought I would just flag that
but I would make a
recommendation that we adopt the
LFC budget recommendations.
And the your as usual taking
copious notes and I'm sure the
staff has also recognize that
there's a big concern so that
when we deal with that in the
bigger committee we can address
some of those concerns I need a
second front second specs.
Is there any opposition second.
Thank you Phelps is there any
opposition.
No the motion carries thank you
very much thank you Mr Schmidt
thank you Mr that.
M. S..
Yes thank you madam chair
members sounds like the
guitarist and in that band with
that yes.
It is the scarf.
That makes sense.
Thank you.
Thank.
Program number four ninety one
Office of military base planning
with Mr a.
Megan's brigadier general we get
lucky lad but with the the.
Analysts are Dick.
Mr Dicken our agency that we try
to get miss Amanda Dick Peddie
and ms Miller.
Mr Miller.
Okay.
About that
now you're I've I've gotten
worse I promise.
all right thank you madam chair
members of the committee my name
is Amanda Dick Peddie I am the
fiscal analyst for the
legislative finance committee
my counterpart but is agency is
Simon Miller by we have once
again our great the money to buy
just stepping in for us today to
help out
We're also in this agency our
office of military based
planning and support is
administratively attached to the
Economic Development Department
so from the agency we have EDD
CFO Development Lena I'll go
over the different sheet as you
can see there's not a huge
difference between the LFC and
executive recommendation the LFC
recommendation includes an
additional three hundred dollars
of general fund revenue and in
the base really the only
difference is you know where
about fifty thousand is
allocated so the HSD received a
fifty thousand dollar recurring
junior bill appropriation in FY
twenty two I believe and I was
very administrative assistant
the LFC recommendation of
budgets that administrative
assistant in person while the
executive budget that contracts
analysts reach consensus on all
performance measures and targets
and unless we have anything to
add we can turn it over to
develop.
Go ahead you.
Thank you madam chair members
the committee I have no
additional comments oh well okay
then brigadier general we get
lucky that are you on.
Hey man this is a researcher
human life from I'm from the
National Guard so we're actually
next well my speaking to I
thought I say your name twice we
have development Lena she's
she's on here okay Dorrell I
apologize go ahead I was testing
remember I said I was testing.
Thank you madam chair and
members of the committee
thank you Amanda
As stated on the CFO for
economic development we oversee
office of the military base
planning as part.
Can you hear me OK yes okay
right now we do not have a
director he retired in September
and so we're actively looking
for director which we should
have by the end of the session
so I apologize if I don't have
answers to programmatic
of questions but I do have the
budget in front of me.
And so with that being said I
will go ahead and share my
screen.
Yes I'm allowed to let me see
here.
You guys have the handout yeah
we have the handout great okay
so let's see.
I'm not sure how to share if you
can't do that go ahead and just
guide us with yeah that sounds
good okay before yes okay so I'm
gonna go to page two of the hand
out gives the budget comparison
I did get the break down of the
two three and four from
executive I I reached out to
Simon but I think he's not
available
Amanda stated there's a three
hundred dollar difference
Because we want that extra three
hundred dollars
you know
I don't know if you guys are
aware but this office has one F.
T. E. and so we may possibly
have the smallest budget in the
state.
So three hundred dollars is big
to us.
So that.
The majority of the money we did
get that fifty thousand dollar
junior Bill appropriates.
Sorry.
Go ahead.
We did get that however we only
have one two FTE authorized so
we were hoping to move it to the
three hundred account and
contract for an assistant to the
director.
So I'm not sure this isn't you
know a huge office and
you guys do have the hand out
you guys can read and I'm not
going.
Mr Lena.
Eight just as I took a second
look I have to HFC National
Guard ones but nothing from
yours does anybody else get
anything.
No it looks like everybody else
did not get another copy so
rely on your.
On your wits to advise us what's
going if there's a way for me to
present that would be great.
So if in Mike can we allow her
to upload her her information on
the screen.
Whenever the staff is that is
working on that Mike Mulligan.
Can you help for upload her
stuff on the screen.
I'm sorry madam chair I.
The permissions are authorized
but there's nothing I can do
remotely and all right you want
we can try to get you another
different she for a military
base planning I didn't take my
system did take the handouts so
there there somewhere
I'm sorry what are you missing
the different sheet as well or
just the presentation The
presentation which is which was
referring to but if you can tell
us what the the difference
sheets are.
I mean what you're talking about
with the gesture.
Just let me just state that our
cut current budget is two
hundred eighty six thousand nine
hundred dollars I mean that's
our total budget again like I
stated it's probably the
smallest budget in the state our
request was for three hundred
thirty four thousand.
Executive recommended two
hundred ninety five thousand
nine hundred and LFC recommended
two hundred ninety six thousand
two hundred a difference of
three hundred dollars.
So I will go over each slide
it's just gonna be a lot of
talking since you can't see what
I see let me just real quick see
what my options are for sharing
this presentation
Madam chairman yes.
It I believe up yes I do have
the orange sheet on this agency
and day one she white paper for
military base planning and
support and up given this about
I I think the presentation
should.
Can you and maybe those handouts
can catch up to us at a later
date yeah that's what we're
gonna do we're just gonna go
ahead hello miss Molina to
present differentiates and and
that move that forward because
it isn't a significant sum thank
you madam chair.
Thank you madam chair and
members of the committee.
So.
The mission of our office is to
strengthen our military
installations and support our
communities by investing in
programs to improve the quality
of life in our military families
here invest in our military
missions in communities to
improve our critical
infrastructure and enhance
resilience.
Ensure our military
installations and specialized
training areas are buffered from
development that will negatively
impact mission success faster
economic growth and vitality in
our military communities and
find a qualified workforce to
meet New Mexico federal mission
requirements.
Some of the issues that the
military the office of military
based planning and support can
note that the commander issues
in these spaces
We are working with the judicial
branch to
for something called spousal
license reciprocity and so what
that means is military families
coming to New Mexico you know
the wives and husbands who come
over with the the the military
officers
sometimes you know there nurses
or attorneys we're working with
the judicial branch to get a
faster approach to getting
licensure in New Mexico so they
can immediately start working
sometimes it takes up to a year
to get those licenses
transferred
Ensuring a quality education for
all military personnel to bring
their families over specialty
medical medical care is an issue
and the rural areas you know we
have a base in accounting in
Clovis home in an Alamogordo
White sands New Mexico that is
army based.
And a lot of these families
can't get a specialty medical
care in those areas
The biggest problem is our
immediate problem is the
infrastructure of the bases and
needing critical upgrades.
Defense spending in New Mexico.
There's a chart in the handout
that you will eventually get but
it has gradually grown.
And the last data we have is
from FY nineteen and it
surpassed four point five
million dollars are sorry
billion dollars it up to four
point seven billion dollars we
right now have a contract with
you and them and they are doing
and economic impact study
that'll give more detail data as
to how the military bases have
enhanced our communities and the
dollars they're bringing into
our state.
And.
So let me
slide here.
Okay and so.
We asked for more funds in the
three hundred account fifty
fifty thousand of that is to
support an assistant to the
director but.
Significant contracts we need
for the three hundred account
are a study and analysis of
military value in New Mexico
that's a continuing effort to
the study that were already in.
But we are actually needing an
additional twenty thousand for
renewable energy opportunities a
web based tool that we are
already contracting with UNM
To have a centralized database
for central station for
renewable energy opportunities
for the military and this
includes air space.
Airspace for developers to go to
the site and look to see where
there's a more billable airspace
And.
Do additional an additional
twenty thousand for marketing
and outreach for this web based
tool.
And with that being said I'll
stand for questions.
Great thank you miss Molina
do any of the members of the
committee have questions.
Super quick.
Yes and I believe our chairwoman
is back.
Just very very quickly I wanted
to mention Mr leader mentioned
that they only have one
authorized FTE and that's why
they wanted
the show money for
administrative assistant in
contracts rather than person the
LFC recommendation does include
a half feet to address that so
just so all members are aware.
Thank you and then I have
Representative Sarinana followed
by Representative Anderson is
there anyone else.
I don't see anyone else go ahead
Representative Sir and thank you
madam chair question who is the
director before what was his
name.
Madam chair and representative
start sorry not sorry singer
sorry
that was Greg Myers he was here
for approximately I want to say
five years and he retired three
months ago okay I remember
seeing one of the committees
path
so as far as the base planning
this is an important position in
getting the voices ready for
what they need recently white
sands but white sands they have
this huge storm that hit that
the base
and I used to work all right
sounds like thirty years ago and
we have that same huge storm to
two storms collide over the
basin we were out for quite
awhile that happened again even
recently so the planning is
definitely needed I know
I am currently looking at a
micro grants there's a whole lot
of things that were in the plans
and this is a huge position this
is what we actually need and we
need a good person in there and
we need support for it
I I hesitate to I think we
definitely need to director and
we need some support but this is
gonna help our bases and and a
whole lot of ways and they they
need this person in there we
need someone in there who knows
about the military bases and
I worry that we're not going to
support the way we need to but
we definitely need to support
this in order to help our bases
because our bases are huge
they're ten billion dollar
industry in New Mexico and we
have to make sure this is taken
care of because of that and
because of our personnel and and
and our housing is really
important because we have a lot
of places specially with the
boom in on the eastern part of
the state where there's not
enough housing for New listed
when they go out the town knows
how much you know how much
they're getting for per diem and
they're they're really or that
we're housing allowance they're
getting they're really charging
high prices in our in our in our
list you can handle it so that's
something I know they're looking
at federally but this is so
important to our bases I hope we
can get the funding we need and
and a good director in there so
we can continue the great work
that Mr Myers that thank you.
Representative.
And offender sin thank you madam
chairman of the shortened to the
point I believe a
Representative Syria serine Jana
up point was right on target but
I do think the LFC
recommendation embraces that
point with the expansion on the
contractual side if I'm reading
The presentation correct is that
correct LFC.
Madam chair representative
Anderson when you're saying the
expansion on the contractual
side
The LFC keeps contractual
spending flat with FY twenty two
the executive increases it but
the LFC recommendation does
include more for person which
would you know help attractive
director
things like that does that
answer the question
it it it doesn't away but I'm
looking at the orange sheet of
column under total
recommendations under.
FTE positions
it shows a term at one point I
in the executive one I would it
made me think that the LFC had
a part time assistant somewhere
folded into their number yes I
apologize madam chair
representative Anderson that's
exactly correct yes it contract
they got confused The LFC does
have that part time position
included in the recommendation
thank you madam chair I just
wanted that clarification
because I think it it supports
LESC thank you.
Thank you and
Representative Dixon did you
have a question.
Or no okay before we go to you
for a motion Representative of
sun and Gnagna is that correct
yes they are I it yes A. and
they.
The team that is on the first
and so when you say your name
it's we all we all have kind of
destroyed a little bit but it's
Psy.D neon not.
Okay thank you I had
Representative Dixon.
Thank you madam chair I'm it
appears that the committee had
some discussion about the value
of going with the slightly
higher LFC budget
and so I would move that we
recommend the LFC proposal.
For.
The budget recommendations
second this is by Representative
brown is there any opposition to
that.
There's no opposition to the
motion carries if there's
discussion by the LFC late by
anyone later on we'll discuss in
the big committee but the
increase of course really
insignificant I think we could
take a risk thank you very much
miss Medina thank you madam
chair and members of the
committee very much appreciated.
Thank you and the next one is
now no.
Brigadier general may get lucky
that and it is the homeland
security no I'm sorry it's a
military affairs department
agency right been and he menace.
Afternoon again madam chair and
members the committee Allen
right and LFC unfortunately in
Diego Jimenez cannot be here
today so once again similar to
it will be presenting for the
executive what a for the state.
and as you stated.
Acting as in general Miguel
Aguilar I will be presenting for
the agency and and he will
introduce any other members of
his staff who are often called
at that time.
offers to.
You know I want you all to the
HSD is number seven zero five it
sounds like you all have that in
front of you if you're looking
for more detail on the
legislative recommendation LFC
is volume two pages three forty
four to three forty six as more
detail.
The executive recommendation
provides for significant
increases in general fund for
personalities agency and that in
turn leverages federal
additional federal matching
funds the LFC recommendation
doesn't provide these could be
is additional person general
fund or federal leverage federal
funds but it does estimate of
the Legislative competition
package is being considered for
section eight which would be a
seven percent average increase
for all employees we we
anticipated that would cover the
needed adjustments for
appropriate placement that the
agency has a.
The executive recommendation
also provides more funding for
the agency to take over
operations of the New Mexico
military museum than the
legislative recommendation which
does still provide some increase
for that and executive also
supports a fifty thousand dollar
increase for tuition assistance
but it's not in the LFC
recommendation.
I'll briefly on the expansion
requests the agency requests and
expensive three million dollars
for proposed job challenge
academy which they will I'm sure
speak to more both
recommendations funded this
partially as a recurring expense
and partially nonrecurring for
those initial start up in
construction costs next year so
legislative recommendation has a
two million dollar expansion in
the base and recommends a one
million dollar one time special
appropriation and those are
split seventy five percent
twenty five percent of federal
funds general fund.
And the executive recommendation
with the same split supports a
one point two million dollar
expansion in the recurring
budget and recommends one point
eight million dollars in
nonrecurring capital outlay
funding.
the executive also includes
recommended language that is not
in the LESC recommendation this
language would have paved the
adjutant general and deputy
adjutant general at their
current levels so this language
would not affect anyone's
current salary and it doesn't
affect the amount of the
executive recommendation nor
would it change the LFC
recommendation if the committee
wished to take the LFC
recommendation and the executive
language I'll just briefly go
some background on this issue
I'm state statute sets
compensation for the adjutant
general equivalent to the panel
out this for active duty major
General unless it's specified
differently by the legislature
in the GAA which the legislature
hasn't done since two thousand
six previous I just in general
just retired at the end of last
year received a base salary of
one hundred ninety one point two
thousand dollars annually which
is near the top of the range for
active duty army Major General
and the W. as in general
receives a base salary of a
hundred and seventy three point
three thousand dollars that's
the maximum for an active duty
officer of a public right.
Both the salaries since the
executive points out the both
the salary significantly exceed
the standard salary for cabinet
secretaries a hundred fifty six
thousand dollars and then on top
of those base salaries both
positions also received standard
military subsistence and housing
allowances totaling forty four
point four thousand dollars each
year.
That is the reason that the
executive has included that
language capping the rate at
current levels.
Indeed recommended language from
the executive this copy for your
reference number language header
on page two of your packet if
you'd like to take a look at
that.
We've come to consensus on all
performance measures and targets
and I'll now handed over to
Cindy for any additional
comments from the executive
before we go to the Department
thank you.
Thank you madam chair members
the committee talented an
excellent job of covering the
language question of the
executive recommendation and she
did touch on all of the
differences which are not too
big
and I will turn it over to the
agency for their presentation
and any comments.
Are you ready.
Members of the committee my name
is Miguel I you are brigadier
general I'm I am currently the
acting as in general for the
department military affairs in
New Mexico National Guard of so
many of you probably know and in
every Ellen mentioned a few
minutes ago Major General can't
now retired at the end of this
year and and I'm honored to be
appointed by the governor is the
acting adjutant general as we go
through the process of
appointing a new act general it
is so all up let me start of the
presentation for you if I can
get this spring this year.
So working there go.
Apologize when mouse is a little
to cheer.
Okay so up.
Madam chair members of the
committee will will quickly go
through I think we've covered
the budget request and the
differences in doubt what I'll
do is I'll spend a little bit of
time talking about all what are
for priorities are Indian will
stand for questions so if all of
proceed on to the next slide so
are our number one funding
priority is appropriate
placement I think it was going
off about it a few minutes ago
but I want to just point out a
couple of things and what is
that we we asked for an
additional amount of funding in
order place are up our our
employees some of our employees
in a proper salary adequacy so I
was as I was reading through the
legislative report.
That was one of the things that
was touched on what I want to
point out though is that
there are many employees for for
whatever reason over the years
act up at DMA who have who are
not attic operational comparable
to what other state employees to
similar jobs are across the
state and so I just want to make
clear that the the amount of
funding that we're looking for
isn't necessarily to give raises
for the sake of giving raises
it's really to to do appropriate
placement all on the scale of
other employees and other state
agencies are we falling behind
on the we've we've got some
poise twenty year employees to
radical operational point eight
of which is which is not all
that common across the state
government so that's the reason
for this particular I asked it
isn't necessarily to try to
bring them to more competitive
rate as it applies to outside
the outside the state
government.
Funding priority number two is a
request for an increase really a
budget that is that we've never
really had so we for our New
Mexico military museum of the
museum four years has been
categorized as it readiness
center and it was receiving some
amount of federal funding up
we've we've determined that is
not the appropriate way for that
museum to be categorized it's
just not a place where we
actually have soldiers drilling.
So this amount of money will
least allow us to take up the
amount of federal funding that
was utilized for I general
upkeep for utilities I ended to
give the program that the museum
manager or director if you a
little bit of a budget in order
to be able to do some things up
for the museum the rest of of
of.
We want to use it would you to
come out of requests for capital
or we would leverage the New
Mexico military museum
foundation to fund raising
activities to do larger types of
of exhibits and changes to the
music.
Our third funding request is it
is a small fifty thousand dollar
increase to our tuition
assistance budget that it
currently provides the
scholarship for all New Mexico
national guardsmen from the army
or Air.
The fifty thousand all request
bring us in line with what we
currently spend into that
program.
And then the last one the
property is is the one that they
also spent a little bit of time
talking about but but not too
long so we have an opportunity
to bring a second the second
piece of our youth challenge
program to the state of New
Mexico and so I'm sure most
you're familiar that you
challenge program currently
located in Roswell takes at risk
teens and put them through a
twenty two week of five military
type program to try to still
values in in discipline and then
catch them up on their education
provide some type of vocational
training.
The job challenge program which
we proposed to place in
Albuquerque up is is it would be
an additional about five months
it would only be open to those
who graduated from the U.
challenge program also also it
would be it would feed from that
and we we would partner with
currently CNM in do additional
vocational technical training we
give me a chance to get wanted
to get these kids in a still in
this type of environment a
little bit longer so that those
values and that is when Saks off
and then the other thing we do
is increase up their their job
skills and try to place them in
a career field that would give
them the longer term career so
have some initial discussions
with C. N. M. about this they've
got lots of great ideas they
would they would lead us in
identifying the job skills of
programs that that would
actually help and and would give
them the these kids the best
amount of opportunity to to up
become six into careers that
would be successful financially
rewarding.
Of the the intent at this time
is two hours this program of
dormitories at the expo New
Mexico fairground in the morning
it is it is it is folks are
graciously offered up to leases
some of that space that is
currently utilized only a couple
weeks a year for the for for the
for each program during the
state fair times
the the office of the National
Guard bureau and the office of
the secretary of defense will
send representatives on the
aging of February to the look
over that side in lesson and if
this funding is increases
received and we have buying from
the National Guard bureau the
office secretary defense then
this program would be funded and
we would look to start the
program probably no earlier
than.
July of twenty twenty three in
that would all be based on up
getting the total amount that we
would need for remodeling that
facility as well as hiring all
the folks that we needed getting
C. N. M. online in order cert
program so sometime in in late
mid twenty twenty three up
perhaps early twenty twenty four
I depending on how the
construction project goes that
the that the dormitory in at at
at at the fairgrounds is fairly
old.
And so at this point we're
estimating somewhere between
five and six million dollars to
do a full remodel.
It does we just don't know what
we're going on coverage really
started to do a remodel project.
And so here's a breakdown it is
was already been discussed of
what our request was for this
year what the executive
recommendation is and the LESC
recommendation.
it I think I wanted to a good
job of kind of breaking down
what those are so with that all
up.
I'll stop the presentation.
Okay in in I'll stand for
questions.
Okay soon as you release that
then we can see if there are any
questions.
Thank you very much.
Let me check.
I don't have any questions
believe it or not are there is
there anyone else that I'm there
we go okay we have
Representative Dixon
Representative of sun Gnagna.
So not seven yeah I'm not.
Representative after all that.
And Representative Brown and I
don't see anyone else so go
ahead Representative Dixon.
Thank you madam chair and
thank you for the presentation
General board brigadier general
I apologize for not knowing
that.
Appropriate.
Raised I'm.
I just wanted to you know to
commend you for the proposal for
the New Mexico you challenge
academy I'm I really like that
you know you're doing a
significant leveraging of
federal funds and that this will
help create a pipeline of for
future members so that was it
thank you.
Thank you.
Do you have any other responses
brigadier general madam chair
members of the committee UP
Representative Dixon I just want
to say thank you but I I think
that this program this is going
to do a lot for for use in in in
in specifically all one of the
things that that is missing from
our youth challenge program and
Raul is participation from the
the Albuquerque metro area we
just don't get why we should in
the the strategy behind put it
in in Albuquerque aside from
teaming with C. N. N. is T. is
to get a little more exposure in
the Bernalillo county area in
the hopes that we will get of
war of the kids that drop out
from for APS in the surrounding
school districts to participate
in this program.
Thank you I'm.
Meredith I mean Representative
Dixon you have any other
questions.
Okay Representative Sarinana.
I screwed it up from sorry
share no worries
thank you prepare thank you very
thank you are right thank you I
think we're going to be in great
hands Representative I've seen
you I heard you many times and I
I think you're gonna do a great
job so thank you for being there
I also I kind of which I'm
Representative Dixon said I'm
hoping it works in Albuquerque I
think this is it would be a
great thing property I had a lot
of students I could have
recommended but the thought of
going to rise will they wouldn't
do it so I think whatever we can
do in Albuquerque even bringing
the program total or you know
two separate ones I think that
would be great because we have a
lot of kids in need we have a
lot of games out there we have a
lot of kids dropping out their
freshman year
so this anything that would help
them would be great and the
military any part of the
military that this plan
organization all these things
that it brings to that would be
so good for our kids so thank
you for having this this of job
challenge and moving some of its
Albuquerque thank you and good
luck.
The committee.
Representative Santillana thank
you so much for up for your vote
of confidence in absolutely we
we really we really hope that
this will draw more kids they'll
still have to go to the
challenge program and Rossell
but I think maybe this ought to
be able to come back home and
still participate in the program
would still be in that
environment is is going to be
the key to changing more lives
because really the folks that
you challenge program to do jobs
job challenge program I mean it
the end of the day I told them
when we speak is there the
business changing lives and they
do a great job we just need more
of it.
madam chair when request is when
the question General is there.
Is there any thought of bringing
having of a place in Albuquerque
just like you have in Roswell or
no just for the.
Program.
I'm sorry yes I so we've I think
that topic is come up multiple
times over the years
I think the the the only thing
now is that the capacity that we
have at the site and in Ralph in
Roswell I could probably almost
doubled before we needed
additional facilities on it we
could look at that the thing
with a list with the office and
secretary defense man who funds
this program is any any
construction or additional
facilities are better generated
were required after their
initial amount is expected to be
under percent state funded so if
if we look at that
there's additional overhead
costs that we would have to fund
it construction to get there on
top of maybe a duplication of
effort when it comes to staffing
in those sorts of things
although up you know so we can
look at that but but it will be
at some additional and maybe
somewhere down the costs all
right thank you so much and and
again good luck.
Thank you and our next person is
representative brown followed by
Representative Garcia.
Thank you madam chair and.
Bring your general I I have just
a couple of observations and
then a question.
I have visited the the challenge
academy in Roswell a number of
times and I was just so very
impressed.
With how well that program is
run as far as I can tell and
Justice hello beneficial it is
to the students who were at that
program
I have received letters through
the years from graduates and
they were form letters that were
written in their own words
expressing their own thoughts.
And these are truly life
changing
this is a life changing
experience for them so I really
really like the idea of for
those who qualify in a
recommended that we get to do a
five month program had to to get
some job skills and you know we
as a legislature madam chair
we've we've a lot more over the
last few years emphasized career
technical education and we have
such a need for for people with
with those technical skills in
in in a number of categories so
I see this is a very very good
idea and especially you're
catching students when they
finish with the rules will
program sometimes it's a kind of
a let down because they've been
very much challenged and they've
made it through and they've
graduated and then what next and
sometimes that will can
get them a little bit off of
course that would like to see
them on so I just see this as a
really good progression the
question I have is regarding the
funding level fight I'm a little
bit confused Madam chair because
our our ten
difference worksheet says of the
agency requests three million
dollars and the LFC recommended
to the executive twelve hundred
so there's a difference there
but the slide deck that.
We see artists
Sure the page number but it's
funding priority number for for
this program it says that the
general fund at the overall
increase requests is three
million and seven hundred fifty
thousand would come from the
general fund and then the rest
would be federal funding.
Two point two five million so it
looks like the numbers that I'm
seeing on the ten sheet I don't
see a seven fifty there
So that's the first question
that I'm going to add a little
extra question and that is we
certain of that federal funding.
Madam chair.
Mr.
I'm in general I do that or
Ellen may been first.
I think I'd like to take the
first part of your question and
then turn it over to acting
adjutant general you are to
answer the second part
with regard to the first part of
your question the three million
dollars is that shows on the
difference she reflects seven
hundred fifty thousand dollars
of general fund and two million
two hundred fifty thousand
dollars of federal funds the LFC
and exec recommendations also
have the same split and while
they do not fully funded the
request of recommendations.
Have the rest of the funding in
a nonrecurring area SO the LFC
has it as a special
appropriation the executive
hasn't capital outlay.
To answer that question for you
yes it does thank you
second part of your question
regarding how certain that
funding is I will defer to the
agency.
Is there.
Members good members of the
committee up Representative
Brown so are you still in the
funding sat right at this moment
no the it is not a one of those
deals where you know really what
comes first so the National
Guard bureau the offices
secretary defense all wants to
see that the state is is got the
share available before they make
the funding available I'll share
with you that Mr page who was
the program manager offer
molestie are when he last
visited here was was already
budgeting in out years all for a
program in New Mexico there is
currently I believe only five
programs in the country they're
looking to expand.
the end so so I I believe that
with with funding being
available and then accepting the
site that we're willing to use
the amount of funding it would
require in order to do the to
the do the reconstruction
remodel I believe for the word.
Thanks and again I've right I
believe that the funding level
are the funding from the state
being there is the leverage that
will need in order to be able to
push this program through this
yet so I'll have a better idea
after our meeting on the eighth
of February.
On on whether they've accepted
that site indeed we do glad this
year you know that information
as soon as we can in I've my
attention if they accept the
site is to ask vaccine or
question is are are we good to
go ending it this funding being
available in in I'll be able to
share that up before the
sessions or.
Okay and before we go to
representative Garcia and I know
that we still have someone
asking questions Ellen or David.
If if that if we're still
waiting on some kind of
information from the brigadier
general to move this forward to
court where does that places.
In terms of a recommendation.
David.
Turn on your Mike.
You know I I think when we
consider this we were I wasn't
as clear that it wasn't certain
so I wonder Ellen that there
would be some merit to and madam
chair to making the general fund
appropriations contingent on
federal some certification by
the board of finance the federal
government is approving the
federal money coming our way
before we start spending the
state money.
Is that the.
Matt madam chair when we get to
that point that that wording
with along with the LFC
recommendation seems to be the
way to go for the higher highest
food so I recommend that you
madam chair the less so general
ocular has a different thought.
Do you think Representative it
up general argue that.
Madam chair members of the
committee I I we don't see any
any any issue with that of the
that's that's kind of you know
not not think you want me to do
a handshake deal right and save
I swear we will do it but I
think that that would be our
intent regardless okay well that
makes sense then go ahead
Representative to continue.
Madam chair that's that's really
all I had and I hope everything
comes together for this project
thank you okay thank you and the
next speaker was Representative
Garcia to close thank you madam
chair a regular general with a
congratulations on your position
as you all know General I worked
along with the general mop up
before but also with you when
you were not a general and I
look forward to welcoming fun
doing that and do what
Representative balances earlier
of this academy to have for the
kids is of the utmost
importance.
You know if we can save one kid
we fit a bunch.
And like I said general I look
forward to helping you out and
if you have any comment.
Madam chair members of the
committee representative Garcia
thank thank you all for your
support in you with that we got
discussions quite a few times
about this program I think the
only the only thing I'll call
all add that in and that this
the the speak to a few minutes
ago is up everybody on this
committee and and who said to
the legislature is always
welcome to visit we're going
through this through this COVID
thing right now but but one of
the things that we we certainly
want to do is to provide
examples in in leaders across
the state to come and share
their story their success story
there by with these with these
kids because I think that you
know we find that discipline to
all but it's always great to
have members of the community
and leadership I'll come out and
visit whether it's at the
beginning of the program this
already and I'll tell you that
the when when I want to feel
good.
I drive to Roswell and I spent a
little bit of time in that
program any changes my
perspective on what's important
in what should which across
stress from being what you're
not and so is you're absolutely
right it is a fantastic program
it it's is pennies on the dollar
for the state of the weights
funded it would be worth it if
we pay for our percent state up
but but it's a great and
fantastic program we hope to
grow it over the years and I to
general knowledge tended to do
and and as long as I sit in this
chair that's what I intend to do
with my efforts into thanks.
Thank you general of madam chair
thank you for everything and
thank you for bringing that
funding problem up I hope we can
resolve it and we can we Fund
you've been all thank you thank
you madam chair okay and the
Representative Dixon do we have
any recommendations I'm thank
you madam chair it sounds like
the committee would recommend
the LFC budget recommendation
with contingency language
regarding the federal funding.
That's great.
Second is there's a second are
you position.
There's no opposition the motion
carries that you have a wreck
recommendation to move this
forward brigadier general ocular
thank you.
The next item on the agenda is
the seven ninety five homeland
security and emergency
management I know that Bianca or
tease R. was the former was the
former don't secretary but I'm
not sure who's is it Carla.
Are you presenting.
Madam chair actually me Kelly
health and what do yes.
Thank you David let's go ahead
and get started with miss raven
and and I guess agency Montoya.
Replacing the Mister Jimenez and
then we'll get to Mr Hamilton go
ahead.
Thank you madam chair.
Department of Security Agency
number seven nine I I apologize
that I am David turn off your
your.
But they're going to get
reimbursed yes David Abbey.
David Abbey.
You're you're but.
Dave.
David Abbey well somebody mute
M..
Michael.
I think he's I think he's maybe
muted.
No.
David mute your button.
Thank you.
Okay.
Go ahead.
Yes so I did that I neglected to
note of the relevant sections of
our volume to our your different
sheets so I wanted to make sure
you're aware there on on page
three seventy five through six
three seventy nine of all you
need to and that's where you can
find more details on the LFC
recommendation.
I'm just be presenting from the
overall summary differentiate
the agency does have to programs
but I think the differences are
simple enough to not have to
delve into that level but I'm
happy to cover those in more
detail of the community feels
that's necessary.
I do want to make a quick note
well.
Some of the other differences I
I want to note about these
expansion requests that you'll
see on the different sheet the
department did request expansion
funding in both programs to add
new positions to assist with
their existing agency functions
and then to also increase
compensation for some positions
that already existed neither
recommendation thought that
these were proper expansion
request because they didn't
reflect new initiatives but we
did consider the requests and
both are commissions partially
support some of those requests
as the increase to the base
budget so that's why you'll see
nothing recommended tools
expansions us really mostly it's
a technical thing.
Both recommendations kept
general fund revenue flat with
the agency's FY twenty two
operating budget.
So look they don't
recommendation does support the
addition of six federally fully
federally funded positions in
the homeland security and
emergency management program and
also includes federal funds for
this purpose.
Nation doesn't support the
addition of these positions or
the relevant federal funds.
The recommendations for other
transfers in other revenues
deferred due to technical
corrections to the request that
were reflected in the executive
recommendation but they were
reflected in the legislative
recommendation because we did
not have that accurate
information at the time there
were numerous issues in the HSD
initially said that is budget
request and some of those are
still reflective because they
were not resolved at the time of
the LFC recommendations
finalized the executive on the
other hand did have the
opportunity to refine some of
their estimates and projections
after our recommendations
finalized.
This is a previously noted
provided right recommendation
ads will six positions to the
department of homeland security
and emergency management program
and the executive does not
support those additions.
It does move funds from the
contractual services category
to person in increases the
agency to fill vacant positions
and reduce its reliance on
contractors to perform staff
duties provided recommendations
is not be this.
The LFC recommendation also
includes a hundred thousand
dollars to increase compensation
for existing positions in the
state fire marshal's office
program.
Instead it actually funds three
new positions in that program
and that's the total cost of
three hundred and eighty one
point two thousand dollars.
There's a one point four million
dollar difference between the
recommendations in the other
category this is primarily due
to what I reference or
adjustments to the executive
recommendation made to
anticipated fire tax insurance
revenues will result in lower
fire protection grant Fund
distribution.
Both recommendations include
language to specify what amount
of fire protection fund revenue
may be used for the state fire
marshal's operated a operational
costs but we do use slightly
different language to do so the
executive uses not withstanding
language of all the Legislative
doesn't and I would recommend
the committee look at those
language recommendations
carefully their copy on page for
your packet so that you can
really consider those
differences.
Additionally I'd like to note
regarding language that if the
legislative recommendation is
adopted the amount specified in
the language should be adjusted
from four million nine hundred
ninety five thousand two hundred
to four million nine hundred
seventy one thousand three
hundred to correct a technical
error and a lot of the language
with what was actually in the
final recommendation.
We've come to consensus on all
performance measures and targets
those are it just seven through
eight.
And I'll now turn it over to
Cindy for any additional
comments from the executive
before she hands it over to the
agency for their comments thank
you.
Thank you madam chair and
members of the committee I just
have a brief comment in regards
to the federal funds and the
executive not including that and
that recommendation I'm
currently the agency has a very
high vacancy rates and that
includes federally funded
positions the executive of the
executive took the approach on
us agency our report
recommending that the agency
fill those current federal
funded positions without adding
to their right the HSD right and
that's why we left the positions
in the funding out however that
doesn't mean that the agency
cannot go for those federal
funds and receive them they can
still do that and bring them in
it's just the executive did not
to recommend them as part of
their based budgets.
with that being said I will go
ahead and turn it over to the to
Mr Hamilton for his presentation
and any comments that you may
have go ahead Mr Hamilton that
one welcome.
Thank you very much madam chair
good afternoon madam chair and
committee members my name's
Kelly Hamilton and on the deck
one of two deputy secretaries
now at the New Mexico department
of homeland security and
emergency management state fire
marshal's office our second W.
which is is Carl Walton and she
just began this week and
administratively we've kind of
divided up the agency in two
operations and administration
and business and we're as we go
forward we're going to approach
it in that manner with those
with both myself and is an W.
secretary Walton
managing one or the other of
those I'll have appropriations
the rest of the team with me
this afternoon is John to drag
our acting state fire marshal
David Snowden our financial
manager and Matthew Stackpole
general counsel and then again
my name is Kelly Hamilton and
I've been here for going on
almost three years now.
Pleasure to be here this
afternoon.
I would be remiss if I didn't
that just throw slide in here
thank you Secretary Ortiz work
time.
Secretary worth time was.
She was an active secretary and
she's going and joining the
infrastructure implementation
team for the governor's office
and the secretary and I were
joking yesterday that.
Rather than be here and and ask
you all for money she's now in a
position where she's going to be
distributing money those federal
funds coming in and working with
you all on that so big thank you
to Secretary work time we so
enjoyed the last the last couple
years you might find it
interesting that we have the
forklift and a fire truck
underneath her name but the
secretary was very active and
and prided herself and not only
being secretary of the agency
but obtaining her forklift
certification to move PPE around
the warehouse and and get it
distributed throughout the state
and then as you know when we
inherited the state fire
marshal's office we also got the
far more the training academy
down in Sapporo and it was not
uncommon to see the secretary
driving one fire trucks down
there so very active secretary
we we sure absolutely all the
best and we will continue to
work with her new position to
and I'm pleased about that.
Just very quickly and we told
you this before but I just want
to remind you that when it comes
to homeland security emergency
management and fire marshal's
office we can really classify
what we do around five critical
mission areas and these align
very well with the FEMA mission
areas and that's good because we
receive so much federal pass
through funding from FEMA that
we get out to our locals so when
you look at our mission if you
will I wanted just to remind you
that that first and foremost we
try prevention we try prevention
from naturally occurring events
to then maybe events to
technically bands we do that to
our homeland security bureau we
do that through our state fire
marshal's office installing
smoke detectors and working on
rules and regulations and so
prevention is really our first
are our first option and and the
end goal and then we look at
protection because things do
happen and when we think of
protection we think of our
homeland security bureau in our
fusion center The New Mexico all
source information center so we
acquire that information we work
with other state police and we
try and protect our critical
infrastructure and our assets
and our people most of all
throughout the state and then
sadly when things do happen we
try and mitigate those just as
quickly as possible with the
resources we have you can be
anything from bring taking a
generator to the community and
help empower up to a long term
moving into the response and
recovery we are not a response
agency per se but again we have
a lot of we have equipment
mobile command post generators
forklifts those sorts of things
that we can assist the locals in
our tribal partners and their
response efforts and then
finally recovery is so important
and so huge here with the HSE
and millions of dollars a year.
and and requests that and and
projects that go back to two
thousand eight that we're still
working on.
It's also important to remember
here at our agency that every
disaster begins and ends locally
so that's who we really work for
and that's we coordinate with
immediately when something
happens where that con do it if
you will between the the federal
programs were some of the
disaster monies relied ally or
governor's executive order
directing that conduit gets set
money through to the localities
in the tribe's we manage
millions of dollars and grant
opportunities from everything
from emergency preparedness
grant to border monies and
border requests for border
security and that of course and
and chief and radical talked
about this a little bit but
getting money to the local fire
departments to you know to get
them the equipment they need and
and those sorts of things we're
information how the work
clearing house we work closely
with others such as DHS and FEMA
and customs and border
protection so we get those
federal initiatives and try and
understand you know what's
what's next you know on the
border for instance and how we
can best prepare our state for
asylum seekers or what what we
can do even though it's a
federal program sometimes it
spills over on to our state
resources.
I don't need to remind you of
the but I am going to some of
our partners you know we're
we're stationed here on the
National Guard base and so we're
kind of squatters but we do on
our own building we have an
office in Albuquerque in the to
a building that we just entered
because our state fire marshal
code inspectors are down there
and of course we have the
training academy down in Sapporo
so we're we're spread out a
little bit but we we couldn't do
our job if we didn't have great
partnerships with both private
sector agents are private sector
organizations and of course our
public sector partners as well
both of the state try art all of
the state tribal and and federal
levels.
This is just a quick snapshot
because I'm often asked what it
twenty twenty one look like
twenty twenty one was a banner
year with seventeen state
declared disaster declarations
none of them we could move up to
federal disaster declarations so
when when I say state disaster
declarations that mean the state
we had to assist the locals and
if you count the stars you'll
see that there aren't seventeen
but so many communities will
face multiple disasters in a
season and so we had fifteen
monsoon related emergencies into
decorations for extreme weather
and probably more sadly as it
comes in and this winter
continues in that equated to
about twelve million dollars but
I'm really excited to tell you
in the past our procedure has
been to get executive orders for
state disaster declarations in
chunks of seven hundred fifty
thousand dollars and working
closely this is something that
really concern the governor's
office because if we only used
two hundred fifty thousand of
that seven hundred fifty
thousand and we had five hundred
thousand encumbered and so we've
changed our tactics we get out
there quicker and our recovery
we look at our disaster
assistance and what our local
partners need and we do better
calculations up front so now our
disaster declarations are very
close to the actual amount of
damages done in that local
community for instance we just
issued one I think for three
hundred thousand and one prior
to that for about two hundred
fifty thousand well that saves
us from income bring and holding
on to those those dollars in the
last year we have reconciled and
reverted about eight or nine
million dollars back into the
general fund as we've cleaned up
some of our previous CEOs and
got rid of that money and got it
back where it needs to go so
that's kind of a large overview
of the.
HSM the assistance but it even
gets down more granular that
that when we look at the code
enforcement for the the fire
marshal's office going into new
construction facilities and
ensuring that people are safe
fire investigations.
We have those folks both of
those agent other both those
bureaus in our fire.
The state fire marshal's office
it just exponentially exploded
in the last year since the state
fire marshal's office for the
last six months so they've come
over from PRC and so we've we've
adjusted some things any of it
gets more granular than that
this summer you know we sent out
four hundred thousand individual
sandbags and help local
communities and as we sit right
here right now this instant we
have COVID tests that were
moving out you know to all
corners of the state in a
strategic best fashion working
with the department of health in
a course of personal protective
equipment we still maintain with
department of health the.
warehouse in Albuquerque and
that's a continual needed to
continue push we have strategic
stockpiles stationed around the
state in twenty two different
locations so when we see
something fire up it needs PPE
and COVID really hit a community
we're able to get that pushed
back to I'm just almost
immediately so large large items
and and management right down
into the living sandbags of
COVID tests and PP so we're here
to assist the communities with
whatever they need whether it be
large or small.
As we just kind of talked about
our budget for the department of
homeland security side of things
for FY twenty three is a flat
request basically we have some
things we need to do I'm not
going to
shy away from that are vacancy
rate is way higher than it needs
to be then I want it we we
struggle because our our
partners and the Representative
Garcia mentioned this this the
is areas like Los crucis and
Albuquerque and Santa Fe you
know they seem to get the
attention they steal we bring
folks on we train them and we
get him going in on our salaries
are quite such and the local
communities stealing the
opposite side of the coin that's
not all that because they
started here and they know our
processes so we were able to get
that out to the community but
does create a higher vacancy
rate so again we have a flat
request for FY I mean for in FY
twenty from FY twenty two FY
twenty three.
Chairman committee members Mr
Abbey we're more than happy to
take any gifts of financial
assistance you want to give us
even though that says it's a
flat were only too happy to take
any extra money you have and and
try and put it to good use for
you.
And in the state fire marshal's
office as you heard for FY
twenty three we're looking at we
need to code inspectors and we
brought in we brought over a
couple grant programs for the
state fire marshal's office of
weird ministration and we needed
oversight auditor and I'll call
on chief and ready to explain a
little bit Sir if you don't
mind.
Thank you deputy secretary
animals and a good afternoon
madam chair members of the
committee also are requests that
regards the fire marshal's
office for those factors as a
the secretary of the mentioned
and so we anticipate the more
inspection requests as the the
cannabis facilities as part of
their process is up we're gonna
be conducting inspections in
these facilities of our safety
inspections that's that purpose
and regarding to the auditor
position are requests program
has expanded the agency this
year again about the
approximately twenty million
dollars in grant requests also
we have the fire protection fund
which approximately sixty four
million dollars and distribution
we would like to have an auditor
to examine into a review of
extended years of with the fire
departments.
Thank you Sir greatly appreciate
that.
I realize that work presentation
is the only thing standing
between you all the journey and
so that's what we have we're
more than happy and and hope to
stand for questions and and have
a good discussion with you.
Thank you so much Mr Hamilton
We are now of the thank you for
questions and I'm sure Meredith
I know I thought you had one.
You didn't.
Madam chair I do in fact have a
question I believe it's for
maybe for Ellen Arabian or David
Abbey and that's a relating to
whether or not.
If we do take the LFC
recommendation if we do need to
also note that we need to adjust
the language I'm referring to
The difference worksheet for the
state fire marshal all
Marshall's office.
Madam chair representative
descend yes it would be helpful
if your mission included
direction to update the language
okay thank you very much that
was my question madam chair
thank you for helping clarify
that Representative Garcia.
Thank you madam chair just one
question for the fire marshal.
What are we doing or how we
addressed in our small
communities that are struggling
with the equipment and so forth
for all their fire equipment
stuff.
Madam chair of the.
Representative Garcia thank you
for the question and so this
year
was passed in regards to
there was the reversion that was
removed for fire protection fund
any monies left over are are now
a transfer to the the fire grant
funds last year leave FY twenty
one the distribution was six
million that program now this
year is now a twenty million to
put more money out there
available for fire department so
they can get resources and
equipment.
Thank you for that the you know
I and I knew that it happened
but I do want to make it the
public will Moul for these small
fire a stations out in the rural
New Mexico.
All aware of it so they can have
been little funds and the I'm
pretty sure you guys reach out
to him and maybe making aware of
these funds.
Question at Madam chair of
Representative Garcia yes Sir
and so all we have are far
support euro we have four
inspectors to go out and
collaborate with departments
provide information system up as
they acquired.
I thank you madam chair Sir
because you know a lot of other
small fire departments don't
have all the technology that
needed to apply for these funds
so I appreciate that very much
thank you madam chair.
Thank you and I have a question
for Mr Hamilton.
I'm.
I'm a former educator nicer bun
Education Committee and of
course this appropriations
committee as well but one of the
rumors I'm hearing is that
because schools are having such
difficulty trying to find
substitute teachers that there
is a request possibly and I'm
not sure how to this rumor is
that they may be going out to to
the either the National Guard or
to some military entities to
Have some of your folks actually
we are playing the role of the
substitute teacher do are you
aware of any of that.
Madam chair committee members
that's the first time I have
heard that but I can certainly
research it and see what we can
find for you if I may just have
a little bit more on that madam
chair one of the things we're
looking at doing with our
homeland security bureau is
actually starting to do more
assessments of of our schools
and there how protected they are
with regards to fencing and
those sorts of things and trying
to get some consistency and and
the.
Around the state and and do some
critical infrastructure
assessments that's one thing we
do but specially in our in our
smaller communities that maybe
don't have the funds to hire a
security assessment team or
something like that but I'll
check on that madam chair and
I'll get back to you.
Be great in New Mexico if you
just send it to the house
appropriations are secretary
they can just.
Distributed to all of the
committee members and I don't
know if anyone else has a
question regarding that
particular issue if not I will
go to
Representative Dixon four of
motion.
Thank you madam chair I would
move that the subcommittee C.
adopts the LFC recommendation
with the cabbie ought that the
language be adjusted for the
fire marshal program
Yes.
Is there a second a second that
manager thank you is there any
opposition to that motion.
The motion carries looks like we
have a recommendation moving
forward.
I would like to thank everyone
who participated today thank you
all of Mr Hamilton and your team
for for all of the information
and Mr Ken Ken dot trick.
Kondracke madam chair.
that up demand apologized thank
you all very much for all of
your work thank you for the JFC
team the LESC team the DFA team
and everyone on the committee
thank you for making this such a
pleasant presentation and I am
not going to step.
Any further onto your toes about
going to dinner.
You all we we will now adjourn.
Recess whatever we do thank you
thank you thank.
