Present.
Moya here.
Okay, We have a forum. Thanks.
All. Thank you, Mr Baker. Now
we're gonna go. Uh, we're we
have one item today. The final
review for the General
Appropriations Act of 2024 Gonna
ask Vice chair Dixon for a
motion so that we can consider
and go to director solely for
the substitute for hospitals two
and three.
Thank you, Mr Chair. I would
move House appropriations and
finance committees substitute
for House Bills two and three
for discussion.
Mm. Moved and seconded. Is there
any opposition to that? I don't
see any So with that we'll go
straight to director silly.
Good morning, Mr Chairman. Um,
I'll give a brief summary of
what's in the UM House bill to
substitute
So overall with house bills to
three and the feed bill
Total recurring spending would
equal 10.18 billion from the
General Fund. There's 10.062
billion from the General Fund in
house Bill two. And then you've
got to feed Bill, um, that has
recurring appropriations that
sits on top of that.
On a recurring, You know,
Section four of the bill.
It's $28.9 billion in all.
Sorry, thank you. Director
Sleeve Represent Brown is
pointing out, Can you as we
point as you pointed, uh,
explain this if you can refer to
the pages here on our handout,
please, Mr. Chairman. I'm gonna
be working off of this, okay?
And so we're on this summary
portion of that members. So on
the top of that, that's correct.
So, Mr Mr Recurring
Appropriations Mr Chairman that
are contained in the bill before
you as well as the feed bill.
From the General Fund with total
10.18 billion.
That's about a 6.5% increase.
HB two also includes about 1.2
billion and non recurring,
special and supplemental
appropriations.
In addition, it has a new
section. Um, that authorizes 100
and 50 million from the General
Fund for major infrastructure
projects and heavy maintenance
through the Transportation
Department.
The bill also transfers about
1.1 billion
From the General fund to a
variety of, um endowments and
expendable trust to support
future spending for the mid to
long term.
Including things like filling up
the
Um
Land of Enchantment Legacy Fund
at about $300 million
Um
And setting up
Um, funds for government
innovation and demonstration
projects.
HB two builds on the work of the
LFC this interim that focused on
investments on evidence based
strategies to improve outcomes
for new Mexicans.
Particularly those that invest
in building the state's human
capital, with the goal of
producing higher annual per
capita personal per capita
income.
As an example. HB to invest
about $100 million to develop
the state's workforce through a
series of appropriations for
career technical education
industry recognized
certification programs, trades
and apprenticeship. HB two also
contains
Um, the LFC recommended strategy
of multiyear pilot projects.
Um at agencies to provide them
with funding for the next three
years that's stable to
demonstrate their effectiveness
before moving this projects into
recurring based budgets. That's
how you're able to hold the line
on a variety of different high
priority areas in the budget
like Child protective services,
where there was concern about
Implementation and implementing
things correctly. Um, if they do
that they will be able to draw
down significant amounts of
federal revenue, um, and
demonstrate that those resources
should be put into their base
budget into the so the bill
transfers funding to a
Government Accountability
program fund for these
appropriations that are
contained in Section nine.
Um, so those would be available
in
Um, for three years, and they're
broken up in the bill for each
individual fiscal year.
It also transfers funding for
the future investments like this
to an expendable trust.
This strategy is a effectively
helping spread out the uses of
the current surplus of general
fund revenue that is largely
driven by oil and gas. Um, that
we're already seeing a plateau,
Um, in our general fund revenue
growth starting next year.
So this is a strategy to spread
that
Um
Spread that surplus out over
multiple years in public
schools. HB two includes about
4.4 billion in recurring general
fund appropriations.
The recommendation addresses
expansions in the K 12 plus
programs. Despite what you're
hearing in the media, there are
a lot of school districts that
have been expanding their school
calendars. Um, so much so that
the amounts that were contained
in House Bill two this year were
not enough to fully fund
everybody eating and
Leading to the need for
supplemental funding.
Um
House Bill two. Also, um
prioritizes local discretion and
capacity building for a range of
different, um, strategies the
state's been promoting as in
response to the Yossi Martinez.
Those include flexible funding
parts through the state
equalization guarantee for
career and technical education,
structured literacy teacher
mentorship.
Community schools.
There's about 200 million in non
recurring appropriations to
support further support, career
and technical education. 40
million
Structured literacy, Universal
school meals and, um, educator,
fellow initiatives in addition
to the money that will be
piloted through the expendable
trust
Um, find ways to staff hard to
hard to staff, special education
positions and study educator
clinical practice programs.
Higher education includes
appropriations over 1.3 billion.
There's money for, um
Expanding the performance based
funding formula for instruction
in general purposes as well as
targeted appropriations for
faculty pay Student support
initiatives, um graduate student
worker compensation.
Um and then additional money for
nursing and healthcare and
financial aid programs that
range from medical professional
loan repayment to graduate
student scholarships. Um, two
additional matching funds for
institutions for research
grants.
On Page two of the summary, Mr
Chairman.
Significant investments are
included in House Bill two for
early childhood, Um, continuing
the state's effort over the last
decade to invest in this policy
area of government.
That includes about 17.6 million
for pre K services, including 2
million for quality support.
Um, and making sure that your
investment in pre K is actually
yielding the kind of results
that we've seen from our
research in the past. All of
that revenue is coming from the
voter approved expansion of the
permanent school fund
distribution that flows through
the General fund.
There's an additional increase
from the distribution that's
contingent on legislation from
the early childhood Trust fund
that those appropriations with
total $250 million. The bulk of
the increase is for childcare
services as well as quality
initiatives. Percy wife D. The
main recommendation, um
For particularly child
Protective services. As I said,
is coming from the, um
Government Accountability Fund
for the next three years to
invest in a range of community.
Um based services to help
prevent and intervene in
families lives earlier before
the need for Children to be
removed.
From their homes for foster
care. HFC also added to the LFC
recommendation in this area to
provide funding for evidence
based strategies for hard to
place Children who are already
in foster care. You see reports
about Children needing to stay
in in offices and the like, so
this would be a strategy to
ameliorate those particular
challenges.
Health and human services.
HB two and appropriate almost $2
billion in general fund revenue
to the new Healthcare Authority,
which is the current human
services department, plus a
number of programs that you all,
um
Transferred through legislation
last year, including the DD
waiver in the States, Um
State employee health insurance
program.
The
Total all funds budget for this
particular department will be
about $12 billion, So I massive
department with a lot of
touching the lives of almost
half a new Mexicans.
The bill increases spending by
about 180 million, or 11%.
Um, there are large increases
throughout the Medicaid budget
for provider rates for primary
care and infant maternal. That
department would have the have
enough funding, not for all of
those rates to go to 150% of
Medicare, But whichever ones
that chooses, it could go up
250% of Medicare.
There's other rate increases for
targeted for the smallest rural
hospitals for targeted payments
to help assure those facilities
up rural health clinics.
DeeDee waiver providers, Um, and
the like.
The thing to keep in mind about
Medicaid is there's well over
$100 million within the budget
that's needed just to maintain,
um
Flat spending as federal revenue
is declining as we become more
prosperous as a state due to
our, um higher personal per
capita income.
The Health Department. The main
increases for the health
department are focused on state
facilities around the state.
There's also money in the
Medicaid budget to provide
targeted rate increases through
Medicaid, which primarily
finances much of the health
department's operations.
Natural resources significant
increases for many of the
natural resources agencies, Um
Everything from increasing
staffing and the regulatory
capacity.
Uh, um, for overseeing an oil
and gas industry to fighting
fires to expanding staffing and
funding for operation of our
state parks around the state.
There's increases in non
recurring funding for, um let's
see the Environment department's
budget. There's significant
investments in their staffing
pay.
Their overall but general fund
budget would grow about 19%.
Um
Those increases should allow
for greater
Effectiveness in their
regulatory responsibilities.
There's also money in the budget
$20 million for Indian water
rights settlements for those non
native communities that are
either seeing cost increases
such as the house or setting
aside money for
A new settlements that Congress
is, um
Considering right now, but it's
not finalized.
Commerce industry economic
development increases for
tourism advertising, Um,
increases for lead of
$13 million.
As well as maintaining the
staffing increases that LFC had
recommended for focusing on
those strategic plan Priorities
and the Economic development
Department.
Judicial Branch House Bill two
made inroads on backfilling a
lot of the last few revenue that
the administrative Office of the
courts received. But that was,
uh, was coming to an end as a
result of legislation last year,
still probably work to do in the
Senate there.
Um, compensation on a recurring
basis. HB two includes salary
increases for all employees, Um,
across the board. There's a 2%
cola. And then there's
additional 2% that agencies
would have. That would be
flexible. Um, for, um
Sending out those compensation
increases.
Like I said specials and
supplemental appropriations.
There's a
You know a lot of action in the
back of the bill and prior
years, you know a big specials,
Appropriations. Um, House Bill
two would be about $300 Million
you've got you know, well over a
billion dollars in specials in
this particular budget,
everything from other major ones
are 50 million for agencies and
tribes to have matching funds
for federal grants.
Um
The House bill. Two includes
$100 Million to Supplement Water
Trust board.
Water projects that are have
already um
Demonstrated their their close
to being ready to go.
Like I said 20 million for the
settlements for water projects.
80 million for rural health care
expansion, along with money for
expanding behavioral health
services over the next three
years, and the Government
Accountability Fund and 30
Million that was not an LFC for
apprenticeship programs programs
that contingent on house Bill
five. Mr Chairman.
With the spending and House Bill
two as well as assumptions that
we have for other legislation.
Um, it would leave reserves at
32% of returning appropriations.
That assumes there's there's
enough room for the Legislature
to make $200 million in tax code
changes. It assumes the lfc
level of spending from the
General Fund for capital Outlay
and 935 million and it assumes a
delay of moving the tobacco
permanent fund out of the
General fund to FY 26.
Pages five.
Through 10 have General fund
detailed by agency and pages, 11
and 12 show. Um, your General
fund financial summary. I will
note that HB two does leave
money in the operating reserve.
In case there is a
Downturn in the economy. The
executive recommendation that
you had before you earlier spent
all of the operating reserves,
um down, requiring a transfer
from the Tax Stabilization
reserve.
The expendable trust would act
as a backup reserve to the
operating reserves. So you think
you've got another 5% that is
like the first line of defense,
um, for any kind of revenue
destabilization that you can go
and reach into before even
needing to touch your 32%.
The higher Education Endowment
fund that's contemplated in the
overall financial plan.
Um, also would act as a backup.
But start spinning off interest
income to help
Um fun tuition programs through
the lottery and opportunity
scholarship for the foreseeable
future.
Assuming that we don't let
tuition run rampant, rampantly
high with that, Mr Chairman, I'd
be happy to answer any
questions. I'll turn it over to,
um, your chief of staff to go
over any anything else you would
like to talk about.
Thank you, Director Sally. Good
morning, Mr Chair. Members of
the committee. I would like to
briefly touch on some of the
technical adjustments that were
discussed in this committee and
changed in the bill. Before you,
um I was able to get ahold of
most of our technical committee
this week. Um And you all should
have an email from me with these
adjustments for the most part,
Everything that was changed here
was minor. Um
As you all caught. There were
some incorrect fiscal years.
Little things like that, so
those were all adjusted. The two
major adjustments I would turn
your attention to or not Major,
but the two bigger technical
adjustments I would turn your
attention to, um there was a bit
of a discrepancy between two of
the documents that were before
you on Friday for the courts it
had to do with the ninth or
sorry. The courts. The district
attorney's it had to do with the
Ninth Judicial District
attorney It was a less than
$20,000 change, but one high
level said there was an
additional $19,000 in one
document didn't so we went with
what the workgroup suggested,
and added that $19,000
Um, In addition to that there
was a reauthorization change
added into the bill. That is
before you, um that was
something that had dropped off
one of the spreadsheets, and it
would essentially reauthorized
the RP funds from 2020.
Um, the language that you'll see
for that reauthorization is very
big. It looks like we're
reauthorizing about a billion
dollars. In truth, there is
about 100 million that the
reversion date for the federal
deadline and the reversion date
that was enacted by you all in
2020 was different. Um, it's
been brought to our attention by
the executive and by many
agencies that if those funds
were to not be reauthorized, it
is highly unlikely that they
Be able to get spent because of
some of those federal
guidelines.
By reauthorizing that
appropriation that also
reauthorizes the, um community
and quality of life rec center
grants from D F A. Which I know
is a concern for representative
Brown, representative Luhan and
others. So those funds are
reauthorized here at those
communities will not lose that
money. And that's um that's the
extent of the significant
technical changes in this
document. Thank you. Excellent.
Thank you very much Chief of
staff.
Uh, um. Okay. Let's go straight
to members. We're gonna start
with represented Chatfield.
Thank you, Mr Chair.
Recurring funding.
You said a number, including the
expendable trust in the early
childhood and number not
including there, so I just
wanted to
Going to get a hold of what it
is including them and what it is
not including them.
Yes, sir. Mr. Chairman, Um,
excluding that, excluding the
expendable trust funding.
But
Including house built to feed
Bill as well as what's in house
Bill two. Before you recurring
spending would be 10.18 billion.
Uh,
Mr Chair, talk about reserves,
including her. Mr Chairman,
Reserves would be at 32%.
Including or excluding, or both
ways expendable trust is not
calculated as part of reserves.
Okay, so 30 32% excluding the
expendable trust. Thank you.
Thank you, Mr. Thank you,
Representative. Chatfield
represent pedigree, please.
I figured out was way down the
list. Thank you. Chairman just
start with a few questions. I
think I'm going to have some
more as I go through this, but
Chairman director, One of the
things you I think I heard you
say is we're already starting to
see a plateau in the General
fund from oil and gas.
And
Could we not?
I agree that if we wanted to sit
there and say Okay, we're seeing
that plateau.
That would be because of some of
the changes.
Chairman and director that
happened in house built to house
will send a Bill 26 and Senate
Bill 378 from last year where
many of those revenue funds were
directed in different locations.
And so it looked actually looked
like glowing gas wasn't
Applying or
Providing as much to the state
of Mexico as, um
You know, with $3.45 billion or
something like that a real
number Without those changes in
those three bills from last year
would have been north at 6.5.
Mr Chairman, Representative
Pettigrew.
That's correct. The, um
The direct
Money coming from oil and gas is
now capped.
In the General fund.
But even when you look at the
money that's being transferred
from oil and gas into those
trust funds, including severance
tax permanent fund.
Revenue estimates move those
amounts down. Um, and so there's
been a peak and then decline in
the revenue estimates The
general fund has not felt that
decline in the revenue estimates
precisely because of the fiscal
policies that you all have been
acted to basically insulate the
General fund from that
volatility.
Thank you. Thank you, Chairman
and thank you, Director. But I
think I think the point that I'm
trying to make is the only gas
is still providing well, beyond
what
What the revenue estimates were
for a year and a half two years
ago versus where we're actually
at now, it just looks a little
bit different because of the cap
that we now look at. Mr
Chairman, representative. That's
correct. And so now we're
exposed to the kind of growth
for General fund.
Coming from the broader, mostly
the broader economic, Um
Conditions of the state. Those
have been brought down by a lot
of tax code changes that you've
enacted over the past couple of
years. And my main point is that
For next year and in the over
the period of time for the
fiscal outlook, revenues are
only projected to grow 2.5 to 3%
a year.
Thank you, Chairman. And thank
you, Director. I would think
that revenues could probably
grow a little bit more if we
could actually move through
stuff through some of our
departments.
And and out and and get to work
in the oil field. With respect
to that, Um
And made a couple of notes
chairman.
If I were recall the information
that we received on Friday
versus today, there seems to be
a few discrepancies with respect
to
Um, the numbers there's about,
uh, 2.5 million more and and
And money that were was going to
specific agencies we had about
50.3 on 50.2 on Friday now were
52.8.
And, um, there's a also a change
with respect to what we talked
about on Friday is
About 3.5 million to the courts.
Now, versus about 5.8.
Chairman. Director, Can you
speak to that?
Mr Chairman, Um
Without seeing your
documentation. It's hard for me
to
To respond to any changes, but
You know the You had a lot of
Changes that HFC had enacted.
Had recommended through work
groups and a variety of ad hoc.
And then you had a number of,
um catch up. Cleanup item
changes that sometimes it's kind
of hard to track.
With all those documents that
you had before you
What's going on.
The, Um I will say that the
amounts
That are above the yellow. You
went with the LFC
recommendation. There was an
addition There was an increase
of of lfc and the feed bill that
can be causing some of that
discrepancy between what you
were seeing, Um on Friday and
what the totals are in the
document that you had before you
Chairman director. I appreciate
that the description sees there
don't get anywhere near 52.8. So
that was my my concern. Can we
talk about the changes with
respect to what we're looking at
Towards the end of last week
with the courts with where we're
at today?
Mr Chairman.
The high level that you had
before you on Friday may not
have matched the underlying
detail that you adopted in terms
of adding money to the AOC,
which is the 3.2.
Thank you very much. Thank you,
Chairman.
Thank you very much represent
Pettigrew. We're gonna go
briefly to representative had a
meal, please. Thank you, Mr
Chair.
Um, I am trying to find more
detailed information on the DD
waiver. Can you break that down
for me about the increases or
what's there in the budget for
the D D wait
Thank you.
Yes. Um, Mr Chairman
representatives, so the DD
waiver had about 38 million that
needed to be replaced Federal
funds.
There was an increase of at
least 11 million. I believe for,
um, the rates
And then there was an increase
from LFC to cover the cost of
care for people that are on the
waiver but are more using more
services. I believe that was
about 14 million.
And then there were some other
savings that netted out to be a
slightly smaller amount than
those three items that you
totaled up there.
Thank you. Thank you, Mr Chair.
Thank you, Representative.
Camille. Next we're gonna go to
represent vodka, please.
Thank you, Mr Chairman. And
thank you, Director sleeve. This
is very helpful, okay?
I want to be kind of focusing on
three areas one regarding the
first area of
Mr Chairman, Director Slee is
the public education.
Um, the $200 million that are in
non recurring, um, spending.
One of the
Activities under there is the
structured literacy.
Ah, Director sleeve Mr Chairman
does that include the
construction of the literacy,
senator or
Or what? What does that fund
Mr Chairman, the 15 million for
structured literacy includes
funding for
The interventions that will that
are proposed to be delivered all
across the state this summer to
students as well as through
after school programs, I think
is the plan. It does not include
the facility. That's a
separately going to be addressed
in the capital Outlay, Bill. So,
so thank you, Mr Chairman. So
the
The money infrastructure level,
you'll be in the I think that
with the number of 15,000
students that hopefully would be
Supported during the summertime.
Is that correct?
Mr Chairman? Yes. The summer
interventions. Okay? And thank
you, Mr Chairman, the other
number under public education.
The 75 million
Um, uh, We did talk about the
Um, special education hard to
fill positions. Can you give me
just another the teacher
residences that also included in
that funding Because I know I
see that the educational
educator fellows was funded kind
of above that in that 200.
What else is in that 75 million.
Mr Chairman, Mr Chairman. It
includes, um
Two separate demonstration
projects. One is for the feeling
hard to staff special education
positions.
The other one is for educator
clinical practice that would
include, um basically the
current funding levels for
The teacher residencies and paid
internships. And then the Ed
fellows is on top of that, in a
separate one year appropriation,
the other clinical practice have
three years worth of
appropriations. And thank you,
Mike. Mr Chairman and director
Salim My one question under
higher education, and it's on
page two.
Is it saying that under house
built to it actually fully funds
the opportunity scholarship.
Which I support. Can you give me
that? What does that number
there to fully fund the
opportunity scholarship,
additional monies.
Mr Chairman Off the top of my
head. It's a little north of 140
million. I believe there's a
supplemental request.
Um, for this fiscal year that is
funded contingent on legislation
creating the higher Ed Endowment
and thank you my last question,
Chairman and director Sally is
regarding early child childhood.
Okay, um
The innocent last time there
the, uh if I 25 recommendation,
um
Increases the distribution to
250 million.
Mr Chairman and director. Sweet
How much of that, actually or
first of all, how much the total
budget for the early childhood.
That's my first question. And
second how much of it comes from
the early childhood Trust fund,
Mr Chairman, 250 would come from
the early childhood trust fund.
There's
Another 100.
1720 million from the permanent
school fund distribution that
the voters approved.
And then there's a mix of
federal and general fund.
Totally over $700 million for
next year's budget for earlier
over $700 million for the early
childhood. Thank you, Mr
Chairman. Thank you very much.
Represent vodka. Next we're
going to present bound, please.
Thank you very much, Mr.
Chairman. Um
Mr Silly and Amanda. Uh,
Appreciate all the work that has
most people realize just how
much work it is.
I did want to ask Mr Chairman
about, um
On the yellow packet that we
have here in the first
paragraph. It's a summary page
one.
It says that, um
House Bill two authorizes 150
million from the General Fund
for major infrastructure
projects and heavy maintenance
for the Department of
Transportation.
So, Mr Chairman, Mr Silly. I've
gone through the yellow packet
and I see under. I think it's
page four there.
Yes, Page 45. Mr. Chairman, um,
under, um there's a category
Department of transportation at
line 153.
And so it's showing zero on this
sheet.
But when I go, Mr Chairman to
this, um, the actual budget
itself.
I see that 150 million is in
section 11 of House Bill two.
It is for 100 and $50 million.
I'm just curious to know why
it's not showing up, so it's in
there, but it's not showing up
on the yellow sheets. So, Mr
Chair, we could just have some
clarification. Mr Chairman, that
table is, um, showing recurring
appropriations and 100 and 50
million would come from non
recurring appropriation and
section 11. Very good. Thank
you.
Okay? And, um
I just make the position
statement again. Mr Chair that I
with $3.5 billion of extra money
in the General Fund for fiscal
25.
150 million is not nearly enough
because
Especially in my part of the
state, those roads or commerce
roads that are producing all
this extra revenue that we have,
and this is such a small amount
to address the condition of our
roads, and I just think we could
do so much better on that. So
thank you.
Thank you Represent Brown. Next,
we're gonna go to represent
correct.
Thank you, Mr Chair. Thank you.
to both of you and all your
stuff.
Um, my question is about, um
The difference between what the
executive requested for Medicaid
and what we're passing in HFC.
Initially, the LFC was 200
million lower.
Then the executive budget.
And
And then I think what I heard
you say Charles was that it's
100 Million to maintain Let
spending and 63 million more has
been added for provider rate
increases. Can you just clarify
it? Mr Chairman, one of the
major adjustments that, um, that
occurred with the HFC scenario.
Is
We got a new Medicaid
projection.
In January that did not inform
the executive request.
And what we found was that their
their Medicaid is projecting a
$40 million surplus.
In the current year.
And so they
They're HFC scenario took that
40 million and adjusted the
starting point for what the base
budget would be down by 40
million in order to accommodate
Some of the projected enrollment
growth changes that the
executive had that were far in
excess of LFC. So that helped
really close close the gap.
The full gap is not close.
There's a number of areas within
this budget where you've left
room for the Senate to be able
to, um, still make other kinds
of changes, including those
education totals that you're
seeing, you know, come up to
half of what the
administration's priority is so,
um
The
That's the difference between
what you saw in the executive
and what HFC is able to do.
So, Mr Chair that gap that we're
looking to the Senate for would
be about how much
At least 8 to 15 million. Okay,
thank you very much.
Thank you, Representative
Garrett. Next, we're gonna go to
ranking member Armstrong. Thank
you, Mr Chairman. And and thank
you all. First of all, for all
your hard work all the staff
sitting out in the audience. Uh,
I don't know how you do it.
Um, you know, people are running
us down in the hallways. I can't
imagine we were all after you
after they're running us down.
And so it's kind of a little bit
of a circus. And then it comes
into this, uh, masterpiece here,
um
And masterpiece because it's so
much work and so much
Intricacy goes into it. So thank
you. For that. I you don't go
unnoticed and you don't go
unappreciated so
Um, I have a few questions. Uh,
Mr Chairman and director on the
Providers for D, D, um
Yeah, the
Reimbursement rate for providers
in the DD waiver have how much
have we raised that and do you
think it's sufficient?
Um, where we're not going to be
caught by surprise and have to
have a special or supplemental.
Mr Chairman, Representative.
This next You've been increasing
rates each year for the past
couple of years, according to a
great study that was conducted.
I would acknowledge that there's
probably some in the provider
community that feel that that
rate study is is out of date and
needs to be updated and
methodology. Updated. So there's
Probably going to be another
one. I would anticipate being
done.
I know that there's concerns
within the provider community.
About, um
Whether these these rates will
be sufficient, given that we've
essentially eliminated the
waiting list and do they have
the capacity to be able to
deliver all of the services that
folks coming off the waiting
list might need. Um, what we're
seeing is that
As folks it moved after waiting
list. They're they're falling
into a service pattern that we
had kind of fit within our
projection that many of them
were Children and have don't
require independent living
services.
Um, that will change in the
future, obviously, um, but we
acknowledge that they their
provider community does still
have that concern and they
probably would like for it to be
higher, But this is a another
year of pretty significant rate
increases. I can't tell you the
percentage. I don't have that
off the top of my head. Thank
you, Mr Chairman. And thank you,
Director for that, Um
I'm I'm a big proponent of it,
but it's it's you know, it's
kind of a band aid when we lump
it all in together with
All of the cliff effect that we
have across the state and
And until we really address that
Cliff effect
We're just gonna have to keep
increasing. And so, um, I know
that people are working on that,
And I appreciate that, but I've
been here eight years screaming
and shouting about that and
nothing has been done yet, So I
would. I would really hope that
that we're gonna be getting
that, uh, reeled in Mr Chairman
and director
Um
I have a I have a my own opinion
on this special education
teachers. I know a few that are
scared to leave the position.
They're in. Now They're not
under special education because
they love their kids and they
love their school and there's
other
So I don't think it's that they
don't want to move into special
education. I think they're just
they love their family that
which they consider their
classroom. And so I don't know
that that this is going to make
a huge difference. I'm hopeful
that it does. Mr Chairman and
director
Um
I appreciate all of the career
and technical education.
In the higher ed and at the ped
level. There is, of course, I do
have a major problem as you
know, with some of the wording
on the $30 million, and I'm
I'm really torn.
Whether to vote for this budget
with that language in there
because it's unfair language,
And so, um I'm hoping
I don't know. It's just a It's
just a struggle that I'm I'm
with because that that's a big
deal.
To my to me and and several
people in my community.
Um
The other thing that I have a
problem with
Mr Chairman and director is the
expansion of the Cape 12 plus
programs.
Um
As I as I love the career
technical I love so many things
that we're doing.
Uh, we tried to mandate it. It
didn't work. Schools didn't want
it. And once again here we have
funding in
Here because we're gonna put
them under if if the rule of 180
days goes through
Through p e D. We have funding
in here because everyone will
qualify for the extended
learning.
And I have a problem with that.
I think it should be left up to
local control.
The other question. I have Mr
Chairman. It's not really
question. I haven't asked one
yet, but, uh one
Is, uh, the transfers funding to
the government Accountability
Program. Fun. I thought
originally, that was for four
years.
That was Mr Chairman and HFC
took action to reduce it to
three. Okay. Thank you for that.
And and so just moving money
around to different things, and
that's
That's where we had to get rid
of them four and turned it down
to three once again, Mr Chairman
and director, um these multiyear
pilot projects, um
I don't think a lot of people on
this committee
I know you all did your job and
and helped choose those. There's
some that I have.
Issues with
And I know Mr Chairman and
director that
Ultimately, you know, we're
looking at report cards and we
keep funding. We just keep
funding.
Everything that has a poor
report card.
And not holding them
accountable.
And I have I have issue with
that. Where are the
appropriators and we? We should
not be doing that.
And that we should also not be
changing the report card.
So that to ask the questions and
report on things that we know
we're going to be good.
We would do this. We would not
do this in our homes. If
something's not going right, we
would make a change.
And so I have problems.
With, uh
The government accountability Um
Fund in the general.
And most of those pilot projects
that we're going to be going
through.
Will become recurring.
No matter what their report card
is
Because we've done it year after
year after year.
So, um, I thank you again for
all your hard work.
Um
And and for your leadership and
appreciate all of your time and
hard work. Thank you, Mr
Chairman. Thank you were gonna
go next to represent Montoya,
please?
Um, thank you, mr Chair.
Um, I don't really have a
question here. Um, I do have a
brief statement figured it would
be better to do it here than
explaining my vote.
At the end.
Um
As you know, I do have a problem
with the way that $6 million was
put into the budget.
For staffing for legislators.
And briefly. I want to describe
that. However, I have a
solution which I want to present
at the end.
Um, Article four, Section nine.
Authorizes the Legislature to
hire staff, but the positions
described are fairly specific.
Such as chaplain, chief clerk
sergeant at arms, enrolling
clerks, reading clerks,
etcetera.
And the provision allows staff
for each house but not for
individual legislators or
district offices.
All other legislative agencies
such as LSC.
Uh, l c S l E S, C H D. C and
SCC have been created by
statute.
Which set their duties and
responsibilities, set, pay scale
and other things.
Um
Unfortunately, what the what the
way money was stuck in the House
Bill two this year and an
appropriation of $6 million for
future full time legislative
staff.
There are no details provided at
all and have not been provided
to
This committee.
Once again. We came in a week
early, so there was plenty of
time to have this discussion.
Um there's no information that
has been provided as to how this
uh how the staff would be hired
when they would be hired who
they would report to
Um And we have no idea if this
$6 million is the is the final
is this the Senate may add
another $6 million
We don't know which of the
Uh, options that were
Given to the
Two legislators in a survey
which is the only interaction
that most of us have had with
this concept.
We have no idea which of the
three tiered options we're
looking at here.
Um And if there and Mr Chair if
if if
The staffers are not tied to a
department.
We have no idea.
If there even are limits on how
we hire there. There is. There
are literally no specifics.
Um
As to, uh, questioning that I
had on this on Friday There was
a suggestion that there was a
robust process that we went
through.
And
Proceeding with
Potentially the hiring of staff
for legislators.
And I, so I looked into it and
all I was able to come up with
Mr Chair was that there was a
discussion.
During in Legislative Council.
I don't believe And I'm not
positive, but I'm not sure that
anybody in this room serves on
legislation. That is a very,
very limited group of folks.
Um, there was a study that was
authorized. And then there was a
Uh, a survey that also that was
authorized.
But after that work was
completed, Mr Chair
Legislative Council, then did
not put
A group together.
Uh, to to go over the findings.
Mr Chair.
There was not
Uh, a recommendation by
Legislative Council.
That this would be something
that we would pursue this year,
especially in this manner
without a bill.
Um, as I looked into it, there
was where there was likely
robust discussion. It appears as
if there were members.
Of the majority party in the
House.
That conducted, uh, a their own
research. This did not include
minority party legislators, and,
uh, if there were any Senate
members, Republican or Democrat,
I don't know that there were any
If if there were I could not
find them.
Um
But the Legislative Council did
not create a formal interim
committee to study and discuss
district or regional offices.
Um, to whatever degree Mr Chair
that there was a robust
Uh, delving into the idea of
whether or not we should have
legislative staff.
Republicans were not involved at
all.
I do know that
So, however robust this was it
was very one sided.
And
To whatever degree or pursuing
Putting this in the budget.
It does appear to be unilateral.
And
Um in looking into the potential
legality of this
Um
It.
It appears.
That they're They're hurts quite
a bit, And I'm not going to go
over it quite a bit.
As to the legality of taking
this process forward.
And putting district offices. I
think we can hire staff. I think
I think we do have statutory
authority to hire staff but
putting them in district offices
cannot find any statutory
authority for that at all.
And we have other items. Mr
Chair in this budget that are
tied to a bill being passed and
That would allow for this
robust.
Type of discussion and debate.
And so I mentioned to you on
Saturday that I was getting a
bill drafted. I do have a bill
drafted.
I'll be introducing it today.
At the very least.
The process needs to be
legitimized.
Um, we have done several things
over the past.
Four years to increase
transparency.
And to legitimize our processes.
Um
I'm introducing this bill. Not
because necessarily. I'm a fan.
Of hiring staff, but I am but I
did create a bill here that I
could live with.
Which
Is the lower end tier of the
Options that we were given which
most legislators could agree on,
which made staff
Uh, nonpartisan.
They would report to Legislative
Council service, which I think
That structure is in place that
would also allow us to know what
the pay structure is for staff.
I think that's a very important
key component that we have no
idea here could as it is right
now. I have no idea for each
legislator could pay somebody
what they think they're worth. I
don't know.
No one knows.
So I'm gonna I would imagine
this bill be Jermaine. Since
there's a line item now in the
budget.
And so, um, I'm gonna pursue
this. I'll speak with the
speaker today to see his
thoughts obviously had to get
this drafted before yesterday,
so I could even get this
introduced.
If this is not
Ah!
The bill that is was in mind
when this money was put into the
Budget. I would suggest Mr Chair
you and other chairman and the
leadership.
I have dummy bills.
That can be altered and can be
put in. If this is not what's
I was in mind when this money
was put in here. I have no idea
what was in mind when this money
was put in here.
So I would suggest that someone
get drafted, But if not, I
believe this gives us a vehicle
to legitimize this budget item.
And I think that is something
that all of our constituents
expect is for us to do things
above board out in the open,
have the debate.
And it should be clear at the
end what we're voting for rather
than voting for something and
then seeing what's in it.
When it is created. Thank you,
Mr Chair.
Right, heard them.
Thank you, Mr Chair and Mr
Presenter. I just have a
question for clarification. If I
look on page 12 of the yellow
sheets that you provided to us,
and I'm looking under
Appropriations contingency fund
And the revenues and diversions.
There's eight is that 8 million
and my reading that correctly or
is that what is that number?
That's correct. And what can
that be used for?
Mr Chairman, usually the
disaster funding.
Comes out of the appropriation
contingency fund.
Um, I'll double check with our
economists, but I believe those
would would have been, um
Versions from unused disaster
declarations. But I'll confirm
that and get back to you.
Okay. Thank you, Mr Chair. Thank
you very much upset. Herndon
represents Johan, please.
Thank you, Mr Chair, and I want
to give a special Thank you to
Charles and all your staff and
all the work that you've done.
Thank you to Amanda for helping
us on the house side.
Um
So much work as already
mentioned, and I just want to
appreciate everything and all
the work you've done. I just
have
Um, I want to be
Very thankful for, um on page
four or five on the yellow
sheets. Just what line 147.
We heard the message and and
that was very clear. And I am
appreciative of us making that
That change in our budget.
I just have a couple of
questions, Mr First clarifying
questions, Mr Chair regarding
the budget.
Um
So
And I may have missed this Mr
Chair. Was there any anything
anywhere in here that for the
strategic water supply?
Ah, that was mentioned by, um
The environment Department. Mr.
Chair, Mr Chairman,
Representative. No. That was a
proposal for the executive for
the capital Bill.
It was capital improvement. So
that was with the line item was
Thank you so much. I just I
wasn't sure I wanted some
clarification on that. And then
For we got this. I think there
was just one question, but I'll
ask you one after, but I think
that this
There's more that we can do.
We're still learning and
Getting the hang of all of
everything that's integrated
into our budget process and then
to our budget. I think that
we're doing
Would you in the work of the
people as we always say, and we
couldn't do that without your
staff and without the incredible
minds that we have, and those
that we hired to help us with
all of this Mr Chair, including
our, including our committee, I
think our committee is is
diligent.
I think we are. We are open to
having these conversations and
figuring out things and I wanted
to just thank you all for the
work that you've done. Thank
you, Mr Chair. Thank you
Represent Luhan. Next, we're
gonna go to represent Karenina.
Thank you, Mr Chairman. And I
want to echo. Thank you for all
your great work and all your
staff. You guys are just
wonderful. Thank you. So I just
want to go back a little bit on
as far as legislative staff.
Um, there were two surveys done.
And um Bieber Study and
Legislative Council services and
every member of this body was
asked, had the opportunity to
take these surveys put in your
what you thought you wanted as
far as legislative staff. Um,
they went to the extent where
they called us if we called
people to see if they wanted to
do the survey, But every member
of this Republican Democrat
Um, Senate and House. Every
member was asked twice. Two
different surveys on what they
would like for staff if they
wanted if they didn't what they
thought of times what it was all
it was there it happened. We
worked on this bill, a group of
us required almost a year. So,
um, then passed last session
didn't come up all the way. But
This. This has been vetted
through. Everybody had the
opportunity. I just want to make
that clear. It was not one
sided. Everyone had the
opportunity to take the survey
put in their input and be
listened to Thank you, Mr
Chairman.
Thank you Represent Santayana
represent Allison, please.
Thank you, Mr Chair. Um I really
don't have a question just to
comment.
Um, First of all, Mr Silly and
your staff, we thank you for the
hard work that you put into this
and
I'm going to continue advocating
for my health councils. Um, as I
look at the description on the
health and human services
The first sentence is House Bill
to appropriate 1.96 billion.
That's a lot of money into the
new
Health care authority. Um
I'm a little bit and
questionnaires to how we invest
such a large amount of money
into a new authority and in my
House bill, asking for 6.6
million for the healthcare
councils.
We thank you for giving us 3
million
And we're still short 3.6.
Million dollars to basically do.
Uh,
What a new authority is tested.
Do we are doing the basic work
at the group grassroots level,
especially in the very rulers of
areas we are doing. What
the objective of the health and
human services going to do, And
yet we're still short 3.6
million. I'm just wondering why
That was not considered when we
were appropriate 1.96 billion,
when all we were asking for was
6.6 just to comment. Thank you,
Mr Chair. Thank you, Mr silly.
Thank you represent Alison.
Ah, I don't see any other
questions. I'm gonna go to know.
Vice chair. Dixon has a few
questions. Thank you, Mr Chair.
Thank you. Charles and Amanda
for the presentation and for the
hard work that goes into this. I
wanted to go back to the
discussion about reserves and
recurring spending. Um, Charles,
can you remind us
When we first started as a Jfc
two weeks ago, we had a
discussion about, um
Hmm. What would happen if we
grew the recurring budget too
much? And I just wanted Could
you
Remind us of sort of what our
target area was for that for
recurring spending growth.
Um, Mr Chairman.
Members of the committee. So we
we had a discussion about this.
Plateau of revenues starting
next year because of um fiscal
policies and tax code changes
and just general slowdown in the
economy coming out of
You know the inflationary
pressures post Covid.
Um and so
The
The presentation really centered
on
The date that you want to start
building budgets that only grow
250 million a year.
In total.
Um, And the more that you spend
today, whether through tax code
changes or through the recurring
budget, the faster that date
moves up.
This 6.5% increase.
Keeps that date at bay and
allows you to do a lot of non
recurring spending multiyear
spending through like the
government accountability, um,
for
You know, years to come. Um so
you're starting to pull back the
reins on the 10 to 15% recurring
increases that we have been
doing the past 10 years and are
entering into a more
sustainable path that still
allows you to make really
important investments for
today's needs that new Mexicans
have, um, as well as big
investments for
The future and even the new
strategy of for the midterm. Um
All of those are contained in
House Bill two and the overall
financial scenario, Mr Chair.
Thank you, Mr Chair it. Thank
you, Charles. Um And based on
the work that we've done in HFC
and having gone through the
committees and, um, sort of made
adjustments, um
Can you tell me when for the lfc
recommendation? What was the
reserve level? Um And then what
is the reserve level that we
have proposed here in this
committee substitute after all
of those changes.
Mr Chairman. Uh,
Um, the overall financial
scenario that's assumed with
this HFC substitute for House
Bill two is 32%.
Lfc had 30%
Thank you so much. Charles. Mr.
Chair. I don't have any other
questions. Thank you, Vice
chair. Dixon. Um, thank you all
great questions. I'm going to
have a couple of quick things,
sort of reinforcing.
Uh, Director silly, Chief.
Amanda were, um this will be the
smallest recurring increase that
we've had over the last really
for you. Well, at least three
years is that accurate? Mr.
Director sell it.
Yes, sir. Mr Chairman, the only
really tight year was coming out
of the Covid Covid.
At the same time Director Sally
This budget also represents by
significant factor, the largest
investments before the Senate
has had a chance to take to do
their action during session.
In areas like housing in
infrastructure, the largest
healthcare investment that we've
ever done as the Legislature is
that accurate
Yes, sir. Mr. Chairman. Okay,
Mr. Director, I think in
members, this really goes to a
huge opportunity and challenge
that we have.
As director Sally is talked
about how we spread our surplus
after we've used the last
several years to catch up to
close to where we need to be, is
such an impactful question that
we wrestle with and that we take
on
And so the fact that this
committee has met for many, many
hours heard more public comments
than we've ever received in our
committees history.
Uh, taking time to do work that
was previously done outside of a
public forum. We've chosen to do
that all in this public forum,
which is meant a longer time.
More questions. I think it also
reflects in a much better budget
that we see here today. I think
we can be confident that we are
spreading our surplus in a
responsible way.
Making sure that not only core
functions but the things that
are going to grow, diversify and
set our economy and our
education system up for success,
or they're in a very strong way.
So, uh, thank you. All. Thank
you, Director. Thank you to the
LSC staff. Thank you, Mr Dick
Petty for your work in R H A F c
staff. I don't see any other
questions. So we'll go ahead and
go to the vote will go to the
vice chair for our motion.
Thank you, Mr Chair. I moved
that the committee not adopt
House Bills two and three.
And adopt House Committee, House
Appropriations and Finance
Committee substitute.
Her husband for house bills two
and three.
They're a second. Okay. It's
been moved by Vice Chair Dixon,
second by represented a la Cruz.
Miss Baker, can you please go
through the role?
Listen. Yes. Yes, I would like
to explain my vote.
Representative Dale after. Yes,
Yes.
Presented Herndon Yes.
Harvey out? Yes, explain my
vote.
No.
No, ma'am, and I'd like to
discuss my vote.
Yes.
Let's go ahead and call the
vote. Can you give us the total,
please? And then we'll go to
those who want to explain their
vote.
13
Okay? And, uh, to explain their
vote first with Representative
Brown, please. Thank you so
much. Mr Chairman. I just want
to start by thanking you for
your leadership on this
committee and
Vice chair Dixon as well. I
think the process has been more
thorough, perhaps that I have
seen in past years.
Yeah, I think that's very, very
important that we we've had
these things. Very well. Um, my
no vote. Really. Mr Chair is is
due to the transportation
appropriation. I've said it so
many times already.
I do represent idiot, Lee County
and this is where so much of
this new revenue Almost $7
billion over the last two years,
2425
Has come from that area of the
state and the roads are for the
most part in very bad condition.
We have got to invest more in
the infrastructure that keeps
the revenue flowing. And we know
Mr Chair that
Well, I guess revenue whether
people like it or not, is about
52% now of our general fund
revenue.
We have got to do better and we
can do better, but it takes the
will of the Legislature to do
that. So
Uh, I think I've said enough on
that. But I am pleased that the
reserve is where it's added
about 32%. I think that's
prudent helps. I think I would
hope with our bond rating.
Um I also I'm actually very
happy. Mr Chair that
The increase in the overall
budget is six point at least
See, I wrote it down six point
some percent.
And I think that is that is
really close to being prudent.
We know that 5% is really the
best figure for that were a
little over that
Um, so I'm not as objecting to
the overall spend increases I
have been in years past, so I
commend everyone who helped that
to happen.
In the overall scheme of things,
Mr Chair and my hope.
Is that the Senate will do
better for us in transportation
funding.
Um
I'd like to see 500 million
Quite frankly, again. $7 billion
has come in for 2425 and, um
I represent a district that
really needs to see some
movement on this, and so I
appreciate the time and I again
appreciate all the effort that's
gone into the bill. Thank you
very much Represent Brown
represent Luhan, please.
Thank you, Mr Chair. Appreciate
the time to explain. I just
wanted to say and go over the
words of wisdom that we've
received from
You know, our financial experts
in our director Director Sally
and really looking to see how
we're going to build for the
future and looking at you know,
we're considering how we are
looking at our reserves budget
in and are
looking at our reserves budget
in and our
investment budgeting.
And how we depend and were
dependent on volatile. Um
Reliability on oil and gas and
what that means for our future
and how we are coming to that
and the preparations that we are
making, and I think that we are
doing our diligence and we are
asking a lot of questions, and I
want to just commend this
committee for doing that and
continue to do that. Encourage
all of this to continue to dig
in and ask these questions
because this is a This is a time
where we have
Which is perceived that we have
so many new revenues and so many
new things that we can do, but
we have to be careful and we
have to represent the taxpayers
that we, um
Asked to vote for us So once a
take some special time of notice
of that, and how this committee
is is working towards that and
getting us to the point of how
we are going to become more
solvent in ways say that we are
less reliant, and that's gonna
depend upon how responsible we
are when we're looking at those
investments. Thank you, Mr
Chair. Thank you. Representative
Han represent pedigree, please.
Thank you, Chairman and, uh,
Failed to say this earlier.
Thank you for all the work.
I mean, there is so much work in
here and there are times and
it's easier to critique and
create.
I appreciate the effort that you
all put into creating
And the information that you
give us in such a way that
We can sit here and critique and
look at it and say Well, what
about this? What about that, Um,
Chairman.
Um and I could go through three
hours of reasons Why I can't
vote for this bill.
I'm gonna drum it down to this.
I have a book right here.
I have no department.
Whatsoever.
It's not in the red somewhere.
And in each case we gave
extended responsibilities.
We extended their their budget.
We added people
No business.
Then once to survive does that
with the department within their
business.
If you're underperforming, you
fix the underperforming before
you give more more effort.
Before you get more
responsibilities, more employers
or employees.
More money.
You go back and you fix the
things that you're supposed to
be doing right to begin with.
And if you can't do it, right.
Why continue to over fund?
And give them the ability to
hire more people and give them
more money to do it.
Increase the responsibilities.
C Y f D D O h I can go down 18
department secretaries.
That's my concern.
Do we need to grow? Do we need
to do better things Do we need
to fund things and certain very
specific ways? Yes, but if you
can't manage what you got to
give them more
And that's my problem with where
we're at in today's budget.
Thank you. Thank you Represent
Pettigrew will go to represent
vodka, please. Thank you, Mr
Chairman and thank you.
Come. First of all I want to
thank chairman and vice chair
for their leadership through
this process also want to thank
Charles and, uh, his staff
Amanda for everything else. This
is the budget folks. This
represents
Hundreds of hours.
Of work.
In committee and
You know?
There are things in here that I
really like.
There are things in here that I
don't like. And my job to sit up
here is the balance is there is
there good and there is more
good than bad.
And I think that
You know, for myself in the
areas that I represent.
Public education, pre K
Higher education.
Are things that really represent
are indicative of my community.
The public schools and in
Valencia County are the biggest
employer.
Of people with you Look at all
the school district so
I do want to say that I do agree
with the transportation. I do
agree that there's other things
that quite honestly I wish we
could have addressed.
And I think that it's just
important to understand that the
work is here and again, Uh
It's a difficult process.
But I think that
It's not for lack of effort and
lack of hard work and thank you.
Thank you, Charles for all of
us.
Thank you. Representing vodka.
Okay, members that concludes us
today. I want to thank each and
every one of you for your work
your time. Your commitment What
you've brought to this
committee. What you continue to
bring will announce sort of how
we're going to approach bills
here. We won't be meeting today.
So we have at least a few hours.
I want to conclude us by asking
everybody stand and give a round
of applause for our incredible
staff.
Their hard work and all the
commitment that they show.
What's that? We're adjourned.
