Meeting we start with represent
a bucket.
Good morning and thank you,
Madam Chair. My name is Brian
Vodka. I represent House
District eight, which is
Valencia County. Thank you.
Good morning, Madam Chair vice
chair.
My name is art Dela Cruz. I
represent district 12 Heart of
the South Valley and
Albuquerque, Braulio County.
Uh, good matter. Good morning,
Madam Chairman Jerry Garcia. I
represent the half of the New
Mexico.
Gripped in houses, 69 recovered
parts of one more
Gripped in houses, 69 recovered
parts of
one
central counties.
Thank you, manager.
Good morning, Madam Chair. Nice
to be here. Jack Chatfield
District 67. I represent the
other half is actually the
I represent the northeast corner
of New Mexico, six counties in
northeast Quarter glad to be
here today.
We're going to represent a
Montoya.
Good morning, Madam Chair and
everyone representative Montoya
from
Farming to NASDAQ, four of US
House district you want. So I
got that vanity plate that says
Number one. So anyhow, thank
you, Manager. Good morning,
madam Chair. I'm rep. Joseph
Sanchez. I'm from the Espanola
Valley. My district goes all the
way through Montana up to rat
Juan.
Good morning.
Good morning, Madam Chair and I
represent house District 28 in
the Northeast Heights.
And I am again. Debbie Syriana
represents house District 21
right next to the represent
appointed in, um, right. But in
the Manzano high school areas,
so welcome So today this is the
first time we are hearing from
the agencies and we will save
space for, um, adjustments for
later. But that's not for today.
So today we just want to precise
re
Presentation and
So you will begin. Thank you.
Good morning, madam chairwoman,
members of the committee. My
name is Rachel Mercer Garcia.
and I'm, the LFC, analyst for
the State Fair, So we'll begin
with the state agency code 460.
They're behind cow. Four in your
bikers. Addition of you to a
couple of pages in your volumes,
additional information. So, um
Involved two page 201. You have
more detail about lfc
recommendation we're going to
talk about and then we do
provide a supplemental table
about the state there on page 59
of all.
I'm mostly gonna be walking
through the different sheets
that are in your packet. So
again Agency code for 60 state
there.
With me at the table is general
Manager of Expo New Mexico Dan
Morning, as well as the EFTA
analysts Glory SEAQ.
Um, overall for you to know the
steep for your generally
operates with their own revenue
that they generate. Um and they
service the fiscal agent for the
African American Performing Arts
Center.
LFC recommendation and the
executive recommendation are
identical.
In both revenue and
expenditures and performance
measures.
Um, In addition, both the
executive recommendation as well
as the LFC recommendation
includes $375,000 from the
General Fund for the African
American Performing Arts Center.
Analysts have reached consensus
about all of the performance
measure targets. Um and that is
what I have for you this
morning. I will turn it over to
counterpart as well as Stan to
share additional comments with
you.
Good morning, madam Chair.
Members of the committee. Um,
Rachel pretty well, summed it
up.
And I have no can hear you.
Is it better?
Okay. Good morning, madam.
Chair members of the committee.
Rachel summed it up pretty well.
I have nothing else to add. So
with your consent, I will hand
it over to Mr Morning. Thank
you.
Hold on. Okay, back that off a
little bit. Sorry about that.
Um
I didn't schedule us first, but
you better buckle up the state
fairs up first, and we are ready
to go. Um
I'm so happy to be here again.
My name is Dan warning the
general manager of the State
Fair. Um we had a magnificent
fair this year was great over
465,000 people were in
attendance. Um, are since Covid
since we were completely shut
down. Uh, during Covid. We've
seen our numbers increase.
Steadily the last couple of
years. Not only is that
happening with the state fair
event, but also events in
general that we hold. I try to
be brief in my comments, but
some couple of things that I
want to point out to you about
the fair, uh
Outside of the fair event, which
is the one we are still
consistently ranked in the top
five fairs around the country.
We are not only, uh,
You know, well represented by
the by the general public from
the state of New Mexico, but
people from around the country
but no how great state of New
Mexico is, through this one
event we had over 20 fairs that
came and saw what we do We do it
a little bit different than
other affairs do, And they also
saw the magnificence and the
beauty of our grounds in our
magnificent state, so I just was
returned from, uh, our fair
convention.
And, uh, we won over 30
different awards for the things
that we presented our fair. It's
great to be recognized by your
peers of what you do, but the
awards are not once important,
it's what they represent. These
are great value and great
entertainment and great service
to the people of New Mexico,
which we serve. Um
One of the things I want to
point out that this I'm most
proud of.
Is that this was arguably the
most safest event.
One of the definitely the safest
fair in the country.
I'm not blowing smoke. That is a
legitimate thing. I just
returned. We had four
Listen to this four misdemeanor
arrest in 11 days with 465,000
people.
Why does that happen?
It's called work hard work by a
lot of different partners, not
only the state police but
homeland security fire a PDB CSO
all the entities that go in to
put on a safe air, including my
security staff on private
security. This is something we
work on year round. The world
has changed. I don't have to
tell anyone sitting in this
room. How it has
And especially for large scale
events. Uh, it's frightful even
go to the store the grocery
store anymore. Imagine going to
A large event where there's 30
40,000 people in one shot,
Remember prior to our fair two
weeks before
A young man lost his life. A
young child right outside of a
baseball game.
Puts a damper on people's
spirits. Our job at the fair.
To turn that around, They have
to feel safe.
And that's what we do, and I'm
proud of the folks that we work
with, and especially state.
Police hats off to them. They're
just outstanding and stellar and
what they do, but we have great
partners with the city of
Albuquerque in the county as
well. So, um, that's one thing
that I want to talk about. Also.
I want to talk about how we're
community partner. We're not
just corn dogs and concerts.
We are somebody that a place
that serves the people in
Mexico. Or just, uh, this last
weekend. We had the gun buyback
at Expo New Mexico over 750 guns
were turned in.
Uh and we work with state police
and we have the facility to be
able to get those people in fast
and quick and out and get that
in a safe fashion. So we're very
proud of the technology that we
have that we're going to
increase as well, uh, with
cameras and things that are so
that when you do come into the
campus yet feel safe, and I
believe that the people that
came to the fair this year feel
safe.
And I'm gonna keep saying that
because I really believe that
it's the numbers back that up.
Um we also 3/3000 families
received food from Roadrunner
Food Bank through our
distribution thing that we run
at Expo New Mexico. Uh, we still
have to keep in mind that people
are still struggling that even
though the times are a little
bit better for some people
that's still
Struggle and we want to make
sure that we're there for people
when we need them were also
received stage and store site
for the federal government as
well as the state. So anytime
there's any sort of natural
disaster, we are ready to go
that our our campus and our
facilities and my staff as well
will be there at any, uh, the
drop of the hat if you will.
So one of the things that we're
asking for in our capital
request is a redo of our public
safety building. Our public
safety building is 1942. It's
served its purpose. We need to
put a mini emergency operations
center, which is what we're
proposing, and this will
service not only the city of
Alker, but state police will
have a place as well as all
Forms of first responders will
have a place to stage in case
there are any type of incidents
so again a year round of
facility. We think there's
desperately needed at this point
in time. Um
He also partnered with our
sensory station is for the folks
that are auditory repaired. We
were the first in the country.
To put a station a century
station on a place where people
can come and get away from the
den of the noise of what we do
as a business. It's very, very
tough. You know this with the
sights and sounds and smells
that we have, but we have that
and we're proud to say that is
being replicated and improved
all over the country at this
point in time. So again, we try
to service somebody that's
innovative in trying to make
sure that we're doing things
that serve the community and
make sure that everyone can
attend the state fair and our
events in general.
Um
Volunteer program was nationally
recognized by our convention
this year for a volunteer
program.
And that volunteer program. What
we did is, uh
Obviously, I don't have to tell
folks that are business how hard
it is now difficult. It is to
get staff of what we did was
that we partnered with not for
profits as well as a lot of
schools who need fundraising
opportunities, So we allowed
them to put their parents and
kids to get some work experience
and they came in, and they were
paid for the work that they did
We raised over $34,000 for these
folks from schools over
different 11 schools from Gallup
to Albuquerque.
Um, you know, and we're proud of
that. We can offer that kind of
opportunity. Folks was extra
extra curricular activities are
very important for these kids.
Um
One of the things that I'm
really excited about.
And I'll start briefly on this.
We're partying with the military
Affairs department, and it's the
job challenge part program
that's run by the National, uh,
New Mexico State, a national
guard.
Um
There's a program that started
in Roswell taking rip youth at
risk we talked about
You know, helping youth at risk.
This is not talking. This is
doing
National Guard came to us and
said, We need a facility to take
our program to the next level.
We need to house these young men
and women were going to partner
with CNN, and we're gonna get
these folks trained it for the
workforce. Whether it's up, uh,
certificate in welding, for
instance, or preparation for
college, but this is something
we're excited about. And with
the construction that is going
on right now, we're on target to
after the fair. Their first
session should be early 2025.
Um, stream Lee proud that we're
utilizing our property in a
different way. But for the
people, it's not just again.
Like I said corn dogs and
concerts, the fares evolving and
we're trying to evolve with the
community. So with that, we hope
to continue to grow with our
state. We hope that, you know,
show what we've done One other
point about the job challenge.
At the time, the dorms will be
vacated so that the four agent
and FAA kids will have a place
to reside so they can show their
animals which we had a record
sale this year. We're looking
for more parking great problem
to have because we had so many
entrants. So with that, I'm
gonna conclude my, uh,
presentation and I'll stand for
any questions.
Thank you. Do we have any
questions?
Thank you, Madam Chair and thank
you for that couple of quick
questions.
Um
As far as total attendance of
the state there. Do we know how
many folks attended this 23
season?
Uh, Madam Chair Representative?
Yes, 465,000 people.
Thank you. Um and madam. Sure,
the
Question. How many events do we
have throughout this the year
utilizing Expo New Mexico Madam
Chair representative. We have
over 100 different of events all
over the campus again. We're,
uh, multipurpose facility,
Whether it's from dog shows, uh
to horse shows, two concerts and
tingly to the flea market.
To, uh, shows that we have in
Luhan, whether it's a chocolate
and coffee. The gathering of
nations were a host of many,
many events.
And thank you, Madam Chair. My
final two questions are really
regarding you said your capital
quest for the public safety. Um
But my my question, Madam chair
is really what about kingly
calls him and what needs to be
done for team the calcium
And also to address the parking
issues that we have as far as
with the traffic.
During such events, Madam Chair
Madam Chair. Representatives of
great questions. As far as I've
stated in many years past, Uh,
we did do a study on building a
new arena at the fairgrounds.
This was completed in 1617. What
we believe needs to happen is a
new master plan for the
fairgrounds and we've had that
in our capital request.
Hopefully that will be able to
fund that so that we could get a
true dynamic whatever they're
still a desire to build.
On arena and we are ready to
offer the state fair grounds for
a new arena. Um, there's private
sector money that is also very
much interested in this. It's
just kind of having something
together to say that this is the
pathway that we would like to
take. And not only this is what
we want to do for maybe an
additional arena, but what we
can do with the rest of this
campus understanding that
there's a 25 year lease still in
place with the downs of
Albuquerque, there'll be racial
horse racing and and also
gambling.
That the casino so we have to
take that in mind, so it's a
little different. We think it's
time for a new study and last
study that was done was in 2009.
And that was when the casino and
racetrack we're talking about
moving to Moriarity. So it's I
believe it's time. Thank you,
madam Chair.
Anyone else?
Thank you, madam Chair, thanks
for the presentation.
Have you had it? How are your
audits last year?
Uh, Madam Chair representative.
Clean audits and this. This
year's audit has not been
released, but it was very good
on it.
Manager. What's your vacancy
read?
I know it's part time a lot of
it part time employment.
But your full staff What's your
recon should read Madame Chair
representative. I'm not sure
exactly. I think we have
I
think one or two if that in
there Gove expositions, Okay,
And one more question, madam
chair of you mentioned
The youth challenge for the
National Guard.
I know they have it in Roswell.
Are you trying to recruit these
people to come and work for you
at the state fair you make. Can
you briefly touch on that?
Representative, Madam Chair
representative. Yes, Absolutely.
We do have trades at the fair. I
have welders, plumbers,
carpenters, electricians. There
will be opportunities for
internship. Not only that they
will build a professional
kitchen at the fairgrounds in
the youth hall that will be used
to train up and coming new
chefs. Thank you, madam. Thanks
for that, because you know
reality.
You know we trained people and
then they leave the state. Ah,
if you can recruited from
Rodwell, do you that big? Nice
to keep him and our city? Thank
you. Thank you, madam. True.
We have any more questions?
No. Then I'll go to my vice
chair for recommendation.
Madam chair. I move that we
adopted LFC budget.
Thank you second. Thank you,
Representative. So we have a, um
Recommendation and second we
have any opposite. Alright. You
have the LFC recommendation.
Thank you.
Alright the next presentation of
the African American affairs.
Whenever you're ready.
Yeah.
Thank you, Madam Chair members
of committee. My name is Isaiah
Little bit louder.
Thank you, madam Chair.
My name is Isaiah Taurus. I'm
the general government fiscal
analyst for the Legislative
Finance Committee. I'm also the
fiscal analyst for the Office.
African American affairs, and I
just wanted to say that it's an
immense honor and privilege to
be speaking with you all today,
we really appreciate the work
that you do for New Mexico and I
think that should be now.
Thank you.
Um And then with that, I'm going
to be introducing Who's with me
on stage with me. Today is my
DFA counterpart Lorries.
Shaka Shaka and then executive
Director Charles redone And then
with that, I'll begin the
difference. Presentation for the
office. African American Affairs
If you could please turn to tap
six agency code 603.
And with them, Adam Charles
Weekend. The difference
presentation.
Um, for General fund revenue for
the office, African American
Affairs. There is a $27,000
difference. Um, with our
recommendations. The LFC
recommendation is lower in that
aspect in regards to personnel
services and employee benefits.
The LSE recommendation is
53,053 $0.6000 less than
The executive recommendation in
regards to contractual services.
The LSE recommendation is
$41.6000 above the executive
recommendation.
And then for other costs. The
LFC recommendation is $15,000
below the executive
recommendation. And then as well
with that there was a base
expansion requests for the
office of African American
Affairs. The LSC recommendation
is 202 $100.9000 below the
executive recommendation. The
two F T s is
For a program manager for the
coordinators as well as a health
coordinator.
And then and then just to
conclude in passing on to my DFA
counterpart in the executive
director, the analysts were able
to reach consensus on
performance measures and targets
And with that, I'll turn it over
to my DFA counterpart and
executive director. Thank you.
Hello again. Is this good?
Thank you, madam Chair members
of the committee. I think I
don't know I misheard Isaiah,
But the dump The total
difference is 227.9000.
That's 200.9000 for the two
expansion FTE that D F A is
recommending, and then a
$27.9000 difference. Um
With D F to increasing the risk,
and with that I will pass it
over to director Rito.
Madam chair. I just wanted them
preface just in regards to that
difference in the initial
request for the office, African
American affairs. There was
initially a $247,000 increase in
personnel services from
communications with office,
African American affairs.
In communication with office,
African American Affairs. This
was a technical error made in
the budget request process. So
this was, um not. This wasn't
initially a part of the request,
but was attacked technical
mistake made in the request, um,
cycle, So I just wanted to
preface that mountain. Sure.
Can you hear me? Ok,
Good morning, Um Madam
Chairperson and vice
Chairperson.
Um and representatives money
strolls. Reto, Me, acting
executive director for the
Office of African American
Affairs, Um, open in my current
role as the Active Act, the
acting executive director for 16
months. Thank you this
opportunity today.
To present to you my response to
the fiscal year 25 LFC and
executive budget recommendation.
I'm here today and support of
the executive recommendation in
my plan for the fiscal year 25
budget increase in the amount of
200,900
For two additional FTS. Um I
want to thank the LFC Committee
for its support and
recommendation to reallocate,
um, personal funds from the 200
categories to our contractual
services category to replace our
previous grant funded position.
Or health coordinator.
However, I believe that in doing
so the recommendation limits my
future abilities to recruit
qualified candidates for either
the executive director position
which would be obviously an
appointment and or the director,
deputy director's position. But
all that depends on which
Way the governor's office elects
to go after this legislative
session as it relates to
identifying, um and um and
executive director of the 1416
months, vacancy savings
information that might have been
used to
Get to the decision is a direct
result of not having an
executive director for fiscal
year 23 and now six months into
the fiscal current fiscal year
Ultra place she'll does not
have, um, a
Executive director appointed so
all that responsibility and all
the others follow me at this
point, um, currently frontline
coordinators covering war
pillar.
Areas and the areas are the
different focuses that our
office, um, is charged with
addressing economics and
education and marketing and
education and health.
The two coordinators are
responsible for project
coordination and disseminating
relevant information on a
statewide basis. Um
With only two coordinators.
They're basically doing double
duty.
Um, because we don't have that
health coordinator. I would ask
that if the LFC recommend if
recommendation is adopted that
the 53 point
Uh, $6000 remain in the
personnel category.
In the 56 points or 53.6000
added to the base expansion for
multiple A and not be taking out
of the 200 categories for
salaries.
Adopting the LFC recommendation
will result in adding additional
challenges to an already
strained and understaffed agency
related to his management
structure and its capacity to
meet the mission's goals. If
this committee adopts the
executive recommendation, Triple
A would be in a better position
to supervise staff.
Grow as an agency and increase
its capacity to address the
needs of the average American
community statewide.
As promised by the governor's
gubernatorial. Uh, W doing
Torrey a meeting during a speech
in at the community to really
leaders in October of 2022.
Uh huh. She promised that she
would grow the office of African
American Affairs. Obviously, he
wasn't outline about what that
would look like.
Like with the executive
recommendation. That would be
the start of that.
The executive recommendation of
400,000.
Uh, $209,000 is critical to
ultra pull a because it would
add supervisory capacity agency
growth, capacity building
opportunities and the ability to
achieve its mission goals and
performance measures moving
forward.
For the past 14 months I
mentioned I've been wearing
several hands.
The increased funding and
personnel category would provide
Triple A with the critically
needed separation authority.
Supervision, capacity and
staffing coverage or that
Tripoli needs to be successful
in accomplishing its mission and
performance measures. The Office
of African American Affairs will
be creating will be celebrating
its 25th year anniversary in
April.
April of this year. Um, please
do not allow the agency to
continue to be underfunded and
understaffed for its 25th
anniversary.
With that. Thank you for your
time and consideration and I
will stand for questions.
Thank you for your presentation,
Mr Reto.
Thank you, madam Chair.
Yeah, you didn't You mentioned
uh, acting director. You
mentioned that statewide efforts
to assist African American
communities like Can you expand
on that? How? How would a
location Albuquerque be able to
do that? Can you
Henry.
You mentioned helping African
American community statewide.
How would a location in
Albuquerque do that? Can you
expand on that?
So I'm still in the last part.
How would
One right here. The question
That's okay. Uh am I can you
hear me? So
You mentioned that the African
center would be able to help
statewide African American
communities. I'm assuming
People of color.
How can that happened with the
location in Albuquerque? Can you
expand on that?
So
Obviously.
The
Plan would be
Um, for the
The two FTE s specifically, um,
what we do is our coordinators
traveling.
Right, and they traveled to
different parts of the county to
do either listening sessions
town halls to find out what that
area might need.
Um
What I plan to do and not,
you're obviously But physically,
you're 26 providing
What the committee does here.
Is to expand to have, um here
coordinators or community Health
workers station and different
areas of the state and have the
hub be the Albuquerque office,
but that future planning But in
terms of the two FTE s that I'm
asking for
What I feel is that
Wearing all of these hats does
not give me the capability to be
able to effectively and
efficiently supervised the
current staff that I have to a
and able to be able to provide
them with the supervision and
direction that they need in
order to go to these different
places.
Being the executive director,
two deputy director of the
program is supervisor manager
supervisor. It's challenge
So that's what those positions
would be doing. The supervisor
would supervise all of them, and
then we will have the health
coordinator which we currently
don't have, because it's being
done by another coordinator, um,
that how we would be able to
better serve the communities
around the Mexico
Statewide.
Madam chair, so with the
assumption that that would occur
and you were to receive the
additional funding for the
additional two individuals, How
do you propose to measure
success?
So we would measure success
because I mean, where would we
do that already started.
And what I've done is I have
redrafted.
Each one of my coordinators. Uh,
employee evaluations so that
they know exactly what they need
to accomplish her water.
And looking at what our overall
mission is. Then they know each
order that in order for us to
get to the end result they have
to do X Y and Z
A good example would be that
For each pistol year. We have to
accomplish, um
I think it's 7 1750 encounters.
What I've done is I've redrafted
the coordinators. E is breaking
that up into three sections.
Each. One of them is now aware
that
With they do their events or
projects it needs to include in
some way, shape or form these
encounters that will total at
the end of the fiscal year.
Their number.
And that number could be worth
5460 something of that nature.
That's one of those examples.
But again we're in all these
hats. I am the one that has to
not only function at the
executive level but at the
supervisory level at the same
time, and that's in conflict If
you ask me Ah, because instead
of focusing at the higher level
Ah!
Picture of what needs to happen.
I'm down in what I refer to as
the weeds weeks. Bad place if
the right person there
But that's how things sample of
how that would be accomplished.
Madam jerkin last question. Uh,
can you restate the difference
for the committee? The
difference between the LFC
recommendation and the executive
direction?
Right. The LFC recommendation
and correct me from if I get
this rolling Isaiah, they're not
recommending that, um, that my
budget be increased personal
budget by the 200,900.
They are recommending that we
pull, I think
53,600 from the personnel budget
and put it in the contractual
line item. And then I can
recruit a contract person.
To do the health coordinator's
job.
Um
I mean, that's that's very
creative of them, and I
appreciate that. But there's
also something that I could have
done.
So we kind of defeats the
purpose of
What the office needs to do,
because once you pull money from
one area to another, then you
you're limited in that area
about what you can do.
I mean, if if that's what the
committee decides, you know I
will work.
But it's not growing the agency
it's not providing the
supervisory capacity that that I
need. Uh and again, this is all
be turned upside down. Governor
decides to appoint an executive
director.
But
Change directory but in terms of
building the agency building the
staff
That would be maybe at a later
date. Thank you, Madam chair
seems like a modest amount to
me. Thank you.
We're gonna keep our answers
concise. Sorry
about him. If you're just one
question a couple of years ago,
Sir Charles
You had there was issues with
your audits have been taken care
of.
Madam Chair representative.
There has been a history with
them with auditing of politics,
representative There has been a
history with audit findings for
the past for office, African
American affairs. I would say
just from my research that it
has been approved auto history
But in FY 23 there was to repeat
audit findings. And if you would
like, um
Some more clarification on what
those were. I think I would
probably defer to the executive
director to provide you that
information, but it has been an
improved audio history for the
past five years, but there are
still two repeat findings. Um in
23.
Of admiral Chair of
I don't understand what you're
saying Yes or no answer. Hello?
Dad has been yes. Thank you.
Thank you, madam Chair.
Manager. If I can responded, I
think when that question comes
up that the office of African
American Affairs is confused
with MLK.
We have not had any repeat
findings that the findings that
he's that I just referring to
were not repeat findings. One
was something to do with about
fiscal agent first time and the
other had to do with, uh, staff
person that used the wrong code.
Those aren't repeat findings.
My apologies.
Thank you. Thank you, madam.
Thank you. Advice You heard him.
Thank you, Madam Chair, Mr Reto.
How many positions where you
authorize to feel this past
year? We are minus the
exposition We authorized to six
And Mr Reid. Oh, madam Tear. How
many of those positions did you
feel right now? We have, uh, six
positions still not including
mine.
So, Mr Madam Chair, Mr Reto.
Basically, you're saying every
one of the authorized personnel
positions that you had at the
office of African American
Affairs was field correct.
And Madam Chair. And Mr Reto,
When s question you're asking
for our health position. And why
is it important for you to have
that position?
You know, having position is
actually a crucial position in
our office because that
individual will be addressing
the health disparities, whether
it be health, equity or health
literacy around the state.
And at this point
It's not being done.
Because of that vacancy. Thank
you, Madam Chair. Thank you, Mr
Reto.
Representative. All right, I
just have a couple questions.
So, um, you said, it's you
haven't been able to feel the
executive director position for
a couple of years. Is there a
specific reason? So that's
that's the governor's decision
to make that appointment. Okay?
And, um, versions was looking at
three versions. So last year
It was 3000.
Right. So what I can share with
that is the
Reverse from the two hundred's
category was a accounting era We
were given to $50,000 junior
bills and the correct
The cold was not used by the
time we acknowledge that or
discovered that it was in June,
and there was no way we could
have, uh, used that money
effectively and efficiently and
15 days and the rest of it was
from the two hundred's. Thank
you. We have any more questions.
I'd like to ask my vice chair
for a recommendation.
Madam chair. I moved that we
accept the LFC budget.
Okay, so representative handed
first and
Recommendation and the
Cruz for the second we are
required to take the LFC
recommendation just to let you
know and we will be looking at
other things. We will make
adjustments.
Okay, possibility. Okay. Thank
you. Thank you. Your
presentation.
Horace.
Can you make sure we can barely
hear you if you can. My
apologies, Madam Chair
Whenever you're ready.
Yeah. Thank you, madam Chair
members of the committee. My
name is Isaiah Torres. I'm the
fiscal analysts for the LFC and
also for the Martin Luther King
Commission.
With me. Today is my D f a
counterpart Laurie Sayaka and
exactly director Leonard weights
and then with that, I'll begin
the difference presentation for
the MLK Commission. If you could
please refer to Tab six agency
code 605. Thank you.
So the LSC recommendation for
General fund revenue is $4.1000
more than the executive
recommendation recommendation
for personal services and
employee benefits is $14.3000
less than the executive
recommendation and the LSC
recommendation for contractual
services.
Is $18.4000 more than the
executive recommendation. My D F
a counterpart and I were able to
meet have a consensus on all
performance measures and targets
and the LSC did not recommend
the $83.9000 base expansion
request.
And with that, I'll turn it over
to my DFA counterpart to fill in
anything that I missed. Good
morning again. Madam Chair
members of the committee. Isaiah
did a great job summarizing the
differences, and I have with
that. Um, and with your consent,
I will hand it over to director
weights.
Thank you. Good morning. Good
morning, madam Chair
representatives.
Uh, my question is very small,
so I don't have a whole lot to
say this morning.
Ah, I'm gonna start with our
vision.
Vicious increase the number of
MLK holiday celebrations
throughout the Mexico Also, they
implement the youth leisure
programs in different regions of
the state.
Maintain and increase the
participation of students and
leadership and mentorship
programs.
Increase the number of non
violence, youth conferences and
youth anti violence workshops.
Educated community groups at
schools about Dr King's
philosophy and its six
principles of Nonviolence
Commission budget is requests
remains flat.
Requests this year's or full
time, additional FT.
It is a chance that accomplished
this vision.
And mission and with the of the
MLK Commission with our current
Um, head count of two.
They're requesting full time
position for this, uh, for
project coordinator will have a
primary focus of planning.
Coordinating and evaluating the
data day operation of fiscal and
administrative activities.
And of defined funded programs
and projects. The addition of
the project coordinator were
also allows support of the
increase of MRK holiday
commemorations.
Used to leadership programs and
the youth leadership Conference.
Strategies for our success.
We need to employ highly
competent staff.
Which includes that additional
FT.
Defined measures of success.
Steps and cultivate new and
current partnerships.
Reaffirms strength of statewide
enthusiasm and support
Expected outcomes.
Increase our brand recognition
increased the number of
statewide holiday
commemorations.
Increase the number of youth for
two participant in our youth
leadership programs.
With that I sent for any
questions. Thank you for your
presentation.
Representative Chris
Thank you very much.
Okay. I was helping troubling.
Here you are. Thank you.
Uh, same question to you. I It
intrigues me because you're
located in Albuquerque.
And yet you want to do statewide
efforts which are worthy, But
how do you propose to do that?
We are currently doing that we
traveled state to set up our
youth leadership programs. We
have that program in seven
cities right now.
And so it is a challenge with
two people in that office to
travel and do that, but are used
for leadership program is an
event that we started. I started
eight years ago seven years ago,
and that programs growing
tremendous Madam chair, so the
celebration is coming soon,
very, very, very soon.
Your coordinate? I is that a
rhetorical question. So again,
I'm sorry. Rhetorical question.
I was privileged to speak at
that event, and and it's one of
my favorite events every single
year. Is there anything new plan
this year? Um, um again, we have
a Madam chair representative. We
have that, um
Presentation of commemorations
in seven cities. Um
We have a great event planned
for this weekend. Um, with the
event in Albuquerque, which will
probably have about 3500 to 4000
people.
Los Cruces is very big Clovis, a
lot of different cities new
additions this year is in
pharmacy.
Which helps us, uh, spread out
rings a little bit farmers in
has over 2 to 300 people
involved this year. Thank you,
Madam Chair. I don't know if
I'll be able to be there. I
think we have to work this
weekend doing
Shucks. Thank you, Madam. Chair,
Colin. Sig. Yeah. Thank you.
Thank you, representative anyone
else?
Yes, Madam Chair.
I met him.
Madam Chair, Mr Executive
director. It's impressive that
you are putting on a youth
leadership program and you have
a staff of two.
Who all participates in this
youth leadership program to
teach the youth that you're
describing
Actually. Great question. Um,
Madam chair. I mean, Ripston
vice chair.
Um, great question. Um, we as we
travel, we also recruit
Volunteers and each city, um, to
help us with Eileen used
leadership programs so and
clothes, for instance, we'll do,
uh, as, um
Community meeting.
And recruits.
Uh um.
Individuals that will support
our youth leadership program.
They Thank you, Madam Chair.
Thank you, Mr Executive
Director. That's all Madam
chair. Thank you again for your
presentation. I don't have any
questions.
Then you do and we need it for
our state. I
I can't hear you yourself. Just
thank you for your presentation.
Thank you. All right, so I will
ask my vice chair for
recommendation. Madam Terra
passage of the LFC budget. Um
Representative Delacruz. Is
there any opposition?
Seeing none. All right, you have
a the lfc recommendations. Thank
thank you.
Hmm. Hmm. Alright. Next will be
the board of examiners for
architects, and this one will be
the director will be online.
Yes. Whenever you're ready.
Thank you.
Hey, son. Thank you, madam
Chair.
Um again. My name is Isaiah
Torres. I'm the general
government fiscal analyst for
the Legislative Finance
Committee. And I want to say
again thank you for the
opportunity to speak with you
all today. This is a great
opportunity. I'm really thankful
for this with me. Today is my d
f A counterpart Simon Miller.
Um, are the executive director
for the Board of Examiners,
Architects Mallory Gonzalez is
actually attending online today.
Her mother was sick, so she
wanted to take precautions and
make sure that we were all
healthy and also the board
shares coming down with an
illness, But she wants to let
you know that she is looking
forward to the hearing and so on
so forth, so she she's will be
listening in
Um And then with that, I'll
begin with the budget
differences. Um, this is
relatively straightforward, the
the LFC and the executive
recommendation where aligned and
the and there was a consensus on
all performance measures and
targets. Um, and with that, I'll
turn it over to Simon for any
additional comments if needed.
Not a chair. Members of the
committee, um
No real additional comments.
Both recommendations are
$29,000 increase over FY 24 and,
as Isaiah said, they're both,
uh, the same. So with that wall,
turn it back to you.
Are we ready for the director?
or No? Unfortunately, the
director? Yeah.
Madam Chair members of the
committee. Can you hear me?
Good morning. My apologies. Um,
I am actually sick myself, So I
took the precaution to not
attend because I don't want to
be contagious and get anybody
sick and attending virtually
with me. Today is our board
chair Ray V Hill. My name is
Mallory Gonzalez. I'm the
executive director, the chief
financial officer and the chief
procurement officer for the New
Mexico border examiners for
architects.
Our mission is to protect the
health, safety and welfare of
the public. We are not generally
funded and we are an enterprise
agency independent from
regulation and licensing
departments. The board is an
agreement with the
recommendation and I really do
think that a JFC staff for
allowing me and my board chair
to attend virtually, and we
really do apologize for not
being able to be there in
person.
Thank you, Madam Sharon, members
of the committee. I stand for
questions. Thank you. Do we have
any questions from the
committee?
Madam Chair. I moved passage of,
Madam chair. I moved passage up.
Uh, the LFC budget.
I'm sorry, Alex. See
recommendations. So we have an
L. C recommendation by, um thank
you for your presentation. Thank
you. Thank you, madam Chair.
Thank you.
Excited.
All right. Our next
presentation, Border authority.
Whenever you're ready.
Okay. Good morning, madam Chair
members of the committee. My
name is Lisa and I'm the LFC
analyst for the Border authority
for this agency. Please refer to
documents under tap four and its
agency code for 17. You can also
look at your volume two page 156
for the full lfc recommendation.
I'm joined today by chair of the
Border Authority, Joseph
Delarosa and D. F a budget
analyst Simon Miller.
So starting off with the
revenue, Um, the executive and
the LFC recommendations were
aligned and both recommended a
flat budget for the border
authority.
Part of there is a slight
difference in the general fund
and other revenue where the
executive maintaining revenue
levels from FY 24 and the LFC
Increasing general fund by 27.2
and decreasing other revenues by
that same amount.
The LFC recommendation takes
into account that the agency is
looking to increase its
enterprise funding for other
projects such as infrastructure
and other investments.
The launch is standing. The
executive and the LFC
recommendation were aligned in
personnel, contractual services
and other services.
And then finally, the
Agency did have one request for
a special and you can see that
paged to the request was for
50,000 for meetings with the New
Mexico Sonata and New Mexico
Chihuahua commissions, the
executive recommended
recommended it and the LFC did
not. The agency does have its
Border Authority fund, which
could support those meetings if
they choose to. And that's fun
had a balance of 100 and 26,000
at the end of last fiscal year.
Thank you and I will now pass it
over to Simon for insights on
the executives recommendation.
Madam chairman, members of the
committee on No additional
comments so I will pass it over
to chair Delarosa.
Thank you, madam Chair of the
budget itself, I think is
relatively straightforward. So
what I prepared today was a
presentation to just briefly
highlight one of the major
projects that we are working on
down at the border, particularly
in the Santa Teresa area Last
year in HB two, there was a $50
million appropriation to the
Economic Development Department,
which in part went to
What for border infrastructure
and planning. And so what?
Before? What is before you is
one of the major kind of
projects under that, Um, as part
of that $50 million dollar
appropriation in the interest of
time, I won't go through it
Slide by slide. Um, you know,
it's more like a takeaway. Um,
so it is kind of the session
moves forward. You kind of
understand and have some context
on what is happening,
particularly in the Santa to
this area.
But we did kick off a strategic
infrastructure assessment and
study for the border on which
we'll look at, um the larger or
something that that's an area
which has 2.7 million people, of
which approximately half a
million are involved in the
industrial and manufacturing
sectors. Um, if you look at page
71 of the reasons we've kicked
this endeavor off is because
there's a lot happening.
It's not that Theresa is we've
been hearing recently, including
the announcement of Hoda
Industrial manufacturing, a
Taiwanese auto parts supplier.
That is building a factory for
$99 million in more bring 350
manufacturing jobs to the
border, combined with some of
the other announcements,
including Franklin Mountain
Packaging, and as You can see
here, some smaller, um,
operations that have also
recently located
But one of the primary reasons
we're doing. This study is
starting on page A. We've done
an assessment preliminarily on a
lot of the missed opportunities.
So what? What we've been dealing
with in the last couple of
years?
Particularly in a post covid
world reevaluating supply chains
and looking at kind of the
manufacturing economy coming
back as part of the IRA and the
I J. A, Um, operations is
companies looking to relocate
and near shore. Um, they've come
to New Mexico, but unfortunately
we haven't had the capacity to
Um, essentially build what they
needed. And so on Page nine
again, just going over some
really preliminary numbers. Um
40% had high electrical needs of
the companies that have
approached us 27 had high water
needs greater than 1 million
gallons per day and water, which
would then generate
Um, wastewater in excess of
500,000 gallons, And at this
point, we just don't have the
capacity to to attract those
large investments. So what we're
doing is looking at the land use
for the area and what exactly
could be the potential abilities
to invest in infrastructure and
build up?
The area to attract those
companies, including looking at
um Transportation Master Plan
water, wastewater master plans,
drainage and dry utility master
plans coming up with the cost
projections for what those needs
are generate in terms of, um,
need for investment.
And then also calculate what the
economic impact would be in
terms of a return on investment.
So we would like to have exact
data on what every dollar spent
on infrastructure at the border
returns back in terms of not
only G R T. But then, um,
manufacturing and employment and
what those numbers all look
like.
So with that, I would just say
it's an exciting time to be down
at the border. We have the goals
of building something that will
create generational wealth for
the people of New Mexico. We
recognize you know the budgetary
issues and recognized oil and
gas, which contributes to the
economy and generate the economy
to build something.
Um for further down the road to
generate those revenues, so
With that will stand for any
questions. I would also like to
note with us. Our David
Espinoza, our financial
coordinator, and Julio Jimenez
or acting executive director.
Thank you.
Thank you for your presentation.
First question will come from
representative
Thank you, madam Jer.
Thank you for your presentation.
First question I have is
Can you name a few of the major
projects that we have lost?
Due to lack of it.
Madam Chair, representative,
Check field. Most of those
projects are governed by
nondisclosure agreements, but I
can say
Um, that they are in the sectors
of every battery manufacturing.
We also had a company that was
looking to, um produce other
components for TVs. We also had
a company that was a
semiconductor manufacturer,
which is similar to, um TSMC,
which is located in Phoenix.
For example,
so we will certainly want to go
after them. I know some of the
manufacturing goes on in Mexico
and imported and then some of it
goes on over on this side. We
had a wonderful
Down there a few years back with
the lfc. I really enjoyed it. I
also grew up down there.
Whatever I ever grew up, I used
to write the school bus through
an APRA long before there was
any
Facilities. Nice, uh,
Population like the areas there
today.
Um
So one of the things that I also
had a chance. You say there's a
shortage of water and I can tell
you growing up in southern New
Mexico. There's a shortage of
water all over southern New
Mexico was grateful to be able
to tour the K. Bailey Hutchinson
desalinization plant here a
while back. So what are your
plans if you had funding
To provide enough money to bring
in some of these other
Projects provide to provide and
if you had enough water money to
bring to get water. How did
would you get the water? Where
would you get the water?
Madam Chair, representative
Chatfield. That's an excellent
question. I'm so part of what
this is going to do is look at
on the existing capacity and for
the existing water rights for
potable water.
But also to look at the
utilization of the brackish
water. So there's a very large
aquifer. The MSU conducted a
study on the amount of water and
it's somewhere in the
neighborhood of billions of acre
feet of underground water, but
it's brackish so we would need
to look at desalinization as one
of the possibilities to access
that water. And so what this
plan will do is work with the
community real regional utility
authority.
To look at maximizing existing
capacity and then looking at how
you would transition towards
building the facilities. Um
Firdous. Alex is part of that.
But you know, the issue is right
now there's just no master plan.
That kind of gets us there. So
how we kind of maintain the
existing grow that and then
prepare for that we sell to kind
of come online to the system,
Um, and then also calculate
those cost estimates, so that's
part of what we'll do in this
study. So while back the cost
For diesel at the K. Bailey
Hutchinson plant. When we turned
it, it was $2 per 1000 gallons
that's doable.
I don't know what it costs to
build a plant.
But that's a very economical
source of water.
Ah electrical generation.
Also listed here something
that's a need.
And, uh,
You know, I'm I'm looking around
the area of where you're going
to get electricity. It looks to
me like you're gonna have to get
it from
Wind or solar. I don't see any
coal plants sitting around.
L. Paso.
Or southern New Mexico.
Tell me about it.
Madam Chair I representative
Chatfield. That's a very
excellent point. So in speaking
to, um El Paso Electric
One of the things that they will
be working on in conjunction
with this plan is preparing
requests for the next
legislative session in 2025 to
look at some regulatory changes
that might allow them to access
some of the wind power from Sun
Zia when that comes online, so
instead of having that leave the
state and go to Arizona,
California, potentially
Um, there. There are some
regulatory changes. I understand
they may need
to be able to capture some of
that power within the state.
And we also have right now, um
900 acres of solar, which is
generating around 2.3 megawatts,
um, that the plans right now are
to increase that up to 5000
acres in that area.
Which would provide a
significant increase in the
amount of available power. But
we need to back that up somehow,
for, of course when it's night.
So 50 Meg.
Off the sudden Zia. What will
this total
Capacity of the how much
Electricity is coming through
there anyway, on the son, Ziad,
you know, so I don't know. Madam
Chairman represented Chatfield
off the top of my head. But in a
future presentation, I'd like to
have them. Someone from El Paso
Electric provide a little more
information on that I wouldn't
hold it against you or not
knowing that, But I just thought
maybe you might accidentally. Is
there any plan, you know?
Over in my area where I live,
There's a big line coming
through, and I'm also set on the
electric board up there.
The co op, You know, talk to
them about.
Ah!
Utilizing some of that
electricity for us, you know for
local people, and, uh, it
requires a step down.
To do that.
Which is quite expensive.
Have you guys talked to anything
to San Z about that?
Madam Chair representative. We
have not again. I've only
communicated without Paso
Electric. I know that they've
had some discussions with sons.
Yeah, And, um I think some other
wind power providers, but I know
that that is something that
they're working into their plans
because they are expanding solar
pretty rapidly. They just put in
a huge
I believe it's around 900 acres
as well around Chaparral.
Um of of solar, but it's um you
know, we don't have the winds. I
mean, the sun the way we have
the wind, which is, you know,
blows day and night, So we need
to really, um, I think explore
more wind power.
I would love to see New Mexico
Energy, whatever its source.
What to use in New Mexico
project.
And I hope to see you get a
master plan.
Thank you.
Thank you, representative field.
It's actually Sunday. Is it 3500
megawatts?
50 is not a whole lot of amount
of that. Thank you Next. His
representative Montoya.
Thank you, madam Chair.
Um
I'm not sure who could answer
this, but
Ah!
Is Santa Teresa incorporated, or
are they unincorporated?
Madam Chair representative. It
is unincorporated, so
It's Donetta County. Okay, so
thank you for that, Um, some of
the things that you're
Plan is looking at
To some degree.
Could be
Fixed or at least helped.
If they were to incorporate.
Because then they could be
taxing. Especially on those. So
what we're looking at doing here
without
Looking at
The businesses that are moving
there.
To help support themselves with
infrastructure as we're coming
to the state.
Um, I I think for folks who
Maybe have lived in the
unincorporated areas of
Albuquerque. Uh,
Might have a little bit of a
problem with the state
subsidizing
This type of infrastructure.
Because that is the role of a
local community.
I think the folks in the South
Valley of Albuquerque in
particular
Um
Would have a hard time because
if it's not if it's not the role
of the local community that is
taking advantage of that
infrastructure.
Um, well, then the county
Needs to step up a little bit
more. So, um, what interaction
has been with the county to help
provide this because obviously,
there is some tax dollars that
the county is benefiting.
Thank you, madam Chair and
representative. I think that's
you know, a very good point and
without going into the
complicated history of
litigation between the city of
Sunland parks, annexation and
incorporation of Santa Teresa,
which is an ongoing issue. Um I
will say that the border
authority by statute does. I
think for a reason, it's kind of
allowed to do this sort of
thing. I think in this
particular situation, but we do
work really closely with the
county. And so, um, one of the
projects on page 11
I'm industrial drive great
separation that that is actually
a Dona Ana County led projects
so they apply to the U. S. D O T
and received $33 million grant
for a new
Bridge over the
The railroad tracks there and
that will supplement that. And
so that's a partnership with the
state and the counties will be
helping with the match. So we we
worked pretty regularly on these
types of projects. But you know
again, the
I think the partnership is one
of bringing both. You know some
revenues to the county but also
returning him to the state and
kind of again trying to build
that.
That economic engine to kind of
generate revenues that come
back, you know to the state and
not necessarily just stay in the
area. Thank you, Madam Chair. I
I appreciate that. That
But but within investing in
The border Authority for some
time now, and it has come back
to the state.
But now that we're looking at
pressures on infrastructure
Once again that's usually the
responsibility of the people who
are
Receiving the infrastructure.
Um
I'm looking here at at
wastewater and water needs.
And because they're not because
the local communities not
incorporated now we're coming to
the state.
If we had all of our
unincorporated areas across the
state, all of the counties or
An industrial park somewhere
else.
That would want to
Very much like like your area.
Uh huh.
Bring in revenue to the state.
There wouldn't be any
There would be any drive from
any of those local communities
to incorporate.
So I
I think it's at some point. This
is a question the state has to
ask the community.
Is, when is the community going
to step up?
Um, very happy with what's going
on down there. Various. It's a
kind of a shining star for the
state.
But
This is a transfer.
Of responsibility that I think
that is being asked for.
And I think
I think we need to as a as a
Legislature be very, very
careful about taking on
Something that the local
community should should be
involved with. So thank you,
Madam Chair.
Madam Chair. One last thing this
might be a place for community
community solar project could
happen or maybe along the lines
of, uh
Has been proven at our national
laboratories, and that is a
small
Nuclear generator. Frankly, that
is something that we have done
here in New Mexico. It's in all
of our big, uh, naval fleets.
Both the big ships and the
And the submarines that small,
small loop nuclear generator so
that maybe, maybe that would be
the first place where we can
find an application in New
Mexico, where we could put some
something that's been developed
in New Mexico to good use. Thank
you, manager.
Thank you, representative. Next
representative, Um, Brendan.
Thank you, madam Chair.
And, uh, Mr presented my
question to you is looking at
your other revenues. The amount
that was reduced. What is the
source of those other revenues?
Madam Chair representative
Herndon on the Border Authority
leases space, including office
space, but also some
telecommunications rental
leases. And then there is a
parking lot that is managed for
commercial vehicles. Um, that is
on Border authority property.
So, Madam Chair and Mr Presenter
if the amount is reduced, Does
that mean you won't be renting
those and collecting the money,
Please? Can you help explain
that?
Um, Madam Chair, Representative
Herndon. Um, I believe you're
talking about the LFC
recommendation where there is a
reduction in other revenues.
Yes, that's just the amount
budgeted.
From other revenues. Um
It's not a projection of what
the other revenues will be, Um,
last year, those revenues came
in at about 100,000.
So
Yeah, Those are just the the the
the amount of budget. It's not a
project. It's not a revenue
projection.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Thank
you very much.
Thank you, Vice chair. Um, this
summer, Our intern committee
science technology went and
towards sanitary, PSA and thank
you for that, And it's um it's
expanding so much since the last
time I was there, but one thing
that struck us. I think all of
us was. The buildings didn't
have any renewable energy, any
solar panels or anything. That
would be a great source for
electricity Also because their
buildings are so huge, um
But are you guys looking at
Madame Chair? Um
So the complicated thing they're
much along the lines of like
local, you know choices. Each of
the buildings is designed to the
specifications of the company. I
can tell you that Hoda, um, that
from Taiwan that is coming will
be in integrating solar and
other renewables, water
recycling programs and they're
really forward looking, and it
will be like a LEED certified
building and
All of those sorts of things,
and so we expect them to really
become a model for future
projects moving forward. Great.
Thank you.
All right. Any more questions?
All right. I will ask my
recommendation.
Madam Chair. I moved the we
accept the recommendation of the
LFC second
Okay, second by representing
Montoya.
All right. Um, so we have any.
Thank you. All right? You have
an L. C recommendation. Thank
you.
Right. Our last presentation is
a spaceport authority.
Chris Cities.
Alright before you start.
Remember, this is the first time
we hear from the agencies and we
will save time for base for
adjustments if needed, But today
is precise. Brief patient,
right? Thank you.
Whenever you're ready.
Madam chair. Thank you. Members
of the committee again. My name
is Julie PSA and I'm, the LFC
analyst for the Spaceport
Authority. Um, for this agency,
Please refer to documents under
Tab four and that's agency code
495.
I am joined today by DFA Budget
and LS analyst Monica Tapia as
well as the executive director
of the Spaceport Authority,
Scott make offline.
Beginning with the revenue
Overall, the LSC and the
executive
Recommendations differ by
100,000, with the executive
recommending the higher amount.
Um, there are two differences in
the General fund and in the
other revenue with the executive
recommending 400,000 more in
General Fund and the LFC
recommending 400,000 more in
other revenues.
Moving on to expenditures. There
are two main differences in the
sea and the executive. The LFC
increased funding for personnel
while the executive increased
funding for contractual services
specifically for attorney fees.
Pass it over to Monica for
additional insights on the
executive recommendation.
Madam chair and members of the
committee.
The main difference for the
exactly recommendation is
400,000 over the LFC and
contractual services to support
the forecasted increase of
attorney fees as
The spaceport becomes fully
functional.
That's all I have to pass it
over to Madam chair. I'm in. May
I give a quick presentation
then? Okay. Thank you. My name
is Scott McLaughlin. I'm the
executive director of the
Spaceport America and happy to
be here and happy to take all
kinds of questions of go through
the presentation quickly, um and
let you have time to refer back
to whatever you'd like to talk
about.
Um
So on page four side activity.
This is just a quick
Quick list of side activity and
you can see we've done a lot on
on Page five. There are pictures
of the different types of events
that we host on site. So we're
always working. You know, 11 of
the few agencies to have a
business development department
and we're always working to
bring in new customers to to
hopefully become permanent
customers, but at a minimum
coming and use the site for a
little bit of time, so you can
see we've done engine testing.
Um, we have now become a site
for something called high
altitude platform systems or
high altitude pseudo satellites,
And those are whole new market A
whole whole new technology Where
very, very large U A. V s fly at
60,000 ft and above, um, and
they're designed to stay up for
six months at a time.
So of the major developers.
There's about three or four or
five depending on money on the
list, and we have three at the
spaceport right now to our
tenants that are there
permanently. One comes and goes
and and rents one of our
facilities. Um, for most of the
months of the year, so one of
the things we're trying to do
with those as an example is to
get them to manufacture in New
Mexico once they finish working
on their systems, and they
certify them and they become FAA
certified.
Their goals that we would have
these sort of systems above us
all the time. Or they could go
to where there was a hurricane
or an earthquake provide
communications or surveillance,
But it's it's one of the one of
the oddities of technology.
That's something like that has
evolved at the spaceport can
support um, moving on Virgin
Galactic last year, had six
flights, suborbital flights.
The first one was you 25 in May,
and that was a test flight. And
then they had five operational
fights. They're going to have
1/6 1 January 26th, either 26 or
27, and then they'll have one
more this year.
And if you've been following
along in the news what they've
decided to do, partially due to
the cost of money and the way
the operations have been working
as they are now going to focus
on something called the Delta
class of space ship, which is
basically just an evolution of
the current system that they're
fine. They're going to do some
tweaks. Um, they built US
factory in Mesa, Arizona, and
they're going to bring back to
spaceships to new spaceships in
2025.
They will go through a series of
tests and then they will begin
operations again, Hopefully in
2026, and what will be looking
at then our weekly flights to
space, um and then, and I put a
reference to their site, which
is always good to go look at
their their U. R l site, um,
they will continue manufacturing
spaceships, and then they will
come to the spaceport and what
we're looking at.
Sometime after 2027 and in the
out years, our daily flights and
probably two carrier aircraft,
so we'll finally get to this
cadence of fights that we've
talked about. For years and
years and years each one of
those fights will hold six
paying passengers that come with
their friends and family to New
Mexico. So we got a taste of
that. And this last year with
these five flights we had
Um one every month for a little
while.
We have two more coming up and
then we'll have a drawdown while
we wait for them to bring the
new spaceship. So in the
meantime, we'll be focusing on
other technologies and other
customers. Um hey, Jade is a one
of our haps flyers the prismatic
B A just to give you an example.
This picture was them, Uh, at
the top picture, there was that
66,000 Ft, Um
And, uh, it they're very, very
light aircraft.
But like I said, we have three
of those there and we'll
hopefully have some more. Uh,
when they come they have about
40 people there, by the way.
Um we're continuing to do stem
outreach with students. We have
lots of students out to the
site. We go and visit
classrooms. Part of that is the
on page 10 is the Spaceport
America Cup. So this last year,
we had 1600 aerospace students
came to New Mexico with about
5900 participating worldwide.
Um, what happens with those
students? Those college level
students as they all become
familiar with New Mexico and
Spaceport America and then they
go on and they graduate and they
go work for the major space
companies. And we've had some of
those students come back now who
have come to the spaceport to do
testing? So we consider this one
of our biggest business
development opportunities?
Biggest our marketing
opportunities.
If you haven't if you have a
chance to come down the third
week of June, we'd love to have
you It's hard to explain the the
what it's like to be out in the
field launching rockets all day,
but it's very exciting. We'd be
happy to host you, Um on page
next page 12, this gives you an
idea. The our our sponsors who
helped sponsor these are these
are the major companies and
aerospace right now, Blue.
Origin. The engines on the U L.
A spaceship that launched
yesterday were blue origin
engines, and they come here and
they do their recruiting. They
were our title sponsor last
year, some real quick. I don't
know if we want to talk about
the I C I p request, But I've
listed those the number one is
to refurbish the gateway to
space roof. Um, we're working on
a reception center upfront in
the spaceport.
Um, infrastructure is always
important for us to taxiway and
then a new hangar.
And, um
I'll skip over the details on
that. Please ask me if you have
any questions I did list on page
18. You know, we're like a
little city. So we have our own
water. We have our own
electricity. We have our own
fiber. We have our own roads.
Um, we have our own fire
department. We have our own
um, security so there are needs
there, but that allows people to
come and move in quickly, which
has been happening in some of
our customers.
Um, on page 22. I have the work
chart and then on page 23. I
have the budget. Um um Julius
already spoke and Monica spoke.
What I would request is the
governor's budget. Um, would
work for us the executive
budget.
Um
And I'd be happy to talk about
that. Also, um
Business development wise. Oh, I
should go over the economic
impact. We did do an economic
impact report for 2022, which
I've handed out to you.
Um what it shows a $60 million
in brand new money into the
state of New Mexico, and there's
a typo 811 jobs that are due to
the spaceport when we start
launching in two years when we
expect to start launching with V
G daily weekly, we expect the
total number of jobs to crime
over 1000 and higher
Um and we will continue to
hopefully add more money to
brand new money to the state of
New Mexico.
Business development wise. One
of the things we're working on
is a reentry license. Reentry I
since will last year space which
has developed a very small
shuttle like vehicle to land
there, they're developing a
family of vehicles that are
going to right now Land at the
Cape. We've had discussions with
him and we have an MOU with him
and we're working on this f a
reentry license together.
We're also looking at, um
Ah, Several other types of
kinetic launches. Still, kinetic
launch means the first stage is
done through kinetic means as
opposed to chemical means. So
we're talking to several
customers for that, Um
The commercial space market on
Page 27 is still growing. It's
expected to be one trillion by
2030, depending on who you ask
that I put down one presentation
of what that looks like.
Spaceport, of course, is a very,
very small part of it. But if
you go, uh to the next page 28
what? What is important for any
Mexico is what several of us
have done and got together and
we're calling Space Valley and
Space Valley is trying to get
everybody who is working on
space from us Al most L Paso
together to market the region
for all we have to offer. We
have the manufacturing and
Um, capabilities, especially in
El Paso and sanitary. So we have
the two laboratories up here
with Sandia and Los Alamos. We
have the space force in
Albuquerque. We have this air
Force. Um, we are really a
powerhouse, but we're not
connected in the way that allows
us to show after the nation and
attract people to New Mexico. So
Space Valley has been around
now, about two or three years.
We're working on grants with the
National Science Foundation. We
won one grant with
Economic development Agency.
Um and we're going to continue
to hook together to try and
attract people to New Mexico.
Um
Uh And I think that's all I
have. So I'd be happy to stand
for questions. So thank you very
much. I'm sure Thank you for
your presentation. First
Questions will come from
representative Sanchez.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Thank
you Mentioned that your hope is
2027. You're going to be
Virgin Galactic is going to be
fully functioning.
Yes, there. The plan is to these
new Delta class spaceships are
designed to to fly quicker right
now. The spaceship they have the
one spaceship. It comes down and
it takes somewhere between three
weeks to four weeks to get it
ready to fly again. The new
updated design allows them to
fly that spaceship weekly so
they'll bring two spaceships
back in 2025 2026.
And then they'll start flying
weekly at Spaceport America when
they bring more spaceships,
which is their plan, then we
should start to see daily
flights sometime in 2027 2028
was out years.
Madam Chair. I think you
mentioned that.
This and other things are going
to result in over 1000 new jobs.
Uh,
I know the states invested quite
a bit of money in this
initiative.
Do you have any
Type of forecast or assumption
of when we'll hit that break
even point whether it's direct
or indirect benefits from what
we've invested. That's a hard
one to answer because the
different people will want
haunted answered in a different
way. If we talk about revenue
strictly to the spaceport, the
break even point is off into the
future if we talk about total
economic development, you know
for 2022. We had $60 million in
new money just for one year.
So if we continue, that process
would be at the break even point
very quickly if you're looking
at at economic impact as the
answer to your question, so
really depends on how you ask
the question. I think the
purpose of the spaceport is for
economic development, economic
impact, So I prefer to look at
that metric how many jobs are
created because of the spaceport
and how much new money is in the
state because of the spaceport?
Madam chair, I think at one
point
And one of the past
presentations. It was mentioned
that similar initiatives are
happening in other states, so
there's competition for this, Uh
Where is that competition right
now? And I guess what? What's
the difference between you and
them? But what are you doing to
draw?
These people to our state.
Madam chair and represent such
as on page 29 have the F A a
map.
Of commercial spaceports and
What's interesting, and it's in.
Invest A very good question.
What's interesting is that
Michigan has been trying to
create a spaceport. Um, that is
not going very well. Camden's
created and you got a license,
but they were not able to create
a spaceport Main is looking at
possible spaceport. There's been
one in Yuma, and now there's a
new commercial one. That's uh,
possibly just outside of Las
Vegas.
Um
Most of those are not doing very
well. They have not in my
backyard kind of problem. They
have a funding problem and
another thing they don't have
that in the Mexico was always
lucky to have was foundational
partner in Virginia. Lactic so
Virgin Galactic, as we know has
had their ups and downs, but
they're still here and right
now, even though they had a
layoff in December of about 70
people in New Mexico
They still have 200 people in
Oscar assists and and to your C
So what we're seeing with these
other commercial spaceports is
they don't have the weather that
we have. They don't have the
wide open space they have. They
didn't They're not getting the
support that the spaceport is
enjoyed from the legislators in
the state of New Mexico,
especially when we first started
and it's made a big difference.
And so if you were to get to go
to some of the symposium or the
conferences or exhibits that I
go to Spaceport America believe
it or not, is considered the
leader and commercial
spaceports.
Um, the other ones you see on
the list here? Oklahoma,
Colorado Midland. Um, A few of
those are airports. Um, hobby is
a is a is a county airport, So
their mission is, um, confused
where we're very focused on
going to space, and we're very
focused on eventually having
orbital, um, missions to space,
which we should be able to
support and maybe 10 or 15 years
from the technology.
Um, supports it. And we're also
right next to White Sands
missile range. So in terms of,
uh we're now focused really hard
Internally. Business development
wise on what stronger
connections can we build with
the Department of Defense in
terms of hyper Sonics, which
you've probably heard seeing the
news. The Russians and the
Chinese are ahead of us and that
kind of design and technology,
Um, point to point transport,
how you would get troops and
equipment across the world and
literally 90 minutes.
Um, And there's other things
that we can do at the spaceport
that are unique. So we are very
focused on that, and we think we
it will be a factor in these
jobs and years to come.
Not. I'm sure my last question
Ah!
Do you have an exclusive
agreement with virgin or we see
that like Amazon, they're doing
their own thing. Do you ever
foresee having other entities
using the spaceport?
Where you can expand.
Your business model, Madam chair
and representative, Um
Ah!
Virgin Galactic has openly said
that they intend to expand to
other space parts someday when
they have enough carrier
aircraft and additional
spaceships but their main site
and their focus for the years to
come as strictly spaceport
America.
Um, is what they've announced.
In terms of other customers. We
have about seven other tenants
that used the spaceport
regularly. A couple more
vertical launch. We have spin
launch that is their
AeroVironment. Um, we now have a
satellite ground station, which
is interesting because we're
able to drive a little bit of
revenue from the land, but we're
not using the airspace.
So we're going to continue to
look for all you know, we we
We've got ourselves kind of as a
high tech industrial park and
some of our customers are going
to use the airspace. Some of
them are going to be focused on
the ground. But we we are doing
exactly what you said. We're
trying to find other customers
and permanence in its
Thank you, madam.
Thank you. Representative. Next
will be representative
Chatfield.
Thank you, Madam Chair when I
was down there and turned the
spaceport, they were just
building spin long.
Kind of
Awesome idea, You know, let's
just throw a satellite into
space like a baseball.
Have you done that?
So Madam chair and represented
Chatfield their system, which
they forget what the exact model
number is. But it's a 30 M or
100 ft system and you saw it
being built that is designed for
suborbital practice only in
certification. They're working
on an orbital site, but because
they dropped a little bit of
debris kind of the
The protective coating of of the
of the projectile and stuff.
They're not going to launch over
land. They don't have a way to
do that safely. But they intend
that that site. It's spaceport
will be a long term site to
qualify. What will be like as
you say, thrown into orbit,
which is it's a pretty
incredible thing. There, they'll
throw it at about Mach five, so
it's pretty interesting.
So today, they really haven't
thrown anything.
Out of the out of the spaceport
so far management chair so far,
the
Ah, The objects that they've
flown have gone up five or six
miles.
Um, And so they've been able to
test that spin technology and
and the projectile technology
and other parts of the
technology, but they have not
theirs. Their stated goal a few
years ago was to get to the
Karman line, which would be
about 60 miles and that would
land in white sands missile
range, like like aerospace does
when they launch, so they have
not done that yet. We're looking
hopefully forward to seeing them
do that in the next year or two.
So, Madam Chair. Where did the
one they through five or six
Miles land. So part part of our
madam chair, part of our safety
analysis and and we we do Safety
analysis, both in conjunction
with FAA and White sands missile
range, depending on what the
what The device is and who the
customer is right now what? What
they were doing is they point
nearly vertical and they land
approximately just
I think it's probably about 1000
2000 ft. In front of the the the
centrifuge, so as they get
higher and higher they will,
they will land further out. We
have a designated landing site.
Um
That's uh, about six or seven
miles out, And then once they go
higher, they'll have to land in
white sands proper.
So even in the McGregor range,
maybe know that sorry. McGregor
ranges as far south but just the
northern part of the White Sands
Missile Range, which is which is
where white Sands missile range
has a lot of their targets and
rockets and things that's been a
crash area. I guess if you will,
for many, many decades, Okay,
so madam chairman, more serious.
Uh,
At the time that I was down
there and looked at this one
state was putting in about $2
million a year.
Kind of keep the keep the doors
open. Keep things rolling. We're
hoping that
As more things come
E N, and there's more projects
and
That
That it will become self
sustaining where we at along on
that line.
So, Madam Chair and
representative chapter. I think
that question is kind of like a
representative Sanchez question
about
Um, how do you balance our
ability to to attract customers
and grow with infrastructure and
and with the personnel? Our
personnel we have about 30
people right now who support
that mission?
And how we pay for that, right?
Um, if we were only focused on
being self sufficient, we would
probably reduce our staff and
reduce our projects and support.
The few customers are there.
And new customers would have to
bring everything with them.
They'd have to build their own
hangar they'd have to put in all
their own equipment. They kind
of have to do their own thing,
And that's that does happen in
some industrial and development
parks in the world and the
country. Um, but we're fine.
What we what's always been true
for Aerospace is there on the
cutting edge and any money that
they have goes into whatever
they're trying to develop and
you know, so the spaceport was
definitely a build it
And they will come kind of
aspirational project.
I am And so we still feel that
that's the right approach to be
able to stay a little bit ahead.
We need to build hangars. I like
I said, One of our customers now
is renting one of our hangers
about 10 months of the year, so
they're not a permanent tenant.
But we're getting revenue. So
now we want to build another
hanger so we can attract another
customer and also start renting
that out. Hopefully the majority
of the time or permanently so as
far as trying to be self
sufficient. I know. Previous
spaceport director said that we
would be and that was a goal,
but I'm not finding that's an
easy thing to balance. It is
easier to balance if you
consider the economic impact.
the $60 million of new money.
Um, So when you look at our true
economic impact in the area and
the state against 4 million
we're getting from the General
fund. I think that's a better
way to make that comparison.
Ah, Madam Chair, 4 million not
too now. Yes.
It sounds to me like that that
what you're telling me is that
the existing
Uh, tenets that you have ourself
sustaining
Madam chair. It's something some
of them are spin Launch built
their sight completely
AeroVironment built their sight
completely prismatic built their
sight completely. Um, but they
others like swift and a few
others, they come and go and
come and go there smaller
companies so they need to be
able to rent a facility. Um and
and hopefully we capture him
Eventually. Part of our plan is
our
To get them there permanently,
to, um but but we need that sort
of mix of Greenfield. We have
plenty of Greenfield space.
That's one of the benefits of
our spaceport over a lot of
other areas. Um, but at the same
time having, um, leasable
principle, uh, hangar space or
other area
Very interesting project.
Meet thing two tour and to see
and
We appreciate you think about
here.
Thank you, representative so we
can have represented pocket dela
Cruz chair small next.
Thank you, madam Chair and in
fairness, you guys wanna be
asking three questions
specifically from volume two
page to 16 to 17.
So, Madam chair in the first
question I have and you guys
address it was really the
increase of the
Um, as far as contractual
services attorney fees, and you
said that it was the increase
was due to operational becoming
fully operational.
In the actual brief here. It
says that we have
For lawsuits pending lawsuits.
Is that correct, Madam Chair and
Committee. It's bottom age to 16
under attorney fees.
Madam Chair member of the
committee, representative,
Vodka. Um so the attorney fees
increase or the request increase
attorney fees by 404%. And
that's for increase legal
matters for the authority. So,
yes, madam Chair and when you
said earlier it was that
The justification was that we
would be becoming fully
operational. But in the
Breacher, it actually is that we
have pending lawsuits.
Is that correct? Madam Chair
Madam chair would be for
increased.
Legal costs related to the
lawsuit. It's not for the
lawsuit settlements directly if
that makes sense. Okay, Thank
you, Madam Chair on page 217. We
talked about vacancy rate.
Currently have a vacancy rate.
Somewhere between 20 22%.
Um Madam Chair. Can you tell me
How many Ft designed equate to
What are the types of FTE and
What are we gonna be doing to
attract those? Because it is in
the lfc that we fund those FT.
But
If you can answer those briefly,
I would appreciate it.
Yes, madam Madam Sharon and
represented vodka. Just real
real. Quick on. I'll go back
Real quick. Uh, During the we
had a period of investigation,
you might remember three or four
years ago happened almost the
same time as Covid one of the
things that came out was the
spaceport shouldn't be using the
excess pledged revenue for
operations. At that time we were
approved for about 28 full time
equivalents, but
We didn't necessarily have the
revenue, especially with a drop
of about 2 million. Um, once the
legislators once, uh, I was able
to, um
Convince you all that we were
worth the extra $2 million. So
we were sitting in about 4
million in General fund revenue.
We started hiring and now we're
actually are vacancy rate is
about 6%. So, um, that this This
is a little bit old we had. We
literally had three people start
on Monday. Um, and we've had a
couple other movements. One of
the problems with the vacancy
rate is we have promoted from
within and a couple of positions
so
Or we're shuffling and it looks
bad. But right now we have 3029
people and 31 approved FTS.
And thank you, Madam Chair.
Thank you for the clarification.
My last question is on Capitol
Ally. And that is, um page 217.
We talked about 11 million out
of $44 Million expended from
Capital L. A
Can you can you explain? What is
the You know why? Why do we have
you know as far as all this
money that we've allocated and
we are only used about a quarter
of it.
Yeah, madam chair Similarly
because of the investigation and
partially because of covid,
there was a bit of a slowdown
and our capital improvements and
Also, as I took over trying to
figure out how to get that move
forward. What? What I understood
was I couldn't directly use
capital outlay money for
salaries for internal salary, So
it took it took a little while,
but we hired to project
managers.
That sped things up and then one
of the things I asked the
legislators for last year, which
I got was a single person
dedicated to, um, infrastructure
development, and that person
started about six weeks ago. So
now we have three people fully
dedicated to infrastructure
development, and we're starting
to work through that backlog,
which I apologize for. I
appreciate the fact that we were
Allowed to have that capital
improvement money, but, um, a
few things slowed us down. But
we are now working very
diligently of three people full
time to work through our needs
and our customer needs and build
out the spaceport.
And thank you, madam turn and I
do just capital. And this isn't
just regarding the spaceport.
But when we talked about us as a
legislative body, all the money
is that we have in the different
capital funds across state that
are sitting there and they
haven't been
Used or they haven't you know
the projects haven't been
completed yet. That's just
something that I want to bring
our attention to. So thank you,
Madam Chair.
Thank you, Representative Baca.
We now go to representative dela
Cruz. Thank you, madam Chair.
Self sufficiency is an important
aspect of
What
Operation of your nature.
Needs to do our recognize that
everybody recognizes that at the
same time, I think it's
important not to ignore.
The multiplier effect when you
have
Uh, a similar operation or a
business when we're talking
about economic development. That
being said, would you reiterate
my notes in some of the
documentation, But you really
reiterate the benefits that we
are deriving as a state right
now and the local economies as
well as statewide.
In in
Penn addition to the cost of the
center itself.
Yeah, Madam chair, um and
represent daylight Cruise. I
think that's uh, that that is
the big question about a project
like this and
Um, I think Like I said, we were
very, very lucky that when the
spaceport
The space idea for spaceport
goes back to the nineties and,
uh, even goes back to the
eighties, when when the federal
government passed a rule that
allowed commercial space all
space before then was federal
government. It was NASA. It was
d O d. It was Noah buildings,
weather satellites, but in 1984,
they passed a law that allowed
commercial space and that
allowed, uh
Thanks to eventually happen like
SpaceX, Blue Origin and
Spaceport America.
Um
So
When we were we were lucky
things came together very
quickly at the same time that we
were able to capture Virgin
Galactic Virgin Galactic was
able to find a home and
everybody thought things would
move quicker, of course.
But the focus, I think,
unfortunately, it was a little
bit too much on just virgin
Galactic. So what I've been
trying to do and what many
others have been trying to do
when you talk about these other
benefits is, um besides jobs,
which is important 811 jobs I
spoke about over $60 million,
and that's just again for 2022.
But the other tangible benefits
that we're working on is time
together. I'll paso and sanitary
PSA, um, last Cruces, New Mexico
Tech and see Coral You and M
into a powerhouse all of
Albuquerque and
Saleh most into a powerhouse
ecosystem, a cluster and
Um, aerospace cluster that has
everything you need. Design
development research workforce.
Um, no one place can do all that
alone. The spaceport can't do it
by itself. Last cruises can't do
it by itself. Albuquerque can't
do it by itself. Um, but if you
combine the talents that we have
across the board, I think many
of us, um, talk often or hear
often about how we develop
technologies in the state at Los
Alamos, Sandia or some of the
universities and those
technologies leave the state.
And then they come and recruit
people from our universities. So
the real benefit I think of the
spaceport is kind of a keystone
If you will that we we can go to
space. We can launch and we can
land and we go to space right
here. So if we want to do
satellite development if we want
to do point to point if we want
to do these other, um,
aspirational goals, they can all
take place between El Paso and
Albuquerque and what we're
calling Space Valley so that
I think is the really long term
goal to see us as a powerhouse
across the region.
Madam chair, one of the things
that people look at.
Pragmatically understand this is
that you? You look at the cost.
For your operation, and then
immediately the cost or the the
the amount that you bring in
annually and compare the two.
That's a very easy thing to look
at. And too often we don't look
at that multiplier effect that
occurs and
Clearly the bigger the goal the
longer the time frame.
The more expensive you're going
to be looking at and that you're
gonna have to incur, but at the
same time there are benefits are
being derived immediately by the
operation.
They're in your documentation.
Can you give up quick Thumbnail
amount.
Madam chair in terms of money,
or just some examples. You think
money.
Yeah. Well, madam Chair, UM
representative Daily Cruise. I
think the main one again from
2022, where we had the, um the
center for border and economic
development. Look at the
spaceport. Um, is really the $60
million of brand new money, So
the report talks about 128
million of kind of the money
that gets recycled in the
economy. I like to focus on a
smaller number, 60 million.
60 million is the new money
brought into the state. That's
because of Virgin Galactic
because of our other customers
because of visitors, and that's
probably on the low side because
it's kind of hard to capture.
Um, everything that happens. You
know, we'll have a customer come
to the site will bring 20
people. They'll be there for 10
days and they'll leave. They'll
do battery testing or do some
other experiment on the site.
It's really hard to capture that
money. But, um
But I would focus on that 60
million for 2022 were planning
on doing another economic impact
for 2023, and we're going to try
and continue to do that. We're
also going to try and go back in
time a few years and trying to
understand what that is, because
I think that's your question is
the absolute essence of public
works project Did it pay for
itself? Is it doing something
different?
For the region. I know that me
personally, I probably wouldn't
have moved back to my home city
if it weren't for the spaceport
because things haven't changed
that much in 25 years, frankly,
but because of the space board,
a lot had changed.
Um, And here I am. Um so I'm I'm
a I'm a more tangible example. I
guess. But, um, but I do think
that the impacts uh
We are probably not Somebody who
might have seen that we signed
an MOU with the border Plex
alliance. Um, mou like that
doesn't really specify a lot of
hardcore action items. But the
point is, is that we're going to
meet regularly with the border
Plex. We already meet regularly
with people from Albuquerque and
we'll pass off our prospects and
our site selection and we'll
continue to try and advertise
this whole region. So the
Again. That's the long term
cold. But the 60 million, I
think is the best answer for at
least 2022.
Thank you very much.
Thank you, representative
Delacruz next
Thank you very much, Madam
Chair. Thank you, Director.
Thank you to the staff. Madam
Chair director. Um
Going to the master. Can you
talk us through Briefly
Spaceport America is in the
midst of a minute. Yes, Madam
Chair and represents small.
Thank you for that question. I
forgot to mention that so we had
had some money to enact a master
plan. It took a while to get the
s a The statement of work,
written and get everything
going, But it's it's start in.
May. We're in the middle of it
As a matter of fact, tomorrow
night we're having our second
public meeting and Albuquerque.
Um And then on Thursday, we're
having an internal meeting in
Albuquerque. Um, so the master
plan was won by a company called
R S and H, and they had a couple
of partners, one of his populist
and another one is in Las
Cruces. Um, and the master plan
is designed to look at
everything. It's designed to
look at our facilities and
infrastructure is designed to
look at the economics of the
spaceport.
Profit loss if you will, um,
it's also designed to look at
the market and to try and help
us understand what
infrastructure we need to
capture some part of the market
in five years or 10 years, so
that's underway. Right now. We
expect, um, the kind of a draft
copy of that, Um, maybe in
February or march, Um and we're
talking to all of our
stakeholders and and making sure
You know, we're getting goodbye
in whether it's white scenes
missile range or other people.
the counties that have helped
pay for Dona Ana County in
Sierra County and you also were.
It's in process and we don't
have anything really as an
output yet, but we won't a few
more months.
Thank you very much, Director.
Thank you, Madam Chair in so
your we should look for initial.
Is there any initial product
that you can share from that? Is
there any qualitative feedback
from stakeholders?
Uh, will there be anything
during session that we can see?
Uh, thank you.
Madam chair and represents small
I don't know of anything
quantitative that
What one thing I'll give you. An
example was 11 thing We were
that had always been baked into
the spaceport was the idea of an
East West runway. This is an
example of a very expensive
infrastructure item that
Without a director someday, or
we have to decide whether
whether to build that runway or
not, whether that's gonna
attract customers or not, And
that's when we're looking at,
and we're starting to think that
it's not worth the cost. For
example, Um it's a It's a great
cost to build and a great cost
to maintain. Um, but if we don't
build it, it actually opens up
more space on the spaceport to
do other things because we're
not going to have that.
The money that we have to spend,
and we also have a lot more
acreage that we can focus on in
terms of bringing customers to
the space part. So that's that's
one thing. That's a great
conversation. That's come out of
the master plan. There's no been
no decision yet, but I don't
know if that answers your
question. Thank you, Director of
theme, Madam Chair I. It is a
specific piece. Thank you for
that.
Um
Broader question. Will there be
anything for us to review during
session?
From the Master plan revision.
And understanding that this is a
very important revision. It's
the first one that's happened is
that correct? Since
The building of the spaceport,
and it's How long is this master
plan revisions supposed to laugh
for or last four?
Madam chair about 10 to 20
years, depending on different
parts of it.
Okay. And is there will there be
anything that we can review
during sessions?
Madam chair, I'll ask the
project manager, uh, right away
about that. Whether it's a
contract. They're under contract
us. And if they're willing to
share anything at this point or
not, um
We
11 thing that's come about as
the other company populace.
Which is a company that
literally host Super Bowls and
Olympics. They helped build the
The sphere in Las Vegas.
They're on board with our S and
H for the purpose of trying to
understand our impact in terms
of the marketing for the state
and space tourism, which is a
big part of that, Um, and that's
an interesting thing As a as an
engineer, businessman. I don't
focus as much maybe on the
tourist aspects, but one of the
pictures in here we have people
who
Come to the spaceport just to
watch Virgin Galactic launch, so
we get some economic impact and
we expect that to continue. So,
um, is an example of the
divergence of the master plan,
but I'll ask and see if there's
anything we can share over the
next few weeks. Excellent. Thank
you, Madam Chair. Thank you,
Director. Um
And I that moves us into this
master plan needs to be one of
the core foundational pieces for
Diversifying and recruiting
additional private sector and,
well additional business,
private or public sector
stakeholders. So that's I guess
one of the understanding
Additional potential tenants or
additional tenants that are part
of this as I understand, Madam
Chair director, Um
You're one of the advantages and
one of the things frankly, the
contractor should be doing.
Is they hold relationships with
other stakeholders in this sort
of global
Ah! Ah area.
And you know if we're doing a
good job, we're leveraging our
work with them to meet and
connect and recruit and engage
with a wide set of is that it's
pretty your understanding as
well. And is that what they're
Yeah, Madam chair and represents
small. I think their list of
interviewing people is on the
order of at least 50. They've
interviewed professors at New
Mexico State County
commissioners folks up here. So,
um, really, they talk to White
Sands missile range. They've
talked to all of our customers.
Um, So, um
It's a big part of it, but lean
over a little on part of your
question in in years past, when
when people were saying more
negative about the spaceport.
That did hurt our ability to
recruit.
And you are correct that a good
master plan Very rational,
Logical Master plan should help
us recruit because prospectively
companies that come are probably
going to want to see that and
want to know. Hey, if we if we
put down roots here, what is the
future look like and that master
plan is going to help us market
it in that way, So you're
correct in that.
Great. Thank you, Madam Chair.
Thank you, Director. And I
would. I guess this is maybe
some to go into offline but
You.
I would wonder, and perhaps Oh,
I would hope
That part of that master plan is
engaging.
Non New Mexico stakeholders.
It's it's sort of by definition
has to be done with New Mexico
stakeholders.
Of course, right that that is
first and foremost first lasted
middle who were responsible to
But we also just heard you
minute, Madam Chair director.
Talked about, I think, share
that sentiment that spaceport
here. It remains really a
national leader and participate
on an international stage.
Are those fair characterizations
of it.
Madam chair and represent small
that partially by virtue of the
fact that the company is a
national company and as worked
at many other space parts, they
do take the viewpoint of others
possible stakeholders.
Um, there are talking to, uh
other companies that have not
come to New Mexico. That could,
or maybe in our estimate should
and trying to find out why those
companies are not coming or why
they decided not to come. So it
is broader than just the new
Mexico stakeholders. I
Probably could get a list or
something to you. If you want
that, they say, Manager. Thank
you, Director. I'm I'll be
interested to sort of follow up
offline.
Um
Just real quick, though, so that
I'm clear
Your your characterized, and I
think I share that character
that understanding that
spaceport remains in sort of
essentially the national leader.
There is no space board in the
United States, at least on the
sort of tourism focused side
with what we have here at Space
book.
Is that accurate?
Um Madam Chair if you if you
look at the space ports that are
on that f a map, you you have a
couple of the biggies like Cape
Canaveral and Kennedy and and
Wallops Island and Vandenberg.
Those all the those were all
built up with federal funds, and
in a way, they're very different
from us, although we do compete
against them, and they compete
against us, But when you look at
the
The new commercial spaceports,
the ones who have attempted to
basically do what we're doing.
We are definitely the leader in
that. Where, um, right again
with our partner, Virgin
Galactic were able to bring a
lot of light. You know, a lot of
press to New Mexico and and with
the many different things we
have even the Spaceport America
Cup.
With the number of students that
come here, as has brought
notoriety across the country if
you enter Spaceport America Cup
and search in India, for
example, or a few other
countries, you will find it.
There's all kinds of new news
articles written about the
spaceport. So I think we, you
know art could be considered a
leader definitely was spin
launched Virgin Galactic
AeroVironment.
Um and again, it's because of
the support of the Legislature.
The idea that we would build
infrastructure to attract
people, um, and the wide open
spaces and the good weather.
It's it's a good, good,
competitive advantage.
Great. Thank you, Madam Chair.
Thank you, Director. Um
So then I guess questions around
Capitol were raised.
We're in a critical We're in a
very important and opportune
year.
Um, offline and with your
analysts, it would be great to
see a schedule.
For what the
Current capital outlay.
Dollars of sort of
How you expect them to be
utilized.
What that schedule is, I think
I We share the sentiment that
especially, you know, using
those is doing critical work
around the roof and other pieces
of which are sufficient. There's
a lot of funding now.
Um and I think it's
If we're able to sort of do
Those hard things but which,
frankly, sort of have to acute
on the stuff that we already
have. It puts us
In a position to remain
participant and competitor.
I worry.
About what we need to do to make
sure that the capacity to sort
of reach our potential
Is, you know that that
And so always open this sort of
feedback.
About how we can better enable
us to remain at the forefront of
this one.
Very interesting Madame chair on
the hypersonic side. Imagine
anything that you can expand
upon their You mentioned it.
Madam chair and represent a
small work on the schedule. We
do have now somebody dedicated
to that. So that's a that's not
too hard of an ask, Um in terms
of hypersonic, it's It's really
just, uh
Big because the space part was
perceived as a, uh, not stable
enterprise. You know, In the
years previous again, I think
that hurt our recruiting. So
it's it's It's really important
that we get your support all of
your support. And then that
comes out on the press because
that helps our recruiting, But I
think because of that, in trying
to find partnerships and D O d
Um, that made it more difficult,
But now that we're right next to
white Sands and white scenes is
engaged in all kinds of things
that we we don't even know some
of the things they're engaged
in, but we're right there. We're
right there with a with a 12,000
ft runway and a Greenfield for
expansion. We have full time
security and fire and ambulance
So they're starting. There are
people that are starting to warm
up to the idea.
That part of what white scenes
does or part of what God does
could sit at the spaceport and
and be there as a long term
customer. So that's that's
That's a long conversation
because money moves through the
federal government slowly and
those ideas percolate slowly but
we are starting to get people
warmed up to that idea, and
hyper Sonics is just one.
Of those programs we would like
to help them find a home for
Thank you, Manager. Thank you.
Thank you for allowing me the
time. I really appreciate it.
Thank you, Director. Thank you
to the analyst.
The infrastructure investments
we can make now and continue to
support.
I would urge very aggressive
vision.
Yeah, acknowledging.
The challenges and sort of being
first and sort of the different
challenges that we've gone
through. It seems to me that
we're on the cusp.
Of sort of not only having
succeeded in a place that many
folks thought would not succeed,
quite frankly.
Uh, but we're able to keep that
momentum while we have resources
to aggressively fill out of
vision.
With our space for as a core
drive cation.
In progress in the state, and so
it just urge you
To continue forward leaning,
aggressive mode.
Thank you very much.
Thank you. Mr Chairman. Next is
represented. Thank you, Madam
Chair. Uh, presenter. You know
this? I don't have a question. I
have a concern. You know, quite
a few representatives in here
asked the same question. When
does you Mexico break even on
what they're investing, and you
don't have an answer for that.
You know, keep up, throwing
back Look at what the community
is making. Look at the county
what they're making. Look at the
G, R T s and so forth and
employment. But yet the
The question has never been
answered is when doesn't he?
Mexico start breaking even on
this.
And you know that's a concern of
mine.
You know, we keep on putting
more investment and more
investment in the space board
and at the end of the day
The state is not seen.
Any significant come back on
what the investment is other
than what? You mentioning
employment.
What are the what? The community
making one of the motels making.
I understand that
And I probably can't answer it
because they've been asked three
times and you keep on trying
away from the answer and going
back to the scene matches that
you've been putting out and this
is my concern. And if you know
there's no there's no answer
required. You don't have one but
interesting concerning my thank
you, madam Chair.
Thank you, representative.
Represented hurting or vice
chair.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Just a
quick question to Mr Executive
director with respect to the
$400 decreasing. Maybe this
would be for the analysts answer
Also.
What in the contractual
services what contracts would be
affected if that funding is not
there?
So the LFC Madam Chair
representative. The Lfc s
recommendation decrease
contractual services by 400,000
compared to the executive. That
difference is in, um mostly in
the attorney fees. Um, and the
attorney fees.
Thank you. I didn't. I wasn't
clear about that. Uh, the only
other question I have, Madam
chair is whether or not Mr
Executive director has been up
in space.
Madam Tarrin, Uh, representing
hard to know, But I wouldn't. I
wouldn't like to go with that
would be great. Alright. Thank
you, Madam Chair. Those are my
questions.
Thank you. Thank you all for
your great questions. I think
most of been asked. I just want
to say you're correct. It is
known all over the world. I was
in Hungary for the holidays, and
I did have a a sharp were a shop
steward that was there and and
he asked me we were talking
about where I was from, And I
said Spaceport so, so it is
known all over the world. So
thank you for that. And thank
you for your thank you.
Medals here. I moved the LFC
recommendation.
Committee. The last thing we are
going to use
Thank you, Madam Chair for those
online, please raise your hand
If you'd like to do public
comment will give you a couple
of minutes to raise your hands.
And if we don't see any hand
raised will and the zoom for the
day.
Just do you mind if I get
Thanks.
All right. Thank you. Zoom
participants. We see no hands
raised, so we'll go ahead and
shut down the zoom.
Thank you.
I don't think we come back to
130.
