Representative Herrera.
Representative Little here.
Representative Lujan.
Representative Pettigrew.
Representative Pettigrew,
Representative Sanchez.
Representative Sariana.
Represented Sareana,
Representative Silva here.
Representative Vincent.
Vice Chair Dixon.
Chairs small.
Uh, I'm here. OK, great. Thank
you, members, uh, thanks to
everybody. We're gonna, uh,
shuffle our agenda. We're gonna
go 453448, then 458. Uh, the
vice chair has a number of
things if we've, yeah, shuffling
things around uh and and Nonu,
uh, thank you very much for
being here. If you would go up
to start us off with House Bill
453, um.
Well, please be brief, uh, we'll
move the amendment for
discussion, and then we can go
from there.
Thank you very much, Mr. Chair
and committee members. Hi
everybody. Um, House Bill 453
creates an MFA managed
creditworthiness program through
which property managers can feel
secure, um, renting to
applicants who and for all other
parameters meet the um rental
requirements except for a less
than desirable credit rating.
This program also includes a
training program for qualified
applicants on the importance of
budgeting and the operation of
credit histories and credit
scores. So I just want to
you very quickly outline what
this bill does not do. It is not
rental assistance or eviction
prevention. Um, if a tenant is
unable to make their payments,
the property manager will still
follow their usual procedures,
and this bill does not require
any changes on how a property
manager selects their tenants,
there is no mandate or
requirement for that a property
property manager must rent to a
particular tenant.
And that is all, and I do have
an amendment, you read it, um,
the 231 number, please. Yes,
that is Amendment number
231593.1.
Can we have a motion in a second
for discussion.
OK, uh, the amendment strikes
the appropriation on page one
and then on 16 strikes the
$250,000
representative, uh, the money is
in the budget.
Yes, Mr. Chair, it is.
We will, we will need to get the
bill, we'll need to discuss the
bill, um, we're on the, um,
On the amendment, any questions
on the amendment?
No, move for adoption.
OK, OK, we had a motion and a
second for adoption of the
amendment. We've adopted the
amendment. We're going to go now
to the audience. Is there
anybody here who wishes to speak
on House Bill 453.
Great, come on up.
But
They were worth from the
governor's Office of housing,
uh, speaking for this
creditworthiness is an important
part of um being able to secure
stable housing and move up the
ladder to things like home
ownership. Uh, I was at one time
a credit counselor, that's how I
started out in housing and uh
this is a huge benefit. It's
also complimentary with a
program that we're launching
with MFA imminently to do
landlord support, which also
helps support landlords to take
um vouchers and other um types
of retinal assistance.
Great. Thank you very much, Mr.
Rowe. Uh.
There's, uh, I don't see anybody
else in person. We have two
folks online. We're gonna go to
An Lin Hall and the.
OK, we're gonna cut it off at 4
folks, we're gonna go to Anlin
Hall, briefly, please.
For sure. Good evening, ma'am.
uh, Mr. Chair and committee
members, my name is Alyn Hall
and I'm the CEO of Prosperity
Works. I'm here today to ask for
your support of HB 453. New
Mexico is facing a housing
crisis and we have many New
Mexicans that are unhoused or
precariously housed. This bill
is an important step that
supports households who have
funds to pay for housing, but
have lower credit scores. This
program would give landlords the
ability to say yes to potential
tenants, knowing that if they
are unable to pay their rent,
but the housing credit
Creditworthiness assistance
program would be able to help.
As a state, we need multiple
solutions to the housing crisis,
and this is one piece of the
puzzle to affordable housing for
New Mexicans. I urge your
support of this bill and thank
the sponsor for all of her work
on this bill. Thank you. Thank
you. We're gonna go next to
Rachel Biggs.
Mr. Chair and members of the
committee. My name is Racheligs
with Albuquerque Health Care for
the Homeless. We serve about
5000 people experiencing
homelessness in Bernaleo County
every year. This is a major
barrier to using our vouchers
very quickly and efficiently and
we stand in strong support of
this legislation and thank the
sponsor for bringing it forward.
Great. Thank you very much.
Next, we're gonna go to Judy.
Thank you, Mr. Chair and members
of the committee. I'm Judy
Messel speaking on behalf of
Lutheran advocacy ministry in
New Mexico and the New Mexico
Conference of Churches. We stand
in support of HB 5453, and
especially appreciate the
financial literacy training for
renters. And we've seen this
kind of training work in a small
community-based project, and
they were able to demonstrate
better outcomes for financially.
distressed people. Thank you
very much.
Great. Thank you.
We're going to conclude with
Catherine McGill.
Um, Mr. Chair and uh
representatives, uh, we wanna
I'm from the, uh, my name is
Catherine McGill and I'm from
the New Mexico Black Leadership
Council, and I just want you to
know that we stand in strong
support of the bill, and I'm
here with the representative to
answer questions if there are
any questions about why this is
necessary. I'm in the
international district where 60%
of the residents are cost burden
for rent, and this is something
that will really help people
stay housed. So we appreciate
you very much. Thank you. Thank
you very much, Ms. Miguel, and
we'll noted is that you're
there.
and thank you to represent. OK,
that'll conclude the public
comment or any questions from
the committee, we're gonna start
with ranking members of motion,
OK, uh, we've got, uh, we'll go
to representative Garrett next.
Thanks, Mr. Chair. 2 quick
questions. Who did the property
damage that they're getting the
$2500. I don't quite understand
that.
Sorry, Mr. Chair Representative,
who, who, what? I missed that
word. They get money for rental
assistance, but they also get
money for property damage.
Who did the property damage, the
person who actually is getting
the money.
Or does the landlord get it? So
Mr. Cher's actually not rental
assistance, um, the way the
program would work is a renter
meets the requirements for the
apartment, but they have a bad
credit score, the property
manager can feel secure in
renting to them if that tenant
then defaults within the first
year of the lease, um, we will
cover the remainder of the lease
up to a certain amount and also
if there is property damage, we
will also include that in the
coverage for the property
manager up to a certain amount.
So we
have a cap.
Of $5000 of unpaid rent to a
qualifying grantee per one
participant, and 2500 and um.
Property damage to the property
manager, Mr. Chair
Representative. Thank you. And
is there a specific source for
the financial education
training.
Um, that will be provided and um
administered Mr. Chair
Representative through MFA.
OK, great. Thank you very much,
Representative Garrett. Next,
we're gonna go to Representative
Dixon.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Just to
confirm, uh, Representative is
the money in the budget for
this?
Mr. Chair, uh, Vice Chair Dixon,
yes, it is.
Great. Uh thank you very much,
uh, Madam Vice Chair. Um, I, uh,
representative, I have a quick
question, um, right, this, you,
you're adding additional uh
language here to specifically uh
that we see here on page 2.
And well, and throughout the
bill.
Um
This was working with to make it
easier for property owners to
accept different sorts of uh
housing assistance. Is that
right?
Mr. Chair, yes, that is correct.
We have a lot of programs,
housing programs in place,
including um property management
assistance programs where with
the requirement is that the
tenant make no more than a
certain amount of money. So what
the, the purpose of this program
is to fill a growing kind of gap
of people where they make too
much money to qualify for other
programs like rental assistance,
but they are still unable to.
rent an apartment or a home
because of their poor credit
score. Got it. OK, thank you.
And the work that's been put in,
thank you for the work that has
been put in in our inclusion of
the funding in this budget, uh,
we do need, uh, I will ask for a
do pass motion on House Bill 453
as amended, uh, because we need
that language with the funding
that's there in order to execute
that.
Thank you very much, Mr. Chair.
Great, OK, uh, then I'll now,
we'll accept the motion on the
uh do pass motion on House Bill
453 is is amended.
OK, it's been moved by ranking
member Chatfield, signed by
Representative Little. Is there
any opposition to that motion?
Kate, please show San Pettigrew
in opposition. Thank you,
Representative Enyaornu, um,
we'll have you stay up there.
Or if you, you probably need to
get back to committee. I do.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Thank you
very much appreciate that.
OK, we're gonna go to.
Uh, House Bill 448 and then 458
and then 553.
Can the staff please go ahead
and grab the papers that need to
be handed out, those should have
been provided in advance.
Great. OK. Um, go ahead, we're
on.
House Bill 448.
Go ahead.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Um, House
Bill 448 um is a bill that
establishes an office of housing
here in New Mexico. I think many
of you have seen uh previous
iterations of this bill in the
past, but I think that we are
now at a place where um
stakeholders are in agreement,
um, that this is a necessary
step for New Mexico to be able
to address housing afford
ability and homelessness.
So with that, Mr. uh, Chair, I
do have um Daniel with me from
the Governor's office.
and Taylor, uh, also from the
governor's office, um, and
Daniel primarily works on
housing affordability issues,
housing, uh, in total and then
Taylor recently from Houston,
uh, we're addressing
homelessness issues. So we will
stand for questions. Great,
thank you, uh, vice chair. Is
there anybody who wishes to
speak in support of House Bill
448.
OK, please come on up.
And support our opposition,
we've got it. Great. OK, we're
gonna, we'll sort of commandeer
one of the microphones there.
Go ahead and just, yeah
All right, Mr. Chairman, members
of the committee, my name is
Mark Duran. I represent the
manufactured housing and modular
industries in New Mexico.
Uh, Mr. Chairman, I think it's
uh New Mexico has a 35,000 unit
deficit in housing in the state.
And I think it's fair to credit
the housing in Mexico, they're
doing a great job. MFA is doing
a great job with their
responsibilities. Certainly you,
Mr. Chairman, and the
legislature has appropriated
over $200 million in just the
last 200 years, uh, sorry, in
the last two years, uh, but
without uh an organized
arising entity in a coordinating
entity like this office
purports to also work with all
the red tape and the
bureaucracy, especially at the
local level, we're never going
to address that deficit. Uh, we
think this bill does that and so
for that reason, we support it.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Thank you.
Mr. Chair, members of the
committee, my name is Mone Silva
and I'm the executive director
of the New Mexico Coalition in
Homelessness, and we stand in
support of House Bill 448. Over
the last 5 years, we have seen a
steady rise in individuals
experiencing homelessness and
the threat of homelessness
looming at the doors for many
New Mexicans. We know that
affordable and deeply affordable
housing, early intervention is
needed in our state to help
address these issues. Some of
the key objectives of the Office
of Housing, Planning and
Production are to increase
housing availability and
affordability.
Address housing insecurity and
decrease homelessness through
prevention, emergency
responsible response strategies.
We believe that with funding and
staffing resources to address
these issues at the state level
will significantly help to
address affordable housing and
homelessness in New Mexico. We
urge you do pass on House Bill
448. Great. Thank you very much.
Good evening, Mr. Chair and
members of the committee. My
name is Craig Hay, Assistant
general counsel with the Asian
longterm Services Department, we
ask that you support this bill,
House Bill 448, House Bill 448
will increase, will increase
housing availability and
affordability across the income
spectrum is very important for
older adults and adults with
disabilities to face significant
barriers in securing affordable
housing. A 2024 New Mexico
affordable housing assessment
from MFA found that 33%.
8 % of New Mexico households
include one or more people 65
years of age or older,
nationwide, the rate is 11.5%.
41.8% of these households are
considered low or moderate
income, meaning they earn less
than 4 $40,000 annually.
The Dad from the National Low
Income Housing Coalition found
that New Mexico needs an
additional 4,109,941,090 rental
homes for extremely low income
renters, meaning those at at or
below the poverty line of those
extremely low income renters,
20% are renters with
disabilities. Please go ahead
and conclude your 26% are
seniors, and so we ask for your
support, thank you, great, thank
you very much.
OK, that concludes, uh, in
person, uh, there's a number of
folks online, uh, please be as
brief as possible and we'll try
to get through as many folks as
we, yeah, OK. Go ahead. We'll
start with Chris. Chris, go
ahead.
Uh, Chairman, members of the
committee, uh, I am the
executive director of the
Eastern Regional Housing
Authority, serving 12 counties
on the eastern side of the
state. Um, we stand in very
strong support of House Bill
448. Um, we believe that a
coordinating entity would be
very, very helpful. Um, and, and
we very strongly support this,
so.
Thank you. Great. Thank you very
much. Uh, go ahead, Rachel
Biggs.
Yes chair members of the
committee, Rachel Biggs with
Albuquerque Health Care for the
Homeless. Housing is
foundational to addressing
public safety, education, and
our overall well-being in New
Mexico. It's time that we create
an office of housing to address
all of the coordination, data
need issues to make sure that
we're funding affordable housing
and policy solutions to address
our homelessness crisis. We
stand in strong support. Thank
you.
Great. Thank you very much.
Next, uh, a kind of Peck.
Uh, good evening, Mr. Chair and
members of the committee. I'm a
Conec speaking for the League of
Women Voters of New Mexico. The
league is in strong support of
HB 448, creating a state office
of housing planning is an
important step toward addressing
the lack of affordable housing
and the substantial increase in
homelessness in our state. We
want to thank the sponsors for
this bill, and we urge the
committee to give it a due pass.
Thank you.
Thank you very much. Next, we're
gonna go to Judy.
Thank you, Mr. Chair and members
of the committee. I'm Judy
Messel speaking on behalf of
Lutheran advocacy ministry in
New Mexico and the New Mexico
Conference of Churches. We stand
in strong support of House Bill
448 for the reasons that others
have already mentioned. Thank
you.
Next, we're gonna go to Marla
Schultz.
Mr. Chairman, members of the
committee, Marla shows,
registered lobbyist for NAOP,
the Association of Commercial
Real Estate Developers, and we
stand in support of this
legislation for many reasons
that have already been stated,
we believe it is a necessary
component to address our housing
shortage. We want to thank the
sponsor and thank you.
Thank you very much. Next, we're
gonna go to Walt.
Uh, Mr. Cha and representatives,
uh, I'm Walt Borton, a Navy bat
and member of the Veterans and
Military Families Caucus. Our
caucus has about 560 members.
We support this bill because the
office it creates will address
legitimate and significant needs
widely felt in our community of
veterans and military families.
Many of us are already facing
staggering housing costs that
are still on the rise.
Additionally, it will provide
tremendous information and
support to homeless.
And we don't know how many
veterans are homeless.
This bill will help us determine
that information. We are your
support and thank you very much
for the opportunity to testify.
Great. Thank you very much.
Next, Natasha Martinez. Thank
you. uh Natasha Martinez,
executive director for Northern
Regional Housing Authority. Uh,
I represent the top, um, well,
the northern 10 counties in New
Mexico, and as my counterpart in
the east said we do support
House Bill 448 and
the efforts to, to have a
coordinating entity in the
state. Thank you. Thank you.
Next we have Natalie Green.
What do you mean chair members
of the committee. My name's
Natalie Green. I'm the housing
administrator for the city of
Las Cruces. We are supporting
hospital 4448 access to housing
is a critical issue across New
Mexico and this office will
provide statewide support to
help both rural and urban
communities increase housing
production. This legislation
ensures every community
regardless of size has the tools
and expertise to support its
residents. Thank you. Thank you.
Next, we're gonna have Kathy.
Hi, my name is um Sonia Flores.
I am the executive director for
Western Regional Housing
Authority, and I would like to
let you know that we stand in
firm support of the House Bill
448 as it is vital to New
Mexico, for all the reasons that
all my colleagues have already
mentioned and um
Thank you, and we urge your
support.
Fantastic. Uh, we're gonna, uh,
go to Izzy's iPhone.
And then conclude with Joanne.
Izzie, please.
Good afternoon, uh, Mr.
Chairman. Uh thank you for the
opportunity to speak. uh Isidoro
Hernandez, the executive
director of a housing New
Mexico. Uh, as we all know,
there's a great housing need,
uh, housing costs have increased
significantly over the years.
There are several factors
contributing to the increased
cost and the Office of housing
proposes to work on reducing the
cost of housing as a state's
housing agency who administers
housing programs like across the
uh housing continuum, we support
and welcome.
Come the housing offices
commitment to addressing the
factors contributing to the
increased cost. We believe our
separate roles complement each
other. Thank you for your time
and consideration.
Thank you very much,
and we're gonna conclude with
Joanne uh De Michel.
Joanne, can you unmute?
OK, I think we'll cut it off
there. We've had a really robust
uh or Joanne, are you there?
Yes, can you hear me?
OK, I'm sorry. I apologize. Um,
good evening, Mr. Chair, members
of the committee. My name is
Joanne DeMichel and I'm an
advocate for manufactured home
communities. I believe the
housing office is essential to
help protect and preserve
existing affordable housing as
well as to add much needed
additional units. I stand in
strong support of House Bill
4pore.
Great. Thank you very much. All
right, thanks, uh, that
concludes public comment. We'll
go to the committee. Are there
any questions? Start with
Representative Pettigrew.
That was quick. Thanks,
Chairman.
Thanks, Representative and hey,
Dan. um.
So
Chairman, uh, representative
experts in-house government, you
were asked some very specific
questions.
About how much of the money.
That
will be funded in this.
We'll go to the boots on the
ground in 2 by 4s.
That answer wasn't provided in
house government.
chairman and Daniel, did you
come with those numbers tonight?
Um, thank you, Mr. Chair. Thank
you, Representative. Um, I was
actually not in-house
government, so I may, um,
Have uh Daniel out a little bit,
but as a, as a note, there is
recurring funding in the budget
for the Office of Housing, and
then there are larger um amounts
of money that are in House Bill
2 that are dedicated to the
2x4s, um, as you, uh, so put it.
So there's, there's funding for
homelessness initiatives, as
well as transitional housing and
also uh workforce housing.
So I, you know, I think it's
easy to say close to $200
million representative, yes, I
agree with your numbers.
And I appreciate the
confirmation on those numbers.
And we
Try and throw a number at the
question I asked.
Chair Representative Pettigroup,
um, in this case, the budget for
the office is $2 million and
none of that other money has
been ascribed to our office,
that money is primarily for
staffing and for studies
contractors, things like that
that we need to identify what we
need to do. We're 100%
advocating that state funding be
more strategically allocated
towards construction. That's one
of our big challenges right now
is deciding, do we put money
into, say, supply side.
uh solutions or demand side
solutions, down payment
assistance, demand side, uh,
private activity bonds for
mortgages are demand side,
right? So we've, that's one of
the things that we don't really
analyze at this state, and it's
kind of an analysis that we hope
our office can do.
Chairman and, and Daniel, I
appreciate the answer uh.
So
We've spent over 200 million
over the last year or two.
How much and through some of
that effort.
And with the assistance from
some federal programs from 2019.
Um, we've produced about 462
units.
Uh, with an average cost of
around $204,000 per unit.
How many of those units
That we produced and put people
in.
Are the same people in there.
And we're in are still able to
continue to make the monthly
payments.
Of those 462 units. Mr. Chair
Representative Pettigrew, I
think that um level of detail, I
would have to say, um, is why we
want an office of housing. The
mortgage Finance Authority might
have some of that information,
um, but that is, uh, certainly
worthwhile data that I think the
office should be collecting.
Chairman Representative Daniel,
um.
I agree, and it's something that
we should have been collecting
as we were spending money.
And so that's the reason, the
detail of the question doesn't
seem that far out of reach to
ask.
I mean knowing the detail,
knowing, knowing the cost side
of the program.
Knowing where the money went and
what we've done in the past.
would give us a good indicator
of where we're going in the
future and if we don't know
where the money went to.
Before
How are we going to?
shift and not.
make the same mistakes in the
future.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Thank you,
Representative. I think those
are very valid points that date,
you know, to some extent exists
in many different places, and so
if you have a centralized office
of housing, that data should be
at their fingertips and making
sure that these funds are being
spent efficiently and
effectively is the entire point
of this office.
Thank you, Chairman. Thank you,
Representative and co-chair for,
for that.
I would agree that that, um, if
we created this.
That.
That department should be able
to
Tell us things in the future.
Somebody got 200 million.
Somebody spent 200 million.
And we don't know that number.
And I would think that to defend
the decision to be able
To create this pos this office.
In the multiple funding sources
that comes with it, we would
have those numbers and sit there
and say, or we would say we just
don't have those numbers. We
really don't know what
government spending, and
We don't know how many of the
462 units actually still have
the same people in them.
And all that kind of stuff, so I
would have just thought we'd had
more information to back up the
decision that we're making.
So, thank you, Chairman. Thank
you for the time. Um,
I would have liked more detail.
At your fingertips to
Be able to support this. Thank
you
Mr. Chair
and representative, uh, our
expert can um send you that
information. He does in fact
have a spreadsheet.
OK, thank you, Representative
Pettigrew. Thanks, uh, Mr.
Warwe, please send it to the
committee as well. Uh, we're
gonna go next to Sam Garrett,
and Representative Herndon,
Representative Duncan, then
Representative Silva.
Thanks, Mr. Chair. Um, you've
mentioned that you have to avoid
duplication. Can you tell me who
the two of you are again, now
that I've read this, Who are
you?
Yeah, who are you and what's
your connection?
Chair, uh, Madam Representative,
my name is Daniel Wewa. I joined
the office of governor about a
year ago as senior housing
policy advisor. Um, we created a
nascent Office of housing under
executive authority, and I lead
that, uh, with me is Taylor
Cook, who's our director of
homeless initiatives.
OK. Thank you. And I just wanted
to ask because, you know, I'm
writing this down. It's a lot of
money. There's pots here and
then we have county projects, so
at some point, even before this
is the session is over, it would
be good.
To get a chart.
And then is it the governor's
office that's going to be
responsible, like the hub of the
Office. I'm now, I'm now calling
it oh.
Oh,
like, are you in the governor's
office could be that the
homeless initiatives connected
to it, MFA, the housing Trust
Fund.
Just, I'm concerned.
That I'm sitting here thinking
of all the hearings we've had,
and then you find out there's a
homelessness reduction division
and HCA.
So how does it
Hubs so that the money is clear
and we know who's doing what,
and we know who is the who, who
knows who's doing what.
Mr. Chair, Madam Representative,
um, it is our intent to be a
central tracking of all housing
spending, um, we are in our, uh,
legislation proposing to be
administratively attached to the
Department of Finance
Administration, one of those
reasons is to be able to track
housing spending, um,
project-based money flows
through the mortgage Finance
Authority, appropriations flow
through DFA. A lot of this
homelessness money will flow
through DFA and so we'd
certainly be involved and
Um, helping to make sure that
that money is being used
strategically, uh, in
non-duplicative ways, um, in
ways that have data and outcomes
that we can track, uh, and be
able to come back and report in
detail on the out feature.
Thank you very much, and I would
just flag that for the LFC.
Thank you. Thank you very much,
Representative Garrett. Uh, next
is Representative Herndon.
Thank you, Mr. Chair and thank
you presenters. So last year
when uh
There was the attempt to create
this department of housing. It
was in huge conflict with MFA.
So my question to you is, uh,
now you are administratively
attached, which means you have
your own budget, but it's
submitted through MFA. So why
are you, why are we creating
this housing and not under MFA.
So, uh, Mr. Chair
Representative, so, um, the
Office of Housing will be
administratively attached to
DFA, the Department of Finance
and Administration. Um, MFA is a
quasi-governmental organization,
um, and has a particular um
mission, and so they will be
collaborating closely and have
um come to agreement on this
bill. So Mr. Chair and
presenters, so where exactly
will you be housed?
Mr. Cher, Madam Representative,
uh, we will be housed as, as,
uh, it's an executive office,
um, that's attached to the
Department of Finance
Administration, uh, right now,
uh, are two staff people are
housed in the building across
the street with a local
government's division, um, and
that makes a lot of sense
because of our mission to help
assist local governments to
address their housing programs
locally. Uh, the way I would
differentiate with the mortgage
finance Authority is to say that
they do project-based finance.
Um, as a quasi-governmental,
they have no influence over the
internal operations of state
government. Um, they do not
necessarily drive policy or do
those types of things that we
could do internally in state
government, and that's the
missing piece that we see that
there is no internal
coordinating function for
housing across the 18 or so
agencies that have housing or
housing related activities held
in them. Um, so that would be
the primary difference, but um
the other reason is just that
MFA is a finance administration.
It runs project-based.
programs. We're looking at
housing.
In general, not income-based
housing. We're looking at
housing systems like zoning and
all these different frameworks
are really outside the mission
of the mortgage Finance
Authority.
Uh, thank you, and Mr. Chair,
just a couple more questions
here with respect to MFA, 11 of
the things that they were doing
and not just a project-based
housing, but helping individuals
to get into homes, helping them
with down payments and then uh
making sure that those down
payments could be forgiven if
they stayed in the house long
enough, so that's more than
project-based housing, so I'm, I
hear you saying that there are 2
people.
Who would be who would be uh
over the housing, uh, office of
housing, is that the extent of
the staff, Mr. Chair, Madam
Representative, um, right now we
have a staff of 4. We anticipate
to, uh, by summer have a staff
of around 6, with a couple
interns. Um, I would just add
the differentiation is that we
do not anticipate doing consumer
related programs. Um, like you
mentioned, MFA doing down
payment assistance. Again, this
isn't about direct service. This
is about working at the
underlying
issues around housing, housing
supply, housing regulatory
systems and those types of
issues. And one of the uh
question, Mr. Chair and
presenters, so the legislature
previously allocated funding to
DFA to administer a fund
transfer to MFA's New Mexico
Housing Trust Fund. What's
happened to them?
Mr. Chair, Madam Representative,
uh, the, the uh housing New
Mexico, the mortgage Finance
Authority is, is they has
rebranded, um, I believe they've
received around $87 million last
year in a combination of a
one-time appropriation and about
$37 million in reoccurring
portions of Severance tax bonds
that they receive every year,
um, the analysis that we did
about a month ago, uh, around
90% of that spend, um, allocated
to projects, uh, it hasn't
necessarily all been spent, but
almost all of it has been
allocated to specific projects
or activities including down
payment assistance.
OK. Uh, thank you, Mr. Chair,
and just uh just for my own
information, what happened to
Amy? She was over this last
year. Is she a part of this now?
Amy has transferred over to the
Department of Transportation is
leading a pedestrian uh
initiative.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Great.
Thank you very much from Sam
Feron. Next, we're gonna go to
Representative Duncan and then
Representatives.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Um,
Is, is this, can you tell me how
this is related to the office
and perhaps uh Rep Herman.
Um, got this question answered
for the new department that was
created last year, the Office of
Housing, that the Governor
formed. Is that related and how
is it?
Mr. Chair, uh, representative,
uh, the, this is that office,
and what we're seeking is
statutory authority for this
office to continue beyond this
governor's term, and the belief
is that the things that we're
working on issues like state
level strategic coordination
around homelessness, fixing
regulatory frameworks, things
like local land use and zoning
or building codes or processes
around that, that will be a
multi-year task, and that we
need to have a long-term, uh,
approach to that stuff. OK.
Um, you'd mentioned, I think,
reoccurring funding.
And where is that located at?
because it's non-recurring and,
and recurring, is that correct?
Um,
thank you, Mr. Chair, um, and
thank you, Representative
Duncan. It's actually non
non-recurring. Um, I apologize,
I misspoke earlier, um, but it
goes to DFA uh for uh the Office
of Housing.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Thank you,
Madam Vice Chair. Um, one last
quick question for you. So
you've got a budget of $2
million now and you've got 6
employees.
That's a whole lot of money for
6 employees, so I, I'd like
somebody to answer, that's about
$300,000 a pop.
I'd like to work for that
department.
Mr. Chair, Representative, um,
the, as currently budgeted uh
about less than 1/3 of that is
is budgeted for salaries. The
remaining money is to do things,
one of the biggest expenses will
be creating a housing dashboard
that we're working on to show
the housing needs around the
state and begin to start
collecting data around housing
production. One of the big
things we see is a lack of
accountability in local
government levels, both to the
level of need in the community,
but to the actual production.
And so we're working on a
housing dashboard that that's
the type of example of a
on track that we would probably
fund to have developed, right?
So right now, about a million
dollars of our budget or a
little bit more is earmarked to
do projects like that, um, if we
need to do more in-depth studies
of things and things of that
nature. So third party
contracts. Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Thank you for that, uh, Daniel.
Is that software?
that what that is, is creating
software that would be, you'd be
able to input all the data and
get a report, Mr. Chair, uh,
Representative, uh, it would be
like a website. I think what
we're trying to develop is
something that's much more real
time. We have a lot of problems
with the housing data we have
currently in the state. We do a
lot of housing legislation and
policy and funding without
having good data about it. And
so one of the goals is to have
really good transparent data,
um, uh, up on the web that's
available to the public and
legislators alike.
Thank you, Mr.
Thank you very much,
Representative Duncan. Uh, next,
we're gonna go to Silva.
Thank you, Mr. Chair and thank
you, um, vice chair and Daniel
and Taylor, I appreciate the
Um, the bill and just
remembering the 90 minute, maybe
almost 2 hour presentation we
had in front of this committee,
um, early on when we were doing,
um, our budget process and so
that really helps give me a
picture of where we could go as
a state. And I remember
You all saying very clearly that
the state of New Mexico is
flying blind because we lacked
data and coordination, um, about
our housing needs. And so I'm
wondering, and then I'm also
looking at page 6 of the handout
that you gave us, um, and
Looking at the numbers of
Houston, the amount of homes
that they've been able to add
and the rent growth percentage,
but then also looking at
Minneapolis, that they've
actually decreased their rental
prices. And so I'm wondering
what were the conversations
like.
In Houston and Minneapolis
before this tipping point
happens. Like, can you talk
about
What did the conversation sound
like?
And what did it take?
For these two cities to then
reach where they are now,
because I feel like we're almost
at that tipping point, um, so
I'm, I'm just curious.
Um, about that like our
trajectory given these two
cities as an example. Thank you,
Mr. Chair.
Mr. Chair representative Silva,
um, I would say I don't know a
lot about Houston, although
Taylor, Taylor does. I can speak
really quickly to Minneapolis.
It was a bunch of different
approaches focused on both
adding a lot of housing supply,
uh, easing regulations around
building more housing and
investing in affordable housing.
It was really a three-pronged
approach that led to that, um,
and led to them being one of the
handful of urbans that have a
decrease.
A lot a little bit about
Houston, um, the, the growth and
development planning in Houston
has always been a little bit
unusual and kind of a stand out
for the country, um, it has no
zoning, as the largest, by far
the largest city in the country
that has no zoning, um, but I
would just say in addition to
that, they've always been uh
been able to build housing
relatively cheaply, um, because
its location is a big factor,
um, lots of labor availability
there in Houston, and of course
the regulatory environment has
always been um permissive.
Thank you all for that, um, so
it, it's just for me it's like a
window into how can we?
Um
peek through into our future,
um, given this, uh,
establishment of, of this, um,
Department and um
Really looking forward to the
coordination of all the
different resources and other
agencies that are involved in
creating more housing stock in
New Mexico. So, thank you. Thank
you, Mr. Chair. Great. Thank you
very much from Silva. OK, I
don't see any other questions.
Uh, thanks for all your work.
Great to see the stakeholders
and uh the mortgage finance
Authority coming together um
with that we'll go for a motion
on a do pass on
House Bill 448.
So moved.
OK. We got a, uh, do pass the
second from instead of Silva,
representative uh editor,
continuing her streak for
tonight.
Is there any opposition to that
motion? We show Representative
Pettigrew in a position. Thank
you very much.
And uh uh members were on 458,
then down to 553.
We're on 458 and then ask for
55.
All right, got great, uh, vice
chair, please, uh, kick us off
with the bill. Take us through
the amendment.
And um we'll go from there.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Um, could
we, could I get a copy of the
amendment?
Just make sure that we're on
the, the same one.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Thank you,
members of the committee, um,
this evening, uh, I'm here to
present House Bill 458, which
relates to geological carbon
storage, it is a long-term
stewardship fund, and this is
part of two bills that are
complimentary 457 and 458.
The two of which will allow the
state of New Mexico to apply for
primacy with the EPA.
Currently, the EPA oversees the
permitting and regulations for
class 6 wells, Classic swells
are carbon dioxide storage.
If the state of New Mexico
applies and receives primacy, it
means that the state can add
additional.
regulations and requirements to
this process, rather than simply
relying on Washington DC or
Dallas.
House Bill 458 sets up a
long-term fund that collects at
least.
Um, 10 cents per metric ton.
to fund long-term stewardship
for the state. Um, the fund over
time will grow to be
approximately $300 million based
on capacity.
Capacity, um, in New Mexico. So
I do want to clarify that the
FIR is one year for one well.
So there is a large discrepancy
in the figure there, and that's
precisely why.
Um, we do have an amendment, um,
Mr. Chair, and I would be happy
to explain the amendment. Can
you read the 231 number, then
we'll ask for a motion in a
second for discussion and then
you can explain it. Thank you,
Mr. Chair. 231-707.2. Great. I
think that's OK.
Uh, moved by, uh, Representative
Garrett saying by
Representative uh Chap Marine
remember Chatfield and Sanchez.
Please explain the amendment
Wonderful. Thank you. So there
were some questions about
whether or not the amount of the
fee would be sufficient um to
cover future needs. And so we
are making 2 amendments uh that
pertain to that. First, on page
5, line 15 before 10.
We're saying, uh, insert, not
less than. So the fee cannot be
less than 10 cents per metric
ton.
The second item that is getting
added is on page 5, line 18
after the period, um, insert the
oil conservation commission
shall establish by rule a fee
schedule sufficient to meet the
projected needs of the fund.
That allows the commission, the
ability to monitor the need and
ensure that there will always be
funding sufficient to meet
long-term steward stewardship
needs.
And then the last item number 3
on page 7, line 10, uh, this was
a clerical, uh,
Just it was missed in the last
Amendment, we're striking the
word and, and if you look that
uh takes the sentence to read.
Um, that the state
After 5 years, uh, a certificate
of completion can be issued and
the state will take stewardship
responsibilities. We have struck
the words and legal.
So no longer is the state taking
legal responsibility. It is
solely taking stewardship. um,
and Mr. Speaker, uh, and members
of the committee, I have two
experts here that are gonna be
um excellent at answering
questions. We have Ben Shelton
from uh Enerd, which is the
agency that would oversee this
program, um, specifically OCD,
which I think a lot of you have
heard about and know about that
program is with within Mner and
then Doctor, Doctor
Jennifer Rainey, uh, from New
Mexico Tech and New Mexico Tech
does a lot of the uh carbon
storage work here in New Mexico.
Great, thank you very much, uh,
Vice Chair. Uh, any questions on
the amendment?
Yeah, we're on the, yes, we're,
it's our, we've, we've got uh an
amendment here from uh the folks
can see from house energy, um.
We, we do have questions on the
amendment. We're going to go to
Hernandez. Thank you, Mr.
Chairman and thank you, um,
madam, uh, vice vice chair, um,
and present um in, in your, uh,
Experts, uh, on the amendment,
um, uh, it looks like we're
giving more um responsibility to
the Mr. Chairman, uh, uh, we're
getting, we're giving more
responsibility to oil
conservation commission, uh, um,
I'm vice chair are uh.
I was, I, I always understand
that they need funding and that
we don't give them the full
funding that that they are
requesting, uh, are they able to
even um be able to have enough
like FTEs or are they able to be
able to manage this new group,
Mr. Chair, Maor vice chair.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Thank you,
Representative. That's a
wonderful question. Let me
provide a very brief answer and
then pass it over, um, to, uh,
Mr. Shelton. Yes, there is
funding in the budget to support
additional FTE for M-nerd and
OCD.
Um, Mr. Chairman and
Representative Fernandez, we
have started with the ideas to
sort of taper up year over year
to build the staff for this, so
we don't come back in 2 years or
3 years whenever we kind of
finalize this primacy thing and
ask for a whole new bureau. So
we're trying to build to it
right now are.
Feeling, Mr. Chairman
Representative, is that the UIC
program, which is kind of the
program this would fall under,
which is, um, anytime we're
injecting anything underground,
the UIC program are the people
permitting and overseeing that.
We do a lot of that with
saltwater right now and, and,
and uh and water disposal, so we
can keep those FTEs busy in the
meantime, and then once this
program comes online, we'll just
switch those people over so that
that's a process that we've
already started.
Mr. Cha, Madam Vice Chair, uh,
is there, is there anything
happening at the federal level
to help the state with this um
big uh unknown cause this is,
this is all new. This is new and
uh is there anything happening
at the federal level to assist
the state.
Thank you, Mr. Chair,
Representative, uh, at the
federal level, the EPA is, uh,
it has offered $50 million in
grants to states who want to
seek primacy, the federal EPA
has recommended the states do
seek primacy. They feel that
they are better equipped to
oversee their programs. So far
today, there's 4 states that
have primacy. I believe that
federal EPA approved tax as of
yesterday. So there is actually
quite a a large push throughout
the United States to move toward
primacy for these states.
Mr. Chairman, I don't know if
this is an appropriate point to
ask a question about the, uh,
the 10 cents or if it should be
raised. OK, Mr. Chairman, I
have, I understand, um, Madam
vice chair experts that we have
the 45Q tax credit through the
internal revenue Service, uh, is
Having that in in statute or,
you know, uh, with, with the
status for, for the price of,
of, of, of sequestration.
It is a 10 cents that we are
putting in here.
Um, like, I, I, I'm just trying
to understand.
If we're, if, if we're getting
the lowest end or why aren't we
looking at the 45Q tax credit.
Thank you, Mr. Chair, uh, Madam
Vice chair.
Mr. Chair, um, representative,
that's another great question,
and I may, um, ask, uh, Ms.
Rainey to address the 45Q or Mr.
Shelton, um, but the 10 cent
fee, the amendment clarifies
that it is not less than 10
cents and authorizes OCD to uh
create a schedule, which could
include additional increases. So
the way the fee works is as soon
as a well operator begins
injections, we start collecting
that 10 cents. It could go like
let's say 50 cents, depending on
what OCD decides they need.
Um, that money starts collecting
at the very beginning, most
well.
Operations are about 30 years.
And so that entire duration
there uh the the fund is
collecting money, uh, so that
after the well is done operating
and after all of the reporting
and monitoring have shown uh
that there is no um there are no
concerns. The state has the
funding to provide uh monitoring
in perpetuity,
that uh
And the 45Q tax credit is
something uh that would go to uh
separate.
It, yeah, I'll let Jennifer. The
45Q tax credits have undergone
many changes over the last 10
years, uh, as of maybe 5 or 7
years ago, they were around $35
to $85 per ton very recently
expanded to 60 to $180 per ton,
that depends on the source of
the CO2 where the CO2 is
captured and also the reservoir
in which you store the CO2, uh,
the highest income you can get
that $180 credit would be for
director capture, the lowest is
for enhanced oil recovery story.
deployed oil fields and the fund
itself is representative Dixon
said, is to oversee the long
term monitoring after site
closure, all of the monitoring,
all of the operational expenses
would be incurred by the
operating facility throughout
the entire life of the project.
It's only after that they have
demonstrated closure and
sufficient safe storage, then it
would go into long term
monitoring plan, which would be
very minimal monitoring, you
know, maybe annual testing of a
well head uh nominal.
cost.
costs for the questions, I'm
gonna wait till after public
comment.
Thank you very much, uh,
Representative Hernandez.
Representative Garrett, did you
have a question on the
amendment?
I did. I'm seeing now that the
amendment does raise it beyond
10 cents and then it adds.
That the Conservation
commission.
She established by rule of fee
schedule. Why start at not less
than 10 cents when other states
are 30 to 80 cents. Why not less
than 10 cents. What that's the
starting point. Sure. Thank you,
Mr. Chair. um, thank you,
Representative. Um, actually,
all other states except for one,
have a tipping fee, tipping
point fee, which is between 7/10
and 10 cents, um, Illinois is
the only state that has a 30
cents and a 60 cents, and that's
because of prevailing.
language.
OK, Mr. Chair, but we do have
prevailing wage situations.
Mr. uh Chair Representative. Um,
I think that in discussions with
OCD and experts, uh, we felt
that 10 for a minimum of 10
cents would be sufficient over
the, the course of the fund. OK,
thank you.
Oh
Great.
OK, uh great. Thank you for the
questions. Uh, any other
questions? OK, can we, uh, have
a motion to adopt the amendment?
OK.
been moved by Representative
Sanchez.
Say by representative uh at at
uh any opposition to adopting
the amendment?
and
We've adopted the amendment. Now
we're gonna go to the bill, um,
anybody here who wishes to speak
in opposition to uh House Bill
458 as amended. OK, please come
and come on up. Thank you, Mr.
Chair, members of the committee
sponsor and experts. I, I just
wanna first recognize that this
is a conversation about how to
address the global climate
crisis, and that is super
important and this is a really
important conversation, so the
reason that the Sierra Clubs Rio
Grande chapter and I should say
my name is Camila Feibelman is
in opposition to this bill is
because of our underlying
concern that carbon capture and
sequestration keeps us
extracting fossil fuels, keeps
us needing to look for a place
to put the carbon and doesn't
really help us ramp down on our
under
buying emissions, but specific
to this bill is a concern that
it sounds like really has been
attended to in the amendments,
which I have not seen, which is
that 10 cents seems like too
little to cover a serious
accident like we've seen in
other places around the country,
putting potential water
resources at risk, health and
safety issues, and then the
second question for me is really
a question of liability. Why
take on the liability so
quickly.
if a company is in good
standing, why not just say if
this company goes out of
business immediate transfer to
OCD, um, but in the meantime
companies is in good standing
who are making money off
sequestration should take
responsibility for an accident.
Thank you so much for all the
work on it and all the thought
around it, we really appreciate
it. Great. Thank you. OK. Uh,
now, is there anybody in
support, uh, who would like to
come forward.
Please come forward.
Good evening, Mr. Chair and
members of the committee, Sher
run horse with the PNM. Carbon
capture and storage technology
still quite is still quite a
ways off into the future.
However, it should CCS become a
reality and with this
legislation, New Mexico would be
positioned to be able to
sequester carbon deep
underground. Also, given the
complexity of the energy
transition, the increased
electricity demand and the all
of the above approach needed
with respect to generation, CCS
could be a viable option in the
future for managing carbon
emissions from CO2 generating
facilities should CCS become
viable and cost-effective for
these reasons, PNM stands.
support of HP 458. Thank you.
Great, thank you very much.
Hm
Uh, thank you, Mr. Chair,
members of the committee, John
Lipshutz with the New Mexico
Federation of Labor. Uh, we
stand in solidarity with a
number of our building trades
workers, especially those in the
plumbers and pipefitters, uh,
industry, uh, this kind of
technology, this kind of effort
is going to lead to a a great
deal of good high paying jobs,
manual labor that our members,
uh, certainly will benefit from,
especially when, uh, looking at
prevailing
wages that uh will pay these
folks, uh, we desperately need
these kinds of jobs in the state
and, you know, we see this as a,
as a win-win. We've often been
involved in energy transition
pro uh projects uh that the
state's been undertaking and we
think that this would be a good
one to help uh continue the path
towards um more renewable
energy. So for all those
reasons, we urge your support.
Thank you very much.
OK, uh, we're gonna go online
first, anybody, please raise
your hand if you wish to speak
in opposition.
OK, we're gonna go first to
Rose, and then to Zach Rose.
Rushing, please.
Hi, thank you so much. My name
is Rose Rushing. I'm speaking on
behalf of the Western
Environmental Law Center. First,
thank you, Chairman Small and
committee members for the
opportunity to provide public
comment.
I also want to thank
Representative Dixon and her
team. We really appreciate the
work done on this bill and the
amendments made. We want to
sincerely thank the sponsor for
that. However, we still have
concerns about this bill. First,
New Mexico would be the only
state to take on liability only
5 years after project closure.
Most states wait 10 to 50 years.
This liability transfer should
be longer because the danger of
carbon capture and sequestration
projects can linger for many
years, as these projects are
considered to have 1000
in your lifetimes. Any carbon
capture and sequestration
regulatory scheme should have a
longer timeline for the state
takeover of liability to prevent
taxpayers from inheriting the
entire cost for maintenance and
remediation of these projects.
Additionally, and more
importantly, the Western
Environmental Law Center opposes
the bills because carbon capture
and sequestration is not a
meaningful climate solution in
the state of New Mexico. On a
personal level, in addition to
working with the Western
Environmental Law Center on our
carbon capture team. I am due
with my first child in June, and
I am terrified that he will
never know a normal stable
climate because of the oil and
gas industry. Uh, HP 458 and
carbon capture and sequestration
are not real climate solutions.
This
to lock in oil and gas
development in the state's
economic dependence on it by
providing these companies with
another avenue to keep drilling
and pumping through climate
catastrophe.
Uh, in, uh, in conclusion, the
Western Environmental Law Center
opposes uh for 58, and we ask
for your support. Thank you.
Thank you. OK, next, we're gonna
go to Zach, uh, Pavlik, Zack.
Mr. Chair, uh, members of the
committee. My name is Zach
Pavlick. Um, I'm an attorney
with the Center for Biological
Diversity, um,
We oppose this bill because
carbon sequestration is a false
solution um that encourages
emissions and perpetuates the
fossil fuel infrastructure and
the legacy of pollution that is
already borne by frontline
communities today.
This bill provides another
mechanism for industry to shift
the costs of the climate crisis
on to New Mexican communities,
the environment, and the state.
It entrust regulation of a
complex and risky industry to a
state agency that already
struggles to enforce well
plugging obligations and
safeguards in the oil and gas
context.
Um, and then I would also echo a
lot of the concerns that um have
already been voiced, um.
And uh would just encourage the
committee to think.
In the context of the climate
crisis and the effects that New
Mexico is already feeling, um.
We are due to vote not to pass
this bill. Thank you. Thank you
very much. OK, now is, uh, if
you're in support, please go
ahead and raise your hand
online.
I don't see anybody in support
online, uh, we're gonna go to
the committee, um, first, we're
gonna go to representative
Little.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Thank you
so much for the presentation.
Um, this area of science is not
one that I have a deep knowledge
of, so, um, I'm, I've got some
questions that could be very
helpful to me as I consider
this.
So, um,
Uh
Can you tell me, uh, walk me
through, Mr. Chairman. I'm
interested in finding out where
these sites are located, where,
where are they?
What area are you looking at?
you, Mr. Chair Representative.
So New Mexico Tech oversees uh
regional initiative funded by
the Department of Energy, we are
a coalition of 14 states
comprised of geological surveys,
universities, private entities
like companies that might be the
capture facilities for these
kind of programs. We've
assimilated data to identify
geological sinks where the CO2
could go. A lot of that is based
on well o information and
geological information that you
get from the traditional oil
field industry and it also
happens to coincide with what
suitable reservoirs.
be what you want to look for for
geologic storage is a little bit
different than when you're
talking about finding an oil
reservoir, you don't want
something that's been readily
drilled into and with a lot of
penetrations into that formation
to ensure the security and
storage of that CO2, you
essentially want to inject it
and leave it undisturbed in
perpetuity. And so what we tried
to do is identify areas that
have really good permeability
and porosity, meaning that fluid
can flow through those rocks
quite readily. So
what we've identified in the
state is San Juan Basin, the
Intrata sandstone, is it a
really suitable reservoir, our
geologists and engineers have
estimated at least 6 billion
tons of storage potentially in
that reservoir. And of course,
the Permian Basin, that's
untapped potential, um, much,
much larger or uh for what
comparatively to the um
reservoir in the San Juan Basin.
Right now our projects, we have
active permits to EPA for
classics permits in the San Juan
Basin, and they've estimated.
10 million tons to inject over a
lifetime at 1 million 1 million
tons a year. So they've done the
studies on core samples that
have been taken from those
intervals and our scientists
will test them in the lab to see
if you get that good
permeability and porosity to
ensure that at that injection
pressure, you won't fracture any
rock, you won't cause any damage
to any kind of seals to ensure
that it won't escape from the
pathways, other than the San
Juan Basin, it remains to be
seen because this is not
allowable yet in the.
state, there's no mechanism to
actually conduct these projects.
We don't have the means to go
out and do the characterization
work we need to, however, the
characterization work you do for
CO2 storage is also helpful for
a lot of other areas, so
geothermal, for instance, that
relies on well drilling, knowing
what kind of rocks you have,
knowing the heat and the
chemistry of those rocks. So
it's applicable to a lot of
different fields and uh a lot
more remains to be seen, but New
Mexico does have a leg up
because of the advanced oil and
gas industry, and because the
ization work that's already done
in the state. There's about 6.75
million tons of CO2 already
being injected in the state
through class 2 wells that are
commingled with acid gas. Those
are permitted under a different
division and for a different
purpose related to waste, but
there's a pathway to convert
those into just CO2 in the
future. So we have an awareness
of how CO2 is already injected
and managed at the surface, and
then it can be done safely.
Thank you, thank you for that
information, uh, Mr. Chair, um,
my next question then is, I'm
aware of a familiar with San
Juan Basin and the Permian Basin
and those points and Trotter,
not so much, uh, not sure where
that's located, but given the
geologic activity in the state,
uh, is, is capturing this and
ensuring that it's not
Uh, that this is not going to be
released or find a way out, um.
I'm curious as to what
assurances we have given the
geologic activity in the state,
the earthquakes that have been
taking place because of the
shifting, uh, extraction, I I
think that's the correct word to
use.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Thank you,
Mr. Chair and Representative,
uh, to clarify on the Entrada
sandstone, I get caught up in
the jargon. I, I, I apologize
the Intrata sandstone is about
8500 ft deep, and it is a
formation within the San Juan
Basin. And so those kind of
targets are what you identify,
for assurances for safety.
Again, the technology that we're
talking about with managing and
injecting CO2, this is actually
not a new technology, it has
been done for decades, uh, tens
of thousands of tons of.
to run through pipelines all
throughout the Permian Basin and
in New Mexico in particular, we
have more pipelines than most
states in the entire nation. So
again, we have many legs up and
we are well along in this
process and OCD in particular
have been very impressed. They
have a lot of expertise in this
because it's what they do on a
daily basis. Um, and so for
safety to ensure that nothing
like ear earthquakes would
happen in the classics primacy
effort and actually in the
rulemaking itself, there are a
number of procedures that are
taken that are.
extensive and more onerous than
any other world class to ensure
that this is done safely. So
there's a seismicity response
plan where you would install a
seismometer way you get baseline
recording and data prior to
injection, so you can see any
deviations from that existing
state during injection, after
injection. So all of these
details are very closely
monitored. Mr. Chair and
Representative Little, I would
also note that on everybody's
desk, um, I included some.
Um, uh, reference, uh, pages for
you, one of which, um, describes
the process that operators
already have to go through for a
classics permit, just as a
reminder, classics permitting
already exists.
The EPA is overseeing it. What
we want to do is we want it
brought here in New Mexico so
that we can have more stringent
rules and we can add additional
regulations, um, which we are
doing in the other bill, like
tribal consultation, community
benefit agreements, um, and, um,
compensation for all landowners.
Um, but this one sheet has a
great um it lists all of the um
steps that have to be taken in
order to receive primacy,
including safety plans, um, as,
you know, those are a few, and
then
Um,
Yeah
We'll go there.
OK, thank you for that, um,
information, um.
Madam Vice Chair and experts,
uh, Mr. Chair, then, um, I'm
curious as to, uh, my next
question cause I'm trying to
follow this through is um
On, I'm looking at the depths
and the barriers, uh, and the in
in this uh depiction here of the
of what will happen.
So.
Um
How, how many tons, if you could
give me a general idea, it would
be helpful. How many tons could
be put into one area at at what
depth?
Mr. Chair, thank you.
Thank you, Mr. Chair, uh,
Representative. Each facility
would be permitted based on the
porosity or the space in the
voids in the rock that they
determine and all that's done
through extensive testing and
calculations, you have to shoot
seismic, you have to run
analysis on the actual cores
themselves for the permits that
are already in place or or that
are under works with EPA right
now. Those are gonna be
permitted at a million tons per
year. But when we're talking
about a million tons of ejected
carbon dioxide that's not what
you would think.
For the conventional wastewater
disposal, CO2 itself is
incredibly compressible because
of its physical properties. And
so the same volume that you take
for CO2, it would be much larger
volumes can fit in the same void
space as you would for
wastewater because it can, it's
kind of squishy.
So you can collapse it down.
OK, thank you. And finally, um,
if you could point me to Mr.
Chair, um, you were, I couldn't
locate in there in the bill, um,
or I might have overlooked it,
Mr. Chair, is I'm curious as to
the process for public comment
on this. Thank you.
Um, thank you, uh, Mr. Chair and
Representative Little. Um, as I
mentioned, there are two
companion bills, um, House Bill
457 is the bill that
specifically deals with setting
up the legal and regulatory
framework for New Mexico to go
through the rulemaking process.
Outside of the rulemaking
process in statute, House Bill
457 as twice amended, uh,
includes, uh, requirements for
tribal consultation, community
engagement, and community
benefits agreement. I'd like to
turn to Mr. Shelton to talk
about how that works in the
rulemaking process through our
agency.
Thank you, Mr. Chair and
Representative. So it's
important to remember that this
is sort of a first step and
we're going to go through a very
exhaustive, um, and detailed
kind of alignment process with
EPA because they've got
Hundreds of pages of CFRs on how
you do everything from records
retention to public
participation to well designed
to to all of this stuff, and
they always want to know where
we're going to kind of go with
their language what their
standard is and where we're
going to go above and beyond.
One of the areas that we have
flagged to go above and beyond,
in particular for uh for EPAs is
public participation and
notification. They have a lot of
requirements for um for that. I,
I think the, the big thing we
wind up wanting to add our
additional pathways for public
outreach. Um, not just doing
mail where they specify mail
also having electronic, not just
doing electronic where they
specify electronic. There's a
lot of communities that are not
able to access email very
regular physical mail is really
important. So, um, we have a
variety of
areas where we are already kind
of looking at that rulemaking,
uh, at that rulemaking process
to go to that specific. Thank
you. Thank you so much, Mr.
Chair. That was my last
question.
Thank you very much
Representative Little Ranking
Mem Chatfield.
Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Mr. Chair, I just, I have a
More a couple of statements.
First of all,
CO2 storage CO2 injection and
storage is not new. We've been
doing it for over safely and
effectively for over 45 years.
It began as tertiary recovery in
the oil field.
And in 1996, uh, projects were
begun in the North Sea, uh,
they're currently 6 projects in
the North Sea that safely and
effectively store CO2
underground. There are 18
projects worldwide. There are
currently is a project
beginning, being put installed
in Texas that will sequester 500
tons per year.
Um
Nationwide.
It is estimated that we have the
ability to store 300 metric
gigatons.
Of CO2, uh, safely sequestered,
uh, we release the capstone.
Remember that word capstone,
that's what holds old gas,
everything else down. I live on
top.
Of the
Of a capstone and it's called
the Bravo Dome. It's the largest
CO2 deposit in the world, and
the CO2 in the bravo Dome's been
there for millions of years.
Right now, it's being pumped out
and
set down a 24 inch pot take
about a pipe this big.
At, uh, probably several 100
pounds of pressure. I 30 to 800
pounds of pressure going to the
Permian Basin day and night, day
and night, and nobody has
Be harmed. No, no cowboys have
been harmed in this project.
And uh
it, it works they, uh, we all
had a bubbly here a while ago,
and uh, I had a little coke.
Some of that CO2 that comes from
under my house, goes to
carbonate your, your sodas and,
and uh
Cokes and stuff, so, so it, uh,
you know,
Uh, you can keep it down there.
It's safe.
And uh
So it's, you can't keep it down
there, it's safe and it's not
new. Thank you, Mr. Chair. Thank
you very much for member
Chatfield. Next, we're gonna go
to representative Hernandez.
Like was chair, um, and I
appreciate the, uh, the
discussion that we're having on
this, and, um, now, now uh
understanding that the target
location is gonna be the San
Juan Basin for this, um, Mr.
Chairman, um, I, uh, I'm a vice
chair, um, I also want to
acknowledge, uh, Mr. Rod Black,
who's who who's in the back from
New Mexico Tech. I've had
numerous discussions with him,
which helped me uh understand.
Uh, you know, this whole
process, I, uh, Mr. Chairman,
my, uh, my question is, um,
More about this formation that
the Intrata formation, which I'm
familiar with. I, I, I, I didn't
know that that was a targeted uh
formation. I thought it would be
the uh one of the other
formations, uh, Mr. Chairman,
Madam Vice Chair experts, are
you guys aware of the uplift
formation of the Hagback Ridge.
Thank you, Vice Chair
Representative, that, that's a
very good question and a little
more technologically advanced
than I I expected to go that
formation is actually a key area
of interest of one of our DOE
projects right now looking at
that that anticline and looking
at the hogback that would
potentially be a source for
leakage. So if you have any
faulting that could go from the
storage interval up to the
surface or even out of that
formation, that would be
something that we need to
characterize thoroughly to
ensure that we're not going to
have any.
escape CO2 or losses. And so our
scientists are studying that,
but any areas where it could
potentially leak. Those are to
be avoided, but they're
characterizing that to better
understand the geology and the
depositional environment and
what we might anticipate for
other areas around the area. And
also with the Entrada, that is
not the only interval with a lot
of these projects, you have
different stacked reservoirs. So
to maximize the CO2 that can be
stored, you find highly
permeable intervals with
different seals to ensure it
stays in place. Mr. Chairman,
uh,
vice chair. This is where my
concern is on this legislation,
Mr. Chairman, Ma Vice Chair, I
sit on the uh transportation
committee.
And Mr. Chairman, Madam Vice
Chair, one of the biggest
concerns I've had with my, my
constituents from House District
4 is that the State Highway 64
runs right.
Through, right around the
hogback.
Uh, curve.
Mr. Chairman, my vice chair, I,
I wish I had a visual to show
the committee uh of how close we
are up against the hogback lift.
And Mr. Chairman, and my vice
chair, we've had numerous,
numerous rock slides, and Mr.
Chairman, Vice Chair, my
predecessor documented and
notified the, the Secretary of
Transportation. Why, why is the
state of Mexico.
Do it any safety, safety nets,
safety guardrails on, on this on
this dangerous rock slide, uh,
Mr. Chairman, my vice chair.
My constituents are worried
every day driving around the
curve, talk about curve because
we don't know if we're gonna
encounter another rock slide,
and Mr. Chairman Ma Vice Chair,
now you understand that this is
a potential risk for this CO2
injection project, Mr. Chairman,
Vice Chair, it's, it's really
hard for me to like
To take this information back
home when the Department of
Transportation is doing nothing
to provide any safety or the
public driving next to this
formation. Thank you, Mr.
Chairman, I am vice chair.
If you have any response and
then we'll go to other
questions. Sure. Um, Mr. Chair
and Representative, those are,
um, great questions and um I
think that
I also um allow my co-sponsor,
Senator Scher to chime in, um,
but if, uh,
Ms. Rainey could address uh the
location of potential storage,
and I'd like to also recognize
that um ranking member Chatfield
did talk about the wonderful um
geologic formations in the
northeast part of the state and
also um in the southeast part of
the state.
Thank you, Vice Chair
Representative. Those are really
excellent questions and those
concerns of the communities that
might be impacted at surface,
those are at the forefront of a
characterization that needs to
be done before any project is
even considered, so you have to
cross those paths and you have
to interact with those
communities and identify those
risks. However, regarding the
hogback specifically, that's
really off the table because of
what you described, because of
the geology, anything like this
would not occur anywhere near
that formation. So all of the
things in the San Juan Basin
would be miles and miles away
where the sea.
to what there's very little risk
it would ever,
my last question is on um
just mister, I, I understand
that there's been a lot of
community outreach through the
intern on this, uh, Mr.
Chairman, my vice chair, has
there been any community
outreach about Mr. Chairman, my
advisor, there's 60% of San Juan
County is tribal Navajo Nation
land.
Has there been any community
engagement, community outreach
to the impacted tribal
communities, more specifically
the chapter, uh, leadership, the
Navajo Nation land permittees
that will be uh impacted, Mr.
Chairman, Vice Chair.
Thank you, Mr. Chair
Representative, uh, the project
at uh New Mexico Tech is
prioritizing the tribal
communities in the San Juan
Basin area, especially with the
Navajo Nation because of
location where this might occur,
um, working with various chapter
houses, reaching out and
conducting in person
informational sessions, handing
out materials that might be
written in in um Navajo language
and today we're working with
entities that are Navajo owned.
We are, we have those, we have
consult.
I'm part of the team who helped
guide us through that process.
But until we are further ahead
and we have more authority to
actually engage. We want to rely
more on um government to
government interactions when
you're talking about higher
levels of government. So we is
not or uh New Mexico tech don't
want to make those invitations,
but we do have coordination, we
have drafted invitational
letters to inform them, but they
are aware of this project and we
have been actively seeking this
information in the future.
Um, and to that end, Navajo
Nation government itself is
actually seeking primacy for
class 6 projects. Uh, we have
had a session speaking with our
Navajo EPA to talk about our
work, and we've also offered up
our data and our resources if
they should choose to use that
for their information, Mr. Chair
and Representative, I'd also
like to add that, um, during the
course of the interim, there
have been conversations with
other tribal communities, um,
outside of the Navajo Nation,
um,
uh, that are interested in doing
carbon storage projects on their
own land. Um, those
conversations, um, are
continuing.
And Mr. Chair Representative.
Yes, uh, nappy is actually
actively trying to do this right
now. Uh, so Nappy is far away
from the hogback lift, but
they're looking at uh a variety
of things. One of them is, how
do you turn?
Natural gas into fertilizer, the
fertilizer that they create
right there will save them $4
million a year, uh, and they'll
be able to sell it to the West.
So, the geology there is right.
Um, others, uh,
That uh in tech, uh, I know that
the, the tribal EPA, they're
working right now to get the
same primacy from the from the
federal EPA is, is we're trying
to do.
So
Thank you, Mr. Chairman, uh,
Madam Vice Chair, uh, there's a
chapter meeting this Sunday in
Shiprock. Shiprock is the
largest community on the Navajo
Nation. I'm gonna be attending
that chapter meeting in person,
Mr. Chairman, and until then, I,
I, I just, you know, I, I, ah,
it's really hard for me to, uh,
to make, make a, a, a informed
decision. Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Thank you, Representative
Hernandez. Uh, next, we're gonna
go to representative Pettigrew
and then Garret represent
Pettigree, please.
Thank you, Jeremy, co-chair, uh,
senator, welcome. And uh thank
you experts.
Um
determined I was gonna
start off by correcting some of
the correct statements that were
made during opposition comments,
and I think uh
Miss Rainey took care of that as
well, as well as uh ranking
member Chatfield.
Um
Chairman and, and co-chair, um,
Would you agree that
Without this solution.
Getting to where we need to go.
With the energy required to
create so many different aspects
of uh.
To get us to 2045 without this
option.
We run out of options.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Thank you,
Representative. Um, I feel like,
you know, we've maybe had this
conversation, um, as it happens,
I also want to point everyone,
uh, there is a another handout,
uh, that shows that we cannot
reach net zero, we cannot hit
our target for global warming
without carbon capture and
storage.
No way.
And that is an internationally
recognized fact.
Um, and we use carbon capture
and storage.
To decarbonize hard, you know,
industries like cement
manufacturing, steel
manufacturing, but also the
direct air capture projects like
what's going on in Texas, what's
going on in Iceland, where they
actually extract the carbon
dioxide out of the air and
sequester it. So, thank you, uh,
Representative Pettigrew for
bringing up that point.
Thank you, Chairman and
co-chair, um.
I think adding that
It
Understanding that.
Our electrical grid inside,
inside New Mexico right now.
is so close to capacity.
When we look at just the
southeast part of the state
needing to add at least 3300
megawatts of energy right now.
Knowing that the PRC process
takes 8 to 9 months.
Knowing that those projects
won't make it and won't go into
built out and be, be producing
electricity until 2028, 2029.
Our options right now are
limited to natural gas.
Which is, by the way, the 2nd
most clean, cleanest fuel we
have.
In generating, Mr. Chair and
co-chair.
I think the majority of us know
that it takes 2300 °F.
Make a windmill.
Solar
When, geothermal, biomass. Don't
get anywhere near that.
None of those exceed 3 digits in
heat generation.
I can go through the same
numbers with respect to still,
with respect to the glass that
it takes to make, um, solar
panels.
experiment, uh, co-chair, we
have so many.
Different pieces and also
understanding that as we make
alternative energy sources.
There is an end of life for
those, and then there's a
mineral reuse.
In other words, what we mine to
make a windmill now.
We will have to mine again in 8
to 15 years. Different numbers.
Different people through
different numbers, but you have
the same problem with, with
solar panels.
So we have that consistent use,
and we have that consistent
need.
Or energy generation. I'm not
saying that alternate fuels
aren't gonna get to a point
where we have the energy
generation that we need right
now.
This is our solution to get to
We can get to 2030.
Without this.
We cannot get to the next set of
goals, 2035, and there's no way,
just like your graph talks about
that we get to 2045 at all
without.
There are things inside of here
that we had conversations about
today, that I'd rather see a
little bit different, but I
didn't write the bill.
And so at the end of the day, I
appreciate the legislation, you
have my support. Thank you,
Representative Pettigrew. Next,
we're gonna go to represent
Garrett and representedetta.
Thanks, Mr. Chair. A couple of
quick questions. I just wanna
make sure I understand the oil
conservation division of Ben is
the that's the division that
oversees this in.
Hey
Mr. Chairman Representative,
yes.
OK, thank you. And then my
second question is, what are in
in the handout, I'm looking at
this handout. Thank you, very
practical.
Um, it's paramount that
regulations are put in place to
protect the health and safety of
impacted or nearby communities.
What kind of health situations
do we have to be careful in this
cause there's so much that's
invisible, but it's there, uh,
what is it in this case?
So this it. Thank you, Mr. Chair
Representative. The safety of a
project, uh, the, the
environment and human health are
the the utmost priority and so
the precautions that are taken
involve ensuring that there is
the capacity for the injected
CO2 to be stored. There's also
testing that's done on those
rocks to ensure that when that
CO2 is injected, it won't
fracture the rock or it won't
create any kind of disruption to
surrounding environments. The
priority of the legislation in
general is to protect a.
First potable sources of aquifer
water rather. So any drinking
water that is in that zone needs
to be heavily tested, constantly
monitored throughout the
duration and lifetime of the
project and in perpetuity pretty
much. Any way that that is at
first sign that it's been
impacted by CO2, all injection
has to stop, and then remedial
action has to take place. It
revealing a recent permit that
was issued in Illinois, I
believe, and the site closure
period alone in following the
the operation of the event.
In order to show that the CO2
went where it was supposed to,
that it didn't migrate into any
aquifers. I think that alone was
$15 million those, those steps
included testing, additional
logging of monitoring wells,
closing, plugging, monitoring
wells to ensure that no CO2 can
escape through those pathways.
And so those are the types of
things that you'll see, you're
also going to get ambient air
quality testing to make sure
that you don't see a rise in CO2
to have some kind of migration.
Thank you, Mr. Chara, you know,
we're doing our brackish water,
we're doing our COT, we're doing
this. It's all the mapping is
going on, so it's a concern and
the community benefits
agreement, is that done? It's
the oil division overseeing that
as the developer in the
communities.
Thank you, Mrs because that's
vital. Absolutely, uh, Mr. Chair
and Representative, community
benefit agreements are usually
negotiated directly between um
an operator and the surrounding
community. Um, I'd also like to,
to note that um in order for a
project, um, you know, you need
to have at least 85% of the um
surface owners, uh,
participating and um the
community benefit agreements,
um,
Those are not new, uh, but they
can include things like
affordable housing, support for
mental health care, uh, local
jobs, um, support for the
education system, a wide range
of things, and in the rules
process, which OCD will be
administering, they will be able
to prescribe additional
requirements for how those take
place. The types of outreach,
number of um outreach events,
things like that, but uh, you
know, just as a reminder.
These are additional
requirements that we want to
make sure happen in New Mexico
and without primacy, we do not.
Uh, you know, the EPA still
retains, uh, that control.
Right, and I'm, I'm in that
sense, we need this, Mr. Chair,
because we can't, my cousin was
one of the heads of EPA and he
said there's no guarantees right
now, so this is important. Last
quick question, Senator, can you
tell us about your, uh, show and
tell.
So
Mr. Chair, Representative, some
people think I came in here as
smart as a box of rocks, but
this is really a jar of poor
space.
For space is the space in
between the rocks.
Somewhere down there.
And so the beauty of that
particular thing, if the top of
this building was a surface
owner.
And everything else was
something else, water or
whatever.
That's where you put the poor,
the CO2 in a confined contained
area.
Hm
Thank you. Thanks for bringing
it. I'm a teacher. I like to
answer. That's it. Great, thank
you. uh, next, we go to that.
Thank you, Mr. Chair, Senator,
Representative, experts.
Uh, I'm, I'm very curious about
this premacy, um.
because uh the same thing is
happening in the water.
I was 6,
it's the same thing, uh, the EPA
right now controls all of the
movement of water in this state
and uh in the Senate Bill 6,
we're gonna take over Pharmacy
privileges of the state of New
Mexico. I'm just curious how
many other states have declared
primacy privileges for um carbon
sequestration in the country.
Right now.
Um, thank you, Mr. Chair. Thank
you, Representative. Um, so as,
uh, Ms. Rainey mentioned, there
are 4 states that have, have
been granted primacy. There are
9 additional states that are uh
in the application process and
an additional 23 not including
New Mexico and not including the
Navajo Nation that have
expressed their intent to pursue
primacy.
That's really interesting. Thank
you, representative. Thank you,
Mr. Chair. Um.
We are, we are, uh, the last of
3 states in water.
That particular privacy.
So I think it's as Connecticut
and Massachusetts, so I actually
think that's really going in the
right direction and I'll say.
Just for everybody's information
that came up in uh
And egg and water that um
The APA, the EPA.
Uh, suspects that there might be
a 65% cutback in their
workforce. So if we're gonna
keep privacy, I think from the
EPA and whatever category. I
think now's the time to do it,
and that's, that's really the
only thing I wanted to say, Mr.
Chair. Thank you.
OK. Thank you very much, errera,
uh, representative Dixon, let's,
uh, go back to you for any sort
of closing comments.
Uh, I don't have, well, I, I
guess I have one question and
you noted it. We've gone through
this. Um, but this is sort of a
companion. It's the, the fun
that needs to be created to
other legislation that has
extensive work around some of
the areas that members have
mentioned that show sort of more
focus from New Mexico and
working with communities as we
work to get.
primacy.
Mr. Chair, that is correct in
the.
is here in appropriations is
because it sets up a fund to
collect the fees from the
operators.
OK, great. Thank you. Thank you
very much. Let's go back to you
for a brief closing and then uh
we'll go ahead, we'll go to
Representative Sanchez and
Representative and ranking
member for the motion in the
2nd. Thank you, Mr. Chair. Thank
you, members. You know, I really
would like to
Number one, that we cannot
achieve our climate goals
without carbon storage.
The second thing I'd like to
reiterate is that right now the
EPA.
Sets the rules and regulations
for classics primacy. If we want
to be able to have more
stringent local control, uh, we
need, uh, primacy. Thank you so
much, Mr. Chair. OK. Uh, then,
uh, thank you very much. Uh,
we'll go to Representative
Sanchez in the ranking member
Dua and house 450 is twice
amended
Kay it's been moved by
Representative Sanchez, uh,
signed by vice chair Chatfield,
is there any opposition?
to that motion.
OK. Please show uh
representative uh Hernandez and
Representative Little in
opposition.
Thank you very much.
Thank you, Mr. Chair, OK,
Vincent, uh, we'll ask you for
house bill 553.
It
All right.
Representatives.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Thank you
committee. This is uh House Bill
553. It's the timber grading
bill, and it's a very
straightforward bill does 3
things, uh, we're trying to
establish a setting grading
standards.
And um for uh for timber harvest
in New Mexico, ensuring quality
control in the timber industry.
Regulating or certifying timber
graders and promoting industry
growth by aligning state
regulations with national and or
international standards, and
with that,
I'll stand for questions.
Fantastic. Thank you very much,
uh, Vincent. We've got uh an
amendment here, um, you, can you
read us that 231 number, please?
Sir
I think I might have left it up
there. We'll grab it down there.
Mr. Chair, it's a. 231745.1.
Great. Can we have a motion in a
second for discussion? All
right. It's been moved by uh
representative, um, Duncan,
seconded by the vice chair and
many others, uh, in this just
strikes the appropriation uh on
the page one and then here in
the back.
Um
Yeah, this is an this is in the
budget. Is there any question on
the amendment?
Tan, uh, can we have a motion to
adopt?
OK it's been moved by
Representative Duncan, signed by
ranking member Chatfield, any
opposition to that motion,
seeing none. We've adopted that.
Anybody here who wishes to speak
in support of House Bill 553 is
now amended. Great, come on up.
Um, good evening, Mr. Chair and
committee. My name is Rachel
Wood.
I'm a consulting forester and
I've been working with sawmills
and contractors, um, on a
program called Source Verified
Goodwood and um
through that process, we and
identified the need to have an
affordable wood grading program
in New Mexico.
Um, to create an instate
structural wood grading training
program allowing inspected and
verified New Mexico would to be
used in construction
applications.
The benefits include increasing
the value and marketability of
New Mexico forest products,
sustaining forest industry and
the infrastructure for forest
thinning and increasing the
supply of wood to address New
Mexico's housing needs,
including rebuilding after the
South Fork salt Hermit's Peak
and Calf Canyon fires.
And please, please be brief.
Please conclude your thought.
OK. Um.
Well, it supports New Mexico
forest industry and the
businesses that dinner for us
manufacture valuable wood
products and create jobs. Thank
you very much and thank you for
your work on this. Uh, next, go
ahead, Kim.
Mr. Chair, members of the
committee. My name is Kim
Lagant, registered lobbyist for
Mescaler Apache Tribe. Uh, we
stand in support of House Bill
553, this initiative ensures
that timber products meet
rigorous standards before use in
construction projects, enhancing
safety and quality by developing
in-state grading certifications,
the bill reduces dependence on
external sources, potentially
lowering costs and boosting the
local timber industry.
As Mescalera looks to reopen
their two sawmills, this
legislation is important as it
represents a significant step
forward to sustainable economic
development and improved
construction products, practices
in New Mexico. Thank you. Great.
Thank you very much. Uh, we're
gonna go online, uh, to Kerry
Robin Bruunder.
Go ahead, Carrie.
Hello, Mr. Chairman, members of
the committee, Carrie Robin
Bruder with, uh, Lincoln County,
uh, Kim was very eloquent. I
would just like to add that
Lincoln County really use this
as part of our regional economic
revitalization efforts. We urge
a due passage and thank you for
staying up late tonight to get
the bill out of committee. Thank
you so much, Mr. Chairman.
Great, thank you.
OK, and we'll conclude with
Michael Morris. Michael, go
ahead.
Good evening, Mr. Chairman and
members of the committee. Thank
you for your time. I know it's
late, I'll be brief. I'm mayor
of Clovis. I'm also a
businessman and uh licensed
insurance agent in the state
and, and just really like this
bill because it supports uh
industry growth, um, I believe
it'll be good for, for the
business as well as job creation
and retention within our state,
and I, I think it uh also
complements uh the um the uh
cleaning and thinning uh of our
forest efforts, uh, that, that
are also underway and puts New
Mexicans in a great situation. I
urge you do pass. Thank you.
Great, thank you. OK, uh, that
concludes public comment.
I don't see that there's any
questions, uh, we'll go for a
due pass as amended.
Oh, sorry, uh, Representative
Garrett, go ahead.
Yeah, thank you, um.
People don't know my grandfather
ran the Clayton lumberyard in
Union County for many years.
He's dead now. Um, yeah, my
question is, and this came from
a number of letters that I got.
See if the international
residential codes who have their
grading requirements, and how
does this relate to the ones
that would be developed.
In state, would they be the
same? Would they be different?
Would there be tension? How does
that work?
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Thank you,
Representative Garrett. So yes,
there's gonna be tension because
we don't have to hire out of
state timber graders to come in
and grade our timber, and it's
very expensive to do that, so
we're gonna grow our own like
everybody here likes to do, we
grow our own, we run this
program through, through, uh,
inner.
And they are gonna set the
standards and those standards
will be
Just clear across the board just
like every other standard. We
would never, I know Ener would
never put timber that, you know,
it wasn't good. What has
happened is our good timber that
could be used for housing is
going to things like chicken
coops and palates and fencing
and stuff like that when we
could be using it for
rebuilding, especially in
Lincoln County and the rest of
New Mexico.
So, Mr. Chair and representative
and, I mean, there's all this
tariff going on, timber from
Canada. This would provide a
local source of properly graded
would possibly that could be
used. Mr. Chair Representative
Garrett. Yes, ma'am.
OK, thank you. That's,
my uh representative Lujan
really quickly, uh, thank you
for bringing this forward. This
has been a concerning issue for
a while. So where, where were
the location for this be? Are we
looking for?
two areas in the state or I'm
sorry if I missed any of those.
Mr. Chanpresentative Lujan.
There's, I think there's 77 or 8
sawmills around the state and uh
they're trying to open up to in
my community, just because we
have so much timber to use and
um.
That's why we're, that's why
this bills coming forward, Mr.
Chair,
thank you again. Thank you so
much. I know we're going all the
way to Arizona right now to do
to get the.
Get the work done, but um,
hopefully we can expand because
it's very much needed in the
north as well. Thank you. Great.
OK. Uh thank you very much. Uh,
I don't see any other questions.
We'll go to ranking member
Chatfield for the motion
represent Little for the second.
Move you back. OK, we have a Du
pass on House Bill 553 as
amended thank by Representative
Little, any opposition to that,
seeing none. Thank you very
much.
Thank you.
Right? OK, uh, now we're gonna
go to uh ask uh Representative
Herndon.
To come down for House Bill 519.
And then we'll um.
Members, we know it's late. Uh
again, thanks for Verrera for
the.
Oh, and the roads are bad.
And the rose a quick note, uh,
yeah, I, I get roads are fairly
bad, so everybody definitely
please keep a little bit of
caution.
Uh, OK, Representative Ferndon,
we'll go to you on House Bill
519.
Thank you. Thank you, Mr. Chair,
members of the committee, uh,
before you is House Bill 519.
The bill creates the board of
directors of the
African-American Performing Arts
Center, requiring the board
operate, maintain, and staff the
center, the bill transfers the
functions the personnel, the
appropriations, the money, the
records, the equipment, the
supplies, and other property,
uh, contractual obligations from
the state fair commission to
create the
board of directors.
And um
Mr. Chair, with that, I, I
finally I want to let you know
that the transfer goes to the
Department of Cultural Affairs
and the uh board of directors at
the African American Performing
Arts Center will be
administratively attached to the
center. Excellent. Thank you
very much. Uh, uh, for
explaining the bill, see the FIR
here in your, as you said, sort
of transferring everything,
including the existing budget,
which is clear. OK, anybody who
wishes to make comment on House
Bill 519.
Uh, is there anyone online?
Don't see anybody that's OK, uh,
any questions from the
committee? Hey, we've got a
motion, uh, ready for a motion
from Representative Duncan for
Du pass on House Bill 519 signed
by Representative Herrera. Any
opposition to that, seeing none.
Thank you very much, thank you,
Mr. Chair.
OK, and now we'll ask
Representative Luhan with uh
House Bill 70.
70, yeah, yeah.
Good, OK, uh, we're getting a
committee substitute that's
being passed out to us, um.
Once we get situated uh Luhan,
if you can read that 231 number,
uh, summarize the committee
substitute and then we'll go
from there.
All right.
Right. OK, let's make sure that
uh the representative has a
fresh copy for the
substitute, can you read us that
231 number? Uh, Mr. Chair, it's
uh 231-697.3. That's what we
have. Can we have a motion a
second for discussion?
OK, it's been moved by Vice
Dixon, seconded by
Representative Little, uh,
representative Luhan, can you
summarize the committee
substitute, please?
Or and you're, yeah, go ahead,
my guest as well, Mr. Chair.
Mr. Chair and Jackson for a
disability rights in New Mexico.
This language in this sub was
developed to give the healthcare
authority a little more
flexibility in uh planning for
and implementing this uh waiver
program for people with mental
health disorders, uh, so I'll,
I'll just note that, um, it
gives them the flexibility to
determine what kind of a waiver
because there are several
options. Uh, it clarifies that,
of course, the department, the
authority will continue to have
the authority to establish.
The menu of services and the
eligibility for these, uh, uh,
services, um, it changes some
shells to me so that they have
the option of uh doing a
consultant, but they don't have
to, and it gives them more a
little bit more time, about a
year to develop this
application. Great, thank you
very much, Mr. Jackson. Thank
you, Representative Lujan for
sort of being responsive to
concerns that committee members
raised. Can we have a motion to
adopt the sub, then we'll go to
public comment. OK, it's been
moved by uh Representative
Duncan.
second by representing Verrera
and so uh any opposition, OK,
we've adopted the substitute uh
for uh to go now to public
comment, anybody who wishes to
make comment on House Bill on
house corporations and finance
committee substitute for 70.
Come on up.
Thank you, Mr. Chair and members
of the committee, um, Ellen
Pines representing the
disability coalition. I um spoke
when the bill was originally
presented on the importance of
setting up this program to
provide adequate services in the
Medicaid program for people with
behavioral health conditions, so
I'm not going to go through all
that again, um, but I just
wanted to say in the sub, um
there were concerns from the
committee about the prescriptive
nature of some of the
provisions, and I think that the
sub addresses.
and gives the healthcare
authority, the flexibility they
need, uh, and also there were
some language, very small
language changes made that
incorporated suggestions from
HCA, um, so I hope that this sub
will meet with the approval of
the committee. Thank you. Great.
Thank you very much, Ms. Pine.
OK, we're gonna go briefly on
online to Beverly Neil Clinton.
Beverly, go ahead.
Beverly, uh, go ahead if, if you
can hear us and you can unmute.
OK, go ahead, please. My
apologies. Good evening, Mr.
Chair and members of the
committee. My name is Beverly
Neil Clinton, and I am a proud
member of the Veterans and
Military Families Caucus, which
is a caucus of more than 560+
members.
As a representative of New
Mexico veterans community. I'd
like to express our strong
support for House Bill 70, the
Behavioral Health Medicaid
waiver Act. Our veterans have
bravely served our nation, and
many, along with their families
face significant challenges
related to behavioral health
disabilities.
Including serious mental
illnesses, substance use
disorders and brain injuries.
HB70 proposes a comprehensive
approach to address these
challenges by empowering the
healthcare authority to
coordinate and provide tailored
support services. This
initiative ensures that veterans
receive individualized care
plans developed by
interdisciplinary teams,
aligning with the unique needs
arising from this service.
By enacting HP 70, we urge your
support. Thank you so much.
Great, thank you.
OK, uh, that concludes public
comment. Any questions from the
committee, Representative
Duncan, please. Thank you, Mr.
Chair Representative. Um, is
there, uh, money in HB 2 for
this, Mr. Chair, uh, yes. Is it
the 1.1 million? It's the 1
million. Great, thank you.
Great. Thank you, Representative
Duncan.
Uh, representative Pettigrew.
Thank you, Chairman. Thank you,
Representative.
for this
Can you
The chairman representative, can
you tell me how this waiver.
Ma
Work
With potential
Um, pressure from the fences,
uh, on Medicaid and Medicare
changes.
So, um, chair, um, uh,
representative, thank you for
the question. I think that.
That is a challenge that we're
going to have to address at some
point, but at this point we are
not seeing that this is
affecting this part of our uh
economy or in our budget, Mr.
Chair Representative, so.
We can just be uh look to be
prepared, but we really don't
have to.
Thank you, Chairman. Thank you.
Great. Thank you very much, uh,
Representative,
uh, OK, I don't see any other
questions. We'll go for noting
the money is in the budget and a
great deal of the changes and
not the healthcare authority
which stood in opposition, no
longer here in opposition. Uh,
we'll go back to the
representative, uh, and then
we'll go for a motion of a do
pass or do, yeah.
Oh, thank you for coming. Um,
I'd just like to say that I've
been working with the with the
secretary and noted that we have
further
you know, um, with understanding
what's written in the budget and
what is uh now in this
substitute and um I just wanted
to know that we are, we are
working with her and, and I
appreciate all the, the help and
information that she's given.
Thank you. Great. Thank you. OK,
we'll go to the vice chair for
the motion.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. I would
move a do not pass on House Bill
70 and a due pass on house
appropriations and finance
Committee substitute for House
Bill 70.
Great. It's been moved by Vice
Chair Dixon, seconded by
Representative Garrett, uh, is
there any opposition to that
motion?
Great, please show represent
Pettigrew in opposition.
Uh, OK, remembers that concludes
the work. Thank you so much for
really the diligence and the
work, uh, HAFC is adjourned for
this evening. Please be super
safe, uh, on the roads where
you're traveling tonight. Yeah,
yes, we will be back in members
at 10 a.m. tomorrow. Um, it
shouldn't be, we're, we're
shouldn't be too long of a
