Today's meeting before we get
started we want to first go to
an institution
for this entire legislature and
and we're gonna go to Mr bill
vault as we're gonna have our
staff introductions and then
Committee introductions
so the house appropriations and
finance committee we will be on
time or a few minutes late today
few members including myself
coming in from some other things
we will be beginning on time
and I am really close to get to
turn it over to Mr bill Valdez
who is the house appropriations
and finance committee staff
director of position that he has
held for a significant amount of
time with incredible work and
we're very very grateful to be
able to go to an today Mr Aldous
thank you Mr chairman R. again
my name is bill by this is
problem S. B. A. L. D. E. S..
I'm a lifelong resident of Santa
Fe.
been doing this job for thirty
two years.
This will be a more thirty seven
hundred thirty four years hi
early for god.
and the last year I'm afraid to
say about it this is a been
doing this a long time.
let me introduce our staff are
we have some new folks Senator
Baker.
And she's back here she is a
secretary to Representative
Dixon as well as a
one of our Canadian assistance
or will be assisting us with
subcommittees and other duties
as as necessary.
Our martyr Rodriguez.
She's been with us three years.
And
she's also there will be a
subcommittee secretary as well
as other duties.
Jackie Garcia her first year
with us
we're pleased to have both
Sheena and Jackie come join us
this year
and she's also sparks a
committee secretary and will
help with the other things in
the committee and then Senator
your state is our our longest
term committee economic
assistant
she's been with us for years.
And
she will also be highly that
the.
Subcommittees as well as other
thing she is also the secretary
to chairman small.
and we have other duties as
determined.
Are we have to.
Attendance more to your taste.
Wherever he is back there he's
been with us twenty three years.
And he's also been and others
other committees for a couple of
years but he got smart came to
the right committee now.
Suzanne Senna got fourteen years
experience she's been with us hi
this is our second time around
with us she has been doing this
work for fourteen years in this
house.
Our.
We have our analysts our first
year Annalise's Carol leech.
And she comes stores remained a
lot of different experience and
we're look forward to what you
can do with that for us.
Michael Mulligan right back here
is he's been with us for years.
And here he will handle it
analysis duties for different
agencies but all the analyst do
different agencies
and different other other duties
as necessary.
Richard Jones has been with us
twenty three years.
Richard also was the a retired
director of the.
Deputy director of the state
budget division so he's got many
years of experience were
budgets.
Mr chairman I I think that's all
of that is our staff
Representative leave anybody out
there that.
Okay so that's it thank you very
much Mr Valdez thank you to our
incredible staff both long term
and some few folks come in New
please join us in a round of
applause for the staff.
Go back to work yes.
Okay we're gonna go to committee
introductions brief but please
we want to me we have a number
of new members which were very
fortunate to have
Representative Pettigrew if you
don't mind will start on your
end
take it away please.
Thing is the right of a work.
my name's Randall Pettigrew I am
from Lee County serve now serve.
The majority of Lovington and
about half of Hobbs New Mexico
and some of the area and between
all the way over to the Eddy
County line.
this will be my third year in
the legislature very excited to
be out here
Then engineer by trade numbers
of my game so I enjoy this thank
you.
Thank you Mr chairman my name is
Debbie Syriana represent house
district twenty one in
Bernalillo county Albuquerque
funds on a high school area this
is my third year of this
committee so and it's great
committee and thank you for
being here.
Thank you Mr chairman I'm state
rep joined Garrett northwest
Bernalillo county house district
twenty nine the center of my
district this petroglyph
national monument the closest
main high schools volcano Vista
go hawks.
Thank you Mr chairman import
billet Cruz I'm a new member to
this committee I'm proud to be
part of this committee I look
forward to the work that will be
doing I am house district twelve
which if you're from any of
Albuquerque I represent the
heart of the south valley in
Albuquerque and so look forward
to some good things Mr chair
thank you thank you very much.
But Mr Chairman my name is Jerry
Garcia Representative house
district sixty nine with third
parts of San Juan McKinley
symbol of a new one in fifty
four counties.
I've been this commission's two
thousand sixteen and my hat's
off to director David Abbey and
his staff because they have been
phenomenal on both what happens
around the state without these
people these commissioners exes
will not function right David
having your stuff thank you very
much thanks to all the staff.
In the back.
Members of the number being here
and I will to do what works
thank you for thank you very
much thank you Mr.
My name is Jack Chatfield I'm
state representative from north
eastern New Mexico Colfax curry
Harding quay Roosevelt said
Miguel and union counties glad
to be here in the looking
forward to the year thank you
very much Representative
Chatfield observe hundred we're
going to go to you.
Good afternoon everyone is so
great to see you here I am
Representative Pamela Harnden
and I represent the exciting
thrilling vibrant house district
twenty eight what we're working
every day to make sure that the
children in every school in our
district has a mental wellness
and the mental health room to go
to to support them every single
day.
Good morning Mr chairman and
members and and everyone else
here today Representative Rod
Montoya from San Juan County
I think my largest my biggest
distinction as I I'm I'm from
house district one which means I
have that vanity plate.
Representative Representative
one.
so I'm surprised I didn't get
redistricted away from the but
anyhow first time on this
committee however follow this
committee I've been in I was in
leadership for six years in the
house minority office as the web
so I I am coming in as a
freshman but hopefully Mr chair
not a rookie.
Thank you very much of.
Good afternoon and
Representative of terror Lujan
hi Representative house district
forty eight here in our capital
city thank you I'm very happy to
be.
Afternoon everyone Joseph order
just some
for mobility's called all called
in the Espanola valley
Representative Ali from Espanol
up to the doctor
And this is my second round here
on the the committee so welcome
everyone and thank you to the
staff also are repeated what Mr
Representative Garcia says.
Mr chairman members of the
committee and everyone here
today my name is Katherine brown
hi and starting my seventh term
in the legislature I have been
on this committee for a couple
go rounds now very much enjoy
what we do I will probably point
out a few times in the next
fifty some days that so much of
the revenue that the state has
to spend comes from the oil and
gas counties that I represent
Eddie and we both
my placard says Eddie
redistricting also added seven
Lea County into my district I'm
absolutely as proud as can be to
represent the people of the of
those towns we have Carlsbad.
Malaga the Artesia Otis Eunice
jail and loving so it's a great
district and glad to be here
thank you.
Good morning Mr chair madam vice
chair and members of the
committee the audience as I
looked around today I was
shocked because my name is white
not shocked about being
Christine Trujillo my I was
shocked because I just really.
I just realized I think I'm the
longest serving member on this
committee now I serve on this
committee ten years beginning
may eleventh year and I don't
think anybody has in this
committee has up serve me except
for the press the pre previous
chairwoman so I'm shocked that
I'm still here but I just sort
of house district twenty five
it's smack dab in the middle of
Albuquerque teen Carlisle and
Louisiana and Montgomery and
Lomas right there in the middle
and then please this punch to be
here.
Good afternoon Mister chair I am
terra had a meal I represent
house district thirty eight
which is the Indiana Sierra and
Socorro County.
Good afternoon thank you Mr
chairman I'm Gail Armstrong
state representative for
district forty nine which
encompasses Katrin Sapporo
Sierra and Valencia is now the
largest house district in the
nation and I'll keep reminding
you of that.
And I have twelve grandkids a.
Good afternoon thank you Mr
chair and thank you everyone I
am Representative Meredith Dixon
representing house district
twenty in southeast Albuquerque
thank you.
Good afternoon everyone my name
is Nathan small I'm very proud
to represent house district
thirty six which is down in Dona
ana county
well though we have a number of
new members we have already been
hitting the ground running we
had some excellent questions and
I think the new members joining
folks with what you all know
that this is a very hard working
committee a committee that
prides itself on us a lot of
questions taking extra time is
incredibly fortunate to have an
excellent staff as was pointed
out led by director Abbey and
partners closely with an
executive that is seasoned and
is and as we all are in the
midst of the strongest revenue
likely our state will will over
see at least in our current sort
of economic
structure so we will be a very
hard working committee will be a
committee that encourages
questions the builds upon
incredible structures that have
been built here and looks to
move forward and with that we're
just gonna go ahead and get
started with gonna get started
with Mr setting Lujan for those
who don't know he's our senior
fiscal analyst with the
legislative finance committee
we're also very pleased to have
Mr Simon Miller who is our
principal analyst at the
department of finance
administration and course
secretary Steinhaus and as what
will take sometime today I know
we have a number of leaders in
agencies who are here so the
secretary sent Mr Liu
Dr minor or the sorry doctor Mr
Miller please feel free to
introduce member team members
as appropriate am I also want to
recognize director Perea
Warniment who's here so.
Mr Deputy.
Mr chairman members of the
committee I think a covered all
the big infections I'd just like
to point out that our director
David Abbey in part deputy
director Charles Lee are here in
the audience for questions if
you have any for them.
I'll be working from this.
Based packet here that says
public schools support and
related appropriations as you'll
see up here in the top right
corner you can also reference
some of our volume one two and
three documents if you have more
questions on details regarding
policy and other supplement
tables Mr loop out.
Briefly will stop there this was
mentioned by director Abbey
members these are are volume one
two three
please if you take them home you
have to bring them back also
caught on the floor but as Mr
Liu pointed out these are great
resources and incredible tools
both here in the committee
especially the to bring home and
Mr Liu is the information
available electronically for all
New Mexicans right this is on
our website be happy to prove
prove provide a link if you need
thank you sorry please continue
Mr chair Senator the mostly
speaking from page four five and
six of your packet which shows a
high level and then I'll be
turning it over to Mr Miller to
make additional comments on the
executive recommendation.
Just as a little bit of
refresher and worked one on one
on how to read this document for
those who have seen it for the
first time.
This is a high level overview of
the total appropriations for
public schools support including
the department's budget if you
look at lines one and three to
twenty six how you read this is
something all of these together
to get to the SCG number online
thirty two.
For everything else in the
document you'll be reading it
from left to right.
So online thirty seven for
maintenance and operations to
see the previous years budget
amount and then what the new
recommend recommended amount is
in the second last two columns
of the page but for the first
section all these are to be
added into line thirty two.
Will ask Mr Liu to he's saying
SCG and their new acronyms that
people aren't aware of and maybe
that would be helpful I'm just
suggesting that he for the first
day thank you very much of
Centria thanks for the
suggestion as we sort of
encounter those and I think it's
great for our especially those
who are tuning in from outside
the building the if you wouldn't
mind explaining those sent
limits and feel free to stop me
if there's an acronym that I
spit up that I failed to
describe adequately.
So starting on I'd actually like
to turn your attention first to
page five online eighty nine
which is in the middle of the
page.
So starting from the fiscal year
twenty three operating budget we
had three point eight seven
billion dollars in this year's
budget.
The executive recommendation is
four point seven billion five
point one percent increase from
the prior year and the LFC
budget online eighty nine is
four point one three billion
which is a six point eight
percent increase over the prior
and this is all only general
fund representative under this
line as we go through the
presentation note that there's a
lot of use of nonrecurring
sources and both of these
budgets especially sunny
Executive recommendations about
your grand total for general
fund for public school support
and thank you turn your
attention back to page four will
start from the beginning.
Just a few high level items that
I'd like to point out for you
starting on line for the LFC
recommendation includes thirty
two million dollars to raise the
at risk index which is a part of
the formula that dedicates
funding for at risk students
such as you're reading English
language learners your mobile
students and those in low income
households.
Winds five six and seven are re
prioritization of the previous
K. five plus extended learning
time programs that are currently
in statute these programs at it
twenty five days or ten days of
the school year there being re
purposed in these
recommendations for a new K.
twelve plus or instructional our
recommendation.
Lines eight.
And eight to ten our fund new
funding sources for a K. twelve
plus program recommendation from
the LFC about seventy.
Nine million dollars and then
online ten additional funding to
raise the instructional hour
requirements two one thousand
one hundred forty hours costing
about a hundred sixty one
million and the LESC
recommendations together these
total two hundred forty million
dollars which you'll see in the
subtotal online eleven for those
combined recommendations and
remember this is just the
general fund amounts there would
be another nonrecurring public
education reform and out in both
recommendations as well.
I'd like to point out line
number twelve these are the
salary increase recommendations
for the LFC the recommendation
is a five percent average
increase for all school
personnel at a hundred and
thirty nine million dollars.
And then moving down I'd like to
highlight one item line twenty
about thirty two million in the
LFC recommendation for employer
contributions for health care
insurance premiums this will
give us Karia parity with the
GST rates and I do have to go
into more detail on that and I.
I would like to draw your
attention down back to line
thirty two SCG that I mentioned
earlier is an acronym for the
state equalization guarantee
which is the vast majority of
school operational funding that
flowed out in the formula basis
and for the LFC recommendation
it's at ninety three point nine
two billion dollars which is a
six point seven percent general
fund increase on the prior year
and on on turned out to sign in
to comment on the executive
recommendation they sent me on
good afternoon Mister chair
members of the committee they
get my name is Simon Miller an
analyst with the department of
finance been there over five
years but this is my first year
covering public schools so
hopefully I can take it easy on
me today and I'll do my best to
answer
All the questions that come our
way and I'm joined today by.
The PED cabinet secretaries.
Dr Kurt Steinhaus everybody.
And I'm also joined by the state
budget division director C.
Martinez.
All right so as Sonny mention
the executive recommendation
includes a seven point six
percent increase to the state
equalization guarantee
distribution.
there several significant
changes that I'd like to
highlight so first over the last
few years the state equalization
guarantee distribution has
included hundreds of millions of
dollars for optional extended
learning programs much of that
money went unspent as the
majority of districts hi Mr rod
I apologize do we have a
presentation from you.
No I do not have a presentation
I'm just working off the same
document to sunny Mr chair thank
you for clarifying thank you go
ahead please yes
so so much of that money for
optional extended learning
programs went unspent as.
Many districts did not opt into
those extended learning programs
so the executive recommendation
removes optional extended
learning from the stabilization
guarantee and instead built in
funding to increase the
mandatory minimum number of
instructional hours to one
thousand one hundred and forty
same same number that's built
into the LFC recommendation.
this is a sixty hour increase
for the minimum of for grades
six through twelve and a one
hundred and fifty our increase
to the minimum for elementary
school students but the way in
which these additional
instructional hours are
implemented will be largely left
up to individual districts.
Second the executive
recommendation includes an
additional ninety two million to
to decrease the cost of health
insurance for school employees
by shifting a higher proportion
of the premium expenses from
employees to the employer
so so under the governor's
proposed legislation the typical
level one teacher receiving
health insurance through the
public school insurance
authority would see an annual
savings of about four thousand
dollars under this plan.
And lastly the executive
recommendation includes a
hundred and nine million for
four percent compensation
increases for all school
personnel
the executive also includes
three point three million to
increase the minimum salaries
for principals and then another
ten million for additional
compensation increases on top of
the four percent for positions
that are hard to fill such as
social workers or special
education teachers for example
information implementation of
these additional raises for hard
to fill positions will be left
up to individual school
districts depending on their a
local recruitment and retention
challenges.
So with that I will turn it back
over to Mr live.
Mr Miller we can continue down
to line thirty seven.
This is the transportation
distribution that flows out also
in a formula factor.
If you go to line forty three.
This is the subtotal for all of
transportation the LFC
recommendation includes one
hundred twenty six million for
this line item which is about a
ten percent general fund
increase from the prior year.
Moving down to.
Line.
Fifty you'll see that there is a
increase in the Indian education
fund of about five million
dollars for the LFC
recommendation in total online
fifty three total categorical
appropriations which to give you
a definition which are
restricted appropriations for
specified purposes.
Is an increase of about
seventeen point five million in
general from from the prior or
twelve point six percent now
that Mr Miller described
differences and executive
recommendation think Sonny Mr
chair members of the committee
there's just one categorical the
item that I wanted to comment on
Having a hard time finding it
It's seventeen.
Well.
That's okay.
There's a seventeen million for
the attendance recovery program
in the executive recommendation
the last year last school year
forty percent of New Mexico
students were considered
chronically absent which means
that they missed more than ten
percent of classes or school
days
evaluation of the attendance
recovery program demonstrated
improved outcomes in GPA in
attendance and graduation rates
so the executive recommendation
included seventeen million for
this purpose.
And Mr chair I could just find
its on line one hundred twenty
four and the reason why it's in
the back is because it's coming
from the public education reform
Fund so we've tried to.
Categorize and put all of those
appropriations from that fund
together on the last page so
it's on line one twenty four to
seventeen million thanks a
million million thank you.
Building on.
Starting online fifty nine
related requests this is what is
colloquially referred to as
below the line you might hear
that term a bit more in the low
lying appropriations are.
Reparations that go directly to
the public education department
for specific initiatives I will
highlight here that the
executive recommendation you'll
see a bunch is.
Line one forty two line one
fifty three these appropriations
are being paid out of the public
education reform Fund we just
wanted to show you which line
number there on so you can
reference them.
The LFC recommendation pays for
these people of the land
appropriations out the general
fund I would like to highlight
line sixty one an increase in
the early literacy appropriation
you my part of the letters
training this line includes
funding for that for teachers
line sixty two an expansion of
school leader professional
development funds and line sixty
eight and new appropriation and
recurring general fund for
teacher residency programs
altogether to net decrease in
general fund appropriations
online seventy eight about two
point eight million for seven
point four percent and I'll turn
it over to Simon to talk more
about the executive different.
Thanks Mr chair members of the
committee
the biggest difference between
the executive and LFC
recommendations for the
recurring special appropriations
If you look at line one twenty
eight.
You'll see that the executive
recommendation includes thirteen
point three million to be
distributed to the twenty two
tribal education departments for
extended learning opportunities
to include a native language
programs.
And that's it so practicing
thank you very much starting on
line eighty two this is the
department's operating budget.
The LFC recommendation includes
a one point seven million
dollars increase or eight point
two percent of the prior fiscal
year you also have another
chance to go to the agency
operating budget later on your
agenda in the next few weeks but
we just have it here for your
reference as well and that
brings us back to the grand
total for public school support
the general fund portion of
recurring in section four
online's eighty eight to ninety.
Now if I could move on starting
online ninety one these are your
section five nonrecurring
appropriations typically paid
out of this general fund our
public education reform Fund I
will say lines ninety one
through one eighteen are all
general fund requests and the
back page lines one twenty three
one fifty seven are from the
public education reform Fund.
The major general fund
appropriations from the LFC
recommendation include five
hundred thousand online ninety
four four mark ten is yes the
lawsuit fees and seven point
five million online ninety five
for meal quality initiatives now
turn over to Simon the talk
about the executive items Mr
chair I would just like to
discuss a few items so first as
we mentioned both recommendation
support a new minimum number of
instructional hours of one
thousand one hundred forty
for elective extended learning
above and beyond the one
thousand one hundred and forty
the executive includes a
nonrecurring appropriation of
fifty million which is line one
fourteen.
well the LFC include recurring
funding for this purpose in in
the SCG in the stabilization
guarantee.
Our next the executive
recommendation includes a
nonrecurring appropriation of
thirty three point one million
online at one eighteen for a
variety of special education
initiatives to include elective
extended learning options.
And finally the executive
recommendation includes sixteen
point nine million for the
educator fellows program.
Let's see if I can find it here.
Line ninety eight thanks only.
And but the educator fellows
program is a two year program
that serves two purposes so
first it budget inspiring
teachers by providing resources
and supervise classroom
experience second the
instructional support provided
by the educator fellows allows a
classroom teacher to provide
targeted small group instruction
and more easily
some of provide small group
instruction more easily to
students most in need
the program is currently
supported by a sixteen million
by sixty million dollars in
federal funding this year and so
the recommendation of sixteen
point nine million for next year
would support five hundred
fellows.
Thank you Mr Miller I could turn
everyone's attention to page six
this begins are non recurring
and recurring public education
reform Fund appropriations.
I know we're.
Try to speed this up so I'll
just highlight line one twenty
six hundred fifty million
dollars to the SCG the
operational pays for K. twelve
plus programs this amount will
pay for any potential expansions
of the LFC proposal for that
formula factor a lot of the
other appropriation beginning
online.
One thirty three included
teacher pipeline initiative such
as your teacher residencies the
rate student teaching
opportunities and scholarships
for aspiring educators and I'll
turn it back over to Simon to
finish up on the section.
Mr chair members of the
committee I don't have any
additional comments on the
section.
Last but not least Mister chair
on the other state funds and he
interagency transfers stank
starting online one fifty nine I
I do want to highlight line one
sixty this is a transfer of
ninety four million dollars from
the new constitutional amendment
into the public education reform
Fund which should be used to pay
for those K. twelve plus
expansions I believe the
executive recommendation
includes.
That language for that ninety
four million within the SCG also
online one seventy a hundred
million from the public school
capital outlay fund as some of
you sit on the task force now
this is going to be a
distribution much like just be
in line for schools to do C. T.
a security pre K. and other
maintenance needs of.
Any other comments on the.
Nope Mr chairman of thanks we'll
see on the following pages is a
performance measure targets that
both of us have come to
consensus on those targets and
then starting on page twelve
you'll notice very small print I
apologize but these are the
differences between language in
the executive an LFC
recommendations would be happy
to go over any of these if you
have questions.
I don't know if places the chair
like to turn it over to the
secretary for a few brief
comments thank you very much
Secretary sign house absolutely
that invites you and director we
if you have it any comments that
we want to welcome that we have
a number of questions but
secretary Mr chair of thank you
very much members of the
committee good afternoon it's
great to be with you I've got
just a couple of highlight
points that I think will help
you look through this very
complicated budget and before
that I think Mr chair you want
to introduce the leadership of
the public education department
please Vicky Bannerman would you
hold up your hand deputy
secretary and Tony Ortiz in
charge of transportation All
Things budget Rebecca Reyes yes
Indian Education brand new this
week Jackie Archuleta state one
is here and have another Jackie
W. secretary technical Stallis
right here and then in the front
row is great for us that is the
legislative liaison will be
working with you and then from
the governor's office education
policy Scott Groginsky.
That I miss anybody from Public
Education Department okay Mr
Chairman just a couple high
level things and then if it
pleases the committee I have two
handouts that are like chichi on
extended learning because I was
anticipating you might have a
lot of questions about that so
they're simple clear and one of
them actually gives you a nice
comparison between the L. E. S.
C. LFC and exec.
So others are being passed out
I'd like to point out a couple
of things the first what Mr
chair members the committee what
we do and sitting here we're
here to talk about learning and
teaching and instruction and
even though there's a lot of
numbers in front of us let's all
remember that classroom and what
this is all about the second
point Mr chairman I'd like to
make is what you see in front of
you representative incredible
about a work throughout the
interim and you gave me the
opportunity to be with you I
think every month during the
term and so there's a lot of
consistency and commonality
between the proposals so the
first thing that I want to point
out Mr chair members the
committee is something that
isn't anywhere on your
spreadsheets and it got lost in
the work in preparing the
executive budget but it's
absolutely essential to the
functioning of the agency the
first one is a four point two
million dollars appropriation
for fuel for our school buses
and this is to pay for the
increased costs and we were able
to cover that for last school
year and we liked to put that in
as a deficiency four point two
million the other one is you
funded two years ago a financial
transparency website called open
books and so the public or you
as a legislator can go on and
look up the revenue that comes
into a school and the
expenditures and it's not done
yet and we're requesting again
as a deficiency five hundred
thousand dollars and then Mr
chair members the committee the
third deficiency is from three
years ago there was a mistake
made in calculating the
enrollment growth and there are
several schools out there
districts and charter schools
that are waiting for us to cover
that mistake that we that was
made that's a three point eight
million dollar request.
And with that Mr chair like to
highlight just a couple of
things in the spreadsheet lines
five through twelve and line one
twenty six this is the enhanced.
learning time proposal and
In this handout right here it's
got some boxes on it.
It's quite old.
A comparison of alias the LFC
and exec extended learning
proposals.
If you look it over Mr chair
members the committee and looked
right in the middle of the page
it says overall cost of extended
learning fan.
You see all these line items a
different proposals but when it
comes to the end of the day the
executive is three hundred and
eleven million LFC is three
hundred ninety million and LFC
is three hundred two million so
those are all very very close
and if it pleases the committee
I'll be happy to go through this
presentation yeah when you when
you like the second thing I want
to point out Mr chairman is on
line fifty two that sometimes
called the categorical
appropriation or middle of the
line line fifty two and as you
know from the pandemic
technology has become more
important than ever and it's not
only important for the kids that
if they have COVID they have to
stay home but it's also
important when they go home
nowadays all our kids have
devices and we wanted to have
the technology so they can do
their homework so I called up
the homework gap and the request
that we've got in there is not
covered online fifty two so we'd
like to call your attention to
that and then a couple other
very important proposals that
are not funded in the LFC budget
line one oh three we call it
micro credentials and that's a
way for our teachers to move
from level one to level two and
we've got a one point one
million dollar request we like
for that line one hundred.
Mr chairman in in this room two
days ago the LFC presented a
really good evaluation of to
school districts and in the LFC
recommendations was for us to
purchase a specific learning
management system to all and we
agree with that recommendation
it's not in the budget it's
three million dollars and we
would like to ask that be
included so we can meet the LFC
recommendation.
And then Mr Chairman on line one
oh six.
It's called feminine hygiene
products.
And we know that that's
essential for improving
attendance at school and so
that's a request to we've got in
there that's not funded.
And with that those are the
things Mr chairman members of
the committee I want to
highlight and I think when we
get to Q. NA you might have
questions about extended
learning we can use the handouts
that we've got here excellent
thank you very much Secretary
Steinhaus thank you to the
you're incredible staff for
being here I think we're ready
to go to questions and again
just to note that.
Thank the director familia see
if you have any questions there
we may ask you to come up okay
we're gonna start off we're
going to go to Representative of
you Representative Sheryl the
Lujan first then ranking member
Armstrong.
Thank you Mr chair thank
everybody for all your hard work
and working during the interim
and and really be
Diligent I mean this the on
diligent for putting together
this this budget and I know
you've heard from me before
we've had many conversations Mr
chair
particularly around the extended
learning aspect of things and so
I'm gonna I'm gonna just.
Really emphasize and what I've
been emphasizing of for a long
time now or the after school
programs before school programs
and summer programs if I can get
you to comment specifically on
that and how this is how this is
referenced in the the amount of
money that we is being requested
here Mr chair.
Okay.
Mr chair representative if you
on the LFC recommendation if you
look towards.
Line eight and ten and one
twenty six the K. twelve plus
recommendation includes a
requirement that schools that
add those additional days find
what was previously part of the
extended learning time program
after school programming in
Richmond programming in addition
to the additional time
additionally if you look online
one twenty seven there's about
twenty million in the LFC
recommendation for out of school
learning summer enrichment and
quality tutoring programs and
I'll turn it over to Simon R. Dr
Kurt Steinhaus to talk about the
executive recommendation there
Mr chairman members of the
committee the executive
recommendation Representative
Lujan does include money for
before school after school
Saturday programs and any kind
of local need that exists beyond
the extended learning and we
believe just like you do that
everybody is unique every school
is unique and if we can build a
funding system that allows local
decision making about their
needs that will help in us
meeting the needs of not only
the children out there but the
families out there.
Yes.
Mr chair members of the
committee yeah and in the
executive budget recommendations
you'll see there's a fifty
million dollars nonrecurring
appropriation and that can be
used for before school after
school summer school.
Thank you Mr chair and I really
appreciate this this this
emphasis on this part I just
hope that.
That these are going to be hard
to create programs assess going
through the paperwork and
getting these integrated into
our our districts and I I just
really want to emphasize that
again because I know that's been
my message for a couple years
now and I want to I want to just
make sure that that's happening
right here in Santa Fe in our
school district
we are focus is one of our
focuses in helping our families
especially working families of
course.
And so I appreciate you answer
that question Mr chair my next
question is going to go towards
the affordable housing crisis
that we're having across our
state particularly in talking
about my school district again
here in Santa Fe and we are are.
Our superintendents and our
district is really working hard
to see how we can create some
affordable housing here in our
district we have a we have
public school.
Property here but a lot of our
teachers a lot of our workforce
not just and and as our
educators but other workforce
don't even live here Santa Fe
because they can't afford to
live here I know we've we've
integrated a lot of things
working with MFA working with
creating funding for affordable
housing to
Throughout our legislators but
that is a concept that I really
want to ask you a little bit
more about and there was a
stream of funding for this I
would just like to have a little
bit more.
Share.
Mr Chairman to my knowledge the.
Only a initiative for teacher
housing at this time is through
the public school capital outlay
council the entity teacher H.
appropriation about ten million
they're developing the rules for
which applications will be
prioritized and currently it's
centered on those school
districts that have no other
available housing fair rural
parts that.
Might be surrounded by federal
land states currently the
priority and I on teacher
housing from the council's
perspective.
Madam Mr chair Representative
I'll just chime in that the
governors of recommendation does
have housing package inside be
happy to get you more of that
information and some of it is
related to a lot of some
students for services so I can
get you bring out of that thank
you Mr chair thank you again for
the I think this is this is us
all come together when we were
looking at this type of the
funding that we have here and
with the type of money and this
was told was yesterday about
the.
The spending and and many that
states that back to our general
fund some doctors.
With the increases that we're
looking at now I believe we had
about from what we know here
about is it ten million dollars
that was with the back this last
fiscal year is that correct Mr
chair.
Mr chair ten million dollar
could you repeat the ten million
dollars what.
To.
R. one sixty one in.
The supplemental charts and
graphs following three.
This section of.
Mr chair members of the
committee yes the department
reverted about ten million
dollars and that's spread
between their operating budget
all of the special
appropriations the SCG but but
you're right that ten million is
about the number.
So Mr chair Sir can you.
Understood that was a lot of
money that we had to to extend
now we have even more money so
I'm just asking how are you
looking to really use all this
funding this we're being asked
for Mr chair so that we're not
seeing that much revert is not a
compared to your budget the and
the complete the completion of
an amount of it.
Is not so alarming but it's
still there so I'm just
wondering how you are going to
address that Mr chair
Mr chair Representative Lujan
thank you for asking bottom line
it was a staffing issue and we
just didn't have the people in
our fiscal shop to get the money
out and thanks to Antonio Ortiz
and state state personnel we've
gotten approval to get that
straightened out and we are on
the path to make sure that we've
got the infrastructure to make
sure that the money gets out the
door and the the request that we
have been here for the agency
budget that sunny briefly
mentioned incitement at that
includes a little bit of
additional money to make sure
that our fiscal shop is
efficient and that we get the
money out quickly the the third
part of this is what you see in
this proposal above the line in
the state equalization guarantee
that if we maximize the amount
of money in there that flows to
school districts starting in
July every month and it doesn't
get held up in some of the other
processes that require in our S.
P. an application process that
did slow some things down thank
you Mr chair I really appreciate
that answer and I know we as
we're going to the next interim
will be we check in and see how
that is working really
appreciate thank you.
I have Mister chair thank you
very much Representative Lujan
the next remember option thank
you Mr chairman thank you for
your presentation I'll start off
by saying
staffing issues.
So I I have a text here from a
rural New Mexico superintendent
that says that he's working
fifteen hour days to fill in for
bus drivers that they can't fill
positions for.
Sometimes we have to release
half the kids early so the bus
can come back and pick up the
rest.
From a from a girl who.
Drove a hundred and ten miles
one way to school everyday.
Raising these hours.
Is really going to negatively
affect rural New Mexico so
please explain to me.
Majority of my schools are forty
four day weeks because of the
travel time.
For these kids to get to school.
So explain to me how we went
from making it.
Something that that was
optional.
To mandating.
And and and reallocating that
money I I am all about quality
not quantity.
And especially in rural New
Mexico so explain to me how this
is going to work in rural New
Mexico that want to keep a four
day week.
Mr chair and representative so.
The if you as you recall in the
Martinez Yazzie lawsuit the
court.
Said that the state needed to
make funding available to ensure
that student outcomes improved
and when asked whether a thirty
percent proficiency rate was
adequate.
The department at the time said
that was not and so the court.
Made a decision connecting the
availability of resources
including for extended learning
as a state remedy for those low
student outcomes and in many of
our schools.
That is the proficiency rate and
from the studies that we've done
in the past from LFC L. E. S. C.
other national studies other
independent studies where time
has been shown to improve those
outcomes now it's been very
difficult to move forward with
K. five plus extended learning
given that.
They're huge blocks of days that
had to be added to be eligible
for those funds we heard from
stakeholder groups that there is
a need to provide more
flexibility but mostly in the
form of at instructional hours
and so if you look at on average
what forty school weeks would
have to add to their schedule
would be about twenty four
minutes to their school day on
elementary in about ten minutes
to secondary.
In some districts and maybe a
little more difficult such as
the coral which I know you
representative they would
probably have to add about
closer to forty minutes to their
average day to meet that new
requirement or they could
potentially it had a few more
days to their entire calendar to
mitigate the minutes the added
to each day.
It's not a uniform approach for
every single school so the
approach of providing an
instructional our requirement
would be the most flexible
option if the state were to move
forward with an extended
proposal.
Thank you so I think you for
that thank you Mr chairman and
so part of the the other issue
in rural New Mexico.
in the area that I represent are
the roads.
And those are county roads.
That the county may not be able
to get a permission to go in and
fix because of a sovereign
nation but it's still an issue
we still run buses we still
trying to help the kids get to
school so just just so that
everyone hears that the roads
are an issue in rural New Mexico
miles and miles of dirt road.
And miles and miles of pay for
of roads that aren't maintained
because the county can't really
afford to fix it or can't get
the permission one of the other
questions I have is as we have
we ever looked at
introducing childcare into a
school for the teachers it is is
there funding for that she would
that go through ECDC or did does
that go through the school
system could it be possible
because.
Magdalena New Mexico doesn't
have a child care.
And I've got a couple teachers
that can't find childcare so
that ever been an option.
Amendment Mr Chairman
representative Armstrong thank
you for asking across New Mexico
there are several high schools
that have put in childcare
centers as part of the accord
technical education for their
high school students there are
other school districts in rural
New Mexico that just did not
have child care so they chose to
use their state equalization
guarantee in a partnership with
the community to establish a
childcare center and with the
increase funding that's proposed
for ECECD there will be options
and I'm sure you'll have an
opportunity to talk to secretary
Groginsky about that and she's
the expert and I will look to
her for X. her expertise.
Okay thank you so much and and
that's I mean I don't of course
I'm I'm all about supporting the
teachers in our schools but
Rural New Mexico one size does
not fit all that does not fit
all and and I don't know how
much.
More I can say that thank you Mr
chairman thank you very much
remember It next Representative
Garcia thank you on the contrary
my lines are kind of in love.
Fund you know if you
representative rural New Mexico
Representative frontier New
Mexico.
You made a comment that all
children have the means of
returning home can you expand
that to me.
my district people only have
running water or electricity
however you this these kids are
being left out.
Yes Sir Mr chairman thank you
for that question and I
appreciate that and and this
morning we had a meeting with
tribal education department so
we talked about rural and we
talked about remote and that's
kind of what you're calling
frontier and there is a
difference between that and
thanks to our governor we've got
a broadband office that is
working on getting over a
hundred million dollars from the
federal government to build the
infrastructure New Mexico so the
ideal infrastructure is fiber
how to those homes and that's
going to be many years before we
get that so part of these
funding proposals is to provide
the technology for a very remote
frontier home to use satellite
technology and we do have homes
in New Mexico right now that
have kids that are using
startling for example to get
access to the internet so they
can do their homework so we are
not there yet we have about
thirty thousand student homes
today they don't have internet
connectivity and we're working
one home at a time to bring that
down to zero.
I think the numbers gentleman
I've been of Representative for
the two thousand sixteen never
the same song and dance some two
thousand sixteen.
That our kids are going to get
service the last mile never
happens in all a couple of other
stuff about the.
Broadband we went on a tour and
she was planned out you know my
district is four hundred miles
distant and there's people out
there just do not have service
they're being left out now the
reptiles picture table.
And we need to address those
issues not just rural no
disturbing New Mexico so the
next question I have is
I saw on the news last night on
channel thirteen the teacher
don't want to go to school
because you're afraid of
The problems in schools you know
here we are asking for over four
billion dollars.
We're system do you feel that
this money is going the right
direction because we should not
have issues in schools with guns
to the lax security we had a
meeting the other day and some
of the schools have twelve
thirteen fourteen million
dollars in your bank but yet the
security is not there.
How do you address that issue
that came up on the news last
night teachers say we're a local
teach anymore.
For the lack of security here
we're asking for billion dollars
for schools and I don't think
it's phone in the run with the
right way.
I don't know if it's going to
administration or what's
happening but we're not
addressing the problem or
solution.
Mr Chairman representative thank
you for asking that point number
one the public education
department is requiring every
single school in New Mexico to
have on extensive safety plan
with funding and outcomes and as
a school superintendent I did
that with my schools and point
number two is there's an
organization I'm sure for with
the public schools insurance
authority if the school calls on
and says would you come to a
safety assessment on my screen
they come and do it for free I
had a principal come to me and
say Hey Kurt I'm gonna put in
bullet proof glass in the front
of my screen I said what time
out before you do that bring in
the public schools turned
Insurance Authority they came in
and gave us a forty page report
about what needed to be done so
that's the second thing that's
happening and there are
proposals coming to you this
session for money for schools
for school safety that they can
implement their plans and pay
for all the things they need
access control is probably one
of the biggest ones the second
one is training for staff so
that they can be ready for an
emergency that's part of the
plan that we're bringing to you
and we take that very seriously
and I appreciate you bringing
that to to everybody's attention
with secretary thank you for
that Mr Chairman.
That's funny well you're asking
for more money for that part
what did the school districts
have a bank total money that
they're not using why don't they
do have any oversight on what
they can do with that money to
get this thing done now instead
of asking for the money.
Mr Chairman representative
Garcia and not as much as we
need to make sure that the
safety is addressed but the
federal money you're talking
about is you sometimes called
the RP just for money and that
is a local school district
decision and I do know and we've
got of web page that has where
they're spending their money I
do know that a lot of school
districts are budgeting some of
that money to pay for safety
improvements.
Of.
Another question that came up in
the journal here couple three
four weeks ago Secretary Mr
Chairman.
It builds accusing the district
of of mistreating or harsher
punishment a native Americans
are students of color how do you
address that issue.
Mr Chairman representative
Garcia thank you for asking
about that there has been an
extensive amount of work done as
soon as that report came out the
first one is working with the
local school board to ask the
administration that district
develop an action plan to
address what was in that report
that's point number one point
number two Rebekah Riess is
sitting behind me she is sending
her staff to training in the
Gallup areas so that what's
those staff members can get
trained they can go in the
school district and help and
some of the training is called
restorative justice some of the
training is called positive
support behaviors because the
way to prevent those expulsions
is to catch it early and provide
the kind of positive support
with the family and the child so
we are working on that and
taking very seriously I'd be
glad to kind of follow up with
you as we move forward helping
that school district with the
issue thank you Mr chairman
chairman of.
The minute you just mentioned
right now that.
If you're gonna work with the
school boards to see what's
happening in the school if I'm
not mistaken.
The school board don't have much
to figure much oversight on on
the superintendent of the
school.
And that's a big issue because
you know I have a my ward I've
us time and time again Mr
Chairman.
What's going on in the state of
we don't know we don't have we
don't have no control over the.
The school.
It works you know that's a big
issue and we need to address
that issue and the the last
question I have.
Is and extended learning.
Of Representative more I'm from
well mentioned it how many
school actually want to do this
in comparison to people that
don't want to do.
Mr Chairman representative have
an I have not done a survey of
how many schools want to do it
we have done some surveys to
prepare for this legislative
session and when we survey the
school districts and ask them
what they needed one of the
things Representative is I
called adult time so the
extended learning proposals you
have in front of your to extend
time for students and student
learning but also the executive
recommendation includes I think
fifty million dollars for what I
call adult time and that would
give the school districts and
the folks what they're asking
for it it came out loud and
clear in the survey that they
want more time to
sit down with student work and
work on common planning
strategies they want to take
professional development they
want to become stronger leaders
within that school so that's a
part of the package that's in
front of you and and I think
setting me want to add in Mr
chairman I might add to that
about nearly half of the did the
state is already in extended
learning and I think there is a
potential desire to continue
those calendars for certain
districts and charters.
For the eleven forty hour
requirement that's being
proposed.
Forty one districts and charters
currently meet the elementary
requirement and sixty nine are
you meet the secondary
acquirement so even putting in
these new provisions those
districts and charters would not
have to do any thing different
with their time and they would
see a windfall from the increase
in the SCG appropriation so
there's a significant number
that are currently doing the
requirement before this
provision has been even
introduced I think that's funny
you know uses of difficult
people are doing it would like
to a representative Armstrong
sit in one chair doesn't fit
everybody.
You know partition to the
completely different.
minor well the rules changed in
New Mexico in rural that project
billion fortune a more but you
know we need to really look at
to see what all the people want
not just a certain amount of
district but thank you thank you
Mr thank you thank you very much
Representative Garcia next steps
of setting and.
first I want to thank you for
your presentation for the
committee this summer was the
first time I'd ever but this
year was for sure I'd ever been
able to attend almost every
intern session for LFC and LESC
and if you are interested in
learning all about this budget
and really where the numbers
come from and why they come from
they do a great job in educating
us on this so I I sat through
most all of them and it's an
amazing piece of work they do so
thank you for that and as a
teacher you have to wait my
favorite thing the teacher
residencies because we need
teachers and you are funding it
thank you and the map it
achievement there's a little
difference in in amounts of
money but we are still in need
of math and thank you for
signing that but again committee
I would recommend if you can if
you can't all go to the inner
sessions that's for you to learn
about all of this.
You know we have to go so fast
we don't really get to
understand everything but it is
done thoroughly and in terms of
you understand exactly where
everything is coming from these
guys do a great job so thank
you.
Thank you very much of the
sending unit next Representative
Pettigrew.
Good afternoon thank you Mr
chairman thank you Secretary in
sunny and
for the presentation
Well where to start.
Mr chair secretary line one
twenty for the attendance
recovery program.
Seventeen million if I get the
number right.
What's the game plan.
First the.
Person that's in both of our
gonna get forty percent that
number forward work coming back
with a game plan to get forty
percent that concern the fact
that fifteen percent what the
state.
Mr Chairman representative thank
you for the question the game
plan is pretty extensive it
starts in the bill that this
legislature very wisely passed
call the tenants for success act
and in that act as a legislature
you require school in every
single school district and
charter school to have attended
an attendance for success plan
and it goes one step further
than that if there are students
that are not attending school
there are individual plans for
that student so that's kind of
part number one is the plan part
number two which is even more
important is getting out in
front of the issue before it
becomes a problem and as a
school superintendent my plan
and what I did that worked
really well was to bring every
teacher in that school the
custodian the counselors and it
was after school we turn we
cover put cover lights of paper
over the windows so nobody can
see and we put every single
student's name around the room
and then I have the staff
members say if you have contact
with that student for that
family put your name up there
and then we looked in their
worst children in our school
that did not have an adult it
was connected with the student
and what we do we did an
individual attendance planned to
make sure that an adult was
connected with that student at
school and at home so I I could
go on after that but we do have
plans in place they are not
perfect and we have some
improvements to do as you will
see a bill from us to you
improving the attendance for
success Act because it needs to
be cleaned up a little bit.
Mr chair and secretary I
appreciate that answer but I got
a forty percent issue we're not
getting from the problem.
Word behind can we agree there
yes okay so I'm just kind of
curious that offline.
I'd I'd love to see some ideas
on on how seventeen million
assures us to gain.
What percentage of that forty
percent but because a seventeen
million dollars.
Kind of like.
In the area are
Thank you for that and I'm like
I said I'd love to see some
something with respect to that
okay.
Mr chair and secretary when the
other covers one of the other
budget line items and here's the
mills and.
our governor talked about it in
the state of the state address
morning.
Fresh cut mills for everybody
right.
How many of our eighty nine
school districts.
Playing all schools actually
have the ability for the staff
right now.
Actually make.
The hot cooked fresh milk.
Today how many of Mr Chairman
representative Pettigrew I don't
have the exact number but we
could do a survey and find that
out as a school superintendent
the district I was running the
answer was zero we didn't have
kitchens and so I understand the
problem you're pointing out so
that the governor's goal is a
long term goal to get to that
but we do not have the capacity
as you just acknowledge and and
pointed out we don't have the
capacity in our schools to do
that today the other thing that
I did as a school superintendent
is when we had money from the
public school capital outlay
council we upgraded our middle
school kitchen and we made fresh
cooked meals in that school and
then put my trucks and to come
to every school so that's one of
the options when you're still in
the process of upgrading the
kitchens and it worked very well
for me as a superintendent.
Thank you for that answer Mr
chair secretary has a going to
work out for
Representative Armstrong
Representative
Garcia.
We would want to work with them
and their school superintendent
to submitted application to
upgrade their schools if they
choose representative Armstrong
you point out local decision
making and if that's what they
want they could apply for that
and upgrade their kitchens and
provide a fresh cooked meals
because we do know that it's
healthier for kids if they get
hot meals.
Well I think we knew that we got
away from it but that's kind of
the point when we knew the
vocational was important.
And when we got away from us.
And now we're reinvesting
everything that we got rid of
with.
I'm old enough where I went to
school seventh grade you went to
page up.
You too.
So yeah and then we decided that
that one important.
And so I'm just kind of curious
how all this kind of the
current.
Pulls together we.
We we know the information but
that yeah we get away from it
now we come back we're spending
so much more so my question Mr
chair and secretary is if we're
gonna do this this is going to
be the need to mandate.
I'm gonna assume that
the office that goes away
everybody gets a hundred
percent.
Nobody pays for anything it's
all free to the school because
yeah.
This is a mandate this isn't
something that that was the
dental I one way or another by
the school this isn't something
we want to do that so so so we
were told that.
The
chair representative on I
understand your question
correctly it's about the offset
for public school capital outlay
that's getting removed and the
task force bill.
At that offset was basically
applied to districts of a
legislator gave them a direct
appropriation for capital
purposes and the current.
To skate if endorsed bill would
remove offices that were
previously applied in any future
offset spending four.
Thank you for that after
chairman and and thank
Funny and and secretary I'm
still concerned I you know
there's a level of the office of
the make sense okay.
There is a role.
And in those need to stay that
way yeah has a negative impact
on my school district but those
were the rules in this way it is
but if we're going to put a
mandate out there I just want to
make sure what I don't forgive
back here completely there needs
to be some ballots on the other
side is is important to tell
somebody you're gonna go do
this.
I just want to make sure that
It didn't have a negative effect
on any of their budgets align
with respect to that.
And then I want to make sure to
the consisting of bull when.
I mean we have a budget was with
the significant access right now
that we just heard from.
From staff yesterday that eighty
percent of the money that's an
access right now comes from an
industry.
This legislature and for for is
bound and determined to destroy
between now and nineteen thirty
I mean.
Only thirty so this how do we
get sustainable after that.
Any thoughts and concepts on how
we get there because of the
industry that is creating this
the money.
To be able to do this is going
to go away as a cause
sustainable.
In five to seven years.
And if that thank you very much
Representative Pettigrew if
there if if palace if you have
an answer that's a great I I'll
certainly add a couple of
thoughts uh is very fair
question press address and some
other forms but if if there are
additional thoughts are Director
Abbey appreciate the question.
If you don't have a yes please
miss Martinez Mr chairman and
representative so just not to
fully respond to your comment
but to provide you additional
contacts so the governor's food
initiative has serve like these
large wraparound services in
part of the executive
recommendation of the governor's
recommendation is funding for
universal
so part of that is also building
on so.
Have you.
Also
recurring appropriation I
believe it's been.
But that's going to be to work
with school districts and
getting lunch rooms you know up
to par so they can do cooking
and it's part of a larger food
initiative to work out that from
office in in the DFA
recommendation.
That we did last and so we're
building on that and so you'll
hear more about it that if we
can actually work with you and
get you some more information on
kind of a larger box on that so
I'd be happy to get you more
information.
Thank thank you very much Mr
Thank you it was the only thing
I'd add and and go back to
Representative Pettigrew for
questions we do have nine more
members from yesterday's brief
their money matters brief from
the LFC were shown continuing
plateau in flight increases
roughly through FY thirty five
and
into the FY forty sort of above
where we are now so that that's
something to refer back on the
budget thank.
Chairman I appreciate the
response and are appreciate the
other response I think we can
all agree that those grant of
changed dramatically.
Within the last eight months.
When when.
Well let's just go with the year
because what we looked at twelve
months ago those graft and
looked that way.
Twelve twelve months ago we were
looking at graphs of somewhere
around twenty thirty twenty
thirty two we were having
problems.
Now we're pushing twenty thirty
five we're still talking we
we're sorry talked yesterday
about different volatilities
that we we can't predict and so
I just kind of look at these
things we we go back in why did
we make the decision to go to
prepared foods ones we make
those decisions some of her cost
related decisions right.
So now we're going back to
something that that we've always
known first with bills are
better for everybody but we got
away from that because services.
There was a cost related issue
to.
And so the some of those things
just concern me and I just don't
know how that works especially
in when when we don't have.
The ability to actually find
that.
and and get to the goal that was
discussed.
Mr Chairman on
This morning we had a
presentation from you Secretary
in your and the team and I and I
appreciate the presentation that
I still have a huge concern the
eleven forty hours.
I still think that we have a
goal.
This the wrong goal.
We're looking at.
Setting a number of
instructional hours we're not
looking at what the actual
return on that investment is.
We just went okay have one
thousand one hundred forty hours
no we need to get rating levels
to a certain level we need to
get math levels to a certain
level we need to get
competencies to a certain level.
The rest of the world.
Except right now it seems like
in that potentially in
government
in the rest of the world if you
if you achieve the goal earlier
there's an incentive.
In in this world we're talking
about maybe not having a goal
but just achieving a number
earlier and that concerns me and
so Mr chair
I realize everybody works very
hard on this budget and I also
realize I'm very new at this but
the other side of it is we look
at a way to create inside this
budget and the quote one of we
had a goal.
We achieve the competency levels
that we got but we did it last
time and make that make that an
incentive as well.
For the school districts that
are able to accomplish that I
mean how hard it would be to
make the same incentive.
But with less hours.
It that competency level we're
not talking about changing the
number we're not talking about
changing the a budget line it
just actually put the competency
to.
And we took that out of our
system what four years ago where
we actually put a competency to
now we're just looking at
instruction hours.
I'm not sure that is the right
target for us and so it's just a
thought can we can we think
about maybe doing that because I
don't want to I don't want to
suggest we go redo an entire
budget but what I would like to
suggest is maybe actually put
a goal in here we we talk.
Yeah days ago chair we talked
two days ago were our governor
got up there and put goals out
there for the state of New
Mexico right and but they're
actually for which goals that
were specific in the fine this
goal is just a number.
Thank you very much
Representative Pettigrew I've
will we'll have to wrap up we do
have nine other members any
responses including around the
performance metrics but
excellent thank any response to
Representative questions Mr
chair representative
this every agency has
performance measures you go to
page seven of the LFC packet
you'll see there's three or four
pages of public school related
performance measures I.
RT reading achievement math
achievement science
And plenty of other topics as
well so I don't know if that
answers your question but
there's there's definitely
people looking at performance as
well Mr chair and Sir I
appreciate that response that
doesn't change the graduate
graduation.
Frustrated obviously that didn't
change whether or not you get to
graduate.
Yes there may be a performance
level but that doesn't change
whether or not you get to
graduate graduate right now and
that's a concern for me so Mr
chair
with respect to what you said I
will you know about thank you
very much we're gonna go to
representative census.
Hello thank you Mr chairman Mr
secretary I have a few questions
We keep hearing about these
rankings I just heard forty
seven on four does that ranking
come and are we forty seventh
education or we got.
Mr Chairman representative
Representative such as thank you
for asking there are as you are
well aware many different
rankings but if you look at Nate
the national assessment of
educational progress that's the
yes that's been more
consistently issued throughout
the for many many years across
New Mexico and Archie meant
levels are fiftieth in the
country.
Mr chairman Mr secretary so my
question to you is a what are
your short term and long term
goals were lost now forties put
your goal in four years what's
your goal in ten years what's
the one fifteen years I know we
keep talking about improving
stuff but we got to set goals so
what you see us of those short
term and long term areas with
the the budgets that you guys
are asking for.
Mr Chairman representative such
as
we we I'd be happy to meet with
you and show you the performance
increases that were expecting
every year
this is a little bit unfair but
it's about a five percent
increase per year and the other
part of it that we look at is
down to the individual student
making sure that they gain at
least one year's worth earning
during that school year if they
start the school year behind and
we wanted to gain more than that
school year.
So Mister chairman so in four
years the goals baby fortieth or
what do you.
What's the goal and I know we
always going to be number one
but realistically.
If we're making the improvements
or would you like to see us as
we're we're going on.
That to me it be huge to move
from fiftieth to forty at us
still
A dramatic move so I guess I'm
asking you if you as the leader
of this whole departments what
it what are your goals.
Mr Chairman representative thank
you for asking I was yesterday
with my counterparts from around
the country including the chief
state school officer from
Kentucky and Kentucky has gone
from fiftieth up about ten
points in about a it to ten year
period so that's my goal right
there is to be Kentucky thank
you Mr chairman
I have some schools that have
also brought up the concern
about the extended schools I
have a see my own high school I
think they get students from
angelfire eagle's nest I have to
drive.
Pretty far they brought up to
the concerned that was brought
up earlier just wanted to
mention that.
you talked about of the food
program funding for meals are we
gonna have any requirement that
this food is locally grown and
purchased from local farmers and
ranchers is there anything like
the do that Mr chair at least
I'm sorry some attempts if it's
available to get from local
ranchers and farmers Mr Chairman
answers yes there's an
expectation to get are from
local ranchers and farmers okay
and my last question Mr chairman
I I really appreciate that now
we have a.
Secretary that's actually a in
the state and has experience
here last time I was here we
have someone else in the.
I know you're aware of a lot of
the issues in our state being
here but other issues I see B.
from Espanola valley is which is
a lot of students was almost
high school with that we lose
funding so it's almost like the
rich get richer the poor get
poorer with that simple does
this budget address that issue.
where US Espanola valley high
schools losing funding and then
this almost high school which is
well supported well funded I
think they have a lot of
external support
We're and I know that right
school side so I don't blame
people for wanting to Senator
case to a better school but at
the end of a.
We're
This bill is losing out so I
guess my question is
Does this address that issue or
what are your plans have even
thought of the public just that
issue.
Mr Chairman representative such
as the answer is yes we've got
extended extensive plans and
it's mandated by judge singleton
and Martinez Yazzie so it's more
supports for the school
districts that need the
assistance and I'd be glad to
sit down with you and show you
the plan on how we get that
implemented it just real quick
Mr chairman that plan what is
the time frame to get the
pushed.
Mr Chairman representative yes
we do in that plan that I be
happy to share with you we do
have a time frame in there and
it doesn't have as you are well
aware in the committee knows it
doesn't happen in one year but
we wanted xcelerated we've got a
thing called accelerated
learning work what we're we're
doing with the kids so that the
time line will move more quickly
will achieve the success for
kids in the Espanola schools
faster thank you Mr.
Thank you very much of the
sciences New Mexico
Representative Representative
got your.
Thank you Mr chairman I'll be
happy to know that I'm going to
accept a lot of my questions
thank you very much by the way
for those of you who think
Bernalillo is not rural I have
kids that are best over an hour
first by van then by bus from to
harshly to a school in my
district so a lot of the things
we talk about aren't unique to
any one part of the state
Mr chairman and everybody in the
room I am happy to announce that
the one thousand one hundred and
forty our bill will drop
sometime tonight on the website
is house bill one thirty we're
already of listening diligently
to what Representative Pettigrew
said about a possible amendment
on competency you'll be happy to
know so read it there's a lot of
flexibility within it it's
always helpful to read a bill
and what it says so you know
that it might be better than
even expect just want to make
that point and then my are my
one question is on line twelve
when we talk about the average
salary increase I sometimes get
suspicious Mr chair because I
want to make sure is that an
actual raise or is that tied to
increased hours.
Mr Chairman this is in addition
to the amount that would come
from the increased hours it's
four percent outside of that
recommendation thank you very
much that's it Mr chair thank
you very much Representative
Garrett Representative Bakir
please.
Thank you Mr chairman I will as
always be direct and concise and
expected answers the same way so
study of and Mr chairman of
order on line one seventy I see
amount of.
Of a hundred million seventy
million.
there are four different
Physically designations or or
categories what is the breakdown
of that money
Mr Chairman so satanic
Representative so it's twenty
five million for security and
then the other seventy five
million is for CTE
prekindergarten and maintenance
and general.
What the local district needs
are in particular.
Mr chairman and sunny so when
we're so how is that going to be
divided equally so I mean
because I I know for districts
everywhere we went with the L.
E. S. C. C. T. is one of the
requests and priorities of
school districts so what is the
total amount for CTE and not
just this line but in other
places in the budget please
thank you Mr.
Mr Chairman representative so
the distribution is similar to
the amount that was done in
Senate bill two twelve of last
year.
If there be a for a hundred
thousand dollars for each
district anymore and then.
Anything that they would have
normally received to their SB
nine state match would be
applied to those districts to
have a larger share of the
funding it's mostly driven by
state memberships of larger
districts would see in a larger
amount there's also online one
thirty one a public education
reform Fund amount for.
C. T. A. from the LFC
recommendation and then if you
turn to page five online one of
seven the executive
recommendation has fifteen
million as well but from the
general fund.
We also like to point out that
for schools that are
participating in the K. twelve
plus or extended learning time
programs some of that additional
building would be in excess of
the actual costs of
implementation and schools could
use that flexibly to do C. T. if
that was appropriate for their
local district.
Up thank you Mr we don't
question regarding the security
how will districts be able to
access those funds is it through
competitive grant or mostly go
before committee and make
specific request for funds Mr
chair representative last year
the money was sent out and then
they were just told to report
back on how issues so each
district a hundred thousand
dollars minimum minimum.
Our Mr member go to
transportation I see on twenty
out there so thank you what is
the total amount allocated for
transportation Mr chairman it's
on.
Mr chairman Representative if
you look online forty three
there's a hundred and twenty six
million in the LFC
recommendation from the general
fund and then the executive
recommendation includes a
hundred twenty one million from
the general fund and there's
about nine million from capital
outlay.
As you'll see on line one sixty
six that's about a ten to twelve
percent increase from the prior
amount for transportation and Mr
chairman I just want to ask is
that does does it is that the
filling of the LFC and PED that
that be sufficient for districts
I know many districts they have
to support transportation with
operational funds does this
amount here does it is it the
intent to address that so
districts are not having to our
support with operational funds.
Mr Chairman representative so it
really depends on the ridership
and miles traveled the formula
that distributes the
transportation funding but the
LFC recognition also includes
language prohibiting PED from
using a population density
factor in that determination
which you've probably heard from
Rio Rancho in Albuquerque that
they get a credit against their
transportation formula because
they're a dense urban area and
they have to supplement some of
that with their operational
dollars this would remove that
calculation that formula thank
you Mr chairman we're going to
talk more offline about
transportation because I will
say for New rural New Mexico
even my district I would hope
the cell is funds be used
towards our conditioning and as
far as wifi we have students
that are on the bus for our when
I talk to my colleague
Representative Armstrong hundred
forty miles that you travel I
think that's a good time is for
learning with devices for opted
for that we'll talk about that
and Mr Chairman Alaska is going
more comment regarding the
eleven forty hours I think it's
not just about quantity it's
about quality.
And I think that any.
Any recommendation or any
implementation of extended it
must also include a professional
development for learning for
both the staff the teachers the
administrative stuff there
so I would I would hope to see
it is not there that's a
question but more statement and
finally was term with my last
thing I'd like to welcome Jackie
still in I think she's a great
addition and I appreciate it
thank you Mr chairman.
Thank you very much
Representative Baca next we're
gonna go to Representative
Montoya.
Thank you Mr chairman just a
couple of quick questions around
two topics
secretary Steinhaus have a quite
a concern.
that I'd like maybe for you to
address and that is
private sector providers of a
the child care
combined with pre K. education
some of the the currently these
private providers are doing both
there to provide providing
childcare for
the early early stages birth
till for for for.
And to have jobs are dropping
off their children but also
procurement providing pre K.
education across the state
the concern has been that the
budget that has been presented
by the governor
Essentially by removing this the
the the education component
potentially away from these
early providers many of them
will likely have to go out of
business because of the number
of children that.
Would go with that into the
public education
in schools and public schools.
Not then being able to cover the
expenses of the facilities it
currently have which house both
early childhood education and
child care
I'm just wondering is there I
this I know these discussions
are still are being had at in
San Juan County I know that our
providers are private providers
and our.
New superintendent schools have
had this discussion because in
the end it's our it's our the
same community at the public
schools are trying to serve that
would also be hurt the same
parents who have a one or two
year old child may have a five
year old child and so I'm just
wondering if this is on the
radar if there is a any progress
in those discussions is there
any recognition that this is a
problem.
Mr chair.
Mr chair representative Lente
thank you for raising the issue
secretary of ECECD Elizabeth
Groginsky is the expert on that
and we're taking notes I her
husband sitting right here and
he's taking notes will get the
information to her and we'll get
an answer to you thank you I
would be very happy to talk to
offline about this because this.
this is a subject that even
though we're talking about a
public schools and the X. the
the extended work I've I have
heard from several teachers and
even from some superintendents
around the state to we're not
really looking forward to
potentially the the extended
hours so I'm I don't know that
this is a hundred percent widely
accepted as a positive so that's
the Mr Mister chairman and
sectors that house I would like
to on the kind of the next topic
of the cafeterias that the
governor discussed.
And putting those back and all
of the schools a lot of the
public schools currently have
what is a centralized
distribution center is that no
longer an appropriate model I
mean if if if if a school
district has a facility where
there.
Cooking and making all of the
bills even if we were more mills
it seems to me it's an
unnecessary expense to have to
go back into the schools.
And
quite frankly there have to
build on land that may not be
there a new cafeteria or to
disrupt.
Areas that have been converted
for other uses that the schools
have so I'm just wondering are
they the governor gave a broad
description and I'm wondering if
these centralized kitchens are
still acceptable to accomplish
the governor's goals Mr Chairman
representative monetary the
answer's yes the centralized
kitchens are an acceptable model
and Kendall Chavis is the expert
on that and we can get that to
her and make sure that you've
got a written answer to that
question but as a school
superintendent that's what I use
to centralized kitchen that
distributed the hot meals okay
thank you Mr chairman as my
questions.
Thank you very much
Representative Montoya next
we're gonna go to Representative
check.
Thank you Mr chairman Mr
chairman I like to switch gears
just a little bit go live sixty.
Mr chairman in our small rural
schools if you have a ninety P.
for students and you will decide
what that student needs to
succeed in school here there may
be a speech therapist they may
need a physical therapist thing
we may need the special help in
this area or that area or access
to a certain program
eight eight tiny micro district
cannot afford one of each a
physical therapist a speech
therapist so on and so forth so
the who's provides that for us
you are the regional are you see
the right regional educational
cooperatives
I believe there tell them in my
correct.
So I'm looking online sixty and
I see that
Last year they had one minute
one point one million.
The exactly recommends for this
year one point one million LFC
one point three.
That seems so that's a hundred
thousand for each RAC
you've got a director you've got
staff you have
a multitude of requirements for
people to keep that program
going is is that enough.
Mr.
Mr chair Senator Chatfield
the general fund appropriation
to the REC it's just a tiny
portion of their whole entire
budget I don't have the exact
numbers in front of me is to
help big their budget is but
they receive revenues from
mostly other sources so so.
Mr chairman I believe those
revenues from other sources or
for other programs but they're
injectoral they're they're
operating budget is about a
hundred thousand
right now that's what they but
they live on and the when they
bring in other programs they get
other funding but they're
basically funding is that
hundred thousand and if if
So if that's not true I would
love to and to know that but if
it is true Mr chairman I would
hope that we could just kind of
re evaluate this number so that
we the at that is what our rural
schools rely on to bring the
bring into their into our
districts which are multiple
districts there's ten ten REC
the services that we need so if
we could take just a little
deeper look at that number and
see if there if we're funding
them at a level that allows them
to do a good job that's that's
what we want right to.
Sir can I just have one point
please Representative Chatfield
I I appreciate you bringing that
up in one of things that I've
just discovered in the last
month or so is operating budget
of the REC and then there
infrastructure and their
mortgage payment and their rant
and so I'm working with them
right now to figure out that
second problem so I appreciate
you bringing that up and we are
aware of and working on to
address that problem with our
thank you so much and I would
just I would hope to be kept in
the loop and and hope that we
could maybe work out something
just we just want to do a good
job I mean it's we're all here
for that one reason right.
And so this is the second thing
is competency I like that word
competency so of while.
A few weeks ago some help you
know how many thousands of list
I see that you guys created
within the that we created the
one of the lists have a list of
the schools that have a core
competency and I was very proud
to see that six of them out of
not too many were in my district
they were down the side of the
New Mexico all of them were
all of those six or forty a week
schools
and they had attained competency
in I don't know by us in math
and reading I can't remember
which listed you all probably do
the which listed of us
none of those schools.
Are interested in a in extended
learning time they just
lot of those little kids get on
the bus before daylight and they
get off the bus at the work.
I think it goes to competency it
goes to the quality of the time
that that of the education that
they have there I I think it
goes to to making sure that our
teachers have opportunities for
training and I appreciate you
making it hours and not days I
do appreciate that I think that
was a major thing.
And I also
appreciate it you.
Probably included so some other
learning experience other than
just the the what we normally
think of and and that that made
a big difference it made it a
little more doable for us and
and like save mostly that it was
ours and
I I think that we we do need to
look at competency let's look at
the ones that have attained
competency what are they doing.
And maybe we should
as Mr pedigree as Representative
Pettigrew said may we should
reward competency when you
attain that.
Of this last point five enormous
learning experience I didn't
know that schools are I live in
the land of small school we we
have a kitchen we cook breakfast
and lunch.
And I was I have cooked for more
little dribblers basketball
games and any other living a
bill.
Thank you all for all the to do
thank you Mr chairman thank you
very much Representative
Chatfield next from the
representative you.
Thank you Mr chairman and thank
you all for presenting this is
this is you know.
This is a great.
Presentation I have just two
questions Mr chair first of all
I want to thank the governor's
office for including online one
of six the three thousand the
three million dollars for the
feminine hygiene products really
think it's important and I don't
I know some people think of what
the heck is that doing in
education budget but if I've
been working on this for several
years and the studies are
showing that young girls the the
that miss school alright it's
because they don't they have a
lack of these kinds of sanitary.
products it's really critical
that we make these things
available to them so I'm hoping
that all of you will help me
have included in is that are HFC
of line item that we can
include.
I would love to see it I know we
didn't talk to LESC about it but
it needs to be in there and I
would love to see that in there
somehow we need to have access
to that and the second thing
The LFC road
recommendation several years ago
about Mr Chairman about the fact
that the lop we have a which is
the teacher competency tests for
Spanish of teacher speaking
teachers be updated and of
course
hasn't been done and it hasn't
been funded so I'm asking for
support or and maybe some
information of Sammy where would
it come I'm sorry Senate.
He's going who.
Thank you for what a line item
would it come out of if we could
fund it is only three hundred
fifty thousand dollars.
We cannot be line one forty
eight one forty eight.
Under the bilingual
multicultural Act but we only
have a million in their.
Mr Chairman representative that
the five million online one
forty eight.
Thirty one thirty eight Senator
sorry Representative Mr Chairman
on line one forty eight for the
bilingual multicultural
Education Act that's a million
there's five million.
A new money recommend in the LFC
recommendation.
With all due respect it to line
one forty eight yes
Representative and it's up to
the LFC yes and you're saying
it's one million dollars in the
Mr chairman it's five million
for bilingual and one million
for Hispanic Education Act.
Why I wrote the it was the wrong
thing god bless you do you think
we can get that money Mr
chairman and gentleman.
I have a bill.
Thank you Representative we're
going through the diff the the
the it is in is included in our
unanimously supported LFC
recommendation I'm hoping that
it will be.
That's currently what's there.
It could be in this from this
budget you're saying I'm so I'm
confusing myself sorry
Representative is briefly and
and for folks who are watching
in the the unanimously supported
legislative finance committee
budget proposal that we prepare
as a legislature these two
line one forty seven and one
forty eight are in that that was
adopted and presented
this past Monday I think it was
our front yeah okay so if there
if my bill goes through the
committee process sees the money
would come out of that line
item.
Thanks be to god thank you thank
you very much Representative
Trujillo next we're gonna go to
Representative Brown please.
Thank you Mr chairman.
Secretary to the state house
couple questions for you Sir
currently or maybe Senator
anybody else could answer does
the state cover the cost of
health and health insurance
premiums for any state employees
currently.
Mr Chairman representative if
from I understand your question
correctly the state currently a
provides a sort of tiered
approach depending on how much
your income level is a certain
percentage of that health
insurance premium coverage there
is a line in the recommendation
for both the executive LFC
online twenty two provided for
different levels of contribution
rates.
Mr chairman and and gentlemen it
would be predictable then that
other state employees those who
do not work in the education
space we'll be wanting the same
equitable treatment so we know
that's probably coming at some
point so
we all value teachers and we
want them to get the best
compensation they can but it
puts pressure on all of state
government with something like
that happened so Mr chairman of
this is for secretary starting
house you're trying to address
the low math scores it with I
think a program called math is
me could you tell us how that's
going Mr Chairman.
Mr Chairman representative thank
you for asking last year our
focus was on literacy this year
it's on mathematics and the
mathematics approach that we're
taking is at the middle school
because all of our work on
literacy's with an elementary
school in there are already
overwhelmed so algebra at the
middle school is our focus and
we're off to a really good start
we also including tutoring
services and mathematics it's
that I think is high quality
it's not just a volunteer after
school this is somebody that
would provide the tutoring two
to three times a week and
they're trained in their
professional educator so are we
there yet we're not anywhere
close represented Mr chairman
but we are off to a good start.
Mr chairman and secretary
Schardin has I appreciate your
focus on math and reading I
think those are the jobs wanted
to you can switch the order on
however you wish on those but we
need to we need to get those and
all of the success for students
really depends on having those
faced basic skills as early as
possible Mr chairman and Mr sign
here just
Before COVID over here at we
knew that we were having
declining enrollment in K.
through twelve.
If COVID had not happened in
your opinion Sir Mr chairman
secretary would we still be
having declining enrollment.
Mr Chairman representative my
best guess is the answer is yes
if you look at the enrollment
numbers that we just got from
the forty thing from this school
year to to last school year
there is a small uptick in part
of that is because the economy
New Mexico and suddenly want to
correctly.
Mr Chairman representative we
heard from the state
demographers office that we've
got declining birth rates and a
lot of out migration from the
state so we expect the declining
enrollment to continue okay
thank you for that answer and
then just to I guess a comment
from the Mr chairman them.
I look at the performance
measures I think the budget in
the numbers of the matter but
the performance measures are
really tell me what you're.
Commitment really is for for
kids education and so we have
pages seven and through eleven
of this package deal with
performance measures.
And my observation today is the
same as it was twelve years ago
when I started serving in the
legislature and that is Mr
chairman that.
Our performance is way low we're
talking.
In for fourth grade students
proficiency thirty five percent
at what we we hope to see their
and then it's lower in America
twenty four that's actual for
twenty twenty one twenty two the
consensus target for the fiscal
year twenty three twenty two
twenty four is thirty seven
percent so there's an
expectation of improvement.
At Mr Chairman secretary.
I don't want to see anything
less than fifty percent I think
even that slow I think we're not
doing our job we're spending
nearly half of our state budget
on education and we're still not
making the changes we need and
I'd like to see a performance
measure that says the outcome
we're seeking is to be forty
fifth in the nation in twenty
three twenty four and then keep
going up because that's what
people see and hear about they
don't look at spreadsheets like
this this is meaningless to
people up to those in this room
perhaps and a few others so I
want to see drastic improvement
and I'm losing patience the a
child when I entered this
legislature twelve years ago
that child is the first greater
now ready to graduate.
And we still haven't done it
took to get more students what
they need in the basics so I
think we need to really refocus
and poor energies into these and
then finally Mr chairman I will
add that and I've said this
before interim committees.
Career technical education to me
is the key to improving our
graduation rates there are a
number of students who really
are college bound don't want to
be maybe aren't really suited
for but they would be fantastic
working with not only their
minds with their hands at the
same time so.
I don't think we're putting
enough into career technical
education I think we need to
really boost that
and we've mentioned before
numbers of this is that the
career tech facility in Hobbs
it's it's a model for the state
is also fifty million dollars
and that was a public private
partnership that got it there so
I just believe we have to do
more and more and more in that
space in our students will be
the better for it and our state
will be too so thank you Mr
chair.
Thank you very much
Representative Brown next we're
gonna go to representative of
her name please thank you Mr
chair and Mr chairman and
members of the panel one of the
things I'm looking at is on line
twenty as we look at the
insurance and I'm concerned
about the huge difference
between the executive
recommendation and the LESC
recommendation are we talking
about the same insurance in the
same type of of of budget why is
there such a big difference in
the offering.
Mr chair representative my
understanding is that the
executive recommendation
includes about a nine percent
increase in health care premium
costs and is it three or four
percent for risk of.
Sanitation.
Level at.
they help employee health
insurance contribution increase
the rate to pay for it I see my
apologies Mr chairman if I could
start again Representative the
LFC recommendation of thirty two
million provides the
contribution rate for health
care insurance at the same rate
as state employees so right now
educators are paying for a
larger share of those costs and
this would bring parity with
state employees and then the LFC
recommendation and all that
Sierra Club executive
recommendation Mr chair
representative the executive
recommendation it.
So it shifts a greater portion
of the costs of health premiums
to the employer from the
employee the LFC recommendation
does that as well but just at a
lower level
under the the governor's plan
the employer which covered the
first ten thousand dollars of
premium expenses and then after
that any premium expenses beyond
ten thousand dollars would be
covered at sixty percent by the
employer so.
Basically what what that adds up
to is it if you have single
coverage the ten thousand
dollars is going to cover your
entire health premiums of your
health insurance will.
Be free if you have single
coverage if you have to party
coverage under this proposal the
state would pick up about ninety
percent of the premium with the
employee paying about ten
percent
give or take a couple percentage
points there I don't have the
exact numbers in front of me
and that if you have family
coverage the state would cover
about seventy five percent of
the premium so everyone with all
employees would see a savings
because right now it the
employer for all for most
educational employees the
employer covers about sixty
percent of the premium.
So we are talking about the same
insurance plans yes on the that
point missed no okay.
Thank okay I just wanted to make
because the difference is so
vast I just want to make sure
and
with this one goes to US
secretary stand house I am one
of the things that happens is we
get entered into to comment and
children are are often sick and
there is a a provision within
the rules for school that if you
have some more than fifteen days
you are subject to suspension so
my question to you is where in
this budget are you of taking
care of the students who are
continually sick the parents
don't have to do in the home
schooling but we have a
responsibility to make sure that
they are educated Mr Chairman
representative heard and thank
you for bringing that you
brought out two things one of
them is an area of the
attendance for success act
that's in statute that we would
like to be corrected we're going
to bring a bill forward to you
the second part is money to get
on the front end on the
preventative side of attendance
and those are the two big
proposals we've got in front of
you and and we'd be happy to
work with you to explain more
detail about how we're working
to increase attendance at school
because you've got to show up if
you're going to increase
Representative Brown our
students she met well I was more
concerned about those students
for example who are in
children's Mr chair who are in
for example to this hospital and
they cannot go to school because
they're sick but they still are
we still have a responsibility
to teach them and for them to
learn and so it's not that
they're not going because they
don't for some of the reasons
other than the fact that their
health is within in it and I the
concern that I've been hearing
is that there is.
Who are the teachers that are
teaching the minutes we don't
have enough and how are how's
that now being covered because
that area of health is likely to
have increased.
Mr Chairman representative now I
understand the question and I've
been to visit a couple of
hospitals that have schools
inside of because children maybe
have cancer have to stay in a
hospital and there are teachers
in there with licenses that are
teaching the kids they don't
have enough funding and they
need some more support and I
think that's what I hear you
talking about that is correct it
is that covered in this budget
at all Mr chair
Secretary in Mr chairman
Representative apologize I need
to go through you I'm so sorry
the it does not cover everything
that they need Mr Chairman
representative.
Thank you Mr chair.
Thank you very much
Representative hundred next
we're gonna go to vice chair
Dixon.
Thank you Mr chair
A couple of questions
Does extended learning does the
extended learning a requirement
factor in student success so for
instance if the school district
is performing well do they still
need to participate in extended
learning.
Miss Mister chair madam vice
chair to my knowledge none of
the recommendations provide a
sort of opt out provision of the
I hear that Representative
Garrett mention there might be
an amendment to her bill that
would allow for potential
competency there is a provision
in statute that requires LFC PED
DFA in L. E. S. C. to provide
joint performance targets and
that might be a way to develop
a.
Sort of threshold for which the
school might be able to be
exempt from that if that's
something the legislature
desires.
Thank you thank you Mr chair I
thank you CENIC at second
question of many rural districts
have minimal days or hours on
their calendar which makes the
wage per hour quite a bit higher
than other districts were
working more hours when we move
to extend time will salaries
increase.
Mr chair.
Madam vice chair all of the
recommendations both include
additional factors and
additional funding so schools
would for additional time and
additional days be provide
additional funding to cover the
cost of that implementation.
Thank you and thank you Mr Liu
and chairman to final quick
questions
Do we have.
Are all of our state employees
and public educators are their
health insurance plans.
Different in terms of they're
not under the same umbrella.
Is that correct.
Mr chairman and madam vice chair
right I can answer that question
on public schools the umbrella
of the system in public schools
is two parts one of them is
Albuquerque public schools they
run their own and is the other
one is every other district it's
called dips in New Mexico public
schools insurance and I tied I'm
not an expert on the state
employees.
Mr chair representative state
employees are under a different
umbrella they get their
insurance through the General
Services Department.
Thank you thank you Mr chair
last Madam not a question but
along those same lines and
similar to what I think
Representative Brown highlighted
is that I do think we run the
risk of
Increasing
The state's contribution to the
health insurance
Premiums for educators not to
the state you know if we exceed
the level that we do for state
employees I think we are
potentially going down a very
slippery slope so just wanted to
highlight that thank you.
Thank you very much.
The okay great thank the venture
Dixon thank you all very much
the presenters I have a couple
of quick questions I think so
first
is
with the the salary increases
and and the proposals of which
LFC is slightly higher although.
Secretary sign house is it
accurate that there's a
difference in that the executive
looks to increase
educationalists assistance
specifically set up in
differently from the LFC
approach Mr chairman I I think
the answer is no is no for the
executive the Ellie S. C. was a
proposal for educational
assistance right that they thank
you for that
Have there been issues of
compaction that have that we've
seen with the the aggressive and
I think broadly supported pay
increases up until this point Mr
Chairman yes in two different
areas in school districts salary
schedule for teachers there's
been compaction when I was a
superintendent we were down to
one dollar between each of the
boxes that's a lot of compaction
and then at the the the school
cafeteria workers the bus
drivers and custodians we raise
their minimum rate last year
with what you did and we
implemented it and that cause
compaction at that level as
well.
Thank you for that
finally I guess I I think we've
gone through some of the the
insurance proposals and the
differences thank you Mr Miller
the GST and sort of the state
increases and additional support
that's been added there there
has not been a fix we sort of
isolated and expanded state
support from an insurance
perspective without a whole lot
of necessarily benefit we've
actually seen folks leave
so there's there's clearly a
significant amount of work but I
do want to actually thank at
least there's recognition in
both budgets that particularly
for our our educators additional
Insurance support is is
necessary.
Really I guess my final question
the biggest question that is
sort of come from this hearing
for me is around extended
learning in a question is Mr
move secretary sign house.
If we don't increase time time
learning well I guess for some
test is
more time learning is that just
time in the classroom.
Just because Mr chairman answers
now the extent learning time is
everything you can imagine our
FFA kids out working with their
their pigs going on field trips
with our tribal students going
to cultural activities so we are
encouraging a much broader scope
of the kinds of learning
activities thank you very much
for that answer secretary saying
house and Mr lewd sounds like
from the LESC perspective that's
a shared perspective as far as
extended learning not being sent
limited to more time in the
classroom.
Mr chair.
The.
Constitutional right for
education is at that state care
and I think the recommendation
intensive support improvements
in student outcomes and this
approach is important with the
senator research.
One of those things you can do
overnight teacher quality and
preparation and professional
development takes a very long
time to cultivate this is a more
media press to trying to improve
the quality and quantity of
instruction.
Thank you very much Mr Liu I I
think moving forward and and I
really appreciate so many of the
questions committee members of
asked because these are going to
be opportunities for follow up
as we go through the session
moving forward I think we would
be particularly interested to
learn and see extended learning
in new sorts of ways because we
hear and we hear from so many
folks at least I do back home
that learning takes place in
many areas raising the amount of
time that our kids are learning
is something that is broadly
welcomed.
Limiting that to a classroom is
sometimes a challenge that that
we've heard about can be in a
significant challenge the saying
how we do that Mr blue you
brought up second piece which is
if we don't.
Increase the time that our
students are learning.
So there we go.
The thank thank you to my thank
you for that thank you yep if we
don't act increase our time
learning for our kids.
Will we run the risk of being
found to be in violation again
of our constitutional
responsibility to educate New
Mexico's kids.
Mr chairman thank you for asking
To answer your question
concisely the answer is yes
human behavior is one such that
we don't like change and the
increased ours is a change and
if we don't do something bold as
a state to address the
achievement that I've heard from
many of you today we are at risk
of losing that losses.
Thank you very much Mr secretary
so it and if we stay in
violation and perhaps are found
to have not done this sort of
work that a court would have six
expected.
There are a number of negative
remedies that could be required
of the state in that case is
that fair.
Yes Mr Chairman yes great so are
you know that that's our
challenge and I think this
committee is incredibly well
suited as our Education
Committee and so many others
across the body are to wrestle
with how we how we meet this
constitutional responsibility
that we have been found to not
have met yet while also doing it
in a way that you know really
affirms the differences
throughout New Mexico so that'll
be our challenge and I think
we're up to it will be easy I
don't have any other questions
will look forward to seeing you
again Mr secretary members that
that is going to wrap up today
we're we'll be back on Monday.
if folks want to take these
volumes home please do so just
remember to bring them back.
members the eleven AM tomorrow
they'll be an optional training
around some of the intricacies
of the committee mainly around
different sheets and what's
called the P. S. cal which is
personal services employee
benefits these will be regarding
previous years this will not be
businesses for for the committee
is simply educational for our
new members of an opportunity to
sort of dive in.
At great Representative cert
setting and.
Chairman of C. as of right hand
out on the other workings
lawsuits by maybe to get to this
committee so they really
understand it it would be great
everybody would understand why
we're doing what we're doing.
Thank you very much
Representative Sierra thank you
director for being here we'll
look forward to engaging the
police and and with that hand
out and others.
Okay we won't see folks in
person this committee until
Monday again but thank you all
very much for your time thank
you very much Mr Secretary Mr
Liu Mr Miller and
