Here here here here you got it
for great thank you very much
center of Representative
Chandler please go ahead thank
you very much chairman small and
good to see all of you committee
members I will be brief I am
presenting a license plate bills
that has a picture of a
motorcycle and I have a picture
of it except from my phone it's
yellow with a motorcycle and as
the a symbol on there on the
left hand side and it says look
twice for motorcycles and I have
with me my step son actually who
is a a motorcyclist at my
husband's a motorcycle this my
other step son is a motorcycle
list I used to ride a motorcycle
but it terrifies me so I got
smart and got off the
motorcycle.
But I do think it's good that we
be very conscious of
motorcycles in their presence on
the road my step son has a very
brief statement if that's okay
Mister chair please go ahead and
just if you could introduce
yourself my name is Brett
Chandler and set a more I've
been riding motorcycles for
thirty five years I have a lot
of friends and loved ones who
also write motorcycles Mr chair
and and Representative thank you
for the last eight years a group
of motorcyclists in Los Alamos
have been working to figure out
ways to raise motorcycle
awareness we created a
motorcycle safety committee and
distributed weekly newsletter
regarding safety and awareness
to over five hundred
motorcyclists in three different
states in two thousand eighteen
New Mexico became the only state
in America that is ever obtained
signed proclamations from every
county declaring may as
motorcycle safety motorcycle
awareness month.
This is in conjunction with the
national highway traffic safety
administration all thirty three
counties once again signed those
proclamations in two thousand
twenty one and twenty two along
with our governor we work with
city councilors mayors town
clerks county councils and city
managers everyone was
enthusiastic to help.
We were not surprised with a
number of them told us they were
eager to help because they had
friends or loved ones hurt or
killed.
In motorcycle accidents our
goals been to create something
sustainable for New Mexico as
motorcycle riding community that
not only raise awareness for the
countless writers we call family
but also will financially help
the state's motorcycle training
department the DOT.
The.
Sorry the logo's.
Skip over that Representative.
Representative Chandler already
described the logos motorcycle
with Z. assemble in the back I
really like the line actually
says look twice for motorcycles
great logo the four words spoken
most often by vehicle driver at
the scene of an accident is
simply I didn't see them.
We want to change that
narrative.
We want to make the most
important words.
To be look twice for motorcycles
motorcycle.
In twenty twenty two.
New Mexico saw a ten percent
increase in motorcycle
registrations to over sixty
seven thousand motorcycles more
more New Mexicans are riding
motorcycles is way to commute
back and forth and I believe if
we can reduce accidents we'll
see more.
These plates placed on vehicles
motorcycles will not only be a
good safety initiative.
For your motorcycle riding
constituents but for the entire
state of New Mexico there isn't
another plate like it
immediately immediate safety
initiative seen and read by
commuters look twice for
motorcycles.
Shown quite a few of our friends
are designed the response we've
seen has been overwhelming and
enthusiastic.
As followed by us how long it'll
be till we can get them.
just over the weekend last
weekend we put out a survey two
hundred different constituents
and we got the response that
they wanted over two hundred.
Place for their motorcycles and
two hundred more for their
vehicles we know not everybody's
gonna order for plates but if
only half of them do half of
that.
That's a hundred thirty four
thousand plates.
generating revenue specifically
for initiatives that increase
writer skill.
Raise awareness and save lives
thank you for your consideration
thank thank you very much Mr
chair thank you Churchtown is
there anybody here who would
like to speak briefly in support
or opposition to this bill.
Casey and and we'll go online is
there anybody who wishes to
speak on house bill two eighty
seven.
Seeing no hands we're gonna go
to the committee we're gonna go
first Representative della Cruz.
Thank you Mr chairman once upon
a time I was a wrestling coach
at Rio Grande High School and
during that time I met a lot of
student athletes that later
became adults and became my
friends last November one of
those young young man to me.
losses live just outside of
Alamosa Colorado on a motorcycle
was run off the road and is a
tragedy and unfortunately two
out and I am a motorcyclist as
well.
People just don't see more
cycles and we have to do what we
can Mr chairman to raise that
awareness I'm totally supportive
of this Representative Chandler
and
yeah.
It's it's a did it's
heartbreaking how people through
inattention will take someone's
life thank you Mr thank you
Representative Cruz next we have
Representative Garrett and
Representative brown.
Thank you Mr chair and thank you
Mr chairman of the joint
Representative Chandler just one
question the agencies just move
the effective date to January
first twenty twenty four.
Did that happen or
I'm Representative I believe it
did happen in a moment that
happened in transportation Mr
chair and representative thank
you because it's a practical
thing
that's my only question Mr
chair.
Thank you very much
Representative Garrett next we
have Representative ground then
reverse of the Hon the roofs of
Chatfield thank you so much Mr
chairman and Representative
Chandler in to your expert
witness thank you both.
Mr chair I I mentioned in
transportation committee where
we heard this bill first that I
had a constituent who passed
away from a motorcycle accident
it was a gentleman who work for
CYFD.
And it was just absolute tragic
and again it was because someone
didn't see him and
Mr Mr Chairman representative so
what we did is get the county to
actually design and install a
sign on the road where the
accident happened beautiful
design.
I think I don't think is a
standard motorcycle look it was
somehow or amped up and that was
a good idea and it meant a lot
to the family of the loss of a
loved one and to the community
as well but what I like about
this bill Mr speaker Mr chairman
and representatives that this is
going to be on set of a
stationary sign were only a few
people will see if this will be
all over our roads and highways
in New Mexico it is a really
nice design and I understand
that MPD actually has the
ultimate say on the design but I
can't imagine that anybody would
think of a better design than
what you have so I want to thank
you for this I think this will
save lives and I think this is
going to be a very popular place
so definitely appreciate all
your efforts thank you Mr chair
thank you very much
Representative Brown next
Representative Lujan
Representative Chatfield them
some verses I don't see
Representative Lujan we're gonna
go to Representative Chatfield
and representative Garcia.
Thank you Mr Mr chair we have
some young folks in the audience
that are there brought a brought
a similar bill and and so I want
to just the one and only
question that that matters and
that what is the fiscal impact
to the house bill two by this
bill.
Mr chair there was some fiscal
costs associated with it in
terms of revenue
I don't see in there is some
operating costs that I think
apply frankly all of the
motorcycle plate bills I I was a
little surprised to see it Mr
chair that there's some fiscal
impact in terms of the
department but
it looked like the same FIR that
they'd produce for all of the
license plate Mr chair.
But look that over and and I I
believe that the motorcycle
license plate pays for itself so
it doesn't require a funding in
house bill two and that's what
we're concerned about and I Mr
chair if I may say the
department is very supportive
and spoke in favor of the plate
when I presented in
transportation that they
represent Chandler great point
thank you very much
Representative there's other
people we have Representative
Garcia than we can go to you
Representative Garcia please
thank you Mr chairman of thanks
for the presentation movie under
I got to reason why I'm gonna
support.
Once I got run over in Wyoming
what part of this and I got run
over I don't.
And you know.
One the roll over here I have
the some of the problem is not.
It's everywhere and you know
I've been lucky unfortunate to
get run over New Mexico we have
a.
Hi I support your bill and you
know good people really need to
be aware of was there surrounded
and people just don't
legislation the particular brand
of stuff there and just totally
you know really unfortunate to
will walk away from.
Thank bring it up the commission
thank you very much
Representative Garcia okay I
don't see any other folks on the
list Representative Chatfield
for the motion Mr the past
second second by Representative
Garcia move by Representative
Chatfield is there any
opposition to this motion.
I don't see any opposition thank
you very much Representative
Chandler and thank you for
chairman thank you committee.
Kate members
we're going to we're gonna come
back to a couple of our other
transportation bills.
And we're actually moving quite
fast today so I see we have
Representative Ortez
and her partner with
representative Duncan or the
other way around if you to want
to come up it's the.
Okay
Representative
whenever you're ready.
I thank you Mr chair members of
the committee at I'm here to
we're here to present house bill
three sixty three which is
another license plate bill
honoring Smokey Baer this is a
bipartisan piece of legislation
so it's really you know in the
spirit of this Smokey bear
embodies
it's very similar to the bill
you just heard we have all the.
Required information here the
effective date is July first
twenty twenty four and funds
from the sale of this license
plate will go to EMNRD's you
know fire prevention force fire
work and I'd love for my other
co sponsor to to add to the
reasons why we're doing this.
Thank you Mr chair.
So I signed on to this because
I've got a little history with
Smokey bear and as someone
that's been through the fire
service for the last twenty five
years I like what those two and
secondly I guess the thing
that's this really neat about it
is my wife her grandpa was on he
was one of the crew members if
found Smokey bear and his name
was Linda white and I've been
trying to find out exactly what
year that was and it was either
fifty two fifty three or fifty
four I'm not quite for sure but
I like I like what the
the money goes towards the goes
towards thinning projects go
through a burning project
prescribed fire so with that
stand for any questions thank
you very much.
Thank you Representative Vincent
thank you Representative Ortez
everybody wishes to speak on
this CNN will look online does
anybody there will go to the
committee.
will Representative Montoya then
ranking member Armstrong.
Thank you Mr chair and
representative I once again
similar question that
Representative Chatfield us the
last to the last license plate
bill what is the fiscal impact
of this or does it pay for
itself.
Mr chair representative Montoya
it seems to pay for itself as
well very little fiscal impact.
So thank you Mr chairman have to
weigh this out because the two
bills are the same this one just
way worse.
And go to ranking member on from
for the motion.
That was a quick we got remember
Armstrong with the motion
Representative Trujillo with the
second is there any opposition
to that motion singing then.
Thank you
great to see you Representative.
Okay
and I just play theme
Yet let's let's go
Representative Pettigrew.
if you wouldn't mind presenting
House Bill three sixty.
This is what you call the image
of the.
Representative Pettigrew please
go ahead and feel free to
introduce experts winds up this
one I need to remember please
introduce yourself hi and Jordan
Hamel hello my name is more on
the good.
Chairman and committee I believe
you have an amendment in front
of you.
That that just a few items that
were consistent with what we
talked about and house
transportation.
one of them changes their visual
fee from ten dollars to twelve
dollars.
And reduces the US online nine
and then on line fourteen of
page two reduces the initial fee
from twenty three to twenty five
to twenty three okay that
consists of the amendment you
have to that it it is in the
amendment we have is point two
two five seven five five point
one.
can we have the amendment move
forward.
Point to.
Great for okay is there a
second.
Second by Representative press
has been moved by Representative
Trujillo saying my
Representative Brown is their
opposition to adopting the
amendment.
Okay seeing the.
Percent Pettigrew and please
Samus good please feel free to
add anything about this license
plate it's purpose Mr chairman
this is been something that's
been in the works for a few
years and time just continues to
run out.
That I'd love for.
My two witnesses to be able to
talk about the reason why this
is important to them please
absolutely go ahead please.
Thank you chairman small and
committee members I'm here to
speak in support of house bill
three sixty New Mexico FFA is
teaching the future leaders of
our state generation of leaders
who will change the world FFA's
mission statement states FFA
makes a positive difference in
the lives of students by
developing their potential for
premier leadership personal
growth and career success
through agricultural education
here in New Mexico are are
culturally based classes and the
New Mexico FFA organization are
reaching students in every
pocket of the state both rural
and urban the life skills we're
teaching teach beyond the
classroom and to the college and
career fields are agriculture
instructors are teaching life
skills so vital to our state
currently the New Mexico FAA
Association jade more than five
thousand three hundred and fifty
members but we aren't stopping
there I will sure education has
the potential to reach more than
twelve thousand youth across the
great state support from this
tie will our organization to
provide resources to our
agriculture education teachers
to meet the needs of so many
students.
Chairman members of the
committee I respect we asked
support for house bill three
sixty to meet the needs of our
agriculture education students
and FFA members.
Thank you very much.
Percent of thank you chairman
for mon Committee members I'm
here to speak in support of
house bill three sixty everyday
everyday everyday FFA members
zip up Sliq jacket and we follow
these twelve simple words
learning to do doing to learn
earning to live and living to
serve these twelve simple course
Representative armada they
members we're learning new
things about agriculture every
day that we're advocating that
thousands of people every year
we have to do these things to
learn the agriculture is not
just farming pantry this
organization has allowed me to
find my passion I'm able to use
to advocate on why we earn to
live lastly living to serve
through the organization I have
learned the importance of
service and giving back to the
community and state I live in.
Scott faced it officers we
travel across New Mexico
facilitating workshops all while
showing members that have faced
so much more than saddles cal's
Implats stand in support of bill
three sixty to give our members
representation across the state
the implement the FFA's most
recognizable system symbol of
our organization I thank you all
right bye Connick yellow license
plate we're showing our love for
both New Mexico and our beloved
organizations chairman small
thank you for allowing me to
stand up and speak about this
wonderful organization thank you
very thank you both very much
thank in terminal I'm just going
to close with if you've never
been to one of the competitions
where they have debate you
should
we this is living proof only one
of a our leaders so what they
do.
Absolutely well said thank you
is there anybody who wishes to
speak on the bill here today.
See none is there anybody
online.
Saying that and we do want to
give a special thank you to
former representative Candie
Sweetser whose voice in
leadership around agricultural
issues including and especially
with FFA has been really is
incredibly strong voice on house
okay we're gonna go to
Representative Chatfield
questions.
Thank you Mr Mr chairman I.
First question is to
Representative.
Degrees expert witnesses.
What is the fiscal at impact of
this bill.
Chairman small and
Representative Chatfield others
no fiscal impact on this House
Bill thank you thank you Mr
chairman my second question is
to Representative Pettigrew
Representative Pettigrew were
you an FFA yes Sir.
Thank you Mr chairman that's of
my question.
Thank you very much
Representative Chatfield
Representative Garrett please
thank you Mr chair I have a
question I've been meaning to
ask for about three years future
farmers of America now goes by
MFA a because my background was
in transportation always think
of federal aeronautics
administration can you explain
how are you gonna make sure
people know that F. A. A. is
what it is.
F. A. A. F..
Okay well you can see confusion
right here I just demonstrated
it.
But but.
B. hello how will they know that
is the agriculture.
What's on the license plate Mr
chair.
Sure you can.
Thank.
This is what's on the back of.
And then it'll be it'll just be
bright yellow to show that
that's one of our colors because
our two colors are Cornwell
national blue so we really want
to show off the license plate.
Okay great thank you for showing
that.
I can't.
Right okay thank you very much
Representative Garrett thank you
very much for bringing this
we're gonna go to representative
Garcia for the motion.
Thank you Mr chairman of due
process second okay it's been
moves been second by ranking
member Armstrong is there any
opposition to that motion.
The thing none thank you thank
you both very much and it's
great to thank you very much
thank you.
Okay from members.
what we've got a few notes here.
We're gonna we're gonna go back
to house bill two fifty six and
in consultation with the sponsor
we're going to the table house
bill two fifty six I can ask
vice chair Dixon promotion
please.
Thank you Mr chair I move to a
table house bill two fifty six.
A second okay since of by
Representative Dixon second by
Representative Armstrong Sir any
opposition to that motion seeing
them.
Table that
We're going to keep going down.
That will be expecting
chairwoman the Hochman Vigil
here shortly.
Trying to see who's here so
members just a quick couple of
quick notes we're going to be
rolling at the request of
Representative Townsend again
house bill three eighty two.
So that will not be heard today.
Representative Kate's.
Are you
Kind of ahead of schedule here
we have a few folks who are out
I know chair Thompson's are you
you're waiting chair
representative Thompson is that
correct.
Okay
Let's then go to house bill one
fifty yeah well as I don't see
we'll see if we can get
Representative Figueroa.
To.
A
great security okay members
let's go to thanks by thirty six
and.
Let's go we're gonna go to house
bill
yeah let's go to let's go to
house bill one eighty nine
reserve brown I know you have to
leave that for the.
We're gonna do house bill one
eighty nine and house bill three
eighty eight.
Representative Brown please go
ahead great to see thank you
members of the committee are you
have house bill one eighty nine
as amended and I have David
Archuleta here from the
education retirement for Hughes
executive director to answer any
technical questions Mr chairman
members what this bill does is
take care of an oversight it
does two things really it takes
care of an oversight regarding
southeast New Mexico college
that was formerly average
college of New Mexico State
University and in twenty twenty
one we passed legislation to
allow that institution to become
an independent community college
however Mr chair we did not
modify the retirement part of
the statute so we stranded some
employees who would like to be
part of the alternative
retirement plan but because the
statute does not mention
southeast New Mexico college by
name
they can't participate until we
make that change in the statute
so that's really what we're
doing here and then Mr chairman
members the second thing we're
doing is.
Conforming the state.
basically lower rule regarding
when a retiree must take us and
distributions from the fund and
the federal government has twice
recently modified the agent
which one takes that anymore
distribution and so house bill
one eighty nine would match up
state law with the federal law
so if the federal law.
Federal folks change the age
again we don't have to go back
into the mid our state statute
so
Mr chair what would you want to
add anything.
Mr chairman of the committee I
believe that was explain explain
very well and I don't have much
to happen great thank you
Representative from thank you Mr
to the is there anybody here who
wishes to speak on house bill
one eighty nine.
Yes ma'am please and we'll.
Thank you to our.
incredible staff for making sure
that's okay I.
Yeah let's let's go ahead and
would just gravitate.
And please please feel free to
enter please introduce thank you
Mr chair members of the
community of the committee my
name is sue Griffith I am a
registered lobbyist for the New
Mexico association of education
retirees and two years ago we
have this bill come forward and
so we are making changes to it
today so we do.
Appreciate your support and hope
that you will pass this forward
thank you thank you very much.
Okay I don't see anybody else
let's go will look online.
I don't see any hands raise so
we're going to go to committee.
For questions on house bill one
eighty ninety.
Okay
are there any questions from
committee.
I just briefly
Representative Brown
Mr chair with the so this is
this is a fiscally very
negligible bill it's sort of
conforming with
if you the the both retirement
and federal pieces that you
outlined correct that is correct
Mr chairman and there's really
pretty much no fiscal impact but
we do need the language
understood thank thank you for
clarifying that we wanted to ask
we're going to go are there any
other questions we're gonna go
to Representative Garrett for
the motion.
Mr chairman of the do pass of
this bill one eighty nine as
amended okay there's a motion
the secretary okay it's been
moved by Representative Garrett
seconded by Representative
Pettigrew.
Is there any opposition to that
motion.
Okay I don't see any so thank
you very much Representative
Brown structure with thank you
okay we're.
We're gonna continue on.
We
Let's go briefly the house bill.
Three eighty eight
Representative setting up a.
Thank you Mr chairman the
committee
with director of Russia.
The general counsel for doing
The three eighty eight okay and
that is a cyber Fund
cybersecurity fund I'm three and
has to agree to it creates the
cyber security fund to be
administered by do it for cyber
attack in response recovery
services.
Hi of information systems or
database owner operated by any
branch of the state government
political subsidies sub
divisions public schools and
tribal entities first summit
ministered by the cyber security
office if and when Senate bill
two eighty is adopted.
And why we need it when.
Okay so.
Chair and members of the
committee there is a need for
this bill to exist because out
we do not have the emergency
funding for any.
entity out its political
subdivisions to be supported at
the time of need so they need to
go through pretty lengthy and
drawn out supplemental process
and time is crucial when we need
to respond to a cyber incidents
so that is the reason we want to
create this emergency fund and
make it available for anybody
who may have like immediate need
to get through this.
Thank you very much director
thank you anything to add.
Mr chairman and members of the
committee the implementation of
this fund will be rule driven
will set up the processes for
qualification and expenditure
and monitoring and oversight of
these funds through rule
process.
Okay thank you very thank you
Representative said in the on a
okay we're going to go is there
anybody here in the audience who
wishes to speak on House Bill
three eighty eight yes please.
Come on.
Thank you chair thank you
committee members my name is
Peter then toss I am the
secretary designate for the
department of information
technology an important point
that was not mention to you is
that these of course we're going
to strengthen as much as we can
Agence cyberattacks but they do
happen either because of a
single person or I just a timing
issue that we have an address
that particular threat yet when
these attacks happen the cost of
millions of dollars per incident
and we just had an incident not
too long ago with one of our
agencies we also lent support to
counties that have had it
schools that have had these
problems and I just want to
point out that the the cost on
an average of four million
dollars to recover when this
happens and not a dime with this
money will go to ransomware
thank you.
Thank you very much.
Good afternoon Mister chairman
members of the committee my name
is Roy soulful and I'm speaking
as a former cabinet secretary
for department of information
technology and formers attached
state chief information officer
I'm support of this bill because
of experience what is happens
when an agency or several
agencies get packed it's not an
easy recovery
we had to it's an example we had
with during my tenure we had one
of our major agencies of deals
with a lot of individuals has a
lot of personal identifier
information get hacked.
That hacker got into several
other departments we spent
months months try to correct the
problem we didn't have money
there was to scrape up any kind
of money that they could get
that's why I'm here to support
this bill sure wish that you put
some appropriations but creating
the fund is a good first step
thank you Mr chairman members of
the committee thank you very
much.
Okay
I don't see anybody else wishing
to speak is the right in which
is speaking opposition.
Saying none will look online.
And I don't see we do have a
hand in Fernandez okay
Logan fed a line that is for a
minute whenever you're ready
please.
Thank you chairman at I'm
looking into this and the
receipt and information center
an officer of the administrative
office of the courts.
it is is involved for this bill
having a lot of that government
agencies use as urgent result in
any game those accidents state
government with our position and
also held and overall damage and
recovery faster cyberattacks as
agencies were able to accurately
and we're constantly
trying to balance IT budget
from the city that is
these are the ones I it is very
police were also will be a as a
from thank you.
Thank you Mr Fernandes okay
we're gonna now go to questions.
first Representative Chatfield
and ranking member Armstrong.
So chairman my first question is
to help me understand
I I have read looking at the FIR
it is names various
appropriations to do it and
other agencies but they it
relates to them but it is not
them so my question to you is.
Is there money in house bill two
for this fund.
And Representative Mr.
Million of funding for cyber
security appropriations mostly
to do it I don't believe it was
to the to this fund however it
was to do it and not to the
fund.
So it's available for do it to
address these issues but again
not to to this time so
thank you chairman members of
the committee just elaborate on
what a director Avid indicated
so all right now that R. sum up
portions of money dedicated to a
higher educational institutions
and again through twelfth and
then to support the agency that
got impacted so it is it is post
activity right you know
something happened and we had
hoping that it is not a few
Emergency Management one percent
so if another incident that to
happen tomorrow we would not be
in a position for that that's
the difference the.
So Mr Chairman my understanding
is that there is no funding in
house bill two for the twelve.
Mr chairman and specifically for
this no but in other parts
agencies yes if you remember
back Mr chairman our very first
ATSC meeting this was a huge
issue cybersecurity it's very
important we have what we need
specially for small agencies who
don't have money readily to fix
but they need to be fixed right
away so.
Thank you Mr chairman I
certainly agree with you.
Certainly of grew up to point Mr
chairman I believe that other
funding will not go away in the
absence of this bill.
But I mean I'm just strictly a.
Is there funding for this bill
house bill two or not apparently
not.
They were present at field we're
gonna go to ranking member
Armstrong and representative for
heels and I have a couple
questions thank you Mr chairman
and and thank you for this
presentation
I.
And concern that we're creating
a fund with no funds.
And so I don't understand Mr
chairman Representative why we
would do that.
And and I also am afraid I'm
concerned that there's nineteen
million dollars in other funds.
That they say that are said they
could use for some of this page
can't have both because the
language in this bill says it
will not revert.
And so I I don't understand why
we're creating this if we don't
have the money and.
Chair the committee
Representative as I indicated
that the in our opening remarks
this is gonna be a fun that's
the the management of which is
driven by rules there's a nine
to twelve month delay between
the time a lot of passes that
requires rulemaking in the
actual promulgation of those
rules if we set up this fund now
we can begin that rulemaking
process in anticipation of the
funding for this fund becoming
available in the short session
next year if we wait until the
short session next year to
actually fund the fund and
create the fund then we have to
start the rulemaking in July of
twenty twenty four and we might
not be able to disburse those
funds in response and emergency
for another year after that so
this will give us a head start
on setting up the infrastructure
to disperse the funds even if
there's no funding this session
thank you Mr chairman and thank
you for that
could you not just to the
rulemaking without this
legislation passing Mr chair
members of the committee without
having a law to implement
agencies are not allowed to
create rules in the abstract
hypothetical situations thank
you Mr chairman and does the
governor's emergency funds not
could it not go towards this.
I am you madam chair Mr chairman
and there's I'm not familiar
with the constraints that are on
that fund but we do know that
with the RLD incident that the
funding was not available and so
there is a specific log going HB
two will have an appropriation
to hold a back fill the RLD and
and and and pay for that
emergency so I'm gonna assume
from the fact that we did not
have money for the RLD emergency
that the emergency fund is not
going to apply to these types of
lawsuits.
It will hi but will it be in the
that would be the problem
because it's not if say that
again I'm sorry K. will applied
emergency fund will apply but
even that's limited so it's more
you know as these bad actors
come out and we're pretty open.
It's not if it's when at least
it would agencies do they hit
the O. H. what happens how much
money can we afford not to have
available and we would actually
need to get up quickly.
Thank you Mr I've anything to
add to the order finance
merchants to money with.
The need for of the was three
million dollar.
These things can be more than
you think of the board of
finance emergency authority went
for two and a half million.
Kind of in recognition this the
flooding in the fires of
whether.
Thank you thank you about
director Avid thank you that's
all thank you very much for
remember Armstrong we're getting
good reception here.
Yes thank you Mr chairman and
thank you Representative for
bringing this bill.
Representative Sarinana has been
explaining to me over the course
of the last four weeks what this
bill is about because we room
together so in trying to
understand.
Where what direction it's going
in I understood.
I thank you Sir explained it
best to just need the the
language to start creating the
the.
Rulemaking so they can move it
forward there is no I think you
already exist to write it
there's no further cost in terms
of.
Getting it employees or anything
else we just simply need the to
warehouse it in some place until
the money is appropriated is
that correct.
Then Mr chairman based on that
and based on what the doctor
Abby.
what.
Mr Abbey has stated.
I think at this point in time it
would be a safe.
We would be in a safe position
to move this forward because.
They don't need the money right
this minute.
And the direction that in the
languages to create the
division.
So I support this bill Mr
chairman thank you
Representative you know we're
gonna go to Representative
Garrett thank you Mr chair so my
understanding is that
Representative that Senate bill
two eighty which creates the
cyber security office actually
has to be passed because that is
the body that will create the
rule making for the cyber
security fund so how is S. B. is
that correct we need SB two
eighty and how is that going yes
we do need to do to eighty but
haven't missed Mr chair members
of the committee we do not need
to eighty this is a the.
HB three eighty eight has
contingent language it will
allow the department to
administer the fund in less to
eighty passes in which case the
responsibility for administering
the fund will then shift to the
office of cybersecurity so of
two eighty doesn't pass it will
rest with the department of to a
passes it shifts to the the
offices cybersecurity thank you
for that clarification and and
Mr chair obviously we absolutely
have to have this thank you.
Mr chairman it doesn't have to
come just from the budget
there's gifts in other areas to
get money from that.
Committee.
Great thank you very much for
percent Sauvignon thank you
Representative Garrett any other
questions okay I have a I have a
few questions Representative
Santana and and experts
the you won't hire an employee
to administer the fund until
there is money in the fund is
that correct.
Mr chair members the committee
that's correct okay yes I think
that maybe is takes care of one
of our key questions we see it
at two hundred and seventy six
six thousand dollar
potential impact that's based
upon hiring an employee to
minister the fund but if you're
not going to be hiring an
employee to administer the fund.
This year then I think maybe
that takes care of one of the
one of the issues and then to
also represent Sierra and
experts the
Can you expect at that setting
up the fund now is sort of a
year of hat ahead of when it can
be capitalized can you give us
sort of just a brief sense of
what some of the rules might be
or some of the things you'll be
considering as you as you all
look at this certainly.
Mr chair members of the
committee that the rules will
initially have to establish the
criteria for when a loss will
qualify for the fund as you
heard secretary then PTA's say
we don't want this fund to be
used to pay a ransom where so
the rules will establish this
this this line of what type of
events can qualify what type of
events cannot we don't want to
provide a road map to cyber
hackers and say you know it you
know here's an open door we have
a fund to find a way to hit us
and we're gonna give the money
we're gonna say no there's some
barriers for we're not gonna pay
ransomware and then there's
going to be limitations on the
amount that can be reimbursed
there will probably be some
guard rails around what kind of
protections you know was this a
preventable loss it and if not.
Your application may not qualify
You don't want to deplete all of
the funds on a single claim so
there's gonna be limitations of
that there will be a process for
applying and there's a will be a
process for review we have to
work with the stakeholders but
it's probably going to be a
committee type process for
reviewing the applications and
making the funding
determinations and then there
will be rules for oversight so
we can make sure that the money
is actually spent according to
what the applicants said it was
going to be spent for understand
okay thank you for that thank
you experts immersive setting on
a
I think that that that is very
helpful for me and as we look at
sort of going into the summer if
this should pass and make it
sort all the way through the
process we will sort of have
eyes in to the
into this the into essentially
with the rules that you're
writing and be able to consider
that whether or not and to what
level sort of the framework
provides for funding and also I
guess Representative Sierra and
experts could this be
potentially also
sort of at least one component
of IT and enterprise component
that is entities will pay into
it through sort more of an
enterprise system or no.
Chair and members of the
committee I
For us to get that we have to
put in so many other building
blocks in place to get to the
enterprise level because this is
a open do not only the state but
all its political subdivisions
solid statutory authority is
somewhat limited as we get to
the counties and municipalities
and what not thank that is why
this makes it thank thank thank
you very much.
I see that there's a question
from Representative Pettigrew
What will hold on that I guess
for just a quick second okay so
I guess my core questions.
We won't be hiring an employee
until there's money in the fund
this does not committed to
hiring that employees it's here
If anything else to add before
we go to Representative
Pettigrew for question I just
want to comment on that check
about the question about having
that two hundred and seventy six
thousand dollars that you are
referring to is that taking into
consideration to FTEs and up in
Senate bill two eight zero
they're setting up a a committee
of cyber security advisory
committee and they will have a
role to play in terms of setting
up on the the cyber security
rules and regulations and
whatnot so we need to in that
bill it talks about you know the
committee members getting for
teams and things of that nature
so right now we are going
through.
The process so if you utilizing
Department of information
technology and their program
support folks and that is the
same programs support tools
being used for broadband as well
so we are.
you know I think it's a good and
wait in line is the process that
we have going through at this
point in time so this to FTEs
one will be the financial
coordination coordinator
coordinating all the financial
aspects of the existing cyber
security funds and the other one
will be helping coordinating in
doing community engagement and
things of that nature so that we
can make the communities we have
our yes specially the school
districts will pop public and
charter schools and to be able
to municipalities so this is
their your holistic effort to
make this happen thank you very
much Representative group please
for questions or questions.
Thank you chairman.
Witnesses testimony.
I have a line of questioning the
unfortunately the last quote les
response brought something up.
Mr Chairman representative.
I just heard existing
cybersecurity fund.
Can we talk about that and why
that would be different than
what we were question.
I chatted Committee if I may so
the existing cybersecurity funds
are far presented to our
defensive effort this this this
bill.
is designed to be an emergency
fund for forced.
Incident response those are two
distinct things how do we
prevent an accident is what the
the cybersecurity funds are for
we do preventative analysis we
do a lot of the management
try to understand that the holes
are which doors are unlocked and
do the all the fifty eight
assessment this one okay right
now accident happened how do you
respond to that accident how do
you recover from that accident
that is what this one will be so
that is the difference between
those two.
Chairman and Representative.
This is so what you're saying is
we have an existing frontier.
I also cyber security but it so
tightly defined we can't
expanded we could just expand
the use of of that fund for for
responsiveness once the attack
has happened.
To make the chat and members of
the committee and Representative
the the of the funds use cases
are very limited and very
restricted to what it is
supposed to used for because it
is appropriate but appropriated
for that specific part.
Chairman representative and what
why can't we just expand the
definition.
So for example that is the chair
and members of the committee
there's in the spreadsheet but
we with that that is the funding
associated for although the four
three point five million dollars
that is.
Yeah good good example of that
if we have that money available
it would be specifically used
for that purpose which is the
incident.
Chairman are.
Mr chair and and Representative
and the witness I appreciate the
answer us I was trying to drill
down to I wanted to get.
Yeah this is probably one of the
few funds that I agree with that
we're creating we've we've had
our conversations through
committees and everything I I
understand.
Minutely the problem so you deal
with and I appreciate that.
Chairman my last question is if
we were to create this fund.
And if we were not to create
this fund who would control that
and who would be able to be the.
who would be the decision maker
with respect to reversing those
funds.
Chairman and and other I.
I believe in what you're efforts
are.
I'm just curious are we put in a
bureaucrat in the middle of this
this gonna make these decisions
are are are you as cybersecurity
chairman and witness gonna be
able to make that decision.
Mr chairman of the committee
Representative.
Then that goes back to the the
rulemaking we have to design a
process that has the checks and
balances in the appropriate
authorities and and the chain of
command in decision making set
up if Senate bill two eighty
passes and the cybersecurity
advisory committee is stood up
it is much more likely that the
final decision making authority
over the disbursement of the
funds will be invested in the
cyber security advisory
committee is that committee's
gonna be comprised of membership
from all of the different
stakeholders will be impacted by
the depletion of that fund and
expenditures of the funds will
governments educational
institutions and tribal
governments if the SB two eighty
doesn't pass then we would
envision that under the rules
state a committee of similar
composition will be stood up to
make the final decisions about
how those funds are expended for
the all the same reasons we want
that decision to be made by all
of the stakeholders in the
process this isn't just the fund
for state agencies this is a fun
for all aspects of government.
Chairman and and representative
of the witnesses I appreciate
that answer my biggest concern
is were thrown cybersecurity
money so many different places
and the one person that we've
asked to be in charge of
cybersecurity doesn't seem.
The seated every table leading
the table and asked me thank
you.
Very much for bringing the
legislation.
Thank you very much
Representative Pettigrew we're
gonna go to Representative
Chatfield for a second time then
representative Garcia.
Thank you Mr chairman for
putting up with me two times in
a row
You know at this so that I could
be a good idea but I'm just you
know I guess I'm kind of a live
your bank I'm saying well here's
the funding has no money to go
on the phone so when we're
talking about next year when we
put money in the fund so are we
guarantee that we're going to
fund this fund fund this fund
next year
are are we just we're saying
okay we're going to create a
funding next year we're going to
fund it for more is it is that
the something is that what's
happening Mr.
Mr chairman I hope so I I am off
for the last month where can we
find many for cyber that's ever
funding and I could never get an
answer so let's hope so.
Thank you Mr thank you very much
Representative Chatfield
representative Garcia please
thank you for.
Thanks for the presentation the
only harbor that I have.
There is no fun there's no money
in whole foods to.
You don't have a lot of that
because.
Representative.
Those funding Mr chair will be
good it's a good idea of what
you're trying to do this will
come back to this point there.
Thank you very much
representative Garcia
Representative Sanchez please.
Often late I just had a quick
question on is there a funding
in the budget for this.
At the they they you
representative that I think
junior money so there's no
there's no specific funding in
H. B. two
Is the question around junior
funding Representative setting
on a do you know of any thank
you Mr chairman okay you're
wanting it when we can hit it
would have to pay either way so
this would just make it a lot
faster access to money from the
small agencies but.
The representative setting on a
and Representative Sweetser in
answer to your question
the the this sets up sort of a
fun.
And gives the department
essentially a year to write
rules about how we would be
utilized specifically for after
a cyber attack is taking place
to try to basically.
Get the rules of the road and
then it would be up to future
young over this interim to
consider whether or not and how
much to put in so Mister chair I
guess I think it's a good cause
but there's no money there why
don't we create the fund only
put money in there
they can start doing everything
you mentioned without us passing
this I think
I'm sorry to hear all the
testimony about just from seeing
this coming in I guess for
consistent so we've been doing
everything else that that thank
you for that I think we'll go to
representative on the other side
Indian and her experts to offer
any additional thoughts and in
particularly around why the
setting up the rules ahead of
money does it from your
perspective why that may be
important.
Mr chair members of the
committee representative we've
we've gotten some questions
earlier about that and the rule
making process is going to drive
the the determinations as to who
gets funded and how much and
when it there's a nine to twelve
month lead time between when the
laws enacted in when the rules
that implement that law can be a
can to come into effect there's
a lot of work that has to happen
in the state rules act has some
processes and time constraints
and at the need to be complied
with.
so if we don't if we don't start
the we cannot serve the
rulemaking until we have
enabling legislation agencies
can't just create rules in a
vacuum they have to have a a a
mission statement in the
legislation created by the state
legislature so that the fund is
created and we have the
direction to start doing the
rules we set up the after the to
the qualification application
and funding criteria and then
next year in the short session
this body will see the rules and
if it agrees with the process
that's been set up in place
money in the fund and that money
will become available
in the twenty twenty four if we
wait until twenty twenty four to
create the fund and then start
the rule making it will be
twenty twenty five before we can
respond to a cyber attack with
the money if that's appropriate.
I guess Mr chair
It sounds like we're creating
unfunded mandate and the they're
gonna be doing work that they're
not getting paid for I
understand you want to get a
head start but
I guess if you're creating
drafts why can't you do that
without this legislation and
I totally support cyber security
it's just a in terms of
consistency Mr chair that's my
concern thank you thank you very
much Representative Sweetser I
know that we have Representative
a cruise on the list.
Thank you Mr chairman so I'm a
little bit confused what what's
prohibiting rules from being
created.
Mr chair members of any so all
all rules have to be
Legislation promulgated pursuant
to an antenatal in statute that
tells the agency we're
delegating this authority to use
to create the rules and we're
gonna confine your discretion in
the rulemaking.
I I by certain limits and until
there is that Bill Gates tion of
the authority from the
legislature to HSD agencies do
not have authority to promulgate
rules so that so that to answer
the representative question
could we start a theoretical
process of drafting yes can we
actually sit down under the
state rules act and begin a
formal rule making process now
because one of the first parts
of every rule is what is your
statutory authority for
promulgating this rule and if
your rule does not have that
statutory authority and the
attorney general's office is
going to say you're in violation
of the state rules act and you
cannot proceed so we need
legislation if we're going to
have a rulemaking process that
actually results in a in a
binding rule.
Chairman I'm hearing what you're
saying.
But I'm not agreeing because I
don't see what prohibits the
creation of rules are granted
there in the.
I guess it's kind like the
office there's nothing there's
no statute stopping you know
enacting perhaps putting it into
effect perhaps but I don't I
don't see why that couldn't
happen I I just don't I don't I
just can't see that
Also Mr chairman I think the
other concern I have and maybe
it doesn't matter but it seems
to me that you could do this for
almost any bill that you can say
well we don't have any funding
but let's go ahead and pass the
bill and we'll wait for funding.
I I I like others here I support
cybersecurity I just don't see
how this process is correlating
to to are normally should happen
thank you Mr chair thank you
Representative della Cruz next
we have Representative Montoya
them by her Dixon.
Thank you Mr chairman
Act I agree with Senator
comments Representative that
I've been hearing we are what
we're doing is we're.
We're committing ourselves
without committing money.
Mr chair what and in part it is
creating an unfunded mandate
which if the department wanted
to do it on its own.
Can do it without us mandating.
Work hours.
There B. F. T. E. ours going
towards this process.
And it just depends on on the
bill we sit down we we hear how
we don't want to create unfunded
mandates.
If the department sites do
something on its own.
They can do that and then the
work is sitting there that work
could even be presented during
the interim.
Justifying and then an entire
bill could come forward as one
package but it's my
understanding Mr chairman that
there are over three thousand
funds that we have throughout
state law that and many of our
sitting there.
Empty and.
if we were to.
If the process had been.
To for us to put in the budget.
Money for this process.
And then we were to approve that
that kind of legitimizes process
instead of what we're doing is
we're kind of having the tail
wag the dog.
When we create a fund we don't
fund the work that takes for
even a rulemaking.
It becomes then an unfunded
mandate.
It just it just kind of
undermines the way that we're
supposed to be appropriating
so I would rather have seen.
Us appropriate some money for
the process of rulemaking and
then looking forward to to what
we were gonna be passing up for.
That the department just take
this on.
And obviously there's no mandate
but there's also nothing that
stops you from doing it Mr
chair.
And then it would be presented
in a woods then it would be an
entire package presented to the
appropriation and to LFC.
To justify.
US.
Putting a new fund in place so
it it just does it just is very
disjointed I think is what
everybody's trying to say it
doesn't fit the way we're
supposed appropriate so Mister
chair I I I kind of agree with
folks and I private voting
accordingly thank you Mr
chairman a Representative
Montoya by tiered expense.
Thank you Mr chair of this is
been a fascinating debate our
discussion because I feel like
we're all learning about
promulgation of rules
Question am I understanding
correctly that you cannot make
rules for an entity that does
not yet exist.
Mr chair members of the
committee representative I'm
understanding the question it
let's say that entity was going
to be a and new agency
that is correct you could not.
Establish rules that would bein
that agency before that agencies
created because it's that agency
that has to promulgate the rules
that
govern its operations and allow
to implement the laws it is
charged with implementing.
Thank you Mr chair and
thank you secretary designate
General comes sorry.
So while I.
Agree with some of the points
that have been raised but I do
think is interesting is that
this is clearly an attempt to
pre planned.
and so I am concerned a little
bit that we are
Not in.
We're sort of because the funds
aren't the money is not in the
budget
We are not supporting your
effort to pre plan.
Mr chair and representative do
you know are there federal
grant dollars that might be
available to.
this fund if it were
established.
Chair and members of the
committee
last year.
That there is currently a grant
that we are participating in
that the Feds this is part of
the I. A. J. effort and
The interesting component of
that of funding is it's about
thirteen million dollars up
nearly about thirty million
dollars that we will be
receiving and out they use of
that for the state purposes is
very limited it that targeted
audience for that fund is
schools higher educational
institutions and the local
governments.
So what the feds are doing is
holding us responsible in
setting up the structure and do
the program management for at
them to get the money out to the
affected parties so if I may add
without getting into the details
in the last two weeks of less.
Part of the university.
At Pueblo.
Yes school district.
And some other entities have
been hit.
So I mean they can debate it
sorry I apologize for the
frustration if one is going to
cost you four to five million.
The movie right.
The taxpayers are going back.
Thank you Mr chair thank you
is so the way that I'm.
Understand.
Discussion is that we can
establish a fund.
The agency can then work on the
rules there's no fiscal impact
in terms of staffing because
that staff is not hired until
there's money in the fund.
That correct as.
So there's really no.
Fiscal impact to us passing this
bill at this point in time.
Is that correct.
Madam chair members committee
that.
Thank you Mr chairman
expert so we would be planning
for something that the
legislature could then next year
decide to other appropriate to
or not so the decision of the
appropriation is still with the
legislative body is that correct
Mr chair members many
Representative that is correct
and to circle back to the the
federal funding question the
end of the IDA program requires
the eighty twenty split you know
eighty two locals and municipal
governments twenty percent to
the state and obviously the the
federal government wants to.
Appropriate those funds to the
to the greatest extent for
preventative measures but that
there is a component in the I I
J. no follow the requires the
states to have some contingency
planning and disaster recovery
and to say that we would be
precluded from putting some of
that federal grant funds in a
reserve like this for purposes
of disaster recovery and
contingency planning is
premature we're we're not there
yet the committee is still
meeting to make the plan and and
propose what how it wants to
spend the money but I don't
think that door is shut.
Thank you Mr chair and thank you
thank you very much by projects
and we're gonna go to we're
gonna go to Representative
Montoya for second time and
representative Trujillo for a
second time and then we'll take
action percent Montoya please
thank you Mr chair and and
Representative I it what we're
debating here is the difference
between promulgating rules which
would be we have told you to do
it versus coming up with
proposed rules.
That.
At the time we would receive.
A proposal.
From the department I think
that's the difference I think
the work can be done it's just I
I don't like.
Monkeying with how we're
supposed to be doing things just
because we support something and
I think I'm hearing from
everybody we support we we do
not want to get behind this
curve I just don't understand
why the department can't spend
the time working on proposed
rules.
And then immediately if we have
If we pass a and appropriation
next year.
That the the rules the rules
process has.
Has been gone through and as a
matter of fact I would actually
feel comfortable that some of
those rules could be presented
to us that this is kind of how
you're wanting to do it I that's
the difference we're talking
about promulgating rules verses
coming up with proposed rules I
don't think it slows anything
down thank you Mr chair.
Thank you very much
Representative Montoya
Representative Trujillo please
yes Mr chairman I am ready to
propose a to pass on this piece
of legislation I don't see any
other quite questions thank you
for that there's a motion from
Representative Trujillo there's
a second from Representative
Garrett Senator can you please
call the.
Now.
Nope.
No.
Yes.
Yes.
Award for closest vote so far
goes to representative that I
know.
Thank you all thank you to your
expert thank you committee for a
very thorough and in depth
conversation.
Next we're going to move to a
house bill one five zero retiree
health care contributions with
Representative Figueroa.
Thank you madam chair thank you
committee.
Are you ready yes please go
ahead.
This bill madam chair and
committee increases the employer
and employee contributions to
the New Mexico retiree health
care forty eight unanimously
passed house labor and I bring
it to you now as the line the
attempt in the last eleven
years.
To change the contributions for
the New Mexico retiree health
care of forty right now there
are thirty three percent funded
they have sixty seven thousand
members retired and ninety two
thousand members act and the
need assistance to continue to
be able to help New Mexico's
retirees.
Access health care.
In the last eleven years while
they have been making these
attempts to increase employer
contributions they have taken
steps to manage funds.
Reduce costs the lower the
retiree spouses and domestic
partners subsidy levels the
lowered the dependent child
subsidy level two zero they've
increased pre Medicare and
Medicare supplement rates every
year.
They've implemented the minimum
age of fifty five and they're
not enhanced plans they have
changed the minimum years of
service from twenty to twenty
five years and they're not
enhanced plans madam chair
committee my point is they have
done everything they can do and
they have raised the funding
level in two thousand seventeen
was.
Eleven point three percent and
they have raised it to thirty
three percent but they have
maxed out what he can do it is
time to allow them to increase
the employer and the employee
contributions if this bill were
to pass.
Within five years their
actuarial studies indicate they
could be fifty percent funded
from thirty three percent to
fifty percent in five years.
that would need seven point
seven million dollars from the
general fund in order to do that
this year.
I'm sorry madam chair my left Mr
Neil keeper the director of the
New Mexico retiree health care
it's already and I don't know if
he has anything to add but we've
given you.
Hopefully enough information
that you recognize the urgent
need.
On the.
Thank you Representative gets
Madam chair of committee members
thank you for this time I do
want to thank Representative
Figueroa for sponsoring this
bill but also this is one state
that with the passage of this
bill to and also be a difference
of when we would actually start
deficit spending we would
actually start deficit spending
in July of twenty thirty two
meaning we're actually go below
the revenues that we're actually
receiving and the so the
difference of this bill would
actually keep us in the positive
so it's a difference of two
hundred and sixty five million
and preventing us from going
into deficit spending and
touching that trust fund that
we've been working to build up
in regards to our on funded
status which we do pass those on
to our local public body
entities as well as the state as
far as those unfunded
liabilities so that's the reason
why we want to lower that to
make sure we can help them and
keep it off the financial
statements thank you.
Thank you very much I'm do we
have folks in the audience that
would like to speak what we
start with in favor
okay and wonderful are surgeons
will help us with the microphone
please do use the microphone so
folks online can hear us and if
you can keep your remarks brief.
Madam chair members of the
committee Richard role metal
representing the New Mexico
association of educational
retirees and we endorse this
legislation.
of Mister chair members of the
committee my name is Theresa
unders I'm a retired teacher I
am currently serving on the
board of directors of the New
Mexico retiree health care
authority I represent the
teachers unions I Representative
NEA and A. F. T..
I've been proud to be on this of
HSD they've worked hard and I've
seen the Health fiscally
responsible they are.
As a board member we've had to
make some difficult decisions
like reducing subsidies for
dependent children and spouses
raising the minimum age these
are hard decisions that come.
On the backs of retirees quite
frankly well for right frankly
of the wallets of retirees right
now we're here today to ask you
to support house bill one fifty
to give the states the employers
and employees Kara into increase
the employer and employee
contributions to the retiree
health care this will make an
incredible difference and we
need your support thank you.
Thank you very much I do see
that we have three hands raised
online
I am going to assume that all
three hands are interested in
speaking in support if you're
not then go ahead and lower your
hand
but why don't we start with
Mr Tomas Salazar.
Go ahead.
Mister Salazar.
Okay we.
That can be ready yes please go
ahead.
Good
afternoon as chairman small by
Richard Nixon in the members
wishing to finance committee.
My name is almost done.
I'm a member of president of the
New Mexico association of
educational retirees.
Early service order member of
the New Mexico.
Forty.
Association of education
retirees on partisan
organization of over seven
thousand individuals from
throughout New Mexico deeply
fragmented eight eight eight.
Hi your decision on one fifty.
Today you are grateful to the
bill sponsor and respectfully
request that your support with
the support of one.
When I thank you madam chair.
Mr chair.
and committee members.
Thank you Representative for
your service next we have a
joyous person.
Thank you madam vice chair and
chairman small members of the
committee my name is Roy sources
and I am the executive director
for New Mexico counties this is
an issue that was brought forth
of us here in the interim and
with the Senate right link with
our board of directors and we
fully stand in support of this
on behalf of our members the end
of the long overdue thanks for
sharing this alright thank you.
Okay I thank you very much this
is for the Inc John John Deere
Act done thirds next for one
minute whenever you're ready for
you.
Thank you Mr chairman and
members of the committee under
the SCG Mexico and our retiree
healthcare we're number three
hundred really thought about the
one of you are retired in the
healthcare IT harder from
inactive addition standpoint are
members of those Representative
articles rules know that this is
something that a consider part
of their benefits package when
they do have the opportunity to
retire so really to advocate
it's good for retirees is too
good for education professionals
in the school currently and so
we do urge your support
consideration for this type of
legislation to make sure that
this fund is available all
within a into it in our careers
thank you thank you very much
we see there's one other hand
there might be Russell Goff.
Russell for one minute whenever
you're ready.
We we the hand got told them.
Okay
I don't see any other hands
online let's go to the committee
for questions.
So okay I don't see any question
Representative traded.
Yes yeah we're not ready yet for
that motion but thank you
Representative Figueroa
are there any other questions
any questions from committee.
Okay Representative Montoya and
then I'll have a few words Mr
chair what's the fiscal impact.
Budget.
Mr Chairman representative thank
you for the question it is seven
point seven million that is
needed from the general fund no
it is not you're looking for
help on the Senate side it was
in the budget and was passed by
the house and the Senate.
I'm not sure what it was this
time the need is still there.
Mr chair representative it is
there it in increased employee
contribution in your bill have
not had a chance to read.
Mr Chairman representative yes
the employer increases three
point three percent of the
employee's point one seven.
Thank you Mr chairman for if Mr
chair and representative if we
do not pass this on this site is
their ability for the Senate to
add this in.
I'm sorry Mr chair could you
repeat the question if we do not
pass your bill on this site is
there any efforts to get the
Senate to include this on the
Senate side.
Mr chair and representative
there's no hard commitment the
pro tem is a co sponsor of the
bill and it's still it's no firm
commitment.
Thank you Mr chair thank you
very much for some.
thank you Representative
Figueroa so
this is sort of the the the
contributions are slightly
larger or larger from the
employer side but there is you
Representative Montoya noted
there are increased
contributions I apologize for
being out of the room can you
sort of re so unfortunate as a I
think it's also been noted and
thank you Representative Montoya
we don't have funding in the
budget right now for it we came
in with an LFC framework and
while we've worked well within
that framework this is a core
piece that was not included in
there
I think we do want to make sure
that we have an X. hear very
clearly the the page the the
budget and how we can look at
something like this as we move
into into the summer phase so
could you sort of restate some
of the budget as you see at both
for for current retired and
future educators okay thank you
Mr chairman thank you for the
opportunity.
Our current educators consider
this because this plan The New
Mexico retiree health care of
forty is been in existence since
nineteen ninety there's an
expectation that this will still
exist by the time our current
current employees current
teaching staff
retire but the issue as the
directors pointed out is the
will be in deficit spending and
twenty thirty two they will be
getting into the Corpus that
support the retiree health care
sorority.
In.
Just ten years if we don't make
some changes with this change
which is a very modest change
point three three percent for
the employer and point one seven
for the employee is very small
change but it is enough to bring
them to fifty percent funded in
five years so those are the
choices on the table eat into
the Corpus intend or get to
fifty percent funding within I.
Thank you very much
Representative Figueroa that
that really sort of summarizes
for for me and it highlights why
this will need to be a one of
the things that we pay very
close attention to as we go into
the and from at a time where we
can strengthen some of our
ability to to support these
commitments that we have
it is our director is there
anything that you'd like to add.
Mr chair that the only other
couple items I guess maybe I
would add is one you know
without this changing obviously
we're gonna continue to look at
ways to ensure that we can
adjust for medical trend that
continues to grow at a percent
that means we're gonna continue
to look at how we increase
premiums how we adjust
costsharing to our retirees so
for individuals want to fixed
income this is going to affect
them I do understand that this
is something that's not in the
budget right now of the we're
looking about in total for state
agencies and schools about nine
point nine million I know in
just a vacancy savings for
reversions we were about three
hundred fifty three million for
personal services employee
benefits category which this
would kind of fall in line to
that specific category but we do
a lot to help the program not
only for our current retirees
but also making sure that we're
protecting it for future
retirees but director and you
said something I said that right
now is it at eight to nine
percent annual growth in cost is
that that's what you said you
were saying Mr chair the percent
as far as the health care trend
is about eight percent is the
assumed disruption it does very
based on our premiums on your
tier one we do analysis as far
as that increase but it's
anticipate about that correct
dates which is I think and
that's also part of what will
have to tackle this summer
because that seems
it is that is that.
A higher than other states are
seeing an annual health care
costs growth lower or the same
Mr chair this is going to marry
a cost all states now of course
there is the national trend
which we do compared against but
I will say we work closely with
other states as well as other
federal organizations to review
our program compare as well as
work together to achieve
different initiatives to try and
bend the cost curve or improve
upon our budget right thank
thank you for that very much
okay I saw Representative thank
you by projects and
Representative Cruz has a
question I'm going to by her
Dixon for the motion thank you
Mr chairman Representative
figure are really appreciate the
presentation I appreciate all of
the efforts that the fund is
done to try to keep it solvent
that it's fair and everybody's
pitching in a really would like
to support this and and and I
will I hope we don't table that
I would almost like to see us
pass it and perhaps funded
leader since I think it's it
falls in line Mr chairman what
we've been trying to do for and
by the way it's not just
teachers it's lots of different
kinds of government employees
but certainly it includes lots
and lots of teachers I I you
know once part time people
really wanted to be a civil
servant because while the pay
wasn't always the best you had
read benefits of retirement then
eventually got to the point
chairman for we weren't paying
particularly well in fact we're
really bad at compensating are
government employees so that.
Retirement and benefits almost
didn't matter anymore so we were
losing and kept and still are
losing or civil servants I
really think we should consider
Mr chairman passing this one
like that we just did the last
one and then get it funded a
little later thank you Mr
chairman.
Thank thank you Representative
daylight Cruz this does have a
specific fiscal impact will go
to Representative Pettigrew.
Mr chair a I appreciate the
comments from across calling for
the
This is an issue that we should
have dealt with.
During the interim before this
is a new number and I remember
correctly Mr chair
We just passed this legislation
two weeks ago out here that
increase the premiums for
current state and.
other employees within within
the system.
And I think we need to look a
little bit deeper and how we
actually fixes I've I'm not.
I'm not impressed with the
increasing on top of what we
just passed a couple weeks ago
another seventeen percent on
existing educators so.
for that reason Mr chair make
motion to table.
Okay.
Thank you Representative we're
gonna go to vice chair Dixon for
that motion it usually want to
somebody different sort of
finish questions and comments
and we'll go appreciate your
comments I don't see any other
questions Representative
Figueroa and director and to all
those thank you for highlighting
this issue and thank you for
being partners as we looked at
building will will be building a
new framework the framework that
we came into the session did not
have this in there we will be
building a new framework and I
appreciate very much this
conversation today is
illustrating that with that
we're going to go to by two
Dixon.
Thank you Mr chair.
I would move to.
There's a motion.
There is a second call session
okay there's it's been moved by
vice chair Dixon second by
ranking member Armstrong
is their opposition to that
motion.
Okay.
The let's go ahead and call the
roll and again will remind that
this is a general fund impact
that is not in the budget
because of the framework that we
came into the session with
Mr Diaz to.
Yes the table.
The budget.
Representative traffic.
No to table.
No to table I'd like to explain
my vote.
Yes to table.
Representative.
I know to take.
But here they sent yes to table.
Yes to table.
Okay I think we have
Representative Garrett to
explain about thank you Mr chair
I I believe that this framework
has been discussed for the last
nine years so it's not a new
thing that suddenly appeared out
of the blue and that's why I
submitted to.
Thank you okay thank you very
much Mr Representative Figueroa
thank you director will afford
to working together in the
interim thank you Mr chair
committee.
Okay we're members were on the
House Bill three seventy seven
as amended thank you to
we'll see the secretary thank
you Representative and on this.
West.
Representative Lujan on please
whenever you're ready please
introduce rest since.
To keep.
So since.
Thank you Mr chair we're here
today to present House Bill
three seventy seven the tourism
department marketing center of
excellence.
Of the state of New Mexico
currently lacks a centralized
marketing strategy bureau which
leads individual agencies with
the task of planning executing
and measuring the success of
necessary marketing initiatives
without the expertise or
infrastructure to make them
successful this often results in
a number of issues including
redundancy in effectiveness and
inefficient Market impatience
the lack of outcomes and
measurements of those outcomes
and initiatives which aim may
not be met
or sorry and issued of which may
not meet their goals or
standards of the agencies caring
about source solution
is which is proposed in this
bill is to create the marketing
success marketing excellence
beer within the marketing
division of the New Mexico
tourism department to service
essential as collection of
marketing folks expertise
knowledge and resources to
provide guidance information
support and training related to
marketing and support strategy
alignment develop efficiencies
and assist agencies in
identifying and developing new
market strategies and technology
solutions
this would be a optional.
resource for any of the
departments
and really what we want to see
is as marketing and advertising
gets more complex with
especially in the digital realm
we want to make sure that the
state doesn't waste money on
their marketing efforts and then
doesn't don't get this the
Don't get the goals hits that
they're trying to sell we've
seen it in the past for money's
been wasted on HSD hours
instead of on advertising
because the agencies the the
departments here just don't know
what they're looking for so
my experts today is just an
aspen of so if you would like to
say anything on chairman members
of the committee Jason Espinoza
registered lobbyists with the
New Mexico broadcasters
Association and we support this
bill and work with
Representative Hernandez on this
bill during the interim we had a
lot of meetings with the
governor's office about how we
as the broadcaster's association
TV and radio can collaborate
more with the states not only in
making sure that there's local
advertisements but in training
of marketing officials and
public information officers
across the state one of the
things that we realized in those
conversations that we really do
have a really fragmented system
in terms of who is in charge of
marketing for the state one
example that we like to use is
within the department of health
you have grant managers for the
tobacco requests you have great
managers FOR D. W. why those
grant managers are actually the
ones who are doing the marketing
for this for D. W. I. and and
and as tobacco cessation
programs it's not even one
centralized person with India
wage so with this fragmented
system again there's
not necessarily a lot of
redundancy that that's happening
and we really do believe I
created this sort of marketing
center of excellence within the
marketing Division of the
tourism department we can get a
better results not even you know
this could translate really into
more effective public health
education initiatives that allow
for targeted marketing to at
risk populations think about
April health outreach or opioid
addiction education diabetes
prevention and also recruitment
efforts targeted at specific
professional groups you know
we're doing a lot to attract
rural health care practitioners
think of the support that the
market tourism department to
provide to DO age in terms of
making those our marketing
efforts are.
Treatment efforts really helpful
as additionally state with
foster families so we you know
support this legislation really
think it's going to create a
centralized hub that's going to
be more effective to and just do
you want to know in the house
commerce committee the
appropriation was struck in the
in the language so just wanted
to point that out as well.
also encourage the effective
date was pushed up to twenty
twenty five to
Give really gives tourism time
to figure out what this program
will look like in a more.
When complete.
You know ten thousand for the so
with that we stand for any
question thank you very much
Representative Hernandez thank
you Mr Espinoza anybody in the
audience would like to speak and
course madam secretary if you
want to offer needs to us we
love to hear.
Yeah we're grammar.
Thank you as always for
attendance for X. every making
sure that we're squared away for
the fancy room.
Thank you Mr chair members of
committees week some
representing the New Mexico
hospitality association and real
time solutions real time has
done a decent amount of work
with the state did a lot of work
with the state through vaccine
registration sites just want to
explain that to give context to
the comments and they worked
with the tourism department a
lot in terms of doing marketing
and outreach related to vaccine
registration this is a really
good idea if you are in the
private sector you hire a
marketing firm to do your
marketing for your business this
is essentially the same concept
but for the state you hire the
department and entity that is an
expert in marketing to do
marketing for your various
programs what the beauty of this
is it lets the program gets that
up and allows them to develop
and then it allows independent
agencies to then seek to push
marketing funding into that pot
if need be and then eventually
come back to the appropriators
yourselves and try to get some
money to fund the program
independently but this is a
really good streamlined way to
do this just makes a lot of
sense and it would make New
Mexico and a lot of the
campaigns that we engage in much
more effective thank you very
much.
Mr chair members of the
committee my name is Allison
Smith I'm a registered lobbyist
for The New Mexico restaurant
association we do believe it is
true that the New Mexico tourism
department knows about marketing
and we feel that this is a good
opportunity to get the
consolidated messaging going on
within the state thank you thank
you very much.
Mr chair members of the
committee I am John Schreier
secretary of tourism and we
stand M. in support of this
concept for many years into the
last administration on the
tourism department has been
tapped to take on different
initiatives to support other
agencies last administration the
tourism department supported
economic development with their
business attraction PED with
their talent recruitment for
teachers and then during this
administration we have support a
number of initiatives to to all
of the crisis that we had seen
so we supported all of the
vaccine registrations we
supported all of the when there
is a shortage of baby formula
and making sure that moms and
parents knew where to find baby
formula but we also supported
you wrap which was emergency
rental program so just time and
time again the tourism
department has been tapped to
support other agencies to make
sure that residents of New
Mexico could get the services of
the programs that they need
during a very difficult time
also including the the wildfire
making sure that accurate
information was being
disseminated across various
platforms this particular
industry marketing in general
has become more and more
complicated with the onset of
digital marketing social media
marketing and is ever changing
and so that this would be a nice
way to formalize what we are
currently doing so we can better
support all of our sister
agencies thank you thank you
madam secretary.
anybody else I don't see anybody
in person we do have Chris road
or online.
Chris go ahead for a minute
whenever you're ready.
good afternoon Mister chairman
members of the committee my name
is our CEO of a real time
solutions where the summer
marketing agency here in this
the next so we work with the
state over the last twenty three
years and in particular have
supported the state during the
whole process for learning
department help the vaccine
registration system as well as
marketing efforts
the initiative
I stand here to support this
whole time and we are in this
office all supports agencies
ensure that marketing efforts
that are promoting the very
necessary services and many
citizens are effectively
propagated as well as insuring
others process the seventy
dollars a cent to promote the
services thank you very much for
your time thank you very much Mr
chair.
Okay I I don't see anybody else
on lines we're going to go
straight to committee starting
with Representative Lujan.
Thank you Mr chair really
appreciate this legislation I
think that we've been hearing
throughout interim committees a
discussion at from other from
agencies from EDD to terrorism
us and making their their case
on the return on investment for
these types of services and this
expands it though this really
expanded to work with the other
agencies and I know we're not
really supposed to get in the
weeds with the language but I
would drive just ask for some
clarification on page two line
twelve.
Eleven twelve for the economic
development corporation all
executive branch agencies can
you tell me the definition of an
executive branch agency struck.
chairman Representative Lujan
we're looking at sort of the the
twelve executive branch agencies
like any of them all I know this
came up and I less committee but
there's twelve I mean think of
the ones off the top your hand
transportation
is it a long term Services
Department health similar to the
thank you Mr chair I'm just
trying to distinguish that
between executive.
Office and executive branch
office all of our executive
branch office would be all those
that are under the purview of
our governors that correct Mr.
Chairman representative on I
believe so so that that would X.
exclude all of our executive
offices Mr chair.
German Representative Lujan
could you maybe for for my help
clarify what you're talking
about in terms of the.
I'm just asking you just specify
for all executive branch
agencies we have other executive
awful we have executive offices
of the lieutenant governor the
state auditor's state treasury
secretary state and Attorney
General are they excluded from
this is Jeff.
I Mr chairman Representative
Alcon yes those are excluded.
thank you Mr I would I would
suggest maybe that you looking
to maybe including them in some
shape or form I think that we
are all state.
Agencies and do a lot of work
especially those it's that needs
help in the same areas that
you're
trying to get the help in here
as well Mister chair I really do
appreciate this bill though and
and off of what you are trying
to create here and just for
further clarification you did
strip out the two hundred
thousand dollars from this
appropriation portion of this Mr
Chairman representative Lujan
correct yes we district the
appropriation okay so then Mr
chair than the goes to the point
in this office would take being
affect or the bureau would not
be affected to twenty twenty
fiscal year twenty twenty five.
Chairman representative line yes
correct.
Mr chair
Representative I think I I take
concern with that I think that
if we're going to look that far
ahead I mean I I would love for
this to take effect now this
year to be quite honest with you
I really understand the need I
really
have heard what of our
especially our our secretary of
of tourism and what they've been
able to do with that return on
investment and I released I just
I stand behind you and also our
our secretary we should he's
with and economic development in
the need there are there any
other agencies that are
currently doing in kind of
marketable are asking for a
budgetary adjustments or if
there are adjustments or just in
the regular budget for this type
of work Mr chair.
Mr chair representative Lujan
workforce solutions is engaging
workforce recruitment sort of
efforts through the marketing
department of health has
marketing so this various
agencies are to have those
marketing dollars of an
appropriated and and just one
note to what one of the reasons
that our discussion in the last
committee and with secretary
Schreier for the delay as well
is that it allows them wouldn't
if this legislation goes going
to affected allows them to
really do a audit creased across
state government to figure out
who are those marketing
individuals where the marketing
dollars and that they can
develop a budget off of that but
what we really want to have this
in place so that then we can do
that because to your point
during the pandemic with tourism
took on all these additional
needs they could do that because
we weren't necessarily marketing
because of the pandemic but now
that we are we do want to
provide them additional
resources so that they can do
both jobs thank you Mr chair I
do again really appreciate that
I just I just this is a little
difficult for me to to get and I
understand you actually do with
them that's going to create more
work and if you're you're taking
out the FTEs are required to do
the work I don't know how the
work gets done
also but I mean I have
confidence that and.
But still weary about that the
other thing I just really wanted
to point out is with our under
department of health or
epidemiology
Division I so to speak and and
you mentioned comment Mr chair
Representative they also had to
do a huge lift them marketing
service before the information
piece that we had to get out and
I know that they are depleted
very much now with their
resources and FTEs.
This would you would then help
this division if this were to be
passed Mr chair.
I chairman Representative Lujan
yes and I and I think to your
point to it's going to make
every division were efficient
because right now we're left
relying on the epidemiology
program to do the marketing to
develop the assets to do the
buys work with the marketing
come.
Thank you that those are the
questions I have I just you know
just want to make sure because
when you're looking at the
department of health.
It's a different type of
information piece that we're
doing public on public health
information but thank you for
this bill I I really do
appreciate it thank you Mr chair
thank you Representative Lujan
connects we have Representative
Pettigrew then Representative
Trujillo them center Montoya
Senator please thank you
chairman thank you
Representative for the
legislation thank.
Love the idea.
anything that reduces the
size of government if we could
consolidate it bring it in I'm
all for all in for a matter of
fact I really wish the rest of
this just missed the appropriate
all the other marketing aspects
of every other agency out there
and I truly think that that's
where it needs to go.
Mr chair we just had a really
close.
Vote on the cyber security fund
on an eight to seven where
We're creating something that
doesn't have an appropriation
to.
There is a concern with that
piece of the
well I completely support the
I'm gonna be interested to hear
what else is said with respect
to the speaker.
I'm all in for reducing
government and if we want to put
the marketing on tourism then
and and our tourism secretary
loan to share that load I'm all
in.
I don't I don't see where the
legislation pulls money from
everybody else thank you thank
you very much Representative
Pettigrew next Representative
Trujillo them someone to.
Thank you thank you for bringing
this bill forward I think the
tourism department has done a
tremendous job in moving New
Mexico forward and making sure
that everyone in the country and
all over the world knows know
what
New Mexico has to offer I have a
the only concern I have is the
AG's opinion on page two of the
FIR.
And the what he is saying.
Is that the it says the New
Mexico Attorney General Mr chair
noted concerns about amending
the economic development
corporation plan.
By making the corporation formed
pursuant to the economic
development corporation Act.
A governor as a government
agency for some for some
purposes for currently
it explicitly prohibits treating
that corporation as an agency
public body or other political
subdivisions of New Mexico for
the purposes of applying laws
relating to personnel and it
goes on I I to me when the AG.
Since then the an opinion and
this.
This seems to be very important
and I I'm not sure how you're
going to mitigate this Mr chair.
And the presenters
German Representative Trujillo
thanks for the question when
we're working with the drafter
so specific to that section on
on fifty three seventy six it
does say it an existing statute
that the economic development
corporation otherwise known as
the The New Mexico partnership
is separate and apart from the
state and shall not be to the
HSD public body for the purposes
of applying laws relating to
personnel procurement of goods
gross receipts disposition of
acquisition of property capital
outlay per diem the language
that we added in we believe I
worked with the drafters so it's
narrowly tailored just to fit
within this marketing a
provision so that the.
The partnership's only be deemed
and executive branch agencies
for the purposes of receiving
marketing and nothing else so we
believe without existing
language in there that it's
clear that for the purposes of
personnel procurement eccentric
they're not deemed as that the
only for the purpose of
receiving marketing services
that they are deemed as a
executive branch agencies so
they fit within the definition
of the statute Mr chair is that
the.
The underlying language in page
two
Chairman representative for him
yes thank you for the
clarification thank you thank
you very much for Patricia next
member of someone to.
Thank you Mr chairman
I believe this is the same
discussion that we had on cyber
security once again we're not
putting money.
into the department and yet the
department than would be
expected to do.
I believe was described as an
audit.
Mr chair
since we're not putting
implementation forward until
twenty twenty five this really
is just two years.
it doesn't
at the the amendment was put on
in commerce economic development
change the affected date on page
four.
Raking twenty twenty three and
then making it twenty twenty
five that is two years down the
road.
And we've had the discussion
before that.
If there's a delay and next year
is the effective date that's
still this legislature.
If we push it forward to twenty
twenty five that's the next
legislature that is not.
Necessarily the people that are
in this room I do believe this
is something that.
Is needed I think that
consolidating the efforts and
one department I think is a very
good idea.
however if there are.
With their dollars being spent
in other departments I think we
can do this next year just by
taking those dollars and those
departments and moving into this
bill we don't have to wait till
twenty twenty five meantime Mr
chair and representative
if the department is willing to
do this audit right now without
any funding.
This could still be done the
audit the audit and could still
be done with all the other
departments.
And next year if we could also
identify the dollars being spent
in the other departments for
advertising we could roll them
into this potentially and maybe
get funding for it it is once
again it just is disjointed way
of Mr chair and and
Representative when I came to
this committee the one thing
that I there were a couple of
items that I understood to be
hard fast rules for
appropriations one is not
committing a future legislature.
Another building trying not to
pass on funded mandates which
this would be the work that
would be expected
And and other
just being to just to to pass
the bill forward just removing
appropriation.
It are things that we were that
were are just not the practices
in general that I understood so
I think after today and after
this photo I'm gonna have to
look real hard and just find out
what our our actual.
hard fast rules in
appropriations as to what we do
and.
The things that I understood
about appropriations before I
got here have been challenged a
little bit over the last several
weeks and so I think
Mr chair I think this is a very
very worthwhile I do believe
this could be a money saver
overall and and if we can get
this done next year versus
twenty twenty I I prefer to see
that next year's appropriation
year only.
But I think a full audit Mr
chair and and and secretary if
if we can also find out identify
dollars that are being used I I
think.
He could have a pretty good fun
just by collecting those
dollars.
Thank you Mr thank you very much
for someone to okay I don't see
any other questions
Representative turn please.
Thank you Mr chair and
presenters at I I need a problem
of clarification here this
Department of expansive you are
talking about.
Would be formulated in the
department of tourism but would
be taken out of the economic
development department but what
I'm is that correct are you
taking at what I'm up would like
to hear to me is exactly what
else are you removing because
what I hear from my colleagues
is that I'm looking forward to
combining and reducing
government well what is it that
you're reducing so can be
clarified can you clarify that
yeah I'm Chairman representative
turned in
so the the legislation doesn't
transfer anything what it does
is it creates a the the
marketing excellence bureau
within the marketing division of
the tourism department.
And because other agencies
across the state other executive
branch agencies are doing
marketing but they don't have
the same market expertise or
sort of talent background that
the marketing division and
tourism does so what this
legislation allows is that
creates this division within
tourism to provide expertise
support services to those other
agencies so that we can really
enhance the effectiveness of the
marketing that's going on across
the state because right now
again for the simple to use
within the department of health
we currently have a grant
manager who manages the D. W. Y.
requests who's also trying to
act as basically the marketing
official for that a program this
would allow the tourism
department to provide services
to work with that grant manager
so that we can actually have
affected marketing marketing
across programs within state
agents so thank you Mr Mr chair
members of the panelists are as
I have looked at the the the
various departments that we have
here and looking at what the
economic development department
does for example with the with
amend if what the markets
finance authority does and what
each one of these does in terms
of their own individual
expertise I don't know that
putting it all of the tourism is
where we should be going for
purposes of they have the
expertise so they have the
expertise of marketing New
Mexico which is what they do
right now but all these other
items that fall within a
marketing ram it's really
difficult to say that we should
be putting all of our agents in
one basket for purposes of
marketing so I just present that
to you Mr chair thank thank you
Representative printed
Representative or not.
Representative Mr Chairman
representative
So okay so I'm a professional
marker that's what I do when
we're outside of the legislature
to say that somebody who knows
marketing can only market into
New Mexico is not quite right
they may have been able to you
know do that successfully but
that doesn't mean that they
can't take those their knowledge
and also do it outside of the
state or to different audiences
I mean it's all just audience
building it's doing research and
getting data and putting it
together to figure out who you
want to target so the fact that
the the department currently has
you know that.
That knowledge and that
expertise means that we can
expand that out to whatever the
departments would need and this
is the second thing I want to
mention is
there.
In the past year there was a.
Market.
There was a marketing campaign
within the state within a state
department I don't want to get
too specific but.
The
About eighty percent of their
that fund went or that part of
P. went to.
agency hours and went to the
agency were twenty percent went
to advertising because the
person who was running it had no
idea what they were looking for
and that's what we're trying to
stop an that's that's only one
of what I'm sure is many of just
inefficiencies within marketing
through the departments that
we're trying to bring going to
get either at less money spent
we're getting better results for
the money
and so that's really what this
is trying to do.
Thank you just one more
clarification Mr chairman
members so for example if at
this will help me to understand
as we are looking at for example
the mortgage finance authority
and they have a whole program
that will help first time buyers
and so they are they're familiar
with the the rules or
regulations the aspect of it and
their marketing and they have a
marketing what they call at for
so my question to you are you
under this plan that you have
percent you would move the
marketing that they're doing in
this this bureau this to us you
are proposing to create and I
understand this correctly this
marketing excellence Mr Chairman
representative it is it's not a
mandatory program this is a this
is a resource for the
departments that would like to
use it so if they would like to
use it it's there available to
them it if they do not want to
use it it's not a requirement
it's just it's a tool and a
resource and we're hoping that.
Maybe not right off the bat but
over time as the prove
themselves that more and more
departments will jump on board
to use this to get to become
more efficient in to your member
of several hundred just to add
on to that think of it as a
spectrum of services so they
could provide technical
assistance to you know this
individual just needs help you
know placing an ad or coming up
with that you know sort of
coming up with creative content
that's one role they can play
and then on the other side if
the department will you know ask
Miss bureau you know I don't
really have the capacity I need
more services and support and
less they can play that role so
would be up on a spectrum
depending on the current
capacity within the agency.
One final question for sure Mr
chair.
What's prohibiting that from
happening now is the tourist
Department refusing to do it to
provide the expertise with the
could if they have it
Chairman representative Herndon
this happened a lot during the
during the pandemic as the
secretary noted but one of the
advantages or disadvantages
during the pandemic as you know
there there wasn't a tourism
marketing campaign going on at
that point because we weren't
looking to attract visitors so
the tourism department at that
point could and did divert
resources to help MFA department
help the department of health
with their marketing efforts
they provided that expertise and
knowledge on the now that the
pandemic gonna we're looking at
that that was a really effective
model that we want to carry on a
little too with this legislation
but.
The department's going to need
resources to do that or else
we're going to move them away
from their core mission if we
don't add additional resources
that may you know divert
resources from their current
marketing campaigns so we want
to provide additional resources
and a structure.
They can continue to do this.
Thank you Mr chair thank you
present thank thank you
Representative permanent okay I
don't see any other a question
of
Representative and then this
You so making this effective in
twenty twenty five what was the.
Just if you could be with you in
mind explained Mr chair it was
actually a man it was an
amendment that we kind of did on
the fly in commerce we would be
amenable actually to.
Bring that back to twenty twenty
four it would give.
In talks with the secretary we
think it would give an accurate
or adequate time to get done
what they need to get done to
get this to get this ready and
rolling.
Thank thank you and in
conversations with other exact
have there been conversations
with other executive branch
agencies whether it's it Do�a a
you know a yes the marketing for
benefits or the the that I think
the example that you all
mentioned
HSD and maybe D. O. H. marketing
to health care professionals and
now we have fifteen million
dollars in in loan repayment
funds if if our if our budget
continues.
This I guess I get the point
that it's voluntary thing valid
and good points have been raised
about sort of timing and and.
But I'm interested to hear the
feedback from others.
Share members of the committee
there's been a several
conversations with different
cabinet secretaries regarding
the need for technical
assistance so several times I
get pulled into different
conversations with their program
others a challenge of the that's
something that's not reaching
the public and so I find that
technical assistance to their
current staff however there's
been some secretaries that would
absolutely love even more
support and have that expanded
to more official.
Okay thank thank you Secretary
share okay so we don't have an
amendment in front of us I think
we can go ahead and take action
on this.
It doesn't seem necessarily to.
That I think I I frankly I
struggle is slightly.
With the
How the.
Yeah I struggle slightly with
moving this forward.
It ultimately we need additional
funding to and and sort of
additional perhaps by and to
sort of formalize what is the
tourism department does
extraordinarily well and it's
sort of a star so they've been
really really positive points
that have been raised how we do
that and sort of on what time
line looks like sort of our
question right now is there
anything Representative R. or
expert that you'd like to add
and if there's is there any
junior funding obviously there
is a significant amount eleven
percent growth in
Well I yes significant growth to
tourism for marketing but
secretary that's for your core
mission of bringing people to
New Mexico and that's so it's
not around sort of helping
others do their marketing this
is for your core marketing is
there any junior are there any
junior funds that are associated
with it.
Mr chair okay okay
So okay I I think we've no see
any other questions from the
committee
I think we can go to the
committee for for a motion
regardless of the outcome today
this seems like something again
to be
looked at during the interim
from a Legisla- perspective
perhaps to see how what tourism
offers can be of service to the
rest of our executive and
Representative Hernandez thank
you very much thank your insight
in particular helps to
crystallize this is an
opportunity for us.
By Terry Dixon.
Thank you Mr chair I would move
to table house bill three
seventy seven estimate.
Okay it's been moved by by two
decks and seconded by
Representative Garrett is their
opposition to that motion.
I don't see any thank you and I
think there's a lot of support
for this idea and as we go
forward.
Thank you Mr trump thank you.
Okay members we're gonna go back
three three we have a couple of
quick things first
House Bill three zero three this
is a straight appropriation I
will ask for a motion to table
there is funding that's going on
that is part of this effort but
we will have to table House Bill
three oh three.
Thank you Mr chair I would move
to table house bill three oh
three okay it's been moved
second by Representative setting
on a thirty opposition to that
motion saying none that members
we're gonna go ahead and roll
house bill for twenty eight in
consultation with the sponsor.
This brings us to house bill two
fifty seven as amended and I
know that representative
Thompson and Representative
Cates are here.
Representative K. representative
Thompson please whenever you're
ready.
Thank you Mr chair and committee
I'm we're here to present house
bill two fifty seven it's so
relating to behavior health it's
a bill that will allow appears
supports team to work with our
firefighters
and we.
I will do is I will ask for a
motion to accept the amendment.
So can you please explain the
amendment certainly we we rolled
the import of the of the
appropriations portion out of
the bill.
Okay so thank you Representative
K. on page one line sixteen that
strikes making an appropriation
page five lines twelve through
seventeen.
This is the appropriation which
is two hundred fifty thousand
dollars.
In the okay to move by
Representative Trujillo the
second.
Kate second by Representative
Sanchez there any opposition to
adopting the amendment.
Singing on the amendments
adopted.
Thank you Mr chair and and
committee so for for the bills
is an opportunity that we can
provide expanded more behavioral
health support for the people to
keep us safe which are the
firefighters
it will allow counseling peer
support count of the support in
substance abuse critical
incident stress grief support
line of duty death serious
injury or illness suicidal
thoughts and workplace issues
and the peer support
professionals will keep items is
the conversations confidential
and unless there is a crime or
self harm and and that sort of I
will defer to our co sponsor an
expert witness.
Mr chair and representative this
is really important bills that
this is Miguel Pittman who is
the they you need for
Albuquerque and Bernalillo
county firefighters and he came
to me with this bill and and
lots of things have been talked
about but essentially what I've
been told by many firefighters
is if you don't have PTSD the
first year you will the second
and I kind of think it might be
the first day if not that the
second but I'm gonna let Miguel
go from there.
Thank you Mr chair
representative this public both
Representative stated this bill
is very important to reinforce
one of the most important
structures and benefits to our
firefighters face twenty five
years of trauma saturation
twenty five years of critical
incidents twenty five years of
of dealing with these kinds of
things on a every single day
basis and and having a peer
support team we know
Albuquerque's is very important
we've been able to bolster our
team Burnet county has been able
to do the same we have forty
five percent course in
Albuquerque is about twelve to
fifteen Bernalillo county a lot
of the smaller departments have
your support for support teams
but on on the less organized so
we've we've recognize the
importance of these the we we
know that they work we know that
firefighters are more likely to
seek help from somebody with a
shared experience them and and
seek it from outside of the fire
service and training these
individuals to recognize when
he's in conversations are
important and when they're
needed and and terms of post
instant after traumatic events
is this bill is what we've been
we learned of from our history
so the importance of these
conversations been confidential
and was somebody with a shared
experience is kind of what the
bill is all about
and like I said before
Albuquerque is one of is the
only fire department of New
Mexico has a clinical director
Bernalillo county looking to
hire one.
Albuquerque police department as
a clinical director those
departments with clinical
directors in this larger
departments nationwide that have
that have clinical direction in
terms of their peer support
teams most if not ninety five
plus percent of peer support
teams in the Far Department
don't have clinical direction
and don't have the means of
having that that clip that
specialized clinician to direct
them on some of the important
conversations for instance the
clinical clinician is bound to
laws a state that if somebody
suicidal homicidal or is no
knows about geriatric views or
child abuse and that's when they
are of bound by law to yes I
these peer supporters don't have
that so recognizing that
confidentiality so that they
have the ability to
Representative and and beat her
supports the capacity with true
confidentiality is super super
important to the actual modality
of peer support but like I said
before has has been proven to
work in our departments has been
proven to work in the fire
service in law enforcement for
that for that matter as well but
I'm here okay and capacity is of
Representative firefighters so
with that I urge your support to
to reinforce the importance of
these teams to reinforce the
point of confidentiality in
these teams thank you for your
time thank you very much and
thank you Representative is
there anybody who'd like to
speak on this bill here today in
the audience.
Mr chair members of the
committee on for anybody law
State Farm Marshall we do
support this bill for a farmer
Phil's office and all but
secure.
Thank you thank you very much
for survival.
Hi anybody else here in person.
Saying that anybody was to speak
in opposition seeing none Sir
anybody I don't see any hands
raised online.
Okay let's go to the
ranking member Armstrong please
thank you Mr chairman and thank
you for bringing this forward I
one of I have three questions
how does this affect volunteer
in rural New Mexico.
Mr Chairman representative we
made an amendment to include
volunteer.
A lawyer the.
You know where I was going Mr
chairman okay and then my second
question is on page three
section five I'm sorry on page
five section five the new
material for its exempting you
accepting them is this.
Normal language and is that I
mean it won't an attorney just.
That out and stomp on it.
Mr chair representative thank
you for that question as far as
I know this is fairly normal
wording it's
Similar to similar but not but
not exactly those of national
clinician
in terms of how it would be
litigated I can tell you.
Just curious and then my third
question Mr Chairman said she
stripped the appropriation out
how is this going to be paid
for.
Mr Chairman representative is
also great question
I would hope that we get paid
for the in the future currently
has a stand this bill still
reinforces the importance of
confidentiality for peer support
and recognizes from the state of
New Mexico that these these
programs are are important
but we had the the farm Arsal on
board with being the provider we
had
someone from the state that was
going to be in charge of making
sure that has some some
oversight
but at this point without the
probation is not going to be
paid for so and and in
Albuquerque Frances we graduated
in the allotment for training
and this was a number of but a
bill for Albuquerque because
Albuquerque has a good
supporting this is more a bill
for the smaller departments for
some of the volunteer
departments that don't have the
money in their budget for peer
support from behavior health
because in reality behavior
health in terms of priority in
the budget and the fire service
always goes to the bottom so
without appropriations answer
questions is not going to get
fund there will there will be
money for training and its
current form.
Thank you Mr chairman thank you
very much remember Armstrong
additional.
Okay I I don't see any question
I'll Representative Kate's and
and also to Mr Timmins it how
important is the confidentiality
piece understand and
Representative is to confirm it
had do you know is there any
junior funding either in the
house for the Senate dedicated
to this.
Mr chair and committee system as
far as I know there is not
junior funding I will see the
bill is very important obviously
the full implementation of the
program cannot happen without
funding but by passing this bill
you're not only protecting the
confidentiality but the programs
that do exist now kannst begin
to organize so that they
understand what kind of funding
is needed to be able to bring to
the smaller volunteer fire
departments across the state Mr
chair and members I would say it
brings awareness as well to some
of the departments who may not
have in the volunteer
departments who don't have
support and things maybe it will
generate an idea to start
looking at how to do this even
without money thank you.
Mr chair can I just place it
confidant's confidentiality is
key in behavioral health.
Thank you Representative Cruz.
You Mr chairman that that's
actually what I wanted to ask
about now it it seems kind of
self evident but.
Could you expand a little bit on
that please Representative.
Of thank you Mr chair your
expert at this I I would be glad
to differ I I will just say that
for confidentiality currently in
the law of professional
psychologists are required to
have confidentiality I have not
had the pleasure of working with
firefighters but I have with
veterans and I do know that
individuals who suffer with
PTSD are much easier to be able
to seek out help from their
peers from shared experiences
but beaten need to feel safe
that there are confidential
agreements there with what
they're sharing especially there
in the workplace situation I'll
defer to experts thank you Mr
chair and representative that's
a that's a it isn't the most
important part of the
conversation and in the fire
service we know that the fire
services historically been
Very difficult to crack in terms
of the the conversation behavior
health our members have not
historically been open to this
type of conversation or even to
seek help we've done we've done
it's very very far we've done a
lot of things in my tenure and I
in my locally and are and are
you in terms of negotiating
funds dedicated behavioural
health dedicated to paying for
copays goes far far as to ten a
day they wouldn't pay for it
thank you know they were open
conversation in terms of paying
for Clint professional
clinicians they were wanted to
do it so we we did it for them
and and we've gotten little
steps little little by little to
the point now where.
It's okay to have a conversation
a firehouse about breaking down
some of the stigma breaking down
some of of our of our checks in
armor was far far as a very very
proud population so to say that
confidentiality is important is
is not saying enough it is the
most important part and I've
seen multiple times in in this
field for one firefighter one
peer supporter breaking that
confidentiality can destroy an
entire team so having just one
implementation in statute
legislation is going to be very
very important to the whole
conversation they're health in
the fire service and you know
one thing that this might do
even without the probation is it
might it might wake up some of
the state the for the counties
municipalities to fund this to
prioritize this in their budget
and we can we can go and ask and
I will ask them Representative
firefighters to do that so I you
know once again I encourage your
support so that we can do that.
Gentleman over the years of I've
had the opportunity to work on
some behavioral health local
legislation and one of the
things that has always
frustrated me around the whole
issue of behavior health and
this is an aspect of it is the
statement that you mentioned
that's that's big money you know
as a society to get past that
because I I often use examples
gentleman that you called in to
work and and tell your boss that
you have COVID or flu and I stay
home no problem but you call
your boss you see you know boss
I'm sorry but I'm you know I'm
feeling kind of down down
feeling depressed it's a
statement then now like what get
to work and so the question that
I had the release Mr chairman
is.
The peer to peer and the
confidentiality seven forcible.
Thank you Mr chair and and
Camille defer to my expert
witness Mr chair and
Representative when you say is
it is enforceable demand I
consent can somebody be
compelled to testify against
another member Mr chairman what
what I'm talking about is that.
The competition is critical and
it's peer to peer it's not you
know firefighter personnel to to
see a licensed psychologist
psychiatrist or whatever so
we're you're doing peer to peer
can you do to enter into
agreements how do you how does
that work how does that.
Functions so Mister chair
representative it works based on
educating our members about the
program make sure that they know
what appear support team is and
how they function and there's
not one definition about a
function they could it could
just be a phone call that you
need to talk to somebody about
something or could be a referral
that you need so a lot of our
peers are trained to different
levels of their supporters
sport beginners advanced
critical instance press briefing
we have chaplains are peer
supporters so there's a
spiritual element as well so
educating our members on what it
is and how to use it has been
paramount would be able to to
get a lot of success over the
year but the end of the day
is just up here knowing that
that other peer is a brother or
sister and it's going to keep
their information confidential
and help them with whatever the
crisis as best they can.
Well I think this is an
important bill.
Clearly I supported I I think
it's it's there's still some
challenges for you the right to
thank you Sir thank you
Representative Cruz Mexican
Representative month played an
awesome question.
Thank you Mr chairman.
So representatives and expert
did I guess questions for the
expert did I hear you say that
the City of Albuquerque's
already doing this.
Mr chair representative yes yes
that is correct Albuquerque City
of Albuquerque has dedicated
money to their budget for peer
support they have dedicated
money in their budget to pay for
the clinical director her name
is I don't see your as a larger
agency how do they have they
have the ability to to do that
and coming back up it took years
and years and years of
advocating for this and actually
took a suicide to get that done
so one of our members addressed
I was of completed suicide and
that was that was the hi opening
to go to the more and be like it
is time to put paper to budget
and dedicate funds for this this
import conversation so Mister
chair and and Representative so
the other communities smaller
communities it appears from
testimony that maybe they don't
have money dedicated to this is
that are not all communities
have dedicate money dedicated
this without being correct Mr
Chairman representative.
Thank you Mr Chairman
representative so currently we
have data and we have an organ
is organized process and being
able to train and provide peer
support and we have that in
Albuquerque the originally we
were asking for funding so that
we can bring that program
throughout the state to smaller
communities this bill will
protect will establish the
legitimacy of it and the
confidentiality of it so that we
can use this process the
structure to be able to bring to
other communities and as the
expert witness said find the
funding.
Mr chair if you want to throw in
two hundred fifty K. today we
wouldn't oppose
it so Mister representatives I
guess that's the reason I'm
asking this question is this
commit these other communities
to to do this.
I am I but I didn't get a chance
to read through the.
As we've been having testimony
to try to flip through this I'm
trying to figure out does this
only apply to Albuquerque no no
Mr chair and and and
Representative said it is it is
not a mandate and it is and it
it doesn't only apply to
Albuquerque it is an opportunity
for all of our first responders
are firefighters across the
state to be able to have a
program that can access training
and establish an organized peer
support group that would be
confidential for their
firefighters volunteers and
employees so Mister chairman and
Representative can you point me
to the language where I would
see that it's not a mandate I
I'm I'm wanting to see that
because if we're going to it's
one thing if the City of
Albuquerque's going to continue
this without a mandate but if we
are going to be compelling these
other communities to do it it
then becomes an unfunded mandate
for these other states thank you
and I'll a point Representative
Montoya I think section three
page three.
and defer to the experts in for
the the legislators.
any state local or regional
public fire agency may establish
a peer support program.
this is if you shoot it seems
like there is a shell and the
listening sentence so if you.
If you decide to establish one
of these it sort of sets out
One peer support team composed
it sits on some things but it
does not seem assessments with
my reading to require any
community to affirmatively adopt
this.
Thank you Mr chair so
so Mr Chairman representative
met representatives.
I'm not exactly sure.
Why this is needed them.
It doesn't require anyone to do
anything.
And the folks who are doing it
are already doing it.
I'm not exactly sure why it
doesn't appear as if it's
necessary.
To to pass this legislation
there's no appropriation.
Anyone can do it as it stands
now.
there was mention Mr chair that
an effort would go forward to
encourage these other cities and
counties to do this
unilaterally minus the funding
Mr chairman I just don't see.
The purpose of the look of the
legislation Mr Chairman
Representative Representative
Montoya this kind of sets up the
framework so if if people who
don't have the money for it get
want to set something up they
won't be re creating the we
although we all will be here and
they can start and of course we
would love for it to be fully
funded but that's not gonna
happen so we're we're gonna take
baby steps and this is one baby
step to give them the framework
to set it up.
Thank you Mr thank you very much
for percent of month with we
have Representative Lujan
briefly then Representative gear
referred from Sierra thank you
Mr and skip to get back into the
The fiscal a portion of this you
eat so we don't have a two
hundred fifty dollars on the
table so secretary but hello.
What is the funding that they
they have in Albuquerque Mr
chair that they're using is it
from the firefighters grant Fund
that we already have in place as
well as one of the the itemized
things that they can draw from.
you very much Mr chair
representative will defer to our
expert witness Mr chair and
representative it is not from
the fire fund is for it is from
the budget of the Albuquerque
City of Albuquerque but back to
you know this ties into the
question that Representative
Montoya had do other departments
Mahatma despise counties have
money for this and and my answer
to you Representative they
should every single municipality
counting Department should
dedicate funds specifically for
behavior health Estes and
specially in the fire service
and the way I see it every
departments one suicide away
from opening their eyes and
dedicating them the the money to
that so what this legislation
does is it it memorializes the
importance of of what you're
support team is and how
important confidentiality is to
once that once they finally
realize how important it is and
and dedicate money course
programs like this.
Thank you Mr chair and I I
appreciate that response right I
cannot I cannot express how
important it is to have these
these peer support systems in
place not only just for us for
firefighters but for everybody
across the board especially
those in the high risk areas but
again I'm gonna ask you there is
there is a fund there's a
firefighter for and I believe
Starts at a hundred and ten
million dollars and then that
goes into different you know
different sources of of ways of
use that you're going to a grant
funded program that I believe or
I could be wrong and I'd ask you
us to look more into that to see
if that is something we can
address to those findings and
also
So two diff to get this done but
my you have here is language for
confidentiality I would I would
assume that anything that's in
the health related goes it back
into H. R. and all that is
confidential Mister chair I
don't know that that I would
like to in the we can talk about
offline I'm not going to press
you for an answer now but I just
want to say I don't understand
that so if I could talk to your
friend that thank you Mr chair
person thank you very much
Representative Representative
Curtis.
Thank you Mr chair thank you for
bringing this legislation our
first responders specially EMTs
and I would see affects you.
and so and I see that the
original appropriation which we
stripped out was to the state
fire marshal's office that would
benefit the entire state my
question is are there any
statistics on the number of
firefighters and EMTs who are
veterans do we have any
statistics along those lines I'm
I'm Mr chair representative says
I don't have any at this time we
could provide that for you it is
Mr chairman and and we go you
may know for some parts of the
state but but it's kind of many
of our veterans have PTSD but
their skills that they came in
the military leave them to
become firefighters and EMTs so
there's kind of that double
whammy there so I think this is
really really important and I'm
glad that efforts are being made
even if we don't do it
appropriation at this time
because it's really important
thank you thank you were center
by critics and.
Thank you
I just have one question and I
apologize if you've already said
this and I missed it
Mr chair
In section three B.
it says
each pair.
support team members of
complete a training course
approved by the state fire
marshal's office and then under
the definition
at some point I guess it says
that the fire marshal's office
is going to implement the
program but are there other
programs that are currently
approved and certified so that
if the two hundred and fifty
thousand dollars that was for
the appropriation to set up the
training course.
Are there other avenues for.
Entities that want to have these
peer support services that they
can go through without.
The fire marshal's office
setting up something new for two
hundred fifty thousand dollars.
Thank you Mr chair and
representative I'll defer to my
experts witness thank you Mr
chair representative of the
addicts and yes there are there
are multiple introduce a teacher
support classes and curriculum
the weighted and what with the
state fire marshal here in with
the discussions that we had and
with Mr Blassie who works for
the state that they would be
able to approve those classes
based on a subject matter expert
or clinician a clinical director
Miss already put in place and
that if if we were to have the
appropriations they could either
have the the classes at the
state fire academies of coral or
we could have said I classes and
and at
You know say say for instance
house once that house would be
sent instructor or class we
could be higher for instance the
international association of
firefighters or they take the H.
and triple F. as the national
fallen firefighters foundation
who has this curriculum party
created to go teach the
curriculum to use smaller
departments okay thank you Mr
chair and thank you Mr to admin
and Representative so
without the appropriation and
without the fire marshal's
office implementing something
the language in this bill is
still important because it
allows it so much is the
confidentiality and it it does
other things.
In addition to simply the
appropriation thank you very
much Mr chair and representative
yes absolutely it is the
confidentiality is very very
important but also established
as a structure that if the other
fire departments are around the
state want to implement this we
have a acceptable curriculum and
that process in place and and we
will put
you yes looking for funding.
Thank you Mr chair so if I'm
understanding correctly.
You're asking you would like for
us to pass the language we're
stripping the appropriation so
there's no funding and there's
no unfunded mandate because it's
an option for local entities and
there are already existing other
approved training courses is
that correct.
You Mr chair representative the
the language I think referred to
a doctor
What training course approved by
the state fire marshal's office
I think that's still still works
even without appropriation with
this the deputy fire marshal on
the floor Marshall being on
board with everything that we're
talking about in this bill.
Thank you Mr chair thank you
very much I thank you
Representative thank you the.
Very good program this is a
great candidate for House Bill
to junior
and it's it's you know.
I think we see the affect the
the need to move forward there
has to be a question that arises
when we get to this point in H.
B. two junior funds haven't been
dedicated why that is I think
that's an important question for
us to raise with that said let's
go to Representative Garrett for
the motion please.
That we table I think we can
move this forward okay I move
that we passed house bill.
two fifty seven as amended.
Okay through move by
Representative Garrett second by
Representative dealer Cruz
is there anybody in opposition
to this.
Okay seeing none of to create
we've adopted a house
appropriations and finance
committee amendment one earlier
okay thank you very much.
And you share content.
The N. and again to emphasize
every single legislator had the
ability to dedicate almost five
hundred thousand dollars worth
of funds and that was not done
in this case so we'll we'll go
forward we had yeah thanks
great.
I think it.
Okay Representative Serrato has
been waiting a very long time I
appreciate the time we're moving
the house bill three three six.
Okay we've seen we have a house
appropriations and finance
committee substitute for House
Bill three three six can we get
a motion for discussion please.
Thank okay it's been moved by by
Terry Dixon second by
Representative economy up for
discussion Representative
Serrato can you please explain
the substitute thank you Mr
chairman D. Wonda I begin with
the bill and then explain this
of students that are right for I
appreciate that so the bill as
originally drafted would create
a data sharing committee
throughout and tax hi costs the
program with nine experts from
various places to review the
structures platforms ensuring
reporting for we are how people
use data interstate or agencies
are using that our state Hey
look at the procedures and
compiling and and the
maintenance and it would it
would bring all this together
and presented to the LFC by
January one twenty twenty five
it it's it's important overall
the bill because what it does is
it we need more big data New
Mexico a lot of places I've
gotten to a point where dad is
just simply the up to much and
we're all of our fellow silos we
have a really at that point so
R. one we understand the
correlation behaviors better to
we can target and really hone in
on efficient ways of using stuff
what the committee set up will
do is really clarify those
intentions after we read some of
the concerns from the FIR and
just to be clear number one it
removes the appropriation
there's already a million in the
budget and there's also
additional junior funds that
have been report sent been given
to this because and so it's
enough we believe to be for
icasa due to complex this
objective two eight make sure
that all goes through the into
mining and technology originally
had it there was a oversight I
guess of with you not oversight
but at the administrative burden
on do it and we just decided to
go directly into institute of
mining technology to ease that
also you'll see that on page two
we clarified that the members
and Disney's that are appointed
by the house of representatives
and and the Senate can either
have solutions and public sector
data or cyber security and data
privacy as was mentioned in the
FIR to be.
Concern we also clarified
members seven and eight that
they should be experts in
educational data systems and
public health data systems again
that's more particular and a
better understanding of what
we're trying to do here we had
again clarified that the
representative from the counties
and from the municipalities can
also potentially have
cybersecurity and data privacy
expertise as well we did remove
the open meetings act that was a
concern in the FIR to be clear
with everyone here this
committee would not be dealing
with individual data what would
be doing is utilizing looking at
the procedures looking at the
platforms we're currently using
to make sure we're sharing
enough to to maximize what we're
getting out of it and so then
going on on on piece of a it
also would review the ongoing
data sharing initiatives and
projects we removed the Attorney
General and instead put in
I'm sorry I apologize I just had
a look sorry I guess I should
just as we did remove the
Attorney General and instead we
added in the
The.
This is the sentencing
commission the the sentencing
commission because we felt that
their daughter was more info on
meticulous what we're doing and
there's a couple clarifications
to promote broad but responsible
statewide on data management
this clarifies really what this
bill is right so I don't looks
like it's committee seven don't
enjoy presenting those however
it is really to clarify of the
Representative Serrato I think
we're so we're we're we're down
sort of bloke form right now
clearly were will be going on
the four pretty soon and and
what I love to do is if you
could sort of fantasy
explanation will probably have
to look at coming back tomorrow
for conversations on the bill if
there's anything that you'd like
to add I apologize but we're
getting pretty close to the
floor ways and that's all I have
I do wouldn't use my expertise
in weeks is registered lobbyists
he can go over some additional
pieces I think we're all good.
Thank thank you Mr chair members
of the subcommittee
need to make some registered
lobbyists from Bernalillo county
in this instance just really
quick on text Bernalillo county
has tried to promote broader
data sharing on a local level
and what we found is it's not a
technology problem it's a
bureaucracy problem and the
issue is all the data silo there
are data sharing projects
throughout state and local
government but none of them were
talking to one another
we've kind of reached into other
states to understand what
they've done to facilitate
broader data sharing breaking
down those silos and it's
creating a data governance
structure or a framework they
can be used to help promote
broader data sharing right so
it's sort of the field on which
data sharing occurs but this is
not endeavoring to actually
engage in data collection and
data sharing it present New
Mexico tech is the place where
we put this because they're the
experts they did this for it
goes from there is here from New
Mexico tech and you can clarify
but they've done some projects
for the U. one and U. and that
are like this New Mexico tech is
supportive of the concept
we they they were they testified
last committee also the
association counties have
testified we really feel like
this is a good opportunity to
create the framework to engage
in better data sharing across
all spectrums meeting criminal
justice data so police officers
have information about an
individual from from their court
cases potentially in terms of
whether or not they've been
sound to have a behavior health
issues and they know how to deal
with them more readily folks in
the health care around folks in
the educational round I mean
even as far as going into taxes
it's just creating the relevant
framework to promote that data
sharing so I just wanted to
clarify those points.
I think that that thank you very
much miss Reese okay I think
we're gonna we're gonna close
today will come back to have the
discussion and then
consider taking action on
adopting this up and then we'll
go to public comment
Representative Serrato thank you
very much for taking time Mr
weeks thank you with that we're
going to conclude this meeting
the house appropriations and
finance committee thank you Mr.
