I'm here.
Representative headed up.
Year.
Representative Hochman Vigil
your.
Representative Lane.
Here.
Representative Lotta.
Representative Lotta.
Representative Sarinana air.
Representative Swetser here.
Representative Trujillo state.
Representative Trujillo so.
This.
I chair small.
Your.
Madam chair.
There.
It looks like we do have a
quorum already we do have a
quorum but before we jump into
the first agency I wanted to
call on Representative Crowder
for an announcement.
Thank you madam chair tomorrow
at twelve noon.
We will have a briefing on the
funded vacancy rates were
vacancy savings as it's
sometimes called.
It's an outstanding presentation
of chairman Garcia and I work
with the LFC staff I would
encourage if at all possible to
be there it's it's I've been
here for six years and this was
tremendously beneficial for me
so we'll give you a heads up
staff will send you a link for
that luncheon email thank you
madam chair.
Thank you Representative Crowder
representative Garcia so we look
forward to that briefing
tomorrow just trying to remind
the committee that we're going
to get we're going to be much
more focused on just the
operational budgets for these
agencies today we have seven
agencies we need to get through
and
We're going to ask that they not
talk about supplementals and
specials those are taken up in a
different hearing today it's a
hundred percent focus on the
operational will start out with
the two analysts and I want that
to go fairly quickly so we're
not here late into the evening
tonight on all these various
agencies and please stay focused
on operational budget questions
and let's start out with the two
analysts are first state can see
is agency code six SO nine
Indian Affairs Department and
then after the Ellis will go to
the secretary.
Good afternoon madam chair
members of the committee hi my
name is Jackie and I'm
legislative finance committee
analyst for the Indian Affairs
Department I have partners
is found on page two oh nine
million to.
So the LFC general fund revenue
recommendation is a hundred and
thirty one thousand lower than
the executive recommendation.
And the agency's FY twenty one
operating budget.
The LFC recommendation for other
transfers is where the big
differences and that is the
transfer of the tobacco
settlement fund money for that
tobacco cessation programs.
It is seventy eight point three
thousand lower than the
executive recommendation and the
FY twenty one operating budget.
And the LFC is lowering that
recommendation based on
estimates of the available
funding because of the pending
arbitration.
Both LFC and the executive
recommendation are flat in the
personal services category.
In that contracts category there
is a decrease in both the
executive and the LESC
recommendation that is an
accounting change where the
department is transferring
grants to Indian tribes to the
other categories.
And it's the same in both
recommendations.
And then in the other category
where the programs for the
tobacco sensation and the other
grant programs are that's where
the other differences are and
the LESC recommendation again is
seventy eight point three
thousand lower in the tobacco
settlement program money and
then it is it also lower in the
operating additional operating
cost savings I'm the LFC took
the agency's request as far as
operating costs were concerned
so the difference is really just
in the tobacco settlement money.
And then of the language is
different in between the
executive and the LESC again
because of the tobacco funding.
And with that I'll turn it over
to Michael to see if you have
any additional comments.
Thank you Mr K. T. good
afternoon madam chair and
members of the committee my name
is Michael reckons brick on the
executive budget and policy
analyst for the Indian Affairs
Department and missed the kick
you did a great job of
summarizing the differences
between the executive and out
and LESC recommendations the
executive recommendation keeps
the HSD flat with the current
year operating budget and all of
the funding of the LFC
recommendation again is Mr khaki
stated is in the other costs
category so this will allow the
Indian Affairs Department to pay
out more special project grants
early childhood education grants
and tobacco cessation and
prevention grants I think
secretary Trujillo will speak
more about that during her
presentation and the only other
thing I would add is that akar
let myself have come to a
consensus on the HSD performance
measures with that madam chair
if it's okay we'll turn it over
to a secretary Trujillo for her
presentation okay secretary I
had.
You madam chair and members of
the committee thank you for this
opportunity to discuss our
department's work in our budget
request for fiscal year twenty
to I'd like to introduce
interest president Indian
Affairs team you today I'm W.
secretary needing Padilla.
If all Chavis who serves as the
department's chief operating
officer and manages it the HSD
functions of the department hi
Chandler couple Y. E. who serves
as the department's chief
procurement officer and oversees
the capital outlay and test
programs and Stephanie Salazar
general counsel I want to get
right to the details of our
budget request and provided an
overview of the work at the
department next slide please.
For.
The second slide.
You know you to be I'm driving
this.
Responsible for member the
slides okay Rio.
I'm for FY twenty to the
Department request your support
and the executive recommendation
which will keep our department
and FY twenty one funding levels
I'm as you're all very much
aware our general fund budget
has steadily decreased by twenty
five point seven percent over
the last decade from three point
five million and FY nine to two
point six million today the
executive recommendation would
retain the department at FY
twenty one levels allowing us to
continue our vital work the
executive recommendation that
you see in front of you includes
the one thousand one hundred
thirty one more in general funds
and the LESC recommendation
seventy eight point three more
and transfers than the LESC two
hundred nine point four more in
overall revenue than the LFC and
two hundred and nine point four
more in the other categories and
the LESC and this retains are
requests that FY twenty one
levels the executive
recommendation would allow the
department to fund our special
projects requests early
childhood education and tobacco
cessation and prevention grants
at the FY twenty one level and
the LESC recommendation reduce
the special project funding to
three hundred and twenty nine
point two thousand and tobacco
outreach grants to one hundred
and seventy one thousand next
slide please.
Importantly madam chair members
of the committee the executive
recommendation allows IT
departments to continue our most
important initiatives including
maintaining and strengthening
our state tribal relations which
we've heard from our tribal
leadership here in New Mexico
I'm continuing to further the
work of our missing and murdered
indigenous women's and relatives
task force working with tribes
to respond and recover from the
COVID nineteen pandemic creating
more equitable systems of
education getting funds out to
tribes for critical
infrastructure projects
protecting air water and sacred
sites are we've made significant
strides in these areas which I
will discuss our early before I
get to that point I want to
provide some details on the
support that we provided to
tribes this past year during the
COVID pandemic next slide
please.
Since March madam chair members
of the committee our department
has focused much of its work on
COVID nineteen response and
tribal communities as many of
you know this pandemic has
disproportionately impacted our
tribes here in New Mexico and
this slide highlights some of
the efforts of the department we
created a tribal response
planned that compiled all the
best information available at
that time regarding the pandemic
included safety precautions
isolation guidance and what to
do in case of an outbreak in a
tribal community and I'm really
proud of this because this
became a model for other states
in addition early on in the
pandemic we detailed when asked
we really Salazar to service a
tribal liaison at art at the
Stadio State because we know it
was vital to have somebody from
our department serving in that
role providing services for
tribal communities.
He and the team there at the EOC
distributed food water PPE and
other critical resources and
this is most vital as many of
you know our tribal communities
have enacted some of the most
stringent lockdown procedures
that are still in place and
which is help to mitigate the
spread of COVID in their in
their communities
it was a vital to provide access
to food to our tribal
communities
where we all know that food
deserts exist and many of the
grocery short step shelves were
were anti and they're very
important many of our tribal
communities still lack access to
running water electricity
broadband even public radio so
these challenges really
contributed to the effect of
COVID in our tribal communities.
I'm very thankful to see the
light at the end of the tunnel
with the vaccine vaccine efforts
occurring throughout the state
and through the Indian health
service but we will continue to
support our tribal communities
in these efforts and will use
the budget to do so next slide
please.
especially thank you madam chair
members of the committee and
your your leadership and
governor Lujan hydration we
provided twenty eight million
dollars in Kerr's Act really
funds directly to tribal
communities I'm and I want to
thank you for your support I New
Mexico was one of the few states
that provided funding directly
to tribal nations these funds
help tribal governments to fund
locally determined relief and
recovery projects we work hand
in hand with DFA and tribal
leadership to disperse these
cares Act funding directly to
tribal nations and these went to
fund a variety of things
including purchasing PPE
applying urgency appropriations
within our tribal communities
broadband chrome books and
supporting schools in a special
person next slide please.
I wanted to also highlight some
of the other COVID work we did
we did develop a a children's
coloring book with the native
comedian to help children who
are struggling with isolation as
many of us know this is
something that's happening in
our communities we worked with
ECECD to distribute out care
packages and worked with the
O. S. U. to provide emergency
shelter for those needing to
isolate I.
Probably does get to the.
Some of the the program
victories from this year and the
work that we've done.
Our budget R. and then my dad
you task force has received
national and even international
attention our general counsel
status for your.
Yes yes within our department
we've convene a task force
regularly over the past year to
develop a final comprehensive
report that includes
recommendations for a second
phase of the task force this
legislation is being carried by
Representative Romero this year
and seeks a small appropriations
so that we can carry on this
important work next slide
please.
We were able to host our state
tribal leaders summit this past
year although it was virtually
we also were able to work hand
in hand with our tribal partners
to count as many of our tribal
members as we could during the
census even though it was
challenging and right at the
pandemic last year we received a
one million dollar transfer for
PED are we distributed these
funds directly to tribal
education departments and we're
excited about the work that
they'll be doing under these
requests lastly we have many
other initiatives that we're
working on with our tribal
communities I.
He is behavioral health suicide
prevention which our budget will
go to fund on projects on
cultural heritage and sacred
site protection energy public
safety tell all that being an
education next slide please.
Madam chair members of the
committee I'm really proud of
the staff as you know we are one
of the smaller departments and
we have a big mission
our staff is small but committed
to the lives of improving arch I
tribal people I'm here in New
Mexico we have fourteen FTEs and
we accomplished so much and I'm
really proud to say when I
was appointed to this position
two years ago we had a vacancy
rate of forty percent and now we
have a vacancy rate of seventeen
point six percent
the hiring freeze and COVID has
slowed our efforts to fill these
positions but we are on track to
fill those vacancies with only
for HSD employees we administer
over one hundred and sixteen
point eight million dollars to
all the tribal nations in New
Mexico we had a clean audit for
the last two years well our
previous your audit is still an
overview at OSA we but it will
likely also be clean we have a
full two four for the first time
in four years we participate in
twenty task force on boards and
commissions to represent tribal
interests and we have re
established ourselves as a
valued partner in strengthening
state tribal relations with that
madam chair members of the
committee and happy to stand for
any questions and I want to
thank you for your continued
dedication to not only are need
assistance for New Mexico all
New Mexicans during this very
difficult time thank you.
All right thank you very much if
we if we could please take this
the presentation down.
There we go.
Can we take those share screen
down.
There we go all righty
thank you madam secretary and
analysts what I would like to do
is to go to the committee first.
Representative Crowder you have
your hand up or is that from the
previous issue.
Okay then you need done mute and
we'll go from there.
Thank you madam chair it has to
do with the language on the.
Different sheet on page one it
about the arbitration
do we know where that
arbitration is gonna take place
is there a date for that.
Is it.
Just secretary you know.
Madam chair representative
Crowder I believe it's going to
occur in April or may of this
year that's what we've been told
but it was schedule last year as
well and it was a it was not
pushed out.
Okay and and that's nationwide
right on the tobacco settlement
fund.
Madam chair representative I
believe that is correct okay
thank you Sir thank you madam
chair.
All right let's see we've got.
Okay I don't see any other hand
so and usually Representative
small as we know I missing
anybody.
so are you want to go to
Representative small for the
motion.
Thank you madam chair I would
move the LFC recommendation for
HSD code six oh nine Indian
Affairs Department okay we have
a motion to we have a second a
second and I'm sure you have a
second for representative Garcia
for the LFC
recommendation.
Okay is there any opposition to
that
Motion.
I don't see any opposition so
it's a pro for the LFC.
But
I want to make sure the staff
reminds me we get into catch up
clean up about this contractual
services category want to know a
little bit more about that and I
can do that offline so thank you
secretary Trujillo for all of
your good work and helping the
people in New Mexico.
Thank you madam chair members of
the committee committee
I wish you continued strength in
your work and please continue to
be safe thank you all right
let's go to the next HSD six
twenty for aging and long term
Services Department go to the
analyst first and then the
members.
Thank you madam chair until a
client with legislative finance
committee with us today is also
MaryBeth Densmore from the
department of finance
administration and secretary
Katrina full term Lopez from the
aging long term services
department at the direction of
the chair I will go quickly the
major differences can be
highlighted on the general fund
summary and that's PTA of your
packet eight.
And you can see there's
basically two lines in the
general fund that are the major
differences line twenty six and
that is an increase from the
executive for the aging network
almost one point two million
that wasn't included in the
department question there for
the LFC was unable to consider
it.
And then money thirty three the
executive recommendation
increase four hundred and thirty
six thousand four Indian Affairs
are Indian elder affairs person
that also was not included in
the agency requests and so LESC
was unable to recommend it that
those two pieces of account for
a large part of the differences
as we go over the different
shades with that I'll go over
the summary page very quickly
madam chair.
as I discussed there's a one
point three million dollar
general fund difference between
the LFC and exec being found in
the aging network and program
support for those two
initiatives the executive
recommendation was six hundred
thousand above the LFC and
program support mostly to
decrease the vacancy rate for
this person and executive
recommendation was one hundred
and eighty one hundred ninety
eight thousand but built in
contractual services need a
protective services for
contractual services.
LFC was nearly one million below
the executive in the other cost
category in the aging network in
that stat line we talked about
in the general fund summary
record.
The executive recommendation
included non reverting general
fund language for the aging that
work in the adult protective
services while the LFC
recommendation did not include
that language and the executive
recommendation also included
language that the general fund
appropriation for the aging long
term for the aging network.
In the other category to
supplement the old federal older
Americans act shall be used to
support each network program and
services with that I will turn
it over to my counterpart
manifests over the first
program.
Kelly good afternoon madam chair
members of the committee my name
is merry about guns more money
executive analyst for the aging
long term service department I
will be as quick as possible as
well to help you along I'm at
the program that I'll go over
briefly is P. five nine two its
consumer an elder rights there
aren't too many differences in
this program but I'm overall the
executive general fund
recommendation was one hundred
and four point three thousand
above the LFC I'm this is
basically because LFC
recommendations supported the
department request I'm.
The executive well that's not
why actually I'm but the first
mention of the LFC
recommendation for person
support at the department
request the executive increase
the vacancy rate just a little
bit that that's the difference
in that category fifty one point
eight thousand.
the other difference in the
contractual services executive
as flat as well FY twenty one
and then in other costs this is
the majority of the difference
the executive is higher by one
fifty three point seven thousand
and that's to continue the
executive priority of increasing
outreach for the statewide
ombudsman program but that's
about it for consumer and older
right so I'll turn it back over
to Kelly for the next program.
Next program is P. five nine
your the protective services
exactly general fund
recommendation was fourteen
point one thousand above the LFC
the LESC recommendation per
person was a hundred and fifty
five point seven thousand bodies
that can it do to increase
federal revenues requested by
the department well the
executive recommendation
slightly increase the vacancy
rate the executive
recommendation increase
contractual services to FY
twenty one operating levels
including cost I. T. contracts
resulting in that one hundred
and sixty nine point eight
thousand dollar difference the
correctional services category
and we'll go back to MaryBeth.
Thanks again Kelly and madam
chair members of the committee
the next program is P. five nine
for aging network so this is one
of the biggest differences are
the executive general fund
recommendation and its program
with nine hundred and fifty
seven thousand about the LFC.
Also in this program the LFC
recommendation for person
supported the department request
well the executive increased the
vacancy rate which resulted in
the sixty eight point two
thousand dollar difference in
contracts executive reduce
miscellaneous contracts that was
to better align with actual
expenditures from FY twenty so
that is resulting in need that
are fifteen point two thousand
difference are the main
differences in the other costs
category and that's where the
executive increased
close to a million and that's
for the aging network providers
other also couple differences
all just know quickly here for
language the executive
recommendation did include our
non reverting general fund
language for the aging network
program well the LFC
recommendation did not.
The executive recommendation
also included language that the
general fund appropriation to
the agent network program the
aging and long term Services
Department any other category to
supplement the federal older
Americans act should be used as
a support agent network programs
and services I think Kelly
mentioned that but it's in this
program and I will turn it back
over to Kelly field ask program.
You were in programs support G.
code five ninety one you'll see
recommendation was two hundred
eleven point one thousand hello
the executive the executive
recommendation increase general
fund revenue in person on
employee benefits to reduce the
vacancy rate and slightly
realligned revenues the
contractual services category is
also in at four hundred and
thirty six point two thousand
dollar difference the executive
recommendation supported agency
requesting contractual services
and provided additional funding
for I. T. needs result in the
difference in those categories
with that I'll turn it to invest
for any further comment and then
to the Department thank you
madam chair one.
And Kelly real quickly madam
chair members the committee I
just wanted to clarify I think
the secretary will talk about
this during her presentation but
I believe Kelly mentioned at the
beginning that in programs
support the executive added
money for an office of the
Indian elder affairs
And all funding and that that
isn't quite the intention that
is needed I think the agency
will speak to but the intent was
was just you are decrease our
vacancy rate to get it to a more
reasonable level so just just to
be clear about that for the
committee but that's that's the
only comment that I have so with
that I will turn it over to the
secretary.
Thank you madam chair and
members of the committee I think
I hope that madam chair and Mr
vice chair you received our
letter just directed to the two
of you just summing up in
shoring up our request and the
reason why we thought that was
very important is that we had
spoken with David Abbey about
the discrepancies in the budgets
and are are a miscommunication
with DFA and not getting our
budget completely solid I think
as you know we've been working
very hard and not only COVID
activities but I'm gonna show
you quickly and this power point
and not go through all the
details is that you're gonna see
the work that we've been doing
in and out why it's so important
that we have money added to our
budget what we're asking for
overall is program transfer
authority to to cover our
language shortfalls and so we've
got some areas we believe that
we can move dolorous around if
we just have that budget
transfer authority that's why
we're asking for that we're
trying new things within aging
and long term Services
Department including leveraging
Medicaid dollars we don't know
what that is is that how much
fruit that's going to bear for
us because we've got a large
population that is Medicare only
but summer dual eligibles or
Medicaid only and which we
should be out maximizing
Medicaid for and so that's what
we're working on this next year
we're also working on non
returning languages what we're
asking for for both the aging
network Division and
opportunities services and so
which eight once you see what
these numbers are and as we
continue to grow we need some
non reverting language at least
for a while so that we can
understand what our population
is who's on Medicaid issues
eligible for just Medicare and
how we can develop a statewide
plan with our managed care
providers in order to streamline
our aging network services and
then we want to add that our
language for the keys debater
Fund which.
Will allow for the agency to
utilize all the appropriated
funds for essential services for
adult daycare it's in the
executive recommendation to
support this request and it you
know we can we can extend our
current contracts and to FY
twenty two and FY twenty twenty
three we are also asking for the
continued language to stay in
the budget of the twelve point
five percent of distribution we
believe that that is working
well for providers and the
emergency funding for aging
network providers which is six
hundred thousand dollars
annually which we we use I'm not
stable labor the point but to
show you here if you look at
what COVID has done it is not
only brought out the best in our
in our department but it is
shown seniors people who are
eligible what they can get
through the aging network
services and so you see an
eighteen point seven five
percent increase in consumers
consumers and eight ninety eight
point eight three increase in
the needles provided in just
natural well so we're seeing
those numbers go up by twenty
thirty we are going to have the
fourth highest populated senior
state in the country per capita
sixty and older and so we do not
expect these numbers to go down
they're going to increase and
the consumers that we have today
are not just going to be here
through
through the time frame of COVID
they're going to be here on
after because they need the
service and they enjoy the
service so in PSA to you looking
at the increase in numbers again
for the consumers you seen an
eight percent increase in the
meals is a twenty two percent
increase so more people are
asking for meals and we've also
accommodated more weekend deals
when we can the other services
that we project so there are
other services such as adult
daycare in home services and
case management services that
have been closed down that we
have been able to.
Juggle money from one pot the
next to to mitigate our deficit
but that's going to open up as
we as more vaccine gets out and
once that gets out that we can
start opening up these other
services and we're going to need
more money for these additional
services as well so we predict
that this man is going to go out
again I'm not going to be labor
the point you can see PSA three
nine percent increase in just a
consumers forty three percent
increase in the meals and a nine
percent increase we projected
ninety percent increase once
other services open.
if you look at the Indian tribe
way this is one to pay
particular attention to so when
we've been on the tribes and
pueblos when they shut down
they've shut down everything and
so they haven't really been able
to do grab and go work home
delivered meals and this is why
you're not seeing a huge
increase in in consumers you
actually see a decrease but with
the meals that we were able to
find we did more meals during
eight get our first and second
quarter than we did last year
because of the need in these
communities that you see it
twenty three point one five
percent increase in that just in
meals along so we also broke
this out by by county so you can
see what that looks like I won't
go through that in most you see
that we've had percentages an
increase in a few areas you can
see that we had at the decrease
but most the majority of our
areas are increasing in our
numbers.
Thank excuse me Katrina are you
speaking from a power point
presentation yes I am what you
can't see it I'm so sorry.
Sorry we haven't seen one page
okay.
You want to start all over thank
you so I want you to start from
where you're at.
Okay.
My apologies.
Okay.
Sorry about that.
Can you see it now okay my
goodness okay I'm so sorry is so
you know what you're saying is
the increases that we have
talked about the different PSAs
what you can see here is the
increases in meals and other
services by PSA the Indian
triple a that I just spoke about
madam chair even though when
everything was shut down we
figured out how to get deals in
in the first and second quarters
you can see that our meal
numbers have gone up in the
Indian triple A.'s even though
are provider or our customer
numbers have gone down
and then just moving around meet
we brought this also down so you
can see the increases Parke
county and I will not belabor
this is already know that I'm
behind in some counties you see
that there is a deficit but in
most counties you see that there
is an increase so and are Indian
triple A.'s you see that there
has been a district eight eight
and it where there's been an
increase or decrease in and I
just explain to you why but we
thought it would be important
for you to see what those
numbers are and and finally our
breakdown of our six million
dollar request is as follows and
PSA one we would request one
point six million PSA to one
point four seven five million he
is a three one point five
million PSA for four hundred
thirty eight thousand I triple
eight one hundred and eighty
seven thousand I. T. six hundred
fifty thousand because we need
infrastructure and support and
then are this of Indian elder
fears it you know for the
nineteen pueblos and tribes that
they've been trying to manage
the been managing it with three
people which is definitely not
enough and so we're respectfully
requesting a hundred fifty
thousand and that area my
apologies for not not putting
the power point nine technical
difficulties are all my own but
with that we will stand for
questions thank you madam chair.
All right thank you if we could
stop sharing screen and then I
can see the committee great
thank you let's go to questions
we'll start with Representative
Crowder thank you madam chair
just one question I heard you
mention in your our part madam
secretary that you would like to
have a non reverting language
when I look at your reversion is
there's four million four
hundred fifty one thousand
reductions how much of that was
cares Act money how much of it
was other.
I'm just so I said to to for
this question on to Valerie
Garcia to does our budget Allori
do you have the breakdown of
that number.
Yes
Because of the committee I'm.
This.
The general fund so we've we've
we've rated one point six
million of the general fund a
lot of it.
We were able to
to.
To decrease our spending our
spending in our programs part we
want to try you want to hit the.
The division not all because we
act we were being asked to cut
our budget by five percent so
we're able to do three a little
over three percent so we re very
one point six million of of the
of general fund as far as care
isn't FSC are just we're still
spending that we have until
September of twenty twenty one
to spend this so we're right on
track and spending all of that.
Okay the chairman I'd like to
ask if LFC could help me
Reconcile the number and volume
one of the four point four five
one million in the one point six
million so that I can better
understand this reversion chart
madam chair final question madam
secretary I also noticed in
there that you.
Transferred six hundred and
thirty thousand out of your
personal services employee
benefits wasn't money used for
place.
Certainly I will defer that
again to Valerie.
The
madam chair members of the
committee we have that
information I just need to bring
it up.
Have to get back to you on those
numbers I can send them to write
to you as soon as we're done
with this hearing.
I just be curious how that money
was used thank you madam chair.
Mr madam chair may I respond
also Representative Crowder
hi David.
So this question came up the
other day with do it they
questioned the Roadrunner figure
last week and we've determined
that these figures are right
however the role versions come
from DFA furniture control
division it may include amounts
in addition to the operating
hello that money it could be a
special appropriation for the
even the general fund capital
outlay so miss court will help
research that but I think from
my experience last week the
numbers right we just would need
to disaggregate the tail risk
for work on that with DFA to get
you report Mr madam chair and
Representative Grove.
Thank you Mr thank you Mr
chairman madam chair and someone
questions okay do we have any
other questions Representative
small.
Thank you very much miss madam
chair thank you madam secretary
obviously you as care to
extremely haveli load that said
madam secretary your cash
balances have grown it's up to
six point six million as of
November of twenty twenty
How how those grown how did you
guys not look to tap into some
of those balances and madam
chair will you be looking to tap
into some of those balances as
we face the additional
challenges that you outlined.
So that's a great question madam
chair and Representative small
and we've moved money where we
can move that we don't have full
budget authority to move all of
our dollars around which is why
we're asking for some of that
transfer authority on the heels
of this we're also taking some
rest so we we believe that more
adult protective service clients
actually qualify for Medicaid
and that we should have been
getting them and rolled and
making sure that we were doing
our due diligence and we're
starting on that now we don't
know what those revenues will
yield and so it's kind of hard
to predict which is one of the
reasons why we're asking for
transfer authority also having
you know some non reverting
language would allow us to cover
shortfalls in the years to come
just because it's hard for us to
predict at times how many meals
one client may need because of
their household situation so
right now they need they only
need three meals a week but if
somebody in that household loses
a job or their natural sports
can no longer cook for them they
may need a meal five days a week
or seven days a week and so this
is kind of what we're trying to
figure out and balance out and I
hope that I'm answering what
you're intending to but we've
got money sitting in one area
where we have the transfer
authority to get put it and make
it full in another area and we
wish to do those things.
Thank you madam chair thank you
madam secretary just a quick
follow up so you're saying that
some of that six point six
million currently in cash
balances you lacked the
authority to it at target those
funds yes to our to okay.
Thank you very much madam chair
thank you madam secretary.
Representative Lara.
Thank you madam chair and thank
you madam secretary of the
presentation Mr Abbey mention
capital outlay and I'm looking
at at at the volume and it says
here that there are currently a
hundred ninety four active
capital outlay requests and
that's not including the twenty
twenty bond questions was which
is going to have more capital
outlay requests this so I wonder
what the backlog is and and what
is it that you're trying to do
to to clean up this backlog
because that seems like a a lot
of money here that's as a Bob
balance of fifty five point
eight million dollars madam
chair.
Representative that's a good
question I I think of the
department has beefed up their
capital outlay bureau to address
the backlog and maybe they could
help answer the question.
Thank you madam chair and and
and Representative are that's
exactly what we've done we've
added more individuals there we
put in different processes to
make things more streamlined and
easier it's not always easy when
when we have other partners as
in the in local communities to
may say that they're going to
pony up part of the capital
dollars or operational dollars
and that doesn't come through
and so we had to change projects
up but we're on top of that
better now this year than what
we've done before and we are
working actively to clear those
things up and and they had made
great progress and so we're we
will continue to do that we know
our senior centers are
struggling and we want to get
them up to code we that's one
and that we also want to come
back into sort of the new
generation of what this
generation wants to see in terms
of Sir at a services and maybe
they don't want to traditional
building maybe they want to
intergenerational building so
we're looking at the future and
trying to figure those pieces
out as well.
Okay in the thank you for that
madam secretary and and thank
you madam chair that that was
that's all have thank you.
Representative Anderson.
Representative Anderson thank
you madam chairman of madam
chairman my questions thank you.
We lost you representative.
But madam chairman can you hear
me we can we can hear you.
Okay madam chairman my questions
been answered I'm sorry.
I think my computer still
warming up thank you all right.
He also stands out but I do have
a question myself on this aging
network difference there's quite
a that's quite a difference
there between the LFC and exec.
I understand the issues about
timeliness in getting
information and so budget sins
and different shades can be
And they are prepared.
But this kind of difference what
does that actually mean to the
department's aging Network if
they lose they lose a million
dollars or don't receive this
additional million dollars.
Madam chair it it's critically
it's absolutely crippling you
know some of the stuff that
we're doing it again we've seen
an increase in not only clients
but an increase in the number of
meals we've seen these people
who have the need that we're
going out there to do it right
now we converted to a cost
reimbursement system so we know
how much meals are costing and
and what they're doing to do
home delivered and and grab and
go meals so absolutely crippling
if they don't get it and we will
not be able to serve the people
who now know about S. and who
qualify for services which I
don't believe that the state of
New Mexico ever intends to do.
Kelly I want to ask you is the
reason that we don't have
anything in there is because
It wasn't requested and as we
thought it would be or what was
the reason we don't have
anything in there.
Madam chairman but it wasn't
requested to LFC and all this
was the Act once the second
recommendation came out during
the budget process we did talk
with aging several times knowing
that the average cost per meal
was going up and the enrollment
was going up and in the current
fiscal year they were saying
you're mostly able to transfer
money around programs to cover
the cost and that they were
still working on projections of
what twenty two would possibly
look like about that
informational C. was not able to
make our without the request any
information else is not able to
make a recommendation.
Okay so what that tells me as
they're not allowed to transfer
because we haven't given the Bar
Authority.
On some of the in some cases and
we know that there's an
increased so I want to
Out on a limb here and I'm going
to ask that when the motion be
made that we look at least half
that amount and by the time it
gets over to the Senate you know
they have time to to look at
this and if they need to add the
additional they can.
I was just in the timing of when
things are due or or changes in
conditions so Representative
small for the motion.
Thank you very much madam chair
I would move that we approve the
LFC with the your provision that
looking at least at that half of
the difference within the aging
network program the current
device right.
The second representative
Armstrong any opposition to that
motion saying we have an
approved motion thank you
everybody thank you.
All right let's go to our next
agency which is workforce
solutions Department HSD code
six thirty one start with the
analyst and then we'll go to the
secretary.
You madam chair members of the
committee it's a car that the
khaki again and I am that
analyst for the work force
solutions department
also on the meeting with me is
Simon Miller who is to analyst
with the department of finance
and administration and secretary
mccamley and members of his team
are are also with us so overall
the workforce solutions
department budget is just one
point five percent lower than
the FY twenty one operating
budget the executive
recommendation does include
general fund revenues an
increase in general fund
revenues of eight hundred and
nine thousand.
And the only differences between
the recommendations is found in
the labor relations program
which is P. seven seven six.
So in the other in the agencies
other programs both the LFC and
executive recommendations are
identical and in line with what
the agency requests.
I will point out in program
seven seven six which is the
label at labor relations
division there is a decrease a
two million dollar decrease in
other transfers and a decrease
in federal funds and this is
simply a transfer of the
apprenticeship program from the
labor relations division to the
employment services division.
I'm over eighty percent of the
department of revenue is derived
from federal funding spread
across the five divisions and
the LESC recommendation holds
the general fund flat with the
FY twenty one operating budget
and the executive recommendation
includesd eight hundred and nine
thousand increase in general
fund revenue.
And then the other.
A highlight is that the
recommendation does maintain the
transfer of one million dollars
from the workers compensation
administration fund that we
have.
Recommended for a number of
years now and it this year in
accordance with that agencies
request a hundred and fifty
point five thousand is going to
the unemployment division and
eight hundred and forty nine
point five thousand is going to
the employment services
division.
I'm and with that I was gonna
turn it over to Simon who can go
into a little bit more detail
about the differences in the
recommendation in the labor.
The labor relations division and
we're happy to answer any other
questions about the budget in
the other the other programs but
since the recommendations are
actually are identical we were
going to go through them one by
one but are happy to do so at
your question.
Then all right go ahead to us
the DFA analyst right good
afternoon madam chair members of
the committee again my name is
Simon Miller and I'm an analyst
with DFA like Carlos and I'll
just go over the differences in
P. seven seven six the labor
division.
The core function of the labor
relations division is to monitor
and enforce employer compliance
with labor laws and regulations
for example claims of wage
staffed or employer
discrimination are investigated
and adjudicated by this
division.
The LFC general fund
recommendation is flat to fiscal
year twenty one while the
executive recommendation
provides a general fund increase
of eight hundred and nine
thousand.
So what can the Legislature
expect to see from the
department with this additional
funding.
This increase put forward by the
executive is for additional
investigators lawyers and
technological updates to improve
the timeliness of the
investigative and enforcement
activities.
Currently the caseload is around
one hundred per investigator
which has made it difficult for
the agency to achieve their
timeliness performance targets.
We would like to eventually
reduce the caseload down to a
more manageable seventy per
investigator which would improve
the timeliness of investigations
and determinations.
The additional funding in the
executive recommendation would
help move the division in that
direction to better to better
assist workers in New Mexico
with that I'll turn it over to
secretary McKinley thank you.
Roy welcome secretary mccamley
were all years.
Madam chair thank you very much
for the time this is my ninth
straight year presenting before
House Appropriations next year
should get some kind of watch.
I do appreciate the time let me
share my screen here real quick.
Go.
Excellent thank you very much
Madam chair for the opportunity
to present before you today this
is our presentation number one
the first thing I want to talk
about is the difference between
the LESC and the governor's
recommendation why we are asking
for extra money as someone
pointed out our labor relations
division is responsible for
enforcing wage that if people
even players are not paying
their employees the minimum wage
they can file a complaint with
our office and we have
investigators they can
investigate and determine
whether or not that complaint is
valid or not and if that
complaint is valid we have one
lawyer who can take these cases
to court this is created a
backlog that is fairly well
documented across United States
this is not something that is
only an issue here in New Mexico
but one of the governor's
directives to me when I first
got this job a couple years ago
it was to really work on that
wage theft backlog in so while
we have been doing as much as we
can in terms of increased
organization increased
efficiency or first got to the
office their storage method for
cases was literally piles of
Manila envelopes that is not
what we're doing now we're
working towards getting a
completely online case tracking
system that will allow things to
be done much more efficiently
and effectively however at some
point we just need more people
and I'll go into in a little bit
what are Case counts are looking
like on this but that's kind of
where we are act get more people
in and it's especially important
that we get a new lawyer and
frankly we may eventually need a
new legal secretary madam chair
one further thing before I leave
this topic this request is only
for what we see right now there
are a couple of different paid
sick leave proposals moving
through the legislature right
now that put the responsibility
for enforcing any complaints
about a lack of paid sick.
Leave on our department there is
no appropriation in any of those
bills so if those are passed
this frankly won't be enough and
we will start having not only
more backlogs for wait staff but
also backlogs for investigations
regarding paid sick leave if
that becomes reality once again
we don't know that but I wanted
to make sure that was something
that you all understood moving
forward
additionally if if people have
questions about which step dad
Williamson from our our labor
relations division is on to
answer those questions moving on
to the next slide I'll make the
rest these pretty quick as miss
Becky pointed out we're the
second we're the second highest
state agency in terms of amount
of money coming from the federal
government versus state
appropriations so we actually
got a little bit more money this
year to help out with
unemployment because obviously
our unemployment load has gone
way up but we're just asking us
to stay flat for employment
services unemployment all the
other things that we do
information technology one of
the thing I really did want to
point out as I as I talk to you
about the LFC we are working
hard to actually try to help
lead the effort of the state to
combine offices with other state
agencies in every
in every location and every
community a lot of times
different agencies not only are
spending more money than they
possibly should by having
different offices but that's not
as good for constituents when
they may have to be able to deal
with the same thing with the
same kind of issue with
different agencies as an example
we recently took over of the
tenant for sponsor bill is for
the state those used to be under
the Human Services department we
contract with them excuse me.
They contracted with an outside
agency an outside nonprofit to
do that we took over those
services are starting at the
beginning of the year and will
fully take over starting the
middle year we'll be able to get
some efficiencies in terms of
budget by bringing those in
house and we think it'll be a
better experience for a lot of
customers who do the same type
of thing just a quick update on
three different topics and I
will stop talking answer
questions here's some numbers
regarding ways staff
which I was talking about before
like I said when we first got
here in January twenty nineteen
there wasn't a really good
tracking system for the process
we started really working on
organizational capacity for that
and we're able to put some
comparisons for you together on
the different years as you can
see there there continues to be
increase in wage claims receipt
and that's one of the reasons we
need more people to be able to
process these claims but we are
working on trying to get more
mediation more administrative
decisions and frankly more money
into people's pockets when they
do deserve it I'll go to the
next slide.
And this is where we're really
proud when we first got here we
really didn't know.
Frankly where we were at a lot
of different cases and at the
end of last year we determined
we had about nineteen hundred
cases and what we call our wage
that backlog the two things that
we now have figured out we have
control over or the first two
blocks you see before you seven
thirty six number which the
amount of cases we have an
investigation in the amount that
are are in our batters box those
the folks that have not been
assigned yet the reason that we
are sending all those we call
what we want to keep our average
caseload as Simon pointed out to
a reasonable manageable amount
per investigator so our backlog
now what we consider a backlog
is nine hundred thirty eight
cases as of the end of the year
that number's actually gone down
a little bit over the past month
the rest of the cases we have
our things out of our control
and if you have questions about
each of those things is Williams
and can answer those for you but
I wanna let you know because
this is a topic that we always
get brought up at these hearings
we are making progress in this
regard but we get to the point
where efficiencies an
organization can only go so far
we're gonna needs more folks
further more I'm here to
emphasize highly enough how
important other lawyer is to our
process we have one guy doing
everything in this department
especially a paid sick leave is
passed the bill that went
through the house labor the
update requires us to file civil
actions should there be some
investigations a finder's issues
we simply cannot do that with
one lawyer and make sure that
people get their investigations
taken care of next slide I want
to talk quickly about the
unemployment trust fund as many
of you all know we had a fairly
healthy Trust Fund and about the
four hundred sixty million
dollar levels in April then the
pandemic.
And we went from having about
ten thousand people on receiving
payment for unemployment the
week of March nights to over a
hundred fifty thousand in June
the numbers come down again but
the trust fund formula that
funds that program simply not
set up for a pandemic and we had
to eat into that fund and
eventually started borrowing
money from the federal
government as of the end of
December thank you very much
your work in the participate in
the November legislative session
allowed us to not only get
twelve hundred dollar payments
out to about a hundred and forty
excuse me a hundred twenty
thousand New Mexicans we have
some money left over fifty
million dollars that we put into
the trust fund so for the past
month or so we have been using
that money from the cares Act
instead of borrowing money from
the federal government to pay
unemployment insurance claims
now we're almost out of that
money that money will either
this week or next week will be
out but I want to let you know
moving forward the legislature
will have to make a decision the
session whether or not.
Because we need more money in
the trust fund and the taxes are
being provided whether or not we
want to kind of address that
internally as a state and house
bill one forty eight with
Representative Chandler is an
attempt to do that with some
increased revenues and increased
dispersion from state reserves
or whether we want to wait for
the federal government's either
take care of it with their bill
coming through or frankly for
them to raise taxes it would be
the end of next year that they
would do so if we haven't paid
off or debt by that but that's
the situation I'd be happy to
answer specific questions on
that
The there is a possibility that
the federal government could
take action on this situation we
just learned this morning that
their proposal for proposes the
first a hash mark on that which
is an extension of the interest
free period alone through the
end of August and they are
looking at some more block
grants for states though we're
not sure exactly how much that
is gonna be we think it's a
three hundred fifty billion
dollar mark so if that were
appropriated and if the other
thing would happen we would be
able to possibly use some of
that money for.
The U. I trust fund that would
be a discussion of the
administration level we don't
know when that would be I will
say we had a trust fund working
group that was talking about
this whole issue because is for
serious with the business
representatives from around the
country art from around the
state as well as Representative
Chandler and some folks from our
department they would rather the
state take care of this they
didn't like the federal
government raising their federal
tax rates point two percent
every year like California did
that's a that's a discussion for
for you all to kind of Mull over
as we move into the session.
last thing I want to talk about
madam chair I know this is an
interesting that is a warm to
your heart the workforce
innovations and opportunities
act boards for the state of New
Mexico frankly are not working
well they get about twenty four
million dollars from around the
state W. secretary a lot of
monthly of court of us on board
to talk about the process that
we have been going to try to get
some of those folks to use their
money more efficiently
effectively and I'll be honest
with you our state workforce
board we have put them to work
and the overall.
Conclusion of the state
workforce board of talk about
this is the structure that we
have simply does not allow them
to do well and so they are
working right now on a proposal
to completely reform and
restructure those boards to a
more effective efficient level
and we hope to be able to have a
a presentation to the governor
by late April early may of this
year if she agreed to it we
would have a year long process
where we would go and reform
those point madam chair as
someone who you know who have
had conversations with you about
this specifically these have to
do better and not only was that
important before the pandemic as
we move to recover from the
pandemic it is absolutely vital
that we have every tool at our
disposal as sharp and effective
as possible and we are looking
to do that
We do have some funding levels
we need to get some reserves in
the first.
Families first coronavirus Act
about five million dollars we
have dipped into that a little
bit for some additional expenses
we if at all possible like to
keep those in reserve in case we
go into recession and we have to
spend more money the problem
with federal grants is that
they're generally a few months
behind when we need the money
and so we would really like to
keep that up for as long as we
can in case we needed as a
reserve and we would like to
provide prioritize funding that
will expire because there is no
expiration date on this and then
our our public R. P. and I Fund
is generally what we consider
normal reserves however we have
look to that to pay off the
interest we're probably gonna
have to pay off if the feds
don't X. extend the interest
free period our loan a past fall
because as of now even if this
new bill gets through because it
ends at the end of August and we
would interest at the end of
September of this upcoming year
we would and interest payment
would be need that money to pay
that off for a loan we've taken
Madam chair on the stop sharing
that is my presentation I would
also like to let you know that
in addition to W. secretary
monthly Cordoba who can't answer
questions about the boards in
addition to that Williamson who
can answer questions about the
page that process and stuff
there we also have David Roybal
who is our acting HSD director
and CFO can answer questions
about the budget madam chair
thank you for your time I look
for to answer any questions on
the.
I thank you very much
Mr secretary before I go to the
committee I just have one quick
question on restructuring these
workforce boards is that take
legislation.
Madam chair it might eventually
are W. secretary quarter would
you want to answer that.
Lundstrom and members of the
committee I yes it would be
choir some legislation we would
have to come back and get
approval for just the either if
we're going to consolidate or if
we're going to shrink the number
of ports that we would have to
bring that before the committee
next year so madam chair our
plan was to go before the
governor in the spring Seishi
will take a seat she has to get
the first check off if we did
that we would basically have a
twelve month process where we
would then also work are
provided plan into that for the
short session does that make
sense okay I just didn't know if
you had to have have that in
conjunction with administrative
changes all right let's go to
the committee and let's start
with representative Allison.
My answer.
Thank you madam chair.
This would be for the secretary
of this is in reference to the
ETA I know there was some money
earmarked for you but I don't
see anywhere in the report as to
where where would show up the
reason why a mask and was in my
area there has been some
employees laid off already from
the power plants and I know
they're probably dipping into
your unemployment.
So can you bring us up to speed
as to where.
Where is that money is and how
the unemployment is getting paid
out Madam chair representative
Alice and I are you soon you're
talking about the energy
transition act yes yes so madam
chair representative the energy
transition act allowed for PNM
to issue bonds and some of those
bonds would end up going as a
revenue disbursement to three
New Mexico departments ourselves
we get the the majority of it at
the Economic Development
Department we get a small share
of the Indian Affairs Department
get a much smaller share those
funds are not going to be
available we think until next
year we just checked with PNM we
believe there waiting for some
legal issues to settle out and
so those funds that we would
then use in your area to
hopefully.
Help support a plan that your
local area is actually coming up
with through a group of folks
that have been meeting fairly
regularly to come up with that
plan at that time right now
Madam chair representative that
money is not available to us and
we're still working with the
local groups on a plan to figure
out where that money would be
best used to help transfer some
of the economic growth from
those coal plants and and the
money to new areas of growth.
Okay thank you Secretary and the
so so what happens to the people
that are.
Displaced worker now the does
that mean that they don't get to
dip into any of what was
earmarked and that is in your
holding so madam chair
representative I think we're
talking about two different
possibility so if they are laid
off now they can get
unemployment through the regular
unemployment process which they
will be able to get okay and as
of now because of the bill that
was passed at the end of the
year if they are receiving
unemployment disbursements now
they're getting their regular
weekly benefit amount which is
based on how much of the baby
made over the past eighteen
months and most of those folks
who qualify for the maximum
amount plus an additional three
hundred dollars a week according
to the proposal that the
president is putting forward
that would extend those
unemployment benefits through
the very end of August and keep
an additional four hundred
dollars a week.
In addition to the weekly
benefit amounts that they were
getting at that time that is a
completely different program
though that what you were
talking about with the ETA ETA
dollars when we do get them
available would be used for
workforce training to supplement
new areas of growth and some of
the proposals we've had up there
for value added agriculture
expanding the Raytheon plants
film work that sort of thing is
what the local local group came
up okay thank you Secretary I
think we need to have a lot more
discussion offline so thank you
madam chair.
Representative also
Representative Castellano.
Your muted.
Madam chair I'm I'm not here and
is it just me no I'm sorry you
did.
Okay so
significantly I'm looking at
Right now on your
Apprentice programs.
how much is how much does it
cost or how much is coming out
of the budget for the pension
program because the reason I'm
asking is if we go to volume
one.
apprenticeship apprenticeships
registered and in training you
got six you have sixteen hundred
in FY eighteen and in FY twenty
fourteen hundred and that
targeted in and actuals of
seventeen eighty five.
I'm on the bottom it says
compliance reviews and quality
assessments on registered
apprentice programs you at six
targeted in FY twenty how come
there's nothing on on actuals
on.
FY twenty actuals and and
there's a red what is that red
stand for thank thank you madam
chair representative Custer and
I'll let David Roybal from our
finance office answer that David
do you have a specific answer
that question.
Mind you but as well thank you
madam chair and representative I
believe you are you talking
about a performance measure are
you in a performance measure
right now yes Sir volume is
volume what yes Sir okay I'm
gonna have to get back to you on
that performance measure itself
I apologize I don't have that
data for me but will definitely
address that.
You in the committee to thank
you madam chair it's just I just
want to know because the
pressure of programs I think are
important but if we're not
meeting targets or standards you
know it's kind alarming but I
thank you and you can maybe up
Representative of secure we can
we can call the house well
offline and we can discuss those
in one sure sure madam chair
representative and I I just was
given some knowledge I think
you're talking about on site
audits and I'll be happy to talk
to you about those afterwards it
at your convenience if you want
to just give me a call we can
figure that out okay.
That's fine thank you Secretary
thank you madam chair.
Yeah.
All righty thank you very much
just go Representative Crowder.
Madam thank you for your
presentation Mr secretary it's
good to see you
What questions.
Regarding your budget I notice
therefore you have to.
Your budget increase or a
personal service employee
benefits was up almost two
million dollars for FY twenty
and FY twenty one.
Which is essential increase and
then as I look at your
when funded vacancies.
I'm sorry your funded vacancies.
Is about a million two hundred
and sixty thousand dollars your
labor relations firm FY twenty.
So now is up.
Almost a hundred percent in FY
twenty year relations funding
was.
Three.
And now it's way beyond that so
help me understand with that
much increased over the past two
years why is there still a need
but yet there's a huge.
Funded vacancy so Madam chair
representative I'm gonna let
both W. secretary monthly court
of undead Williams and answer
that question but what I would
say in this is when we first got
here.
In the labor relations
department there were two issues
number one there was a lot of
rotation of people that were in
the investigator and management
analyst positions they will the
amount of folks we had stayed in
those positions and were able to
get expertise.
That rotation was a real problem
for us and I think that might be
one of the reasons that are
funded vacancy rate was so high
we've worked really hard to make
sure that all of our positions
are filled now and it people
stay in those positions as much
as we can because our backlog
was so high trying to make sure
we continue to get the person we
need to make that work so damn
are you on W. secretary Montoya
to do either of you want to try
to feel that I know generally
the reason for that but if you
want to answer that more
specifically I'd be happy to
turn over to either one of you
all.
All.
The early fifties like to that's
fine sure madam chair
Representative Crowder the
backlog was severe when we
arrived on the scene in June of
twenty nineteen and we worked in
conjunction with records
University and it's taken a lot
of innovative approaches to
reduce the backlog so that is
why you're seeing the figures
that you're saying it was an
inordinately high caseloads are
we finally have gotten that
under control but as the
secretary indicates of some of
the the bills go forward we will
need additional staff to keep it
balanced Madam chair
representative I know you're
trying to get at is why was the
vacancy rate so high and we have
worked to fill that vacancy rate
we're working really really hard
to actually put people in those
positions and keep in there I'll
be honest with you in the last
administration and I have I have
a lot of nice things to say
about my predecessor she did an
extremely good job with the
unemployment system we have one
of the first modernized systems
in the country.
You know the people here have
been top notch we only frankly
had to hire a couple new people
when we came in with this
administration so this is not a
partisan thing but I will say
that the attention to that
division was not great under the
last administration and that is
one of the things that the
current administration has asked
me to really focus on and that's
what we've been filling those
positions but even as we fill
them it's frankly not enough as
long as ten years in the walls
go up for that that service is
sixty five.
The madam chair and members of
the committee in addition it
wasn't just our region our but
it was also a human rights
bureau on there was a
significant to all lapse in
terms of hiring for that
division and what I will say is
that since we've been working at
the Human Rights bureau is now
fully staffed and is fully
trained and is fully just there
humming so it's amazing what
we've been able to accomplish
with the Human Rights bureau in
just one year's time so getting
all of those folks on and it
requires us you know a real
special skills that in
understanding in terms of
investigative procedures
processes and best practices and
also knowing a lot about legal
I just want to say that like the
legal process knowing and
keeping up with timelines EOC
and and following with that so
now with the labor relations I
mean I'm sorry with the wage and
hour division we're going
through a similar process we've
had to add several positions
there we finally got fully
staffed I believe we have
everybody hired I see doctor
Williamson going like just we we
finally have everyone on board
and staffed up and so the
numbers have significantly
improved in our ability to be
responsive to to what's coming
in but I you know fully agree
with all of the work that's
coming in and hitting us with
just the amount of complexity of
the cases and the need for
working closely with the court
system it is going to require us
to have another lawyer we just
have one that's helping us with
that right now and that process
is untenable.
Chairman Mr secretary.
Thank you for your responses.
Slide look at the I see in
relations twenty three point
seven percent vacancy rate which
is likely as part it out.
Two hundred fifty.
Or.
Thank.
It was.
Works.
We're.
Here.
I thank you for two years after
the twenty
to twenty twenty one.
Twenty two.
Sequels.
Your.
Huge.
Yes you do.
Still saying a twenty three
point seven percent but I can
see right in so in some I thank
you for your just just.
The need
for peace.
In these documents thank you
madam chair thank you Mr
secretary.
Representative representatives
are not a.
Thank you madam chair and thank
you secretary mccamley it's good
to see again
Question concerning the spending
with technology partners.
In dollars can you expand on
that and and do we need to
expat give you more FTEs to keep
it in house service and
specialized or the specific the
COVID just somewhere in that
area can you answer that Madam
chair representative David let
me just ask you are she talking
about the delay contract.
Yes yes Madam chair
representative when the decision
was made in the last
administration which I fully
agree with to what we call
modernize the unemployment
system what that means is this.
You've probably seen in the news
because of the pandemic that
unemployment systems across the
country a lot of times are still
using computer systems that were
created before I was born there
literally using mainframe
computers from the been nineteen
seventies that are running Coble
and for any of you other
computer nerds out there you
know that that as as you would
know madam chair chair
representative and I say that as
a compliment created in the late
nineteen fifties it is critical
that states modernize their
unemployment systems to be able
to keep up a new programs that
are at the decision was made
under the Martinez
administration to do that in
twenty thirteen and what
happened there was that a
partnership with the lawyer was
entered into to Lloyd the
company is one of the main
partners that unemployment
systems across the country use
to help run the the new systems
that are in place and we use
that.
Service on a daily basis and
frankly we've used them a lot
more in the last year as we've
had new programs coming from the
federal government the twelve
hundred all work pandemic
benefit the state put in and so
the.
That system is generally working
I don't know maybe may not seem
that way sometimes but New
Mexico is actually been ahead of
most states in terms of putting
these new programs into place
and one of the reasons for that
is our I. T. system and that
million dollars that we get is
used to pay to Lloyd every year
to partner with us to run that
system so we don't think that
there needs to be an increase
with that we are hoping that
with this next bill the
hopefully gets past the federal
government that'll be the last
one for awhile and we can get
those in as fast as we can but
we do need that money to
continue so we can continue that
partnership with the lawyer and
keep the services going as well
as we can for these new programs
and as we see a lot more people
in employment it becomes that
much more critical.
Thank you Mr Mr secretary thank
you madam chair.
All right let's go to
Representative Dixon.
Thank you madam chair my
question has been asked.
Okay our Representative Hochman
Vigil.
Thank you very much madam chair
I thank you judge mccamly and
all others for your presentation
you're doing a great job I've
had many constituents reach out
to me and tell me what a great
job you guys are doing so thanks
for that I just have one
question madam chair concerning
the unemployment budget Trust
Fund.
It's my understanding that like
many other states we are
borrowing or have more money to
the federal government to keep
fund solvent and madam chair
director mccamley we are now
carrying a balance as of
December thirty first is begin
to accrue interest
madam chair director mccamley
what is the plan other than
Representative Chandler's bill
to pay this loan balance back or
is there a plan.
So madam chair Representative
Hochman Vigil let me just
correct you the interest has not
started to creating yet.
The the continuing assistance
act that was passed at the very
end of last year that the former
president sign late in the year
continues the interest three
free periods through the middle
of March.
As I said we just learned this
morning that the federal
government's gonna be continued
but proposing to continue that
interest free period in the
buying plants through the end of
August and so if that continues
we want interest have a problem
with that is that
we would generally own interest
payment on at the end of
September so if they don't
extend that for least another
month we would have to pay
interest on that for this year
that is what I talked about a
presentation we are trying to
get a little bit capital outlay
money to fix our building were
finishing up our renovation of
that and instead of using part
of our penalty and interest fund
which we were going to use for
the building we would save that
money to help us pay for the
interest rate the interest
payment that we would that up
now the federal government could
pass this we don't know if they
will or not and we might not
interest until next year we just
don't know what's that's going
to be non terms of your bigger
question that is a question that
the legislature's really going
to have to kind of have a
discussion about figure out
where you want to go
If.
Representative Chandler's bill
is considered house bill one
forty eight which is currently
being heard now House labor it
would increase revenues for a
couple years in put in about
three hundred million dollars of
state reserves to help us both
rate on the debt now and add to
the trust fund so that taxes
wouldn't go up like crazy at the
end of next year now.
We don't know what the federal
government is going to do we
were hoping and praying that
they would put in some kind of
provision it the congressional
level to either give us loan
forgiveness or even give us
grants to where we were back at
the data the US chamber of
commerce is really pushing for
that that doesn't seem to have
taken hold so that that there
may be some block grants that we
may be able to use collect that
the cares Act ended up being
used but as of now.
That discussion will have to
move forward because here's the
the situation if nothing is done
and some states have chosen this
route let me just be straight up
honest with that if nothing is
done if we don't pay the debt
off by the end excuse me by fall
of next year so follow twenty
twenty two the federal
government will start increasing
their federal tax rate across
the board point two percent per
year until that is paid off now
in the Great Recession
California part a bunch of money
and they decided not to pay off
the debt and the federal
government decided to raise
their taxes they've been doing
so almost every year since two
thousand I think nine or ten and
so that is something that that
could be considered but one way
or the other that debt is going
to have to be paid off we are
hoping that Washington deals
with this in our message then
has been looked you all have
chosen unemployment as the.
As the carrier for help to
people even though the system
wasn't designed for for what
we've got here in in the
pandemic and if you chose that
we would hope that you would
make the decision to make states
at least somewhat whole again so
we wouldn't have to face
decisions ourselves or how to
move that out we we hope that
that's still the case we hope
that that can still be made to
move forward but
we'll just have to see from that
angle.
Thank you very much madam chair
director mccamly that's all the
questions I had.
Thank you Representative
Anderson.
Madam madam chair I am here now
thank you all be sure got four
questions and the a short
answers will be appreciated
because we have a a long agenda
this afternoon up first to the
secretary I did just go Mr
secretary I assume you've been
in contact with New Mexico's
economic recovery of the board
of the governor support pointed
the board that meets in secret
and considers economic recovery
for the New Mexico economy could
you confirm today that you are
in fact part of that that that
secret group.
Madam chair representative
Anderson I am not part of that
group it is an advisory board
that comes up with
recommendations for the
administration but I have
presented I think twice to them
about our situation over the
last seven eight month period.
Thank you Secretary you wouldn't
be willing to venture your
opinion on their number one a
recommendation.
Madam chair representative I've
only presented them twice about
the unemployment situation other
than that I have not been
involved with their discussions.
Okay.
Thank you Mr chairman thank you
Mr secretary you sort of
confirmed what I suspected
secondly I wanted to talk just
briefly if I could about the the
impact of a rate of leave of
benefit to New Mexico workforce
and the fact is moving through
the legislature made me wonder
madam chairman you said bill
coming to our committee of or is
appropriations being of
circumvented and we'll just deal
with that later madam chairman I
know that's an awkward question
but it's really one that doesn't
just relate to this bill relates
to a do we see bills that
required future or present
general funding that circumvent
our committee on their what they
are it's way to the Senate madam
chairman.
Representative Anderson was the
bill number.
You know that's a good question
I haven't heard it and I don't
know but would just leave that
for today because I don't think
that's a quick answer but I am
curious about help we address
that in third the madam chairman
I heard about the first of
families first five point two
million dollars it doesn't have
any go back to the fence if I
understood that correctly
secretaries that correct Madam
chair representative Anderson
from my understanding that five
million dollars was set up to
help pay for random things we
would need from employment
moving forward in terms of being
able to hire more staff being
able to to fix computer issues
etcetera so on now so for we
have been able to kind of take
care of our employment situation
with just the monies we get from
our regular federal formula fund
and we've been hire people fast
as we can I think we just
finished up a couple weeks ago
fifth class of twenty people to
come in and help answer our
phones I know we had contracts
with both the lawyer and with
eighty eight to help bring in
additional people because our
our adjudication needs are
processing needs have been so
high right now we haven't had to
touch into that but at some
point we may have to if we do we
need to do it quickly so that we
can really respond to people's
needs and that's why we're so
we're we're trying to keep that.
In our back pocket in case we do
need to tap into a quick.
Thank you Mr secretary well I
certainly agree with your effort
to kind of keep your powder dry
for hopefully emergency that
doesn't rise but none the less I
appreciate the wisdom more
question then to the LFC analyst
is if you could simply.
Shoot me a short paragraph on
whether that money would ever
referred or whether that under
our H. B. two lies outside last
up Mr secretary of is is a
question that may not have in
the end but I was thinking of a
Representative Alison's question
is sort of a follow up I think
okay New Mexico passed
ETA ETA benefited PNM.
PNM is now telling us or we're
gonna get you that money next
year when we sell the bonds.
Really made me wonder will if
they got the benefit if they got
their budget up front right now.
Which I think facilitates the
sale to an out of state company
but that's my opinion
why are we why are we faced with
of.
Employees going to unemployment
in needing the ETA assistance or
their retraining their next
their next workplace.
And and and PNM guess say all
what do that next year I am very
concerned about that and I hope
you will keep us up to date
going.
Going of forward because what we
do next year when we hear the
same story.
What is the penalty Mr secretary
for PNM.
Just saying well we'll do it
next year will sell those bonds
will sell those bonds I'm very
concerned about that madam
chairman Mr Secretary I wish you
the best I think you're doing a
good job over there.
Thank you Representative.
Thank you Representative
Anderson that is a debate that
could go on for a long time and
I need to get to some
operational budgets of.
But it certainly takes a lot of
interest on this committee.
So let's go to anybody also it
may have questions
Of the agency.
I'm scanning and scanning
through here and I I don't see
any but I did I did have a
question
secretary mccamley with this in
to madam chair okay I can't see
your hand because of them.
Okay I just need to do and
Representative brown so let's go
to you first and then we'll go
to Representative Terrio and
then Representative Brown.
Thank.
Yeah Representative sure he'll
go ahead okay thank you madam
chair money is collected
question as it is a a COVID.
I have been working with
secretary must but Cameri pretty
much all summer since the path
and actually in March since the
pandemic started.
He knows that every single one
of the constituents that
contacts me I I refer to him
because they have so many
concerns about their either way
to welcome a variety of wage
issues that and unemployment
issues and things like that and
I eat there's there's only so
much he can do that or his
department can do because their
they are really.
A jam packed with with the
things that they needed to get
done but somehow he manages to
get things done and I get
responses from my constituents
that are really happy with the
outcome was not everyone but the
magic.
Representative we can't hear
you.
I'm sorry I wanted to say that
the recognizing that the.
Times are hard and our budgets
are constrained I would like to
for us to consider the higher
recommendation simply because
this this particular component
of the administration really
needs support as and and this is
only for my perception might my
constituents use this department
a lot as of the the secretary
can attest to so I don't want to
say anything else except that if
we can't do it now that school
reconsider for the end of the.
Of the time we do the budget so
that he can get the support team
needs thank you thank you
Representative.
Already let's go to
Representative Brown.
Thank you madam chair and I'm
just gonna take fifteen seconds
to complement the secretary for
the wonderful job he's been
doing I like Representative
Trujillo I passed on a lot of
concern for my constituents that
I can't solve for them but
secretary mccamley has can we
has really responded always very
quickly gotten back to me if you
could help forget it to someone
who can help that you know he
let me know that that there were
times when his hands were tied
as well but I just want to
compliment him for being one of
the hardest working people in
state government these last few
months thank you madam chair
thank you Representative.
Thank you very much
Representative Brown thank you
very much Secretary I'll be
taken over here shortly are
there any any additional
questions from committee
members.
I don't see any I think just one
quick thought and then we will
we will go for for the motion
thank you Mr secretary echo the
compliments
the the high funded vacancy and
the one program of difference is
there's a convincing case that
this is a very important program
understanding how the high
funded vacancy plus the
additional request fit together
and if there's ways for us to
fix the.
would certainly be helpful on
my.
With that I don't see if there's
any other questions from the
committee is Representative C.
there.
Yes Mr chair
excellent hi Representative
Sweetser can we go to you for
the motion on the work for
workforce solutions please
absolutely Mr chair and I also
want to compliment and secretary
mccamley on the great job he's
doing I haven't given a lot of
compliments to the years so so.
Enjoy it and with that Mr chair
I would move the LFC budget
recommendations.
X. and there's a motion is our
second a second that Mr Chairman
what the compliment as well
great both thank you very much
it's been moved by
Representative Sweetser Sam by
Representative Castellano is
there any objection to that
motion.
Okay hearing on there's no
objection the LFC recommendation
is adopted out Representative
sorry chairman Representative
Crowder this but we
thank you so much Representative
can Dixon.
Representative Crowder I
apologize.
I should of known to a have a
thank you very much
Representative Dixon thank you
Representative Crowder please
note Representative Crowder's
opposition to that motion.
When the bombs thank you
please are there any other
objections from committee
members.
I don't see any the course was
one second ago so.
Okay I don't see any other
objections let's please not that
one injection and please present
Crowder to explain.
Thank you Mr chairman I to.
So.
Expanding the.
What is tied to.
Transferable.
Sure this workforce solutions.
Under.
About five or six years I think
I have a this transfer so thank
you Mr chairman.
Thank you very much
Representative Crowder.
Next we're going to go to HSD
code six seventy that's the
Veterans Services Department
thank you very much for your
time I really appreciate it
thank you Mr secretary they
said.
Okay that agency client for HSD
code six seventy Veterans
Services Department are you
ready.
Mr chair.
What the legislative finance
committee with us today is Mike
Regan Burke from department of
finance ministration my
counterpart and send you Smith
from the Veterans Services
Department there is very small
differences but this agency I'll
go over them quickly internet
over to DFA for any comments the
LFC general fund recommendation
was nine point four thousand
below the executive well both
recommendations increase other
revenue for license plate fees
the executive recommendation was
two thousand dollars above the
LFC in the base both LFC and
Executive recommendations for
personal for person provide
funding to fill vacant veteran
service officer FTE in FY twenty
two.
Recommendation for personal was
eleven point four thousand above
the LFC well the LFC
recommendation was closer to FY
twenty actual personal
expenditures we reconcile
performance measures and with
that I will turn it over to
Michael Mr Reagan birds for any
additional comment.
Thank you miss Clark a good
afternoon Mister chairman and
members of the committee again
on Michael reckons brick I'm in
the DFA analyst for the Veterans
Services Department and miss
Clark did a great job of
summarizing the recommendations
we are very close you will see
the slight difference in the
personal services employee
benefits category the executive
recommendation provides eleven
thousand four hundred dollars
more funding there but both the
LFC and Executive
recommendations are provide
enough funding to fill all
veteran service officer
positions which are governor and
legislative priorities.
With that Mr chairman I will
turn it over to secretary Sonya
Smith for her presentation.
Thank you very much Secretary
spent thank you very much for
being with us today.
Thank you Mr chairman.
All right there's a
presentation.
I'm joined today by my team W.
secretary Brian Oster us wanna
come maces CFO acting HSD
director Larry Campos bill
services director Jemia Warner
health care coordination
director at Mendez state budget
director and also from his
office Jeff George Mr chair.
Thank thank you Representative
it madam secretary would you
mind speak and perhaps closer to
the microphone and maybe just a
little bit louder thank okay all
right sorry about that we tested
this.
That sounds great that sounds
great and also joined by bridge
Casal who heads our veteran
business operations thank you so
I'm proud to be leading this
agency Mr chairman and committee
because we just have one job and
that is to make the lives of our
veterans and their families
better in our great state
internally we have adopted the
model every day is veterans day
to remind us of the privilege we
have to serve those who have
served next slide please.
Our mission is to reach the
approximately one hundred and
forty five thousand veterans in
the state and to ensure they are
aware of the benefits for which
they are entitled this includes
working closely with our sister
agencies to promote their
services because we know that's
had the same needs as other
residents in the state.
We also have been actively
meeting with advocacy groups to
improve our outreach next slide
please.
The pandemic has not slowed our
efforts to assist our vets in
fact last year my predecessor
secretary Griego featured here
spoke on local TV about the one
stop shop drive thru that
assistive that in their state
tax benefits due to the success
we have plans to initiate
another drive through hopefully
this summer.
We're working closely with the
VA Medical Center and deal wage
to encourage vets to register
for the vaccine according to the
O. H. approximately twelve
thousand that sat Register so
far in over twenty four hundred
have received their first dose
to help vets in rural areas we
are currently brainstorming
ideas with the VA because only
those veterans were rolled with
the B. are eligible to receive
vaccines from the VA this
equates to approximately forty
percent of the veteran
population.
This is presented an opportunity
for us to be innovative.
We launch this short survey to
on the comment pandemic on our
website to stay and we're
staying steady participation
from that we plan to use that
data to help inform our efforts.
Our agency has five key areas
Phil services health care
coordination state budget
coordination veterans business
outreach and the state approving
agency for the GI bill.
For the purposes of this hearing
will focus on field services we
have veterans services officers
position across the state who
are trained and certified to
assist the.
Please note their
accomplishments from fiscal year
twenty and the impact of the
federal dot.
Mr Chairman by my I can hardly
hear the presentation.
Okay I will speak up.
Is that better yes please are
you Sir yes so sorry about that
next slide please okay that's
it.
As previously stated the
pandemic has not hindered our
efforts we've been able to
assist vets virtually as any VSO
can help any veteran in the
state this keeps everyone safe.
We held the successful virtually
then on veterans day to assist
with claims and plan to have
another president's day it's our
goal to present these events on
a more frequent basis partner
with other state agencies also
helps to ensure veterans are
enjoying all of the resources
for which they are entitled.
Next slide please.
We currently have fourteen Phil
Services.
The service offices in a
planning on more the
determination for placing
offices is based on the
concentration of veterans
residing in each county
currently Bernalillo is leading
with approximately forty seven
thousand.
Slide.
He's not are continuing
priorities.
For fiscal year two.
One area like to highlight its
transportation.
We awarded we were awarded a
grant last year to help that's
living in highly rural areas
receive free transportation to
medical appointments we have
implemented that program and
have started advertising.
Lastly our new women's veteran
program manager started
yesterday so we're excited to
revive that program with new
initiatives.
Next slide.
So with that Sir I will turn it
over to Monica maces our CFO to
review our budget following by
any questions that you the
committee may have thank you
Sir.
Thank you madam secretary.
Thank you very much we are very
much appreciate it let's go as
we check in here for committee
questions.
Not seeing okay thank you first
we're gonna go to Representative
Dixon and then we'll go to
Representative Chatfield
Representative Dixon first.
I thank you Mr vice chair and
secretary Smith my question is
actually about
the efforts being made during
the COVID to assist our veterans
With suicide.
Installation and I was just you
know it's it's a national
problem but much more prevalent
here in New Mexico and so I'm
wondering if you could just very
briefly talk about those
specific efforts thank you yes
Mr chair Representative Dixon I
hope you can hear me because
we're very proud of our efforts
in that in that arena last month
no in December I'm sorry the
whole month is gonna December we
presented a video live web
session with the local VA
focused on suicide awareness and
prevention and a couple weeks
ago we did a follow up so I'm
very proud of those efforts
because you're right we're also
partnering with other agencies
because we know how prevalent
this is so thank you for the
question.
Thank you thank you very much
Representative Dixon sorry thank
you Secretary Smith next we're
gonna go to Representative
Chatfield.
Thank you Secretary I just got a
second to look at the at the
slide that you put up the show
for your offices work
Representative north eastern New
Mexico from Alice to about right
Are there any the.
off east coast to New Mexico.
Mr chair Representative
Chatfield I'd like to have a
director Campos answer that
question please.
Yes.
Mr chair Representative
Chatfield yes we we have a the
entire eastern side of the state
we have Carlsbad Roswell all the
way up to Clovis.
Bagus.
And our our service officers.
Do outreach and they have a
access all the way up to eighth
and and with no eight it'll fire
I'm not sure if you're part of
angel fire but.
We do have representatives along
the eastern side of the state.
Thank thank you very much
Mr Campos Representative
Chatfield do you have any other
questions.
I'm sorry I was not really get
us well.
Thank you Mr chair of my and my
second question is do those
people travelled stated Clayton
are you have a certain place
that they go there so that
people can meet with them and
request services.
Mr chair of Representative
Chatfield yes when we do go out
the when we have had the
opportunity to go out we do go
to the the local C. box a
community based outpatient
clinics when we go to Clayton
normally is through one of the
veterans service organizations
that we do go out to but I
typically we try to go at least
once a month.
To serve that area and but
Right now our yes those are
reaching out by telephone email
any any form just to follow up
with the the veterans in that
our area to make sure that that
their needs are being met.
Thank you Mr chairman thank you
all for region that are the
rulers.
Thank you very much
Representative Chatfield next
we're gonna go to representative
Armstrong thank you Mr chairman
and thank you so much for your
presentation I too am on on that
same way fully are Rebecca Dow
and I worked really hard to get
someone covering the areas down
in the southwest region of the
of the state and I just didn't
know if that was ever of those
positions were filled in the
catching County area.
And Sierra.
Grant.
Mr chair representative
Armstrong I'm gonna ask director
composted please answer that
question.
Mr Representative Armstrong
thank you for thank you for your
move on that Representative Dow
for for being proactive in
trying to serve our budget in
that area.
We're still reaching out by
phone email.
To those areas we do have a plan
to fill vacancies in that area
and their future but right now
of we're still reaching out via
email and
town hall meetings and things
like that we're being connected
to which we really appreciate
because that's given us more
exposure thank you for that.
Thank you Mr chairman and thank
you all for what you do for our
veterans of New Mexico I
appreciate it and I look forward
to meeting the people you're
higher in those areas I'm happy
to help you.
Thank you very much
representative Armstrong next
we're gonna go to Representative
Garcia.
Thank you Mr chairman all
secretary Smith good to see you
and and they replace the name in
the face of that of that to see
you today I got stuff you
questions you have a sixteen
point three funded vacancy rate
that career.
Representative Garcia I believe
that is correct.
Madam secretary and
Mr chairman I'll put your total
the right right now this is
sixteen point three funded and
it is said right next to the
last six percent of funded what
did you do we can to make Mr
chair representative Garcia I'm
going to ask our CFO and acting
HSD directed to please.
At.
Thank you.
Mr chair representative Garcia.
Can you hear me yes please speak
up as loud as you can thank you
okay hi Representative chair
representative Garcia our
current he can.
Today is a twenty four percent
but we do have we get very few
women VS so yesterday and we
planned to hire in requests for
your mentions that we make our
current vacancy rate overall for
the agency twenty percent.
Thank you Mr chairman and madam
madam secretary.
Program mistaken last year we
funded enough for five years
old.
how many of those positions were
filled with that money that we
got for the five years old.
Mr chair representative Garcia
again I'm going to ask our CFO.
Representative Garcia we have
currently altogether twenty four
vehicle decisions that we got I
mean you want in FY twenty one
we currently have three of those
that we're working on we have
received physician numbers for
all five with the new
recommendations we feel
confident in its current fiscal
year to provide the rest of the
I position.
Education.
For that the.
What is the capacity of useful
did you should have right now.
I'm sorry.
Many B. I'm sorry Mr chairman
budgetary this poll should we
have in place.
Are currently at the account is
twenty four we actually have an
additional this bill that we had
a carry over from the field
appropriation Senator all on so
we get for for the grass area we
also are working with the
department of workforce
solutions out of partnerships to
fund the ESO in Gallup and we
have been currently doing that.
Thank you for that the.
In our madam secretary of Mr
Chairman you said you had the
some of.
The other reason on zoom and
I've always asked his question
how you're reaching now.
Rural New Mexico and the reason
is because I Representative six
colonies which is McKinley
someone's of all of rural you
with essential or counties I
think that what the bill is the
biggest district in the state
how are you reaching out to the
veterans out there the only have
a phone you know you can be text
or or
That yes Sir Mr chair
representative Garcia I
appreciate the question so much
we know that that is an ongoing
challenge and what we what we're
doing is we're working with our
partners we recently had a
meeting with the VA and learned
of a tablet and phone program
that we're going to start
promoting to our veterans to
ensure that they are disinfected
disenfranchised in anyway so
that is certainly under we
appreciate your question I will
ask director Campos if he had
anything else you wanted to add
to that.
Mr chair representative Garcia
of we're also active members of
the stable and McKinley County
veterans coalition and the
coalition that is about thirty
member strong thirty different
agencies that provide services.
In both counties symbol can't
McKinley I'm Irish are you for
mission is out there so that
veterans as a command for you
food basket or or for any kind
of services that they may need
they have a contact information
and yes it is a challenge
because of the phone or email
system but
through the partners they're
able to to reach out to us and
we're able to help them in one
way or another but
I'm sectors with.
Is correct about the VA
resources that we plan to to
help get out to those locations.
Thank you for that Mr Chairman
madam secretary about making
sure that we're supposed to be
talking about the budget not
just problems Madam take a look
forward to meeting you person
face to face their couple you've
always been real helpful I thank
all of you for to give our
veterans keep it up thank you.
Thank you very much
Representative Garcia I don't
see any other.
Questions from members.
Thank you very much Secretary
Smith Mr Campos and others at to
really quick one question madam
secretary do you have access to
the number of New Mexico
veterans who are who are and
will be receiving vaccinations
through the VA clinics.
Mr Chairman that we have started
a conversations with director
Welch over at the VA Medical
Center we had a wonderful
meeting on Friday to just
discuss that very issue I do
have some initial numbers but I
don't have it in front of me so
if you will allow me to follow
what with you because you know
it's it's I'm sure what last
week.
Thanks okay we'll get that are
you thank you madam secretary
that's great and and keeping
that on going we really
appreciate that and then finally
Would just say that at the
Making sure that as you bring on
these new VSO positions finding
ways to get them all of the
appropriate training as quickly
as possible so that they can
offer the full range of services
as quickly as possible I know we
keep going on Representative
Garcia did you have any other
questions.
Thank you Mr chairman I need one
more question to the committee
we need to remember who what is
your of why we're here we do
support inventors what we're
we're doing thank you for that.
Absolutely thank you
Representative Garcia and thank
you for your incredible
leadership in this area.
With that seeing no other
questions let's go over to
Representative Sweetser for the
motion on this agency.
Thank you Mr chairman thank you
Secretary designate Smith I do
want to let you know that I'm
going to borrow that line every
day is veterans day.
And with that I move that the
LFC recommendation Mr chair.
Session.
Excellent it's been moved by
Representative Sweetser second
by Representative Garcia is
there any opposition to that
motion.
Okay seeing no opposition madam
secretary designate thank you so
much the LFC recommendation is
adopted only as a
recommendation for Veterans
Services Department and you hear
the appreciation from the
committee and the commitment
from this committee thank you
very much thank you very much
absolutely next well Committee
we're gonna go to HSD code five
to one that's energy minerals
and natural resources department
will start with this one.
And then go to Mr money.
Just one thank you Mr chairman
good afternoon members of the
committee my name is Caitlyn
along with the legislative
finance committee as Mr chairman
instead add DFA analyst Andrew
Miner will also be presenting
with me on the differences
between the LFC and executive
recommendations and secretary
Sarah Cottrell Propst is here
along with a few of her division
directors again this is agency
code five twenty one the energy
minerals and natural resources
department also known as and
just a few at he just I'd like
to point out in the LFC volumes
that you're looking for more
information a policy discussion
on issues related to this agency
can be found in volume one on
pages eighty four ninety the
full LFC recommendation for
EMNRD is inviting to starting on
page one eighty three and in
pine street we have some
supplemental data related to
state parks and oil and gas
operations on pages seventy
three and seventy six
respectively I'll begin with the
HSD summary of the
recommendations and start with
revenue.
The LFC recommendation for
general fund revenue for and
there it is three hundred thirty
five point eight thousand
dollars or one half percent
below the FY twenty one
operating budget the executive
recommendation increase general
fund by two point one million
dollars or nine point two
percent.
The LFC and Executive
recommendations for all other
revenue sources are the same the
most significant change from the
FY twenty one operating budget
is an eighty one percent
decrease in the use of fund
balance due to revenue declines
in the state parks and oil
conservation division.
In the base budget in the LFC
recommendation personal services
employee benefits funding was
reduced by one point seven
million dollars due to a
combination of vacancy savings
removal of long term vacant F.
T. E. and we prioritization of
funds to other areas of need.
The executive recommendation
increase person funding by one
million dollars to reprioritize
and still taking possessions to
address climate change
priorities this initiative was
not submitted to LFC with the
agency's request or any leader
point during LFC is
recommendation process so LESC
did not have an opportunity to
evaluate the proposal or
consider it the HSD is
recommendation.
The recommendations for
contractual services and other
costs are similar with LFC
recommending more and
contractual services and the
executive recommending slightly
more in other costs I'll turn it
over to ensure now to start with
our first program.
Thank you.
Hi good afternoon Mr chair
members the committee pleasure
to be with you today again I'm
Andrew Miner analyst for EMNRD
and just a quick overview as
Caitlyn stated so the
differences between the racks
here in terms of general fund
our the executive start out by
keeping general fund flats from
FY twenty one then added two
point one million dollars and
that's for various climate and
clean energy initiatives that
are important to that the agency
and the governor and those were
distributed across the various
programs and agency which will
be getting into so with that I
will go ahead and discuss P.
seven forty the first program
that renewable energy and energy
efficiency program.
Of revenue here the LFC
recommendation reduce the
general fund revenue by sixty
two point nine thousand five
percent well the executive
recommendation increases general
fund by about eighty one
thousand and recommendations are
federal and other revenues are
the same and those correspond to
what the agency projected in the
base budget both recommendations
increase personal funding and
reduce the budgets for
contractual services and other
costs.
The executive recommendation
adds two hundred and forty eight
thousand in person one hundred
forty thousand more than the LFC
in both recommendations include
an additional one FTE.
And that's a grant funded
climate research.
that's been building those
already funded additional funds
the executive recommendation
would support a great
modernization and other clean
energy technology projects of
all the LFC incorporate cost
savings reported by the agency
and alter to Kaelin for the next
program.
Thank you Mr chairman at the LFC
recommendations for the healthy
forests program the seven forty
one.
Reduced General Fund and other
state revenues by a total of
three hundred and eleven
thousand dollars relative to FY
twenty one and this reduction
was offset by an increase in
federal funds for net revenue
increase of forty one point two
thousand dollars the executive
recommendation increased general
fund by six hundred and sixty
five point three thousand
dollars but is the same as LFC
and other sources or net revenue
increase of eight hundred ninety
nine point seven thousand over
FY twenty one.
In the base budget the LFC
recommendation re prioritized
funding from personal services
employee benefits to contractual
services and other costs in line
with the agencies projected
expenditures.
At the program according to
LSE's calculations does have
sufficient personnel budget to
fulfill its thirteen vacancies.
The executive recommendation for
contractual services is the same
as LFC but included a small
increase for other costs and a
five hundred twenty four
thousand dollar increase in
person to fill vacancies and re
prioritize existing ditions to
manage increased forest
watershed restoration and fire
management point.
And you.
One so turning to the next
program Mr chair members the
committee is state parks be
seven forty two the revenue
recommendations that are almost
identical as you can see others
only a difference of a hundred
dollars in general fund and the
other sources are the same both
recommendations reduced use of
fund balance by seventy six
percent and that was projected
by the agency as a result of
having to use significant fund
balance and parks would your
while parks were the clothes
during the COVID nineteen
closures the base budget in
parks the LFC recommendation
applied a hundred fifty thousand
general fund increase to other
costs for park maintenance and
improvements of the executive
recommendation increase personal
funding by eighty five point
seven thousand increase other
costs by six thousand to support
implementation of the land and
water conservation fund a new
funding that's been received
there and ultimately on.
Thank you Mr chairman next we
have the seven forty three the
mine reclamation program the
executive an LFC recommendations
for this program are the same
both recommended a slate General
Fund reduction which is offset
by increases in federal and
other state revenues both
recommendations re prioritized
funding from the person budget
due to a reduction of two FTE to
the other costs category.
Turning to P. seven four four
oil and gas conservation
division.
Revenue here at the LFC
recommendation reduced general
fund revenue by fifty two
thousand or less than one
percent while the.
Committed a four hundred and
forty five thousand I general
fund increase recommendations
include both include a reduction
other revenues and fund balance
of about two point two million
due to a decline in the expected
out of revenue in the oil
reclamation fund.
In the base budget the LFC
recommendation reduced personal
funding by seventeen thousand so
she with the reduction of one
FTE the LFC recommendation for
contractual services is the
exceeds the executive by about
four hundred and five thousand
to maintain general fund
resources for well plugging and
hearing contracts the executive
recommendation increased person
funding by about eight hundred
fifty three thousand and
increased other costs by thirty
two thousand to fill positions
and support environmental
compliance initiatives including
enforcement of the methane rule
when.
Thank you Mr chairman and we're
on our last program now program
leadership and support.
LFC recommendation and reduce
general fund revenue by one
hundred and fifty thousand well
the executive recommended in
eight hundred and five thousand
dollar increase the
recommendations for other
revenue sources are the same and
equal to the FY twenty one
operating budget.
In the base budget the LFC
recommendation reduced person
funding by one hundred fifty
thousand dollars to redirect
Baconsky savings from program
support maintenance costs in the
state parks program program
support had an average vacancy
rate of about twenty eight
percent in FY twenty I and in
anticipation of questions on
this I just wanted to say that
that they can see savings in FY
twenty and our really it's not
related to the statewide hiring
previous that went into place in
April before the hiring freeze
this program
in increased their kids F. T. E.
at by at just to from where they
were at the end of FY nineteen
so most of the vacancies savings
that you'll see in your yes all
form are not a result of the
hiring freeze the gist of this
programs normal turnover rate
throughout the year.
And at the LC recommendation
also recommends holding the
contractual services and other
costs budgets.
The executive recommendation
increased person funding by five
hundred and sixty four thousand
dollars contractual services by
one hundred and twelve thousand
dollars and other costs by one
hundred twenty nine thousand
dollars to support information
technology upgrades as well as
emissions and climate data
collection and monitor any and
on this program and all the
other programs LFC and DFA staff
reached consensus on all
performance measures Mr Chairman
unless and you has anything else
to add that includes the analyst
reason cation thank you.
Thank you both
this one Mister miner madam
secretary our.
It is we would not turn it over
to you please and I appreciate
deeply you being here with us
today.
I get afternoon Mr chair members
of the committee thank you so
much for the opportunity to be
with you today I'm sorry
cultural props and the secretary
of the Energy minerals and
natural resources department
with me today are several
members of senior staff Matthew
Lobato with our administrative
services to president and the
Forrester Laura McCarthy and the
parks director Christy to four
yeah and oil conservation
division director Adrian Santa
so get it's really it really is
nice to see you all day thank
you to Dr minor and as one for
that overview
you know our our agency is
diverse and we are essential to
the state's economic security
and advancement our energy
resources our forests are mining
in our mining reclamation
activities and our state parks
touch every single corner of the
state and every single one of
your districts the executive
recommendation as you've heard
proposes some modest but
strategic investments to fill
key positions across the agency
and I'm going to provide more
detail on that as we go through
here the LFC you recommendation
essentially at adopted our our
first mission of five percent of
the cost the board on general
fund with a few add back that
you that you just heard about.
I want to emphasize that as we
build back capacity in this
agency on the executive
recommendation does not request
a whole bunch of new positions
rather we are seeking to fill
existing previously authorized
positions and and to fund them
and so and that is that is at
the heart of this and it and it
did come together wait as the
state's fiscal situation was
improving and we're in
discussions with the governor
about how can we add back to
this important agency and so you
know I I think we've been very
very judicious in what we're
putting in in front of you today
the LFC recommendation as you
heard for proposes a really
devastating hundred and fifty
thousand dollar cut a program
support and it's it's important
that we work together to add
that back that was not part of
our initial submission in
September even under the five
percent cut across the board and
so I would really like to work
with you on that piece and can
talk about that we get to the
program support flight again are
are executive recommendation is
to rebuild this agency needs to
improve diversified New Mexico's
economy advance the state's
climate resilience and position
ourselves for the future so that
we can capture opportunities as
they come for example we
anticipate opportunities
associated with the new
presidential administration any
stimulus that may that may come
along there are a lot of
discussions about programs that
could
Be at the beneficial to this
agency and to New Mexico
everything from plugging
abandoned wells to grid
modernization.
In the energy conservation and
management division this is the
the division that develops and
implements clean energy programs
to promote economic growth and
environmental and sustainability
across the state and highlights
of our work in the last year
include convening a workgroup to
implement the grid modernization
act and those draft white papers
are available for public comment
right now and they've also been
processing solar tax credits
with the recently passed solar
market development income tax
credit so we we did not receive
new resources to do those
programs we absorbed and then
we're we're proud to do so and
this additional investment that
we're asking for in the
executive recommendation that
would fully staffed the division
and increase their ability to
meet claim that read the
readiness challenges while
maintaining the quality of work
that they do.
Equates to approximately one
position and operating costs.
In state forestry this division
promotes the management of
healthy sustainable forests and
watersheds for future
generations including wildland
firefighting we had a very long
fire season last summer and we
expect a pretty tough one coming
up ahead because of the drought
we are experiencing a very mild
winter and that and anticipate
another intense fire season so
this executive recommendation
gives us the tools we need to
find some some I'm funded
vacancies as we go into this
wider fire season and so I
anticipate that this would help
us fill roughly six of the nine
unfunded on positions they're
all tied to water restoration
watershed restoration and and
and while the firefighting.
In state parks the the top line
numbers are really similar in
that I'll point out this is a
this photo of simmering canyon
and this past year with the
pandemic really emphasize how
important our park system is to
New Mexicans and even though
we've had had to have some
closures and some limited
openings due to the public
health order and making sure
that we keep people safe
the the hunger for people to to
visit our parks in the outside
was really palpable all year and
the executive recommendation
invest in the people who operate
or park and keep visitors safe
and at in the last year you know
we've we've rescued folks
falling in the eyes we advise
thousands of people to please
wear masks as they recreation
we've participated in COVID
states community trash pick up
and and Pecos canyon and with
this additional additional
funding we can support more of
those activities in addition you
heard earlier from the analyst
about the land and water
conservation fund and New Mexico
is now thanks to that federal
funding getting about double
what we previously received for
L. W. fiasco is how the
shorthand that and we want to
resurrect the grant program that
gets money out to communities
and not just spending the money
on projects within the state
park system arguments just for
example so this is going to
require an additional person to
support that program and that's
what's built into the the
executive crack.
On the mining and minerals
division this is a picture of
some wild Turkey is that one of
our mind reclamation projects up
near Raton and and as you've
heard there's not a lot of well
there's basically no different
it in the recommendation here.
For the oil conservation
division this division promotes
the balanced consistent and
transparent regulation of the
oil and gas industry while
protecting human health and the
environment and it
they have been incredibly busy
this year with the executive
recognizable expect to fill
about four of the unfunded state
agencies if this were approved
and and could move forward this
division oversees one of the
largest extractive industries in
New Mexico and frankly you know
we're number three on shore oil
producer right now in the
country and and so we are really
a firm believer that industry
can be responsible but in order
to ensure compliance we need to
have adequate technical staff
and upgraded technology.
And finally on I'm program
support.
This this is really important
and.
Program support insurers that
the all the programmatic
divisions that are the ones that
you may interface with the most
they have a legal and
administrative and technical and
policy support to fulfill their
independent mission they're all
part of EMNRD and the executive
recommendation invest in the
backbone of this at this agency
we have eight unfunded positions
so if we got that hundred fifty
thousand dollar cut back we
could add three back the exact
Representative would allow us to
fulfill all eight of those so
again these are in our really
excellent I. T. sought legal and
and and contractual and and
program support the financial
folks to keep the Department
humming along we also provide
administrative support to the
youth conservation corps and
that the same group of people
that support that agency as well
that the ministry of years past
us
just add this additional funding
will help us be more efficient
process permits more efficiently
expand our paperless initiative
and just generally continue on
the modernization effort that we
embarked on two years ago with
the oil conservation division
I'm glad to answer questions and
talk more about our our vacancy
rate or anything else you may
want to discuss but Mr chair I
will turn it back to you thank
you very much thank you so much
Secretary Probst as you say a
very diverse and and deeply
important agency we'll go now to
questions from the committee
beginning with Representative
Lane.
Thank you Mr chairman thank you
madam secretary for the
presentation and just on that
sort of the last point I do want
to ask a specific question
related to personal services so
I I noticed on the very first
sheet the executive is
requesting increase in personal
services of roughly a million
but then when we look at the.
The it the calculation worksheet
at the end.
I noticed in column F. as in
Frank there's fifty six and a
half funded they can FTE ease
and in fact the healthy forest
Division has a funded vacancy
rate of almost twenty five
percent and then if you look at
call then as in Nancy there is a
funded vacancy of almost four
point seven million so I'm
trying to reconcile the request
for an additional million in
personal services verses the
numbers that I just highlighted
on the calculation worksheet
thank you Mr chair.
And Mr chair and I represent
only thank you very much for
that question so let me
eliminate a little bit about
what's going on with our right
so in we have sixteen positions
posted right now on the school
website across a number of
division so those are under way
we were impacted by the hiring
freeze on a number of positions
including in the oil
conservation division where we
were in the process of of
seriously reorganizing the
division we have a lot of
vacancies coming into this
administration and we took that
opportunity to move around
modernize the division and and
streamlined reporting processes
so a lot of those stayed vacant
while we're moving through that
DFA process on re or and then
kind of got caught up in the
hiring freeze at the end of last
year but we're we're living on
them we're having on them right
now so we are you know we had
just made a stop off everything
we were doing and then reorient
based on new budget realities
and new new direction in
addition state parks has a
number of seasonal employees and
those are those are I think a
hundred thirty six diesels a lot
of those are a quarter of an F.
T. E.'s though equates to I
think forty something actually
have to use it all of the
seasonals are vacant right now
because we won't hire them until
the spring so that always comes
up our our vacancy rate for this
department and makes it look
worse that this time of year
than than it would otherwise
and then you know again I'm
pretty much everything else as
you know was held up we that the
hiring freeze was serious we
understood the reasons for it
and you know we were team
players on that but that meant
that particularly in program
support anything that wasn't law
enforcement in the parks are
firefighting directly or oil and
gas emergency response like we
we really had to hold back on
that for quite awhile and we've
only just recently been able to
start proposing those and having
the.
Move through the system again
so a long answer to a short
question I hope that was
helpful.
Thank you Mr chairman thank you
madam secretary and I will say
that the the quality waters of
Navajo dam are in my my district
and we look forward to those
being fully functional again
fully open and and that might be
a great place to have an interim
committee meeting for for us Mr
chair thank you thank you very
much Representative Lane next
we're going to go to
Representative Brown then
Representative setting on
Representative Brown please.
Thank you Mr chairman and madam
secretary it's nice to see you
again and you may well imagine
I'm going to ask you about the
Carlsbad brine well remediation
project that is what district
and
It's really been a ball and
chain for all of us I think the
state has and the local
government and we know it's been
a cooperative effort but I think
we've budgeted about forty fifty
four billion or billion fifty
four million dollars for the
remediation and we heard
recently that so there's a
shortage in our funding to
complete the project so Mr
Chairman madam secretary I I
know in our cash balance report
that.
Energy minerals and natural
resources had about seventeen
and a half million dollars in
the Carlsbad Carlsbad brine well
remediation fund and that was
from November a year ago and
it's now spent down to one point
six million and I know that the
monitoring is continuing but the
work is not.
There's a void there that's a
little larger than was
predicted.
And we knew when this all
started that it would be
speculative to try to put a
price tag on the remediation but
really truly Mr chairman of
surgery I am just so dismayed at
the size of the cost co chair of
the order read I guess you could
call it or at least shortage of
funding.
And in the past we we took some
money I believe out of the well
reclamation fund which is also
in your department and I know
that a year ago that frontier
had six point eight million and
now it's up to seven point six
to gain of about eight hundred
thousand dollars so Mr Chairman
madam secretary could you for
the benefit of the committee
explained.
how we're going to approach what
what plans are afoot to approach
this
for solution and
I know it's at least fifteen and
I believe this is the shortage
that that we have in the funding
is there anything that you're
aware of this being put together
to
to help with this project and I
think it's my understanding also
that the the cavity might all be
stabilized but we're concerned
at this point about groundwater
protection so madam secretary Mr
chairman if you could please.
Mr chair Representative rounded
things to do to help thank you
for the question and I'm I'm
glad you asked about it this is
a really important project that
the agency is responsible for
overseeing.
So the the prime wells this is a
project for newer members that
and an issue that was discovered
over a decade ago under the the
city of Carlsbad I don't think
you could have picked a worse
location for a situation like
this if you had tried.
it you know it's under of these
are under major city under major
roadway near on and your decent
it's near a railroad line it's
not not good so discover was
discovered the department has
been involved in characterizing
that and I'll remediating it and
we we started you know with with
obtaining service access to the
the fight and then working with
the engineering firm to to
remediate the site so we have
made a lot of progress so far
with the money that's been
appropriated to do it which is
is a lot of money and we we have
the southern portion of the of
the cavity you madam secretary
I'm sorry no I apologize madam
secretary and Representative
brown I should of asked this
before madam secretary as I
understand there are special of
other appropriations and other
efforts tied to this is that
part of the operations budget
that we're talking about today
with the Brian well and rested
Care at Mr chair no it's really
a capital outlay discussion it
is a live discussion on capital
outlay to provide the two
million dollars that we need you
know with the exception that the
oil conservation division does
oversee that project so that
does take staff time thank thank
thank you madam chair and and
Representative brown following
the chairs direction I think
focusing in on this very
important issue but focusing in
on it at that capital level and
perhaps in the special
appropriation level are are the
most appropriate areas
and I apologize for that I think
it's best that Representative
Brown or there were there any
additional or other questions
related to the operating budget
definitely want to go back to
this if there were additional
questions.
Thank you Mr chairman and I I
fully respect the guidelines
that are chairwoman has given us
on this side I wasn't sure if
operating budget was going to be
used for any of this I know that
staff times involved and I just
really haven't heard anything
about what's in the offing so if
that's under specials and all
that I'm very glad to hear that
and I will look forward to that
discussion with her
Representative Brown there is
some money appropriated for this
current fiscal year from the Oil
wreck Fund I think it's two
million dollars of that is will
be drying down that balance that
you mentioned earlier thank you
really is what I was hoping to
hear thank you.
Thank you so much Representative
Brown thank you very much madam
secretary on that one we have
additional question is now we're
gonna go to Representative
seventy on.
Thank you Mr chairman and thank
you Secretary Prost pressed for
your presentation this might
fall under that too I just need
a yes or no answer on this
this executive budget includes
funding for
For moving forward on plans to
plug existing abandonment
abandoned wells in New Mexico
does it capture that all the
budget.
Mr chair representative setting
on a yes that is part of the
OCD's annual and performance
metrics that we have and we do I
think last year we plug thirty
six wells and spent about one
point four million doing so and
I I anticipate moving forward
that again this year our great
thank you that's all it.
Thank you thank you very much
for our Representative seven
Jana are there any other
committee questions.
Okay I don't see any other
committee questions
I would just add before we go to
the recommendation madam
secretary the
focus on helping New Mexico meet
some of these looming challenges
around climate and others are
important one quick question I
would ask madam secretary some
of the
hope for technical technological
investments including with oil
conservation division the
incredible director agents and
of all well some of those help
both monitor but also report
the lower emissions profiles
that we seem to be able to
achieve here in New Mexico with
the oil and gas industry so we
think from this committee that
the oil for the oil industry is
actually reaching the strong
emissions targets and has the
capacity to do so does some of
your technical investments
perhaps will that help us to
tell that story and show that
story as a state.
Mr chair yes we we've developed
a methane out you know as our
rules move forward if we get
better data reported more
complete data reported from the
oil and gas industry regarding
venting and flaring we'll be
reporting that not only to to
you through our performance
metrics but also through our
Pueblo app that was that we
deployed along with the New
Mexico environment department
so we can only kind of expanded
double down on that and it will
that the operating and staff
request that we've we've made
will help us manage all that
that thank you madam secretary
and
you thank you very much I know
time is short I appreciate that
very much in the importance of
this in a broad range including
to an incredibly important oil
and gas and other industries in
our state and the strong.
Way forward needs to be there.
With that said I would go to
Representative Sweetser for the
motion knowing that there's
drugs continued work that might
come in some targeted areas
thank you Mr chairman and and I
would second that.
Continue to work Madam and with
that secretary Propst good to
see you I will move the LFC
recommendation Mr chair.
Thank you very much
Representative Sweetser is there
a study.
Is somebody wave and and in see
anybody.
I see okay we got a wave has
been moved by Representative
Sweetser secretary second by
Representative Castellano is
there in the objections to
adopting the LFC recommendation
with continued work.
And seeing no objection and
madam secretary thank you so
much for being here today and we
deeply appreciate your work on
behalf of our state thank you
very much thank you Mr chairman
members of the committee.
Thank you.
Okay next we're gonna say with
miss one and Mr and Dr minor and
I apologize going the agency
code five fifty that's the
office of the state engineer
don't miss one arm or drive
Miner which one of you wants to
kick it off.
Thank you Mr chairman I will
start with the HSD is summary
and introductions again this is
Caitlyn and as he said a Andrew
is still here to present
recommendations for the office
of the state engineer agency
code five five zero state
engineer John de Antonio is here
as well as the Interstate Stream
Commission director Rolf Schmidt
Petersen.
The I I want to point out some
again pages and the LFC volumes
related to this agency Policy
issues can be found in volume
one starting page eighty four
the recommendation from LFC is
inviting to starting on page one
ninety six and in volume three
you'll find a table of the HSD
is at fund balances for the
trust funds that operate on some
revenues and expenditures and
projected fund balances for this
funds can be found on page
seventy five.
Again I will start with the
agency it summary both the LFC
and Executive recommendations
whole general fund revenue flat
with the FY twenty one operating
budget in transfers from the
irrigation works construction
fund and improvements to the Rio
Grande income fund the LFC
recommendation reduced revenue
by fifty three point eight
thousand dollars and the
executive recommendation of
reduced revenue by five hundred
thousand dollars the agency has
historically relied on these
funds to support its operating
budget but recent legislation
has directed an increase in
expenditures for watershed
restoration and thank you a
project and a decrease in HSD
operating expenditures from
these funds.
The recommendations for federal
revenues and fund balance are
the same well the executive
recommended one hundred thousand
dollars more than LFC in other
revenues overall the LFC
recommendation increased revenue
by one hundred eight point six
thousand dollars and the
executive recommendation reduced
revenue by two hundred and
twenty seven point six thousand
dollars.
In the base budget the LFC
recommendation increased
personal services employee
benefits funding by one hundred
and eighty two point seven
thousand dollars to help reduce
the agency's vacancy rate which
was twenty four percent at the
time of budget initiatives the
executive recommendation it
reduced person funding by one
hundred and fifty three point
five thousand both
recommendations reduced
contractual services and
increased other costs and for
all programs in this agency LFC
and DFA staff reached consensus
on all performance measures
target and you'll start which
that recommendations on the
first program and then we'll
alternates from.
Good afternoon Mr chair again
and the members of the committee
just a quick note on the general
direction that the executive
recommendation trucks so as you
can see with the office of the
state engineer the LFC and the
executive are actually went on
general fund have the same
amount there and it's it planned
to the FY twenty one operating
budget so in keeping that
general fund revenue flat to the
executive recommendation
replaced five hundred thousand
dollars in trust fund revenue as
Caitlyn mentioned there was
legislation passed two years ago
that statutorily mandated.
Out for a few million dollars
worth of transfers from these
funds for forest watershed
projects and stuff like that I
think is and that's just as
really put a strain on using
those operating funds for sorry
using those trust funds for
operations in the agency budget
and so that's why the executive
reduce that by five hundred
thousand not going to get them
all the way there but is a step
in that direction and that that
was compensated by the executive
having a bit lower
recommendation overall for
personal services than the LFC
about by about three hundred
thirty six thousand about the
amount recommended for personal
services is still about in the
executive still almost one point
five million higher than what
the agencies actuals were for
personal services in FY twenty
so that I'll go ahead and move
on to P. five fifty one water
resource allocation the first
program.
Revenue here in other transfers
LFC recommended an increase of
sixty four point three thousand
well the executive recommended
a slight decrease
recommendations both increased
other revenues by twelve point
four thousand.
And the base.
In the base budget the LSE's
recommendation includes a slight
increase in person funding well
the executive recommendation a
reduce person by the a fifty
about fifty thousand.
And both recommendations
increased other costs by sixty
seven thousand for increased
insurance rates are aware
software costs and vehicle and
building leases and alter to
Caitlyn.
Thank you Mr chairman and Andrea
so moving on to he five five two
Interstate Stream compact
compliance and water
development.
Both recommendations reduced
other transfers to minimize use
of the agencies trust funds but
the executives reduction exceeds
LFC is by two hundred and
seventy three thousand dollars
the recommendations for federal
revenues and fund balance are
the same.
In the base budget the LFC
recommendation increased person
funding by two hundred seventy
three thousand dollars to
preserve some priorities funded
in the original FY twenty one
appropriation for the program
before reductions were made in
the summer special session the
executive recommendation keeps
the personal budget flat and
both recommendations reduced
funding for contractual
services.
Moving to P. five fifty three
the litigation adjudication
program.
And revenue the LFC
recommendation help all revenue
sources flat with the FY twenty
one operating budget the
executive recommendation reduced
other transfers by a hundred and
thirty six thousand to minimize
use of trust funds and increase
other revenue other state
revenues by one hundred thousand
for net reduction of thirty six
point six thousand.
The base both recommendations re
prioritize funding from
contractual services to other
costs to support increased costs
for software licenses vehicle
supplies and equipment the
executive recommendation also
includes a thirty six point six
thousand reduction in person
funding.
And P. five five Ford program
support.
Both recommendations kept
general fund revenue flat and
reduced other transfers to
minimize the use of the agencies
trust funds again the LFC is
recommended recommended
reduction exceeds the executives
I forty point nine thousand
dollars and in the based both
recommendations reduce person
funding due to decreased
employee benefits cost Mr
Chairman on last answer has any
final comments that is the end
of the analyst presentation
thank you.
Thank you very much miss one and
Dr minor it will now go to
in our
enters the.
I can say right now
Mr Dantonio please Mr engineer
and Mr Rolf Schmidt Petersen and
take it away.
Thank you Mr chairman can you
hear me OK.
Yes Sir
can you share my screen.
Yes Sir okay
good afternoon and thank you
it's a pleasure to read through
the this committee on our
budgets I have with me today
director of the Interstate
Stream Commission Mr Will Smith
Peterson also richly whose are a
general counsel and litigation
and the station program
director.
Dancing girl who's the
Interstate Stream Commission
general counsel Mister John
Romero who is our water resource
allocation program director and
also the water resource water
rights director Jeff Graham or
program support director and Mr
Charles Thompson Arkansas the
euro two.
Get into or presentation right
off here.
Well look at the.
We've been dealing with so
within the past year obviously
we can of the pandemic we've got
two words state engineers and
dealing with and it's it's a
severe drought to on the heels
or during the middle of the
pandemic which is really up and
challenging for us of water
supplies are critical components
to the public health and safety
it's being supported by all of
our out CENIC program staff and
this severe drought is really
required direct watered
ministration by the office of
the state engineer our water
masters in multiple river basins
all over the state of New Mexico
of the Rio Grande the Rio Chama
the rate goes the guiding us the
member is the San Juan and the
heinous rivers also enforcement
actions against illegal
diversions over divisions we
have to have a presence in the
field and it's really taxed
taxed or agencies
we have a of seven district
offices that continue to provide
essential services especially
the domestic well prevents other
water use permits well drillers
licenses things of that nature
of course the Interstate Stream
Commission as operations at
Christina creek and eagle nest
at the reservoir understand
genders there and also in this
still right now refugia as we
get into the the Tulsa area that
we have within the state of
Mexico continues to worsen the
states currently out of fifty
four percent extreme drought
status on experiencing a record
drought it's on the record now
to be as bad as the nineteen
fifties throughout their D.
three status which this the red
color
was downgraded to
well in February as if ever the
fifth a hundred percent of the
state is in D. one to D. four
status of the eighty two percent
of the state isn't the three to
do for status and the dark the
dark brown color of dark red
color with everyone colleges so
fifty four percent in need for
we had a job task force meeting
on Monday of this past we.
We are out task force brings
rounds sound science and policy
experts together to provide
updates a recommendation
recommendations and the final
authority declaring drought
emergencies typically it's done
on form of an executive order
which the governor signed on
December the ninth which
actually frees up some funding
for the clerk emergencies with
the state Mexico.
Our resources we have a critical
resource constraints another
critical initiatives that we
have we inherited a twenty three
percent vacancy rate from the
prior administration I didn't
get to the pandemic budget
impact in the general fund
reductions in the last couple
years we've had a restrictions
on filling vacancies we've also
been dealing with the Interstate
litigation taxes The New Mexico
on both the Rio Grande and
rivers we've got a fifty year
water planned developments
that's a critical initiative for
us the Arizona water rights
settlements Act the laws have a
Cisco diversion project that
that had to go through a
reassessment and re focus on
line unit projects and then of
on going efforts to negotiate
implements multiple Indian water
rights settlements.
getting to the crux of the
matter and I'm sorry for the
business of this slideshow we do
have a.
forty seven recruitments that
had been initiated in twenty
twenty which is eighteen and a
half percent of our current
workforce we currently and we
some recruitment of US
historically high forty seven
out of three hundred fourteen
positions in twenty twenty we've
only of given that amount with
that eight external hires which
is that net increase in our
field FTEs seventeen of the
internal hires advancements.
You know within within the
agency it's hard for us to find
somebody and qualified people
based on the salaries that we're
paying so we have a lot of
internal hires which causes
double that is actually a couple
higher requirements for the
agency we've got eleven
recruitment process and you have
a recruitment spending approval
during the last year twenty one
employees we're lost through
either retirements which we had
ten retirements we have thirteen
anticipated retirements in the
coming year and we've had more
high level staff reach what
retiring than usual all all
tenant for the twenty years
agency experience.
Last year.
Despite the the twenty twenty
recruitment actions outpacing
losses seventeen of the twenty
five I requires during twenty
twenty were internal again as I
said so it resulted in fourteen
FTE decrease in staff to handle
regular workload unless Lestrade
and and special initiatives we
had a.
And I want to explain
the bottom the bottom of the
page they're not the it's
difficult to hire of we we had
the hiring freeze require
approval at sections.
We have recruitment process is
in a it's really time consuming
labor intensive with multiple
layers of approval of the job
advertisements to hiring an
applicant takes about six to
eight weeks on top of that
there's an approval to fill
positions that takes up to a
hundred and twenty days so a
large portion of the agencies
your Google those together it
takes six months to get a new
hire on and a large portion of
the agency positions require
four more years of college and
licensure and that we must
complete a complete for
employees in legal engineering
science Nike feels which often.
Against other employers are
paying a lot more it's difficult
to keep up with those with those
tires and recruitment actions
and for purpose perspective the
state injures office at two
hundred fifty four sealed FTE in
twenty twenty.
Twelve years ago I had three
hundred and twelve of field of
positions with probably a bigger
workload now.
Let's go to that specific
programs and the programs are
as we went over there the water
allocation program you can see
in there your stateroom
Commission litigation and at
eight litigation and
adjudication program and program
supports and the the vacancies
that we have in all of these
agencies we've we've are these
programs we have a funded
vacancies FTE count about twenty
again it sounds like you it's a
lot but for us to be able to
make any ground again through
the hiring freeze of the the
process that we go through it's
a constant uphill battle we're
constantly hiring and you can
see how many hiring actions we
actually at within of within the
the agency itself so it's a you
know when the when there's a
snapshot in time taken and it
shows that we have funded
vacancies and money available
it's really deceiving because
it's very very difficult to hire
those positions are and keep up
with the attrition the National
attritional loss that we have as
we move forward the I want to
talk on this because this does
affect our operating budget and
I know its these are special
appropriations but what happens
when we don't get the special
appropriations we wind up taking
these are these expenses out of
hiding we've had to do that in
the past few years seven hundred
fifty thousand for the the fifty
year water plan you can see the
LFC recommendation for that is
zero for the Interstate
litigation with with taxes we've
had to take a lot of money out
of out of sight for that
particular lawsuit because we're
underfunded or are a technical
services and supports are you
can see where two million up two
point three seven million under
the LFC recommendation verses
the executive and then for our
rate settlements there's a
pumping associated with with
scars that irrigation district
it's far better addition
district not to all of you will
be able to get as much why.
Are down there as the
settlements dictated we have the
pump from us to different well
feels in order to get that water
down there there's there's the
senior user on that system and
again we're a million dollars
short on that on being
requirement for next year and
again the reason for including
it here is if we don't we won't
have of we have to take it out
of our our current budgets
you'll see trust funds again the
combined trust funds that we
have we have to trust funds to
your initial our construction
Fund in the movie of the Rio
Grande income fund you can see
this red line here back in FY
ten it was in excess of thirty
million dollars to fund balance
it's gone it was pretty stable
up until about FY nineteen or
twenty it's taken a precipitous
drop here so that's in between
twenty two and twenty three it's
going to exhaust its fund many
of the operating expenses that
the state engineer and I just do
have come out of this fund you
can see there's a gap between
the expenditures that have gone
out and the total revenues which
remain about ten million dollars
of with the rent with the
expenditures going up almost
eighteen million dollars about
an eight million dollar gap
there.
We'll go over these in too much
detail but these are the numbers
on the irrigation works
construction fund of you can see
it's a larger of the two funds
shows the beginning balance up
here on this top line it shows a
total revenues that you can see
here on this line what I want to
draw your attention to is in FY
twenty and twenty one the
forestry fund and you say you
have fund which were new
additional funds with the
additional hands they're taking
money out of this particular
fund have really caused the
demise of this fund and and is
really out of constant problems
for our future agency
expenditures and operations it
is improvements to the Rio
Grande income fund similar
situation again it's a smaller
fund small beginning balances
revenues of that are of the here
and the projected balances again
going away in FY twenty three.
A dry your attention to this
this monitor general
appropriations act twenty
nineteen on or before October
the first twenty nineteen we
were to put together a plan a
five year plan covering the
period to begin in in fiscal
year twenty one recapture
General Fund to replace the use
of these trust funds we have put
that plan together it's been
slow down a bit based on on
current budget issues but we
gotta get back to this plan
would we've got a fund the
agency with general fund this
these trust funds are going
away.
I want to touch on taxes The New
Mexico
and Colorado it's the U. S.
supreme court's regional action
number one forty one of this one
just update you discovery was
closed in November we've had it
we had over a hundred days of
depositions and expert in fact
witnesses New Mexico identified
seventy one potential trial
witnesses the parties are
currently of breaking motions
for partial summary judgment
filed in our on November the
fifth what we're working on
replied but we just finished the
reply brief they were to last
Friday's we turn and I think we
in conjunction with the attorney
general's office who were
supporting on this oral
arguments are going to be before
the special master on March the
ninth of twenty twenty one
there's a mediation that's also
been ordered court appointed
mediator from California a judge
lane Jr we're meeting with him
parties began with the in
December and those discussions
with the parties experts we're
going to start forming a
technical committees of the
trial itself is starting in July
or August of twenty twenty one
and again the hope is that we
can we can get somewhere in this
mediation so that we wouldn't
have to go through
through the CSR trial.
Let me let me bring briefly a
little bit more on where we're
at with the trial Mexico we
filed three separate motions New
Mexico's contact of course
immense job hello thank you
Mexico things we have a
enforcement of the state.
Texas is arguing the other side
thank you that New Mexico has no
compact apportionment we are we
believe that fifty seven percent
of the project supply was a
portion of state in New Mexico
on the second the second motion
is damages in years when all and
I'll pass on number one received
a full supply there were our
argument is there were no
damages between nineteen eighty
and two thousand two when when
that Texas receive a full supply
they also received a school
supply in two thousand and five
and from two thousand six to the
present there's an operating
agreement that's been in place
that has as really slip the the
compact said and taxes is been
getting a lot more water in New
Mexico that's the the basis for
the motion on number two and
then the third motion is there's
no damages in years when Texas
delta notified New Mexico of
Texas's alleged shortages taxes
never did file a fire
appropriation or a priority
administration call on the state
of New Mexico that we under
delivered and that's an
essential fact in now in other
case law with respect to
interstate litigation Texas is
motion I I told you they are
they argue that New Mexico does
not have proportionally hello
you.
There are are you in nineteen
thirty eight condition and
depletions for New Mexico's.
Post nineteen thirty eight
groundwater pumping violates the
compact United States has a
motion also that that New Mexico
should be enjoined to prohibit
non E. ID groundwater pumping
from interfering with the
project deliveries the make is
briefs were filed on in January
of this year Supporting taxes is
and United States are very ideal
past number one and the city of
all passed so and in supporting
our New Mexico are on growers
and diversified real properties
which are farmers in New Mexico
City Los crucis New Mexico State
University and the Albuquerque
for only a large party of.
The next slide really gets back
into and madam chair I see you
on screen I know you don't want
to get into the special
appropriations but again.
Well I bring it up because we
had to take money out of Clyde
without getting this special
appropriations is essential we
get this at all I will move on
to our Indian water rights
settlements they are the Indian
water rights settlements in New
Mexico we have we have
The three currents water rights
settlements with job which
everybody I think is aware of
the damage to the Navajo Nation
and that's how settlements The
New Mexico's done a really good
job on on these particular
issues I net new Mexico cost
years been MATZIE and really all
of I'll a lot of moves quickly
to just talk a little bit about
admits which out the capitol
there's capital funding is going
to come in to meets those
funding but we all these other
settlements are negotiations
that have to happen and so we
need additional staff in order
to perform these and and work
with our federal counterparts
you can see there's nine of
those tribes and nations and six
different educations and our and
it's very strict important for
us to be able to get there as we
move forward I'm gonna turn this
over to our Director Senate
Petersen just not talk about the
the state water plan does affect
occurs operations and will be a
couple more items before we're
done today.
You guys to to be a little more
abbreviated here so we can get
to questions from the committee
okay madam chair I can do that
really quickly F. three items to
go over very briefly with you
okay of the committee and the
committee first is that the
fifty year water plan effort
that we've begun I want to bring
this up primarily because of the
number of pills that are out
there that relate to climate
change in the rate and the
impacts of climate change across
New Mexico through the
governor's
Action to us we're beginning
this fifty year plan effort and
it really tries to go at that
directly with the following
method I think is it will be
very important and beneficial to
decision makers on the ground.
The plan looks at increasing
temperature through time which
is been the norm for the last
thirty years and says if you
have increasing temperature
across our landscape how are
your water depended resources
affected by that and then by
interacting with local
stakeholders experts on the
ground we can assess where
people are resilient to that
expected change and where
they're not this plan is about a
sixteen month effort and John
could you move to the next slide
since go through quickly sixteen
month effort to we launched it
in early January with the New
Mexico water dialogue we have a
very large number of partners in
that we have very limited state
resources associated with it
we're of leveraging the US army
corps of engineers were
partnering with Indian affairs
division hickory Apache nation.
Water resources research
institute and and New Mexico
water dialogue to do this
effort.
We will conducted initial piece
of this in the next three to
four months we'll work on
outreach iteration report back
to you all during the fall about
what we find and look to iterate
that incomplete the plan going
forward by March of next year
John the next slide on that
just as a it for an idea of what
we're anticipating getting out
of this we're we're not
developing a state water plan
we're not doing regional plans
we we did those those are
completed in two thousand
seventeen and eighteen this is
to this next effort is really
looking at increased
temperatures and what they mean
to water users on the ground
we want to provide them
information about that for their
decision making we want to
assess gaps and operational
infrastructure needs we want to
look at federal and state
institutions and infrastructure
in that regard you know where
those might need modificar
modification we're we're not
communicating really well about
what's already in place and then
and then we want to look at
research because we have some of
the best research experts in New
Mexico in our universities and
our intent is to access that
expertise and bring it to the
ground next slide.
Very quickly just wanted to
update you on the Lori Graham
water conservation I.
And Salling pilot program this
is another area that we have
appropriation for well we're
redirecting a lot of staff
resources both within the I just
see in the OSCE towards we have
a number of partners in the
lower Rio Grande John the
Antonio mentioned them earlier
they have done a lot of work
groundwater and potential for
ground water conservation we've
now put out a grant application
process and we have about
eighteen grant applications that
I will be signing in the next
couple weeks to fellow about
fifteen hundred acres of
irrigated lands in the lower
rate grant the local bio damn
this year and really kind of
assess the ability to do that.
What it takes to put a program
like that in place what it means
for ground water and then local
institutional ability to take
that stuff on John the next
slide.
lastly is our pick the Picos
augmentation pumping I think
you're all aware and I'll say it
again we won the lawsuit against
taxes on the rate goes where
they basically challenge to work
we try to help them during the
floods in two thousand and
thirteen US Supreme Court voted
essentially unanimously that
that Texas's arguments you know
made no sense and that the New
Mexico and the river master were
correct we don't have a contact
issue on the rate goes we have a
hundred and sixty thousand acre
feet of credit there which is a
great thing and it's due to the
two thousand three pickle
settlement and our partners
working with us PED ACD
reclamation C. ID and others.
With that exceptional drought
figure that Jonty showed you we
began pumping are well feels at
lake Arthur and seven rivers in
late October in order to try to
help give Brantley reservoir and
other reservoirs providing water
to see ID up to about fifty
thousand acre foot of volume of
supply by March one we are
meeting our targets of about
eight thousand acre feet going
into these residents have
Brantley before March one in
fact we'll we'll pass that but
it will not be enough the
drought on the rate goes is so
bad we will be at least fifteen
thousand acre feet short which
means under the terms of the
settlement we need to continue
pumping without the laboring it
John showed you the what's going
on with our trust funds that's
what we've historically utilized
I will continue to try to do
that but in two thousand eleven
we needed to come for two years
almost straight as forty five
million dollars we don't have
that money available in our
trust funds and that's why we've
asked for the special we will be
using some of our regular budget
to do this also hoping for a lot
of rain on the pay because that
gets us out of this and the
state engineer I believe that's
the end.
You have any more are.
The answer we're we can stand
for questions all right.
Thank you very much and I and I
after we get questions I'm going
to ask if the workgroup that I'd
asked to get together with the
H. G. regarding this law lawsuit
with Texas versus New Mexico
ever did that so let's start
with the Representative Anderson
and that will go to
Representative Chatfield.
Thank you madam chairman madam
chairman I just said that two
quick questions what the.
One is of to Mr DM Tonio of the
there's a little bit of a of a
effort in the presentation to
mix that crossed funds into to
into into sort of a single
entity that entity building
Trust Fund Sapporo of could you
just real quick describe the to
to can the money be used for the
same purpose or is the money
different and could you describe
that quickly please.
Madam chair representative said
there they are two different
funds they are for different
purposes one strictly grew into
the Rio Grande income fund and
the other ones of.
Representative construction fund
they are for specific purposes
and we we can outline those I I
might have a Mr Schmidt Petersen
answer that's and so this one
that investors it's typically.
If I could Mr chair Schmidt
Petersen not.
And ask you to follow up simply
of I hear a comment that suggest
these funds have sort of
exhausted themselves and will no
longer be useful tools in the.
Management of water surface
surface and subsurface resources
could you comment on that please
Madam chair representative
Anderson if that is correct with
regards to our projections given
the current demands on the trust
funds from the agency as a whole
and and then the other areas
that are going into that we we
anticipate that those trust fund
balances we'll go to our below
zero sometime in fiscal year
twenty to early twenty three
and and that's one of the
reasons why we brought up and
linking you know these different
types of request together to try
to do the work that we need to
do on the ground with regards to
your question about the use of
the funds you know the
improvement of the Rio Grande
income fund is for use solely
within the Rio Grande basin of
the improve the irrigation works
construction fund can be you
statewide.
Thank you Mr Peterson of Mister
Schmidt of less point in and
it's really it's not a question
is merely that I hope in our
fifty year water plant weather
modification will be included of
because I and other legislative
proponents are interested in
seeing New Mexico of be a leader
in weather modification of
that's me and the others but the
I just thank you it's it's it's
got to be looked at in a fifty
year plan is a great place to
start thank you madam chairman.
Thank you.
Representative Chatfield next.
Your your muted Representative.
Thank you madam chair I have
several questions.
Hello start with the fifty year
water plant I've been hearing
about it I.
But you don't know Google
workers close to several groups
and you just named off I have in
the past and still.
And over the years
Work
on two different regional water
plant in our area which came
from all of the state were
compiled to make a state water
plan
been hearing about the fifty
year water plants and wondered
in the past would be funded what
I wonder now is will there be an
opportunity for local input I I
see that the statistics being
compiled from various groups.
It's just not going to be the
fifty year directions or the
fifth year of statistics
A chance for local included to
this.
Madam chair representative
Chatfield there will be a from
my perspective given zoom and go
to meeting and others will be
your it a significant outreach
and coordination effort that
starts this summer and goes into
the fall.
currently we're working with the
New Mexico bureau of geology and
mineral resources where they're
pulling together some of these
expert climate researchers and
others really to to kind of hone
down what it is we need to do
initially but that the major
concept with this is to get
information from those parties
Dr David Kessler from UNM of
Fred Phillips from New Mexico
tech a number of others that
that basically says given the
water warming that you all have
experienced in the last thirty
years here's what that
expectation will be over the
next fifty years with the idea
of planning for the worst hoping
for better.
And what happens to water rain
run off
flood snow and then also if
apple transported the man right
in the the idea on a landscape
if you have many more hot dry
time periods does your forage
last anywhere long as long as it
would under current conditions
to kind of reach out and find
constituents across the state
with that kind of information to
first help them with their
decision making.
That's the I think one of the
first pieces of that they will
interact with them on it and you
coordinated assessments probably
through at least two levels of
interaction and maybe more
depending on what kind of it of
the input we receive.
Thank you madam chair of we I
would ask that when you do that
reach out to you but then a
month off of that list so
Madam chair representative we
will.
Second question I know that over
the years we have been forced to
buyer cation Water to follow
some of our crop land in order
to
our deliveries to the state of
Texas and probably the cover
picture of brought this to my
mind is is there some way that
we could put some maybe cover
crops on these we also we are
traveling or something the whole
that soil so we don't just get a
giant piece of our ocean when we
feel it's been a plow the farm
for years used to have a half
off on that or some kind of a
cross on it we go in there by
the the state by the water
rights and then you just have a
I'll say and so is there some
way that during that interaction
in that for that purchase yeah
we can allow for one last
funding or or maybe a one one
planning a year of follow up to
get some native vegetation
growing in that so also the
low light Madam chair
representative field that is
definitely part of the plan of
the call cover crops for central
we're working with the New
Mexico department back in their
program.
smartphone program see if we can
leverage some of the funding
that we have for that particular
program and do it to work with
local farmers because as you
said it's it's really important
to make sure that those are that
that really valuable topsoil
doesn't blow away during those
times.
Thank you madam chair thank you
guys for a job well done Harper
your so you appreciate the hard
work that you do is a tough
decision you make sure that we
have.
Okay thank you very much
Representative we have anybody
else that would like to ask Miss
the state engineering questions.
maybe double check the panel
here.
We do not have anybody else on
the list from what I can see
With that being said I want to
thank you for the presentation
today as it was mentioned before
we will have a separate many
hearing when it comes to
supplementals and specials and
those kinds of things and it's a
darn shame that we're not able
to meet face to face for you to
talk to the members individually
and that kind of thing and
but hopefully by next year will
be back in the saddle and having
regular hearings where we can
have have you folks up here in
the capital and and visiting
with us.
With that being said
Representative small promotion.
Thank you madam chair I would
move the LFC recommendation.
All second.
We have a motion and a second so
it was representative Armstrong
on the second.
Is there any opposition to the
motion.
Thank we're gonna go ahead and
go with the LFC recommendation
we'll see you during the
specials presentation John thank
you and thank you to.
Thank you madam chair I might
yeah go ahead thank you madam
chair just following up thanks
to excellent work with miss Dick
Peddie with the LFC there's
going to be a briefing a on
Thursday morning
so that continued work on As You
directed related to the taxes
The New Mexico litigation.
It also so working with OSC on
the.
Okay great great good to hear
All right thank you let's go on
now to HSD six six seven the
department of environment we'll
start with the analyst and then
fire up with the cabinet
secretary so if we could please
Alice.
Thank you madam chair this is
Caitlyn want again with the
legislative finance committee
and Andrew Miner from DFA will
be presenting with me on the
differences between the LFC and
executive recommendation I
cabinet secretary James Kenney
is joining us as well as I
believe some of his staff I'm as
with the last two agencies a
policy discussion on issues
related to the environment
department can be found in LFC
is volume one starting on page
eighty four.
The LFC recommendation for the
environment department is
inviting to starting on page two
seventy three and in volume
three you can find a it sources
and uses and fund balance
projection on the corrective
action fund one of the agency's
largest funding sources and that
is on page seventy nine of
volume three I'll begin with the
agency Maria and then Andrew and
I will take turns presenting the
programs.
Revenue the environment
department receives revenue from
the general fund federal funds
and certain fees collected by
the agency one thing I wanted to
note a longstanding practice
accounting practice results in
nearly thirty five million
dollars of the agency's budget
being double counted as both
other revenues and other
transfers and therefore be
affected budget and he do is
roughly thirty five million
dollars less than the amounts
shown about so for example on
your differentiate your FY
twenty one.
Read in column you'll see it one
hundred twenty five million the
affected budget of the agency is
really more like ninety million
dollars because of that double
counting I issue that we have.
So I'm moving on the LFC
recommendation cap general fund
revenue flat with the FY twenty
one operating budget well the
executive recommended a three
point seven million dollar
increase and it will go into
more detail on that later but I
just want to know now this
proposal was not in the agency
requests and not submitted to
LFC at any other point during
the LFC if process so it was not
considered.
For the LFC recommendation.
LFC recommended all other
revenue sources in alignment
with the agency's projections on
request and the executive
recommendation for other revenue
is one hundred thousand dollars
lasts to substitute revenue from
the corrective action fund with
general fund revenue.
In the base budget the LFC
recommendation primarily reduced
expenditures in the other costs
category while increasing
funding for contractual services
personnel funding was reduced
due to the deletion of a number
of long term vacancies.
The executive recommendation the
increased funding for personnel
and contractual services and
implemented a much smaller
reduction or other cost than the
LFC recommendation and in all of
the agency's programs LFC and
DFA staff reached consensus on
all performance measure targets.
Over to ensure now to start with
our first program.
Thank you.
Good afternoon madam chair
members of the committee before
we get started on P. five six
seven just a note that that that
three point seven million the
general fund add to that Caitlyn
talked about that was identified
we're getting into be more
getting into more detail on that
we get to the environmental
protection program but was
identified as a very important.
Thank you have an administration
priority so that's why that was
placed within the budget the
executive budget recommendation
and we do respectfully you a
request that you considered for
inclusion so moving on then to
the first program P. five six
seven resource management.
Hi this is basically the program
support program of the
environment department and so in
the revenue the executive
recommended a general fund
revenue flat without FY twenty
one well the LFC recommendation
reduced to general fund by one
hundred and thirty eight
thousand or five percent of the
recommendations for all other
revenue sources are the same
resulting in a net decrease of
forty four thousand from
transfers federal funds and fund
balances in the base budget to
the LFC recommendation
implemented the five percent
general fund reduction and other
funds reductions as a was
proposed in the initial agency
budget request
in September reducing
expenditures for person.
Contracts and I. T. the
executive recommendation rex's
we recommended the same
decreases LFC and contractual
services and other costs but
increase personal services by
about a hundred and twelve
thousand to reduce the programs
vacancy rate and alter to Kayla.
Thank you madam chair I move on
to P. five six eight the water
protection program the LFC
recommendation increased general
fund revenue by four hundred and
seven point three thousand
dollars above the FY twenty one
operating budget well the
executive recommendation hell
General Fund flat the
recommendations for all other
revenue sources are the same and
align with the agency's revenue
projections for a total
reduction of two point four
million dollars in transfers and
federal funds.
In the base budget the LFC
recommendation reduced funding
for personal services employee
benefits by nine hundred and
seventy three thousand dollars
related to deletion of the
positions.
Increase the contractual
services budget by three hundred
thirty one point nine thousand
dollars for drinking water
analysis and reduce funding for
grants to other entities by one
point four million dollars the
executive recommendation it
reduced person funding by one
hundred fifty one point eight
thousand dollars less than LFC
is recommendation and reduced
the contractual services budget
by two hundred twenty seven
point two thousand dollars more
and the recommendations for
other costs are this.
Okay turning to P. five six nine
the resource protection program
as you can see from your
different sheets the LFC and
Executive recommendations in
this program are actually the
same.
in terms of revenue LFC and the
executive both recommended
general fund revenue equal to FY
twenty one a reduction in other
transfers an increase in federal
revenues it's pursuant to what
the agency projected for a net
revenue increase of about two
hundred and thirty eight
thousand.
In the base budget both
recommendations you see a budget
increase primarily apply to
contractual services for safety
trainings and database
maintenance and then both
recommendations reduce personal
funding associated with the
leading vacant positions at a
slightly increased to the other
cost categories.
Thank you madam chair so moving
on to the last program P. five
seventy the environmental
protection program.
The LFC recommendation or reduce
general fund revenue by two
hundred sixty eight point seven
thousand dollars or five percent
well the executive recommended a
general fund increase of three
point seven million LFC
recommended increases in all
other revenue sources in
accordance with the agency's
revenue projections for a total
increase of one and a half
million from agency generated
and federal revenues which more
than offsets the general fund
reduction the executive
recommendation for other
transfers is one hundred
thousand dollars less than LFC
is to reduce operating
expenditures from the corrective
action funds is revenues
replaced with general fund is
the executive recommendation.
In the budget LFC recommended
increases in all three spending
categories with the largest
increase in the person budget at
eight hundred and forty seven
thousand dollars the executives
recommended general fund
increase would support thirty
new FTE and the programs
occupational health and safety
bureau at a cost of two point
three million dollars for
salaries and benefits one
hundred and seventy five
thousand dollars for training
and analytical contracts and one
point two million dollars for
other costs such as fuel
supplies travel and lodging as I
said earlier this proposal was
not requested or provided to LFC
so there is no opportunity to
evaluate it but one of our
initial concerns based on the
information we've seen so far
is the breakdown of these funds
with one point two million
dollars going towards
operational or overhead costs
which is more than half the
amount recommended for person
additionally the executive
recommended person funding in
addition to that amount for the
new FTE to reduce the programs
vacancy rate.
Thank you madam chair that
concludes the analyst portion
The presentation unless and you
had anything else you wanted
thank you.
Briefly why touch on P. eight oh
two.
The last an accounting program
yes if you would like to take
that thank you sure this is the
second madam chair members the
committee the last Pico you see
in your in your packet is the
special Revenue Code P. eight oh
two this is the source is mainly
it's mostly transfers as the
source of that thirty five
million dollar double counting
that Caitlyn explained at the
beginning the only difference
you see here is that the
executive recommendation for
other revenues is one hundred
thousand less than LFC is to
provide certain program
expenditures with general fund
revenue rather than revenue from
the corrective action fund and
then that's just reflected there
in the other financing uses on
the expenditure side and so that
is all I have and so I will turn
to us secretary Kenny.
Mr secretary at your you're up
next in and in part of your
presentation I'd like to discuss
this double counting so if you
would go ahead please.
Thank you madam chair and
members of the committee I I
also know that I'm your last
presenter of today so I will try
to be brief our our slides are
coming up and the good news is I
only have six slides including
the one that you're looking at
right now so there's not a long
presentation here to leave time
for discussions and will
definitely touch on the the
question you asked Madam about
the double counting
So again thank you look forward
to the questions that we're
going to have in mind my simple
last this this afternoon is
similar to what I presented and
Senate finance is to you please
about the executive budget and
in doing so I can unequivocally
tell you that you'll present
prevent fatalities in New Mexico
your occupational health and
safety program.
So with that I'm going to move
to our second slide.
There we go for members the
committee again if I didn't
introduce myself on Jan ten in
the the secretary for the
environment department I know
many of you look forward to
meeting more of you
but for those of you who are
unfamiliar with the department
and all its programs it's a very
diverse department we we are
obviously the group that focuses
on air water quality solid and
hazardous waste management but
we also are the group that
supports our local restaurant
industry through manufacturers
have manufacturing we regulate
septic systems in real estate
transactions we work on public
pools and spas and we do even
more than that we administered
much of the capital outlay
through for water infrastructure
projects throughout the state of
New Mexico as well as administer
a lot of other water
construction programs throughout
the state
and I I would know that's with
only six people managing over
five hundred projects so again
we're very productive group of
individuals here at the
environment department with the
birds programs
in addition to those
programmatic activities we've
also handled over twelve hundred
in requests informally assisted
in twenty twenty over two
hundred and thirty constituents
either that constituent
questions that either came in
from the legislature or the
governor's office but that's not
even counting the tens of
thousands of hours through
providing technical assistance
to New Mexico businesses as well
as residents on environmental
issues
and if you get weren't aware we
also publish most of our
information in English and
Spanish limited English
proficiency I environmental
protection go hand in hand to
make sure that we reach out to
those communities who are who
maybe would not have the ability
to help themselves by us just
publishing information in
English and most recently we
translated are on rapid response
data
into albeit.
You so that people who again had
limited English proficiency
could be just a safe during the
pandemic as other people.
And we can move to the next
slide.
This is really the slide that I
would focus on and this is
probably the slide that you're
most interested in I just refer
to this as our dashboard but
before that you see the numbers
are where values are over on the
right those core values are
really would turn any challenge
we have the department into an
opportunity to really excel and
and bring a better outcome I
won't go over those but on the
left hand side where we look
sort of clockwise here from the
perspective.
The perspective is just to give
you an idea that we're only
point two percent of the overall
state budget we are the ninth
largest agencies so we have a
very limited amount of general
fund it usually comes in our
department for such a large
purview and large number of
people we minister over ninety
grants as well as twenty four
special revenue funds
and you can see what it would
look like on our budget in FY
twenty one moving to the upper
right quadrant the yellow lines
the yellow boxes I should say
you can see the the governor's
the executive recommendation and
the LESC recommendation and the
difference of three point seven
million dollars highlighted in
yellow that is really three
point seven million dollars it
was added to our budget after we
submitted our budget which
Caitlyn is right about now many
thanks to Caitlyn and Andrew who
are the tough job of dealing
with our complicated budget but
that three point seven million
dollars was added to our budget.
Eight four really our ocean
program and just a quick
highlight honor ocean program
right now New Mexico where our
fatality rate is seventy seven
percent higher than the national
average we were looking at
typically twenty workplace
fatalities a year with twenty
four hundred workplace injuries
a year
and here's the sad part we're
leaving federal grant dollars on
the table we have been in the
past because we don't have the
general fund to pull those
monies down on our on our
federal department of labor
grants match so that's that's
really what you see in that
difference not highlighted
yellow and on black text box the
lower left hand corner here is
the amount of money we spend and
Representative caller asked me
about this prior.
In the COVID our world we we now
spend three point four million
dollars in tears Act money as
well as workforce solutions got
as a grant to hire under and
unemployed New Mexicans to do
our rapid response works like
that three point four million
dollars and the reversion there
is really civil penalties that
we're collecting we have a an
agreement
or gold king mine is going to
bring eleven million dollars
into the state I which is coming
into the environment department
but I just wanted to show that
really six point six million
dollars and civil penalties
about forty percent of our
general fund were able to
collect in in civil penalties.
It's just to to get to point out
that
when non compliance occurs the
environment department is there
to hold polluters accountable as
to what as well as to make
communities whole as reviewing
all throughout the state and
finally on the bottom right hand
corner is really our staffing
it's it's of interest to note
Representative madam chair you
have pointed this out to me
before we really focused on
bringing our vacancy rate down
we're doing that we just heard
state engineer at the Antonio
presented it takes six months to
hire somebody we've gone from FY
nineteen from four and a half
months FY twenty eight to three
and a half months
well we're really managing a
workforce in over six hundred
people with three human resource
professionals that's very
managing over two hundred
different positions person you
can imagine if one of those
people has H. R. question that
that it you know just sort of
cascades that the process
problems that we have we're
working on fixing that have have
more content made tangible steps
in reducing in FY twenty one the
amount of time it takes to bring
people on so we're really
actively working on that agency
right.
Let's move to the next slide
please.
The next three slides are my
last three signs and the these
are going to move very quickly
but just to give you an idea we
have been saying we were we lost
about thirty percent of our
general fund over the period of
sixteen to twenty two I
potentially sixteen about
nineteen twenty eight but really
when we look back further is
really forty two percent of our
general fund that compiled with
about thirty million dollars in
special in the loss of our
special revenue funds really
took a toll on the department on
in terms of the programmatic
activities and outcomes we could
perform as well as the staffing
issues
so I just wanted to again show
that we are on an upswing this
is met then to be optimistic not
pessimistic Iran and upswing
here and I really appreciate the
Legislature helping us make
those gains
Next slide please and madam
chair you had indicated early at
the beginning of this session
today that we work you didn't
need to hear about specials and
supplementals and deficiencies
so actually going to skip the
sliding just me right to my last
slide
which I think I really wanted to
show you that the environment
department while you may see as
as those who sort of regulate
methane or actually don't
regulate methane the the
organization that regulates
ozone from oil and gas and we we
do all these things around the
state you know headlines that
come out of our department are
directly related to working with
communities to bring money into
their communities to make sure
that we are accountable to their
solid and hazardous waste
concerns making sure that
they're drinking water is safe
even when we aren't responsible
like in a private system
scenario even when we don't have
that the authority we don't let
our regulatory lands limit the
implementation of our mission
and our mission is to protect
public health and the
environment so we go the
distance and I think a lot of
these
headlines really indicate what
we're doing in the department
and one last thing the picture
there is you know I I'm really.
Sorry I'm really proud of the
work that we're doing in the
country care settings with our
COVID money that we received
under the cares Act we're out
there looking at comedy care
facilities to see if COVID
appears in their waste water and
if it does we know that somebody
in that facility is COVID
positive so there are countless
indications are countless
examples like it I can explain
you in southern southeastern New
Mexico where we really found
COVID you for it even the
hundred day care facility
residents or staff even knew
COVID was in their in their in
their business in their in their
workplace so again really proud
of the fact that we can use our
ingenuity our innovation to
bring a better outcome during
the pandemic with that type of
work so madam chair and well
Madam let me turn to my
Let me see if Marlene Alaska's
R. C. O. or had their toy our
budget director can answer the
question that you raised right
at the beginning of the
presentation.
Madam chair members of the
committee my name is fighting
the last guest I am the CFO for
the New Mexico environment
department in reference to the
question that you asked madam
chair in reference to the double
budgeting it's merely a a budget
that we put into like and you
said it and keep it to whether
revenue besides and we move that
revenue into our property check
so it's basically just a
transfer or Marquita to fund it
to our operating that's
basically our.
And madam chair if I could just
add one and when it was
explained to me when I first
came to the Department it was
essentially is explained like
this the analogy was removing
money from my savings account or
checking account and it appears
they are now.
That that's.
I'm trying to make sure I've got
the right button there go ahead
Sir.
you madam chair that that's how
it was explained to me it's it's
a process by which we move money
from the effectively what is
akin to a savings account or
checking account so we can pay
whatever the expenses are
revenue that's all.
Mr secretary and out of state
for also from our point of view
it in it doesn't come across as
having strong internal control.
Where where when we see on a
high level spreadsheet that the
accounting practice results in
nearly thirty five million of
the agency's budget being double
counted therefore we're looking
at roughly thirty five million
less any amounts shown in the
general fund transfer.
Anyway let's let's go ahead and
go to questions and then I've
got a couple myself let's go
to Representative Sariñana.
Thank you madam chair and thank
you secretary secretary Kenny
for your presentation so I'm new
to the committee some a little
confused on bacon vacancy rates
I'm when when most environmental
agencies counter Committee and
energy they say we can't.
Because we
We can't compete with other
states are surrounding states as
far as paper vacancies but then
here we're we're taking away
FTEs because they're not filled
so how does this work how do we
help the agencies if we can't
fill but we can't compete with
other states to fill them what
do we do then maybe it's more
for my committee to answer them
for you but madam chair you.
Yeah I can answer that but
that's what our training is on
tomorrow at noon so I'm gonna
call on Representative Crowder
where are you Representative
Crowder you're you're usually
right up in my corner there.
Representative Crowder and rent
a representative Garcia are
going to give us a training to
more on this there should have
been a handout that was
distributed to all of our
membership prior to the
presentation tomorrow.
hopefully everybody's got that
Representative the long process
it's a it's it's can be very
complicated but does Randy are
you there I see your name but I
don't see your face.
all.
Because tomorrow you're gonna
find that training on vacancy
savings and and the help the
chart to the committee.
So madam chair how do we know if
they can't compete with other
states so this is that's what
you're gonna cover that so I'm
just well we're gonna cover
tomorrow's how those
calculations are done okay most
of the person and the
staffing and and wait and wages
are classification is done by
spoke.
So the department actually
doesn't get to do that kind of
hiring is done through Spiro
those wages and classifications
need to be upgraded there's no
question about that we saw some
of that last with the last
administration of these
technical positions I believe
that the cabinet secretary I am
sure is referring to should have
some kind of a special
consideration because of the
inability to compete effectively
but then there's also
departments that intentionally
keep these vacancies open
because the funding that is
moved into other composed other
parts of the budget and issues
to
You know for other things it
just depends on the agency it
depends on where they're going
that's what we find that that
the chart at the very end of
each of each department hearing
and we actually get into some
trend analysis on this but I
don't want to I don't want to
take grantees under on this
unless you want to say something
quickly Randy on all this madam
chair I hope that.
These are.
You all just received an email
is that is page document through
if you get a chance tonight to.
In particular.
In all.
There are.
If they are correct you you need
to be your staff.
Through that.
I'm hoping we're Representative
Crowder tomorrow we've got to
get to a computer fixed it's
been hard to understand you of
the last couple days administer
spent it's it's not been easy
but go ahead Representative
Sariñana if you're if you're
still your turn.
Okay I'm thank you madam chair
and.
I think the other question I
think I have is so do we have
enough inspectors to week
compared to other states that we
have the inspectors we need to
really do it a good inspection
of different parts different
different our oil and gas and
our our groundwater all these
things do we have enough for the
state of New.
Madam chair representative thank
you for the question and the
answer is no we don't I I don't
have any grand illusion that we
should build you know and and
higher so to speak and have an
inspector for every source I do
think we have to have a credible
amount of deterrence from the
environment department as a
regulatory entity to ensure
compliance with the permits
rules eight not only we set out
for you passed as a legislative
body
for example there are there are
multiple programs in which we
haven't done inspections in in
maybe a decade or more simply
because we either don't have the
staff because we're
legislatively mandated to get
permits out the door and we we
have to focus on those aspects
as opposed to assuring
compliance and and just those
topic we speaking Madam chair
representative you know the only
way we can ensure that the
regulatory or legislative intent
of our of of what is enacted is
actually securing the budget
that we hope it does is when
we're out in the field and and
checking on things I would also
add that.
The there is a greater cost as
this legislative body knows in
looking at things like the
financing groundwater then there
is if we have the ability to
prevent P. fussing groundwater
so there there's a lot of really
good benefits simply not
enforcement or being a hammer
there's a lot of good benefits
by having a strong field
presence in in not assuring
compliance and again that does
not always need penalties in
civil actions.
Okay thank you madam chair thank
you I'm secretary Kenny I have
one last question the corrective
action fund so it's supposed to
it's it was created to for
cleanup right of petroleum camp
contaminants so how come how is
it used for other how is it
taken our why is it pooled for
other agencies or other areas
don't we have enough clean up to
do and you to use it
specifically what it's for.
Madam chair representative yes
you are correct in its in its
intent when that when that was
passed we have up to thirty
percent that we can use
internally for matching grants
and and also for paying staff
who are working on water related
issues I would like nothing
better than to bring that thirty
percent down to zero percent if
we had the ability to either do
that through general fund or if
your staff other special revenue
funds paying for those services
and in addition to that right
calf is off the corrective
action fund is often looked that
in times in which the state
needs money to be taken from
money to plug a hole somewhere
literally like the brown well
we've we've given.
Four million dollars I want to
say it least of that particular
project that's not a criticism
either from this department we
are all in this together and in
terms of making sure the prying
well is secured
but but when we take money that
thirty percent for internal
purposes and grant managing that
money that goes to other
agencies that's less money to
clean up hydrocarbons in
leaking our underground storage
tank so you're absolutely right
I wish we could we could find a
better outcome for those other
needs so that we could put that
money into remediation.
All right thank you secretary
thank you madam chair and
secretary thank you.
Thank you very much I just got a
representative of Ryan lane
please.
Thank you madam chair of my
question has to do with what
madam chair reference in passing
and deal specifically personal
services but
and and really the number of
refugees and so if we look at
the first page the FY twenty one
operating for personal services
fifty one point five million and
the executive request is fifty
three point nine million so an
increase of about almost two and
a half million and it is two
point seven million higher than
that else do but then when we
look on our.
On our calculation worksheet
despite that request of increase
in personal services almost two
and a half million we see that
there are.
Under call F. as in Frank
there's seventy five funded
bacon FTEs resulting in almost
thirteen percent funded vacancy
rate if you look at column in as
in Nancy.
There is funded vacancy in
dollars of of six point six
million so when you combine the
six point six.
plus the the additional two
point eight I mean it's a
substantial number it's almost
nine million can you help me
understand that cities thank you
madam chair.
Madam chair and and
Representative and thank you for
the question so I I think it
goes back to a couple of things
one is the this Department of
our I have to put my own slides
here of our
That that dashboard slide that I
showed you don't have to pull up
Rebecca just lack of the
Of the we have sixteen point
eight million dollars in the
executive request for general
fund seventy six point four
million dollars in special
revenue fund what that tells you
is like in whole numbers rough
numbers about twenty percent of
our workforce is funded by a
very limited very restricted
funds so we don't have the
ability to move
are like air quality fund to go
and find.
Now in other parts of the
department we have twenty four
special revenue funds that are
very prescriptive about what
they can be used for so we can't
exactly look at those total
numbers and assume that like the
three point seven month million
that we're looking for OSHA
would be available to us just
based on that he can see kind of
calculation of seventy five
people times whatever of paid
amount and that's that's
unrestricted money it's very
restricted money so that that
should help explain a little bit
how.
Why when you look at the numbers
absent looking at the source of
the the funds eight it doesn't
tell the complete story I hope
that answers your question
Representative.
Thank you madam chair that
doesn't I also just want to just
referenced in passing you.
For members page eighty five
eighty six and R. volume one
there's some really interesting
info in here about renewables
versus oil and gas courage no to
take a look at that thank you.
Okay thank you very much of
Representative Anderson.
Thank you madam chairman madam
chairman I'll be shortened to
the point of the LFC represented
the thirty five million dollars
sort of a double counting of.
Of observation and the I thought
to myself she was that's a lot
of money and and my concern is
this did I understand the LFC
analysts to say we are
correcting that so that will not
happen in the future on on this
budget.
Madam chair representative
Anderson and unfortunately no I
did not say that but this is not
really at an accounting practice
the LFC doesn't have any
involvement in this and really I
I do apologize if I created any
confusion by bringing this up I
I just I wanted to you know that
that the amount that we have on
there really does not reflect
that on the actual amount of the
department uses that it really
is just an accounting quirk I
think probably at and your from
DFA it with is the best person
to explain this again because
LFC isn't really involved in the
day to day accounting practices
of the agency and what I do know
is that this has this is been in
the the department for a long
time I don't really know if
there are plans to change it
going forward maybe and you
would like to comment further.
I'm just briefly Madam chair
representative Anderson is just
killing said it is just how the
department sets up their
accounting in PA though to it
that that program that's where
they receive all of the
environment department has I
think it's twenty two or twenty
three special revenue funds they
receive the money that they
collect for all these fees and
everything directly into that
that he code and then there are
these internal transfers they go
out to their
Their programmatic P. codes to
actually spend the money so you
have to recognize the way the
accounting is set up you have to
recognize these transfers twice
once as a transfer out and then
twice as a transfer in so that's
why you have this kind of double
counting so it was a really good
for Caitlyn to point out that
the other thirty five million is
double counted so to show out
the effectively actual by size
of their budget but it really is
just accounting and it's
something that again has been
set up for years and years and
this has worked well for the for
the agency.
Thank you for that two analysts
for that explanation it is
certainly confusing but none the
less it sounds as though that is
the appropriate of accounting
process for the revenues
secondly I want to just
secretary Kenny simply of that I
wanted to not ask you make the
COVID secretary that I
understand house bill one oh
three Representative Madrid is
trying to take advantage of your
agencies willingness to make a
rural friendly of of result in
utility certification I think of
that opens the door for many
other applications throughout
New Mexico for rural friendly.
That meaning to me people don't
have to drive to Los crucis
Santa Fe and Albuquerque to take
a test spend two nights away
from their family because
desruption they're not operate
their utilities some of these
communities operate with only a
certified water drinking water
or wastewater specialist I think
that's a really good bill Sir
aha I wish you the best with it.
Thank you madam chairman.
Representative thank you
representative small.
Thank you madam chair secretary
Kenny I just one statement and
one question.
Statement wise secretary I
appreciate deeply your work in a
number of areas clean fuels
included to expand and grow New
Mexico's economy and innovative
ways madam chair secretary Kenny
do you think that there are
opportunities hi there are
within these recommendations or
perhaps you're looking at
targeted language to make
progress in areas like in the
produced water rulemaking which
is already brought
Dozens of millions of dollars of
new investment into New Mexico
and could very well bring more
if there is additional work in
the rulemaking process.
Madam chair representative small
thank you to the question I
think we have the opportunity to
certainly we'll forward on our
produced water role making that
was our goal before we lost
positions based upon the the
scale back the setting that
occurred in the special session
so I think there's an
opportunity to bring a lot of
certainty and and work through
our consortium to not only
deliver really good scientific
outcomes but then codified into
rules
it could be more protective of
public health and at the same
time giving a pathway to
You know appropriate uses of
produced water that thank you
madam chair thank you Mr
secretary madam chair I think
that's a an opportunity where
we're bringing in revenue now to
the state where we can
significantly expand that and so
I look forward to working
hopefully working on that moving
forward thank you madam chair.
Representative Crowder.
Thank you madam chairman to try
one more time hope you this is
better.
A
whole different she bears thirty
fifty eight difference between
the LFC and exec.
It is some point student.
There's just inspectors for
something.
I'm here.
Chair representative Crowder
good to see you I'm I'm you
faded out at the last point
bears I didn't get you asked
about inspectors and a
difference I I'm sorry I didn't
get the question.
Yes we're showing up count of
thirty different between the
LESC and the executive on
employees FTEs and I thought
that I heard it mentioned that
the there is a need for more
restaurant inspectors is that
correct.
Madam chair representative out
of gas got your question there
is a difference I think part of
that difference is based on the
when I understand you all are
seeing is something from
September which doesn't reflect
our efforts to bring more people
on and we absolutely do need
more people in our environmental
health bureau that includes the
restaurant
inspectors but they're also the
ones that issue departments and
offered compliance assistance
to.
Okay I I guess where I was
struggling with bringing that
together is I know that there
are hundreds of restaurants that
are permanently closed.
And and so it it stretches made
to imagine why we need more
restaurant inspectors when we
have hundreds of restaurants
closed so I was just trying to
understand the dynamic what was
going on thank you madam chair
thank you Mr secretary it is
good to see you again Sir.
Madam majest responded that go
ahead I'll be brief
Representative Crowder thank you
well remember the inspectors of
the ones that get restaurants
open as well these are the folks
they give them effectively their
their permit to operate we we
hope all of us here including
you know our inspectors want to
see restaurants thriving again
post comment and we want to make
sure they're thriving during the
COVID as best as they can.
The FDA who we received grant
money from has told us that
we're not implementing our food
manufacturing program
appropriately and that we don't
have enough staff to do the
follow up inspections so I will
I will candidly tell you we're
doing.
Want to T. work over quality
work that is not a disrespect to
any of the people who work for
the environment department who
are watching it is any knowledge
ment that they're burning the
candle at both ends to meet a
federal grant requirement to do
the work that they have to do as
well as work with every
restaurant who calls and says I
need I need to get my rest I
need mines how DO inspected I
need my I want to go into the
street can I that's my ten where
is it is a ten on okay COVID C.
practice so we we are
desperately in need of telling
people that burn mental health
bureau who'd who if I look at
their vacancy rate it's it's
probably in the in the mid
twenties at this moment we
actually had to stop servicing.
those in the Espanola community.
Because we don't have enough
staff anymore to fill that
office and we actually people
coming down from Farmington to
just staff our environmental
health bureau at the out of the
Espanola office so I don't want
to leave you with the impression
that simply because restaurants
are closing we need less people
I think quite the opposite we
need to do more to get them up
and running and and feel
supported in our state.
On that point madam chair.
This is.
Representative thank you madam
chair and and that you also
close the environmental health
department location in Sapporo
and now they come from less than
this thank you madam chair.
Okay I don't have anybody else
Part question I want to thank
the cabinet secretary for the
presentation I want to take a
motion and I've got a suggestion
so I'm gonna go Representative
small for the motion.
You madam chair and move the LFC
recommendation for the
department of the environment
okay we have a second the second
was Representative Sweetser
is there any opposition to that
motion saying the motion has
passed but I'm a little
concerned about the general fund
transfer difference there.
At three point six million what
I read here so I'm going to ask
of.
Representative Lane and
Representative Lara.
To work with analysis if we
can't come were a little bit
more in the middle with that
number so we're going to use L.
elsewhere to do that and if you
guys could get together and
Work with our analysts to come
back during the clean up with a
number that's a little closer
than three point six million.
Okay all right I don't have
anything else on the schedule
today we're not going to do.
Corrections department today
will save that for tomorrow I
want to thank the committee
again for good hearing.
You got.
Our twelve o'clock training
tomorrow thank what we want to
thank Representative Crowder and
Garcia.
The analyst said it helped them
we then have our regular hearing
at one thirty.
Which is the corrections
department and I understand
Representative Sweetser you have
your so you're working group at
three is that correct yes madam
chair the working group that
that is trying to get closer on
the HSD budget local have see
that tree okay so that's the
Human Services budget so.
So we've got a cold again
tomorrow but I want to thank
everybody so same time not not
same time is noon tomorrow and
then we'll we'll be able to fire
up at that time so thank you
everybody I look forward to the
presentations thank you madam
chair.
I.
