Iterations Fischer special
appropriations so that's what
we're here to do again today Mr
Simon Mr of you Mr Jones are up
there members.
We want to we want to go through
we've seen this once before
we're going to go through it
again we're going to go through
page by page we're not gonna
take too much time but we did
want to be diligent going
through this and members we want
to make sure as we know this is
in most cases and anything will
be recommending today this is
nonrecurring one time special
appropriation money so this is
not a recurring commitment that
we would be making and in a year
where we have substantial
revenue this is a place that we
want to really dig in.
So as you see something and as
we flag something please bring
this to the attention of the
committee we're gonna be
compiling these as we work
through our catch up cleanup
process you'll see some changes
on a number of these in the far
right column.
That show the process already
where we have adjusted these
numbers again today as you see
areas that you think need merit
just meant for merit more
attention please flag that we're
not going to make all this is
not a meeting were taking action
so but we will be gathering that
information.
Some good.
A right up with that let's go to
Mr at.
Hey we're we're gonna go through
and and it just a brief
conversation with staff we will
look to take action at the end
of this meeting with the
additional guidance but this is
a process is to sort of go
through to flag and with that
we'll go to Mr having Mr Simon.
So good morning Mr chair members
of the committee I'm just going
to go through this sheet sort of
area by area and just highlight
where there's changes different
from the LFC recommendation you
can see over in the second to
last column there's the general
fund difference between the LFC
rack and what's in this scenario
and just for the legislative and
judicial branches you basically
there's the first item there the
Legislative Council Service for
improvements to the state
capitol complex.
And that's really the error the
areas in legislative and
judicial branches.
Turning up on to page four Mr
chairman we get into the general
controlled areas on the line
beginning online fifty two but
I'll direct your attention down
to line fifty five you can
recall there was some discussion
at the state auditor's hearing
regarding additional funds for
them to be able to take care of
some of small government areas
that's included in this in
addition online fifty six a
little extra for the taxation
revenue department to implement
tax changes that are made during
the current legislative session.
On flipping over to page five
there's AG again for the
taxation revenue department some
equipment a some additional
equipment money for that
department.
on line sixty four you'll see a
item for rental assistance there
is a million dollars in that in
addition
we we know that that the capital
package includes a
recommendation to accelerate
STBs which would raise
additional funds
moving down the line sixty six
you'll see law enforcement
programs so this scenario has an
additional seven and a half
million dollars for targeted
felony warrant enforcement
an additional six point five
million for workforce capacity
building thank they let's pause
right there thank you very much
Mr Simon Representative seven
young.
Mr chairman of the first page.
They just for the record audio
recording.
With with the little with not in
the fifties are not enough
support this audio recording is
a lifesaver it's instead of
having to
type had everything it does it
for you it just makes their
lives easier to save a whole lot
of time and if they don't have
enough people I think we should
get it for them Mr the Senate
junior list and there's three
hundred thousand.
Job purpose to improve the
efficiency and timely processing
of traditional.
Appeals increases efficiency
that the court Mr Abbey if you
could the the Mike will turn the
money yes.
Thank you thank you
Representative.
Mr Chairman
representative directly.
German distributor Preciado to
flagging that if you would
continue to please do that
that's how I would do is we can.
Thank you Representative
accrues.
Fate Mr sign
on page I'm sorry hello.
Going back to line sixty six do
we have a sense
for how much we're looking at
recruitment and retention as
part of this current forty
million dollar recommendation
yes Mr chairman so there's a
total of thirty two and a half
million of that for the or the
recruitment and retention and
that creates to sit six point
five million dollars per year in
this scenario understood okay
thank you very much.
Okay moving on to page six.
so a line sixty eight there's
the civil legal services line
has an additional four hundred
thousand.
I'll note online seventy one you
on the negative number there
that was moved and I'll talk
about that later when we get to
the sentencing commission you'll
see it at the I'm a movie the
same thing you have online
seventy four when we get to the
fund transfers I'll discuss that
line on in particular.
Representative from the.
Mr chair would you please go
back to the civil legal services
you're moving really fast and I
just want to ask a question Mr
chair we were we were short
amount of money and the
additional amount is that are we
closing the gap in the seventh
one million seven hundred
thousand.
Thank you Mr Amidu's.
So there was no cut with the non
recurring but this is before
this four hundred thousand more
so that will bring them to an
increase but further there's
about a million of Senate junior
one million Senator June for
civil legal services plus when
you get to the DFA recurring and
working with Mr Propst there was
also a recurring adjustment that
you'll be taken up at a later
point for so civil legal
services is going.
I don't think they're ever down
but there's they're looking into
with the several different
possibility pretty significant
increases thank you this is here
thank you Representative to
fund.
Please continue I'm moving on to
lines page seven
You see on line item number
seventy nine there is money for
animal shelters that was brought
to seven and a half million from
fifteen on line number eighty
there's
two million dollars from the
mortgage regulatory fund and an
additional five hundred thousand
in general fund for conference
of landlords support program.
On line number eighty four there
is funding for the inter tribal
ceremony Association I'll just
note house bill one sixty one
proposes the elimination of the
inter tribal ceremonial office
in that but that committees on
the budget so that's why it's
here.
On to pay when I start.
Would you were defacing the ones
have
yeah that that sounds correct
okay members.
Any questions.
Thank you Mr chairman are one of
the items that I'm interested in
and I think it's important for
the status is a rounds of sexual
assault I'm not is it is I'm not
for any of your I'm probably
just missing it.
And that that relates to the
crime victims reparation
commission and again you're
gonna find.
Frankly in very low numbers more
in the HFC recurring more and
Senator junior for this purpose
the question significantly more.
Thank you very much for the
cruise.
Other questions Representative
I'm sorry.
Moving so fast and that and I
wanted to share I cleared my
whole day for this to my kids
aren't even here though can you
go a little slower maybe on a
little slower it's my first
time.
Thank you I.
Thank you Mr chairman.
That sounds correct.
Mr Chairman I just I just have a
question for the and pass us an
explanation was well a
discussion about the land of
enchantment legacy Fund and
there's an amount there that was
put in by the executive but
there is
no amount am I reading that
correctly this is a let's let's
thank you Representative Kernan
a number of these we're gonna be
addressing as we go deeper into
our packet I think let's go to
page of the time we're we're
highlighting some of the changes
since we've last seen this but
will go up page of the time just
to sort of take that action they
take the the the proper time to
sort of go through.
Representative Allison at while
we're still on page seven I
guess we're still seven.
The online eighty five.
The.
Nine eighty four.
Of you set that.
Eight three one sixty one
proposes elimination of inter
tribal ceremonial office and
it's under the department of
finance I thought move from the
department of tourism under the
DFA and then this one says that
it's eliminate under DFA.
So Mr Chairman additional action
in committee was to adopt the
LFC recommendation to fund the
inter tribal ceremonial as an
agency attached to the tourism
department recognizing the
proposed move to eliminate the
office and that proposed move
included DFA contracting for
these services with nonprofit
providers and then the McKinley
County this takes this moves the
recurring appropriation of
section four to a recurring
appropriation section five to
the same amount to DFA so that
is three hundred and twenty
eight thousand.
To DFA hello it's just not being
eliminated it's not being
nominated you can see under the
HSA column it says three twenty
eight to DFA for FY twenty four
this is an ad knowing that
there's a minus in the recurring
section for for the inter tribal
office.
But there is much.
Thank you Mr Jones.
Mr chair representative about
some
that was probably this model
should be contingent on the
field house.
Because.
Wait set up right now.
Appropriations act we have
funding for the agency.
No deal with.
Make and model longer Ms.
No we we have a scenario that
you catch a plane which limits
funding for the agency so thank
you one what they will be funded
this way it is necessary to a
contingency because of the no
funding one section of the test
funded practice but this let's
go to the cruise then we're
gonna go back we're just going
to go to page we're going to
turn the page of the time as
member as we have flags we're
going to raise those if on that
page there have been changes in
the scenario Mr Simon one ask
you to explain that because
thank you Mr chairman on our
page seven line eighty one
technical assistance and
incentives for local governments
for around housing and then it
references
Ten million on line seven three
can you.
Help you with that what's what's
happening there so Mr Chairman
representative if you turn back
to page six you'll see line
seventy three and there's ten
million dollars in the that was
in the LFC wrecked that's
maintained in this scenario for
the local government division to
provide grants to local
governments to support housing
infrastructure okay so Mr
chairman we we reference a ten
million that yes Mr thank you
for for the.
Of the Vernon Mr chair.
Thank you and and just trying to
get clarification so if we look
at the why there was just
referenced by Representative
Cruz and the ten million and if
we're going back to the rental
assistance on sixty four with
that was originally the request
for twenty five million.
I'm just trying to see these are
all aligned and then if I move
forward to a lot of eighty two
I'm I'm sorry wrong line it's
lying that eighty talk about the
comprehensive landlord support
program Mr chair.
Pamela just want to see are all
of these alliance are we coming
up with twenty five million
eventually so I'm chair Mister
chairman Representative so the
total for the rental assistance
to one million the total for the
landlord support is two and a
half so that be a total of three
and a half and the total for the
housing infrastructure would be
ten so that would be thirteen
and a half total for those three
lines that you mentioned.
Okay.
Representative her to go to I
I'm just trying to to make sure
these are all allied to the same
program but because you're
seeing landlords support but
we're talking about is still
real support but you call it
something different I'm just
making sure that we are at the
same rate to are we not on the
same page.
Mr chairman and Representative
Herndon so the executive
recommendation included a
program for rental assistance
and eviction prevention and the
program for landlords support so
this scenario includes funding
for both of those programs
recommend recommended by the
executive.
Senator one more clarification
what's the difference between
landlord support Mr chair and
the rental assistance is there a
difference you just call the
different names.
So we you know what.
There's money all over the place
and the request came in that way
and that's one of the challenges
when the executive asked for
money and lots of different
places so the staff
recommendation of the committee
is trying to cover them in
multiple ways a dollar for
dollar I I don't know that we
could guarantee its exact same
dollar amount as the request but
there's substantial there's
probably at least fifty million
for different housing programs.
Between capital it's more than
fifty minutes it will have those
three million for housing
programs thank you Mr
Representative Lujan and sort of
noting the the emphasis on
housing will the Senate will
also have the opportunity to
take the budget up here fairly
shortly and will be looking at
addressing some of these as well
thank you Mr chair I I was
really just asking for
clarification if because if it's
called landlords support is that
also rental support and it and
if it's two different things I
was just asking for an
explanation of what is the
difference Mr chair.
The great question of Severn I
don't know that we can answer
that today with let's can we
please flag that to follow up
and thank you very much for the
question.
Okay we are back to.
Where let's members let's go
back to page seven.
And sort of scroll down through
there showing Mr Simon
You've talked this through our
house appropriation finance
committee scenarios.
Any other member questions here.
Okay then Mr chairman if we're
prepared to move on to page
eight so you'll recall for the
one of the DFA items I said
there was a negative one point
five million that was moved into
line eighty seven for evidence
based grants under the criminal
of the under the the crime
reduction grant act and that's
where that one point five
million went.
And that's the only change on
page eight okay thank you for
Representative said in the on.
And please remember to go
if you go to page.
Yes I can speak to that forever
to and I'm sorry.
Yes.
Reflect real flex something real
quick this is that there's a
mistake here in that the LFC
recommendations twenty five
million and the total in the HFC
Center seventy five so there
should be a plus fifty in that
column.
and for some reason that didn't
get in your
In your packet so pop apologies
for that Mr Chairman
representative and so staff miss
hits one on my staff and I was
there for part of the meeting
discussed this with the Schlegel
and they had a significant
request for this purpose what
the conclusion was that there
was fifty million that could be
re appropriated and that's the
number Mr Simon just flagged and
with language that was a little
more flexible that mission I got
a great to it she believed it
achieve the goals of this
executive request.
Three.
Seven or eight.
So I was at the subcommittee
hearing where cyber security was
discussed the executive was five
million less than LFC and
cybersecurity recommendations
and so when you get to catch a
plane to provide rather than
taking the executive
recommendation they took one
million with the LFC was four
million higher and they state
that the scenario will have
three million more recurring for
several security of our old the
plus these amounts which are
substantially more than the
executive asked for and again I
I'm visit with Mister Sandman
them and you know this is a
severe problem and and I'd like
more but they way like the LFC
recommendation which is
approximately this compared to
the exact.
Right.
We have.
For.
I
wonder if.
They.
Thank you thank you Mr chairman
thank you very going on okay.
We're gonna move on from page
eight.
So on page nine Mr chairman
you'll see on line is ninety
five through ninety seven seven
changes in how the secretary of
state items I think there was a
lot of work between LESC and and
DFA in the secretary of state's
office to get this number online
ninety five correct.
moving it down to line one oh
one you'll see fifty thousand
dollars for commission meetings
those are required by by law and
at that from the border
Authority for that online at one
oh three there is an additional
one million dollars for the
tourism department to for
marketing and advertising
nationwide and online one oh for
an additional two and a half
million for the tourism
enterprise fund and local and
regional tourism development.
Thank you Mr Simon the told
Any questions on this.
Representative seven.
Yes so Mr chair and panel so I'm
just looking at the line for
line ninety seven talk about the
state election fund to conducted
administrative actions statewide
in twenty twenty six and we
remove the entire amount.
Mr Simon please explaining a I
think Representative turned in
this was done in collaboration
with the secretary of state's
office.
In order to prioritize funding
into their election fund and so
we're at and there's a total of
fifteen million dollars that
line ninety seven.
Is going into line ninety five
in order to make sure they have
a strong statewide election
fund.
Thank you for that clarification
that is so important thank you
absolutely thank you
Representative.
Okay I don't see.
And.
I
can Mr chairman.
So on page ten Mr Chairman line
one hundred and seven an
additional five million dollars
for lead up
that brings that total to
fifteen million.
on line number
line number one eleven there's a
little bit less one point five
million total for Economic
Development marketing campaign
to take and yet to take it to
the to take it to the executive
level
on line thirteen sorry one
hundred and thirteen there is an
additional one million dollar
for creative industries that's
house bill eight.
and on line number one fourteen
there is two point two million
for the the business incubator
program at the Economic
Development Department.
and line one hundred and fifteen
this is actually Mr chair we
didn't address this on the
But on the FAA this in the LFC
recommendation this was money to
DFA eyes for public private
partnerships for advanced energy
related products that was in
this scenario moved to the
Economic Development Department.
Thank you very much Mr Simon
members let's take a little bit
to look here of course this is
within our economic development
department.
Any questions from members.
Okay.
Okay.
So Mister chairman on page
eleven we get the office of the
superintendent of insurance
there is seven hundred fifty
thousand for to reimburse the
medical insurance pool for lost
premiums due to COVID nineteen.
and also flat feet it doesn't
show up in the column because
it's other state funds Mr chair
but one one twenty three there
is ten point three million from
the health care affordability
fund for Medicaid expansion
adult populations.
And then down on line one twenty
eight this is the cultural
affairs department initial
million dollars for exhibit
Development.
Also Mr chairman I the again
this was another state funds
issue so it's not showing up in
that column.
With back at the top line one
sixteen there was some
discussion with our LD
that other state funds
appropriation was two and a half
million in the LFC
recommendations brought up to
five in this scenario to allow
them the phase one of their
modernization plans for the
boards and commissions.
Thank you.
I don't.
Any questions here members.
So
on page twelve Mr chairman we go
down to line one thirty seven
the energy minerals and natural
resources department is an
additional eight hundred and
thirteen point four thousand for
federal matching funds to match
federal funds for energy
conservation.
I'll just flag on line one
thirty eight that money to it
appears to go away but it
doesn't that's based on a
Department request Lexi it was
requested by both the department
as well as other institutions
that are in involved in this
project
that's NMAA unit Mexico
highlands and the University of
New Mexico they requested that
that this ten million dollars be
given and I miss you and not
EMNRD NMSU the fiscal agent for
this program.
And on line one thirty nine
you'll see the the land of
enchantment conservation trust
fund I'll just flag again we'll
get more into this when we get
into the very back of the bill
section ten Mr chairman that
money to not going away it's
actually going up but of we'll
see that later on in the in the
back of the packet.
and then finally on for this
page online one forty one an
additional one million dollars
for the state engineer are to
for repairs to the dam.
Thank you very much let's pause
here for just a second.
Representative please.
Mr chair members of the panel
when we were discussing energy
minerals and natural resources
department there was a question
regarding the Water Act that was
put into place by Congress woman
Melanie Stansbury does that now
appear in here on years of
hunting what we're going to get
to the water data act here in a
little bit but that and and
again past here at the state
level by then representative
Stansbury our own ranking member
Armstrong and Representative
Chatfield others we will address
that later as we go through
thank you Mr chair seven that
was the environment department
were that was interesting water
data act and I think also the
street what we're gonna see that
in the New Mexico tech.
actually your it was yes it was
not I'm sorry polities Mr
chairman.
We'll keep going on okay
any questions on.
Through here.
Thing and let's continue on so
page thirteen Mr chairman we
continue with the office of
state engineer projects water
projects so on line number one
forty four then in additional
ten million for the lower Rio
Grande on including brake as
water treatment.
On line one forty five an
additional four million dollars
for river flows and elephant
Butte and habitat restoration
I just know in the comments to
there's more information on some
other some other items in the
capital outlay framework.
line one forty seven million
dollars to implement a fifty
year water plan and on line one
forty eight an additional six
million for the strategic water
reserves to lease San Juan river
water rates.
And
okay thank you Mr Simon.
Let's uh pause here
Representative Allison please.
Okay on this page
Simon are any of these remember
to go through the chair
Representative Nelson.
This week sorry about that this
tier Mr chair of.
The presenters
are any of these funds that have
been allocated cover the Indian
water rights settlements.
There's a number of increases
and I think there are several
products that are we.
For funding match because
they've got the okay from the
federal side they're waiting for
the state.
Mr Chairman you and I discussed
this recently and we discussed
it with Mr Mr Hammond in
December and there are some
settlements that are in the
works with lagoon and you
mention some of some of the
other problems that are in
progress but as far as I
understand from Mr Hammond those
amounts are still unclear
they're still in negotiation so
there was not a formal request
as I understand from the
engineer's office to address
those and I'm certain we coming
in in a future here but at this
time it was it was there wasn't
no amount to fund.
Okay thank you for that Mr Abbey
Mr chair.
Yes full level of has a
settlement agreement that
requires immediate state funding
to cover the non Indian
questions that includes the town
of tells so.
And
Some of the groups they met with
the governor.
And the OS in there waiting for
the governor who is out of town
to see if he supports the
request of the group and it also
states that if the state
continues to kick the can down
the road they might see that
there's a bulldozer coming in
the opposite direction so we
need to make sure there's
adequate funding.
Thank you representative Allison
and can we flat can we ask can
we go back with the state
engineer to researching
specifically the issue that
Representative Allison is right
we will do that Mr Chairman also
note that the capital outlay
discussions of led to one
hundred million dollars set
aside for tribal project so we
will see if we will revisit
these items and see if there's
an amount that's ready but also
will note that that hundred
million dollars might be a place
to look for funding if it's
right.
Thank you Representative Allison
thank you Mr okay thank you
Representative Garcia please
thank you Mr chairman of the
Representative L. dispatched.
We also for that
In my district.
requests for water all of them
of the next month it'll.
You know fishermen are what the
state to get slammed with.
A big amount of money that they
can afford to pay and the
secretary of the thing up to you
know I've been contacted by the
fifteenth also both mobile not
for Maximo after.
The jurors of the monitoring of
the for the for the state thank
you Mr thank you very much
representative Garcia will
please include that as we reach
out also just a quick reminder
members I guess in some cases
folks are having a hard time
hearing this on the webcast will
make sure in turn on the
microphones and maybe pull in a
little bit closer.
Okay a quick question Mr Abbey
Mr Simon
We're in sort of a a Madam a
potential settlement phase.
Can we triple checked that these
updated amounts are sufficient
to meet some of those Madam
guidelines and if this is.
Mr chair I did speak with the
state engineer about that just
yesterday and as we understand
it they are to get them moving
on things with the understanding
that these are multi your
requests so they'll be request
that they'll bring back to you
all again next year and maybe
for a few more years after that
the nurses thank you very much.
Any other I don't see any other
questions.
Okay let's then we'll turn the
page.
So a yes on page fourteen Mr
chairman we have
Online one fifty four that total
of twenty five million for
federal deferred matching funds
for federal infrastructure
grants for tribal projects
that's down from fifty million
dollars in the LFC
recommendation
On line a one fifty seven
there's a hundred and twenty
five thousand for the commission
on the status of women for some
some start up money you'll know
that three requests that
That hundred twenty five
thousand dollars was consolidate
all of those items into a single
item.
Okay let's take a little bit of
time.
Representative.
Mr chair.
I'm looking at line one fifty
eight through one sixty one.
And it doesn't look like they
received any funding but is that
funded somewhere else.
Mr Chairman representative how
to meal we call in the.
The of.
Recurring budget request in the
hearing for FY twenty four for
early childhood education care
department the LFC
recommendation was a seventy
five percent increase from the
general fund the executive was a
three percent increase because
they do requested most of their
funding from nonrecurring funds
for it that really were needed
in FY twenty four part of that
related to the uncertainty when
the request came in about
the land grant permanent fund
what would happen to that as
well as some uncertainties about
how much would be available from
the from the early childhood
trust fund so I think the focus
of the sponsorship to to FY
twenty four and again that's an
area where I think the executive
supports funding their apartment
with recurring funding rather
than nonrecurring funding there
some differences in child care
versus pre K. and when you get
to catch a plane up you're gonna
find some significant movement
there but again this
nonrecurring is covered by
record signing in section four.
Okay and and Mr chair I'm I'm
just processing so so you're
saying that the autism
assessments in New Mexico
children statewide is covered in
in another.
Yes and no about that autism in
particular there's an increased
PSP I'm sorry Mr chairman.
The.
There's a line item in the New
Mexico state budget a research
and public service project line
item and the LFC would recommend
an increase of a hundred seventy
five thousand and the.
Education subcommittee increase
the I think another two hundred
thousand and it can be matched
by Medicaid and misuse not
matching their appropriation for
these tests with Medicaid and
generally they would be eligible
for Medicaid match so that five
hundred thousand nonrecurring
funding has been addressed by an
increase in recurring funding in
section four plus the potential
for Medicaid match thank you.
Thank you very much of Madam
Representative Allison please.
Thank you Mr chair I want to go
back to line one fifty four of
the Indian Affairs Department
there was a cut of twenty five
million.
and it's for the behavioral
health services I'm just
wondering why.
That cut was made because some
of the problems that's being
addressed by several bills in
the works if we get to the root
of the problem of the root of
the problem is mental and
behavioral health so the best
investment that we ever make
should be into our help
behavioral health services and
I'm just wondering why there was
a big cut to that.
Mr Chairman representative
Allison again this isn't a cut
this is a new item that they're
asking for funding for the first
time.
they asked for it to be
addressed in the recurring
appropriation and others lodges
question about that about
prioritizing childcare versus
direct services and whether
these kinds of services with
councils could also be addressed
by the Anna age a program so
again it was not a cut it's a
new item.
Thank you thank you Mr Abbey
thank you Mr chair thank you
very much Representative Nelson.
Okay let's move on.
So on page fifteen Mr Chairman
there were a couple of changes
online one sixty seven you'll
see
it's six hundred thousand for
the aging long term services
department that was eight
hundred thousand in the LFC
recommendation but we just note
that the six hundred thousand
represents about ten percent of
the agencies operating budget
And on line one sixty eight for
the the key you survey your
senior dignity Fund that initial
LFC recommendation had
anticipated putting additional
funds in there and
requiring a report a contingency
that that be turned into an
endowment fund.
The HFC scenario doesn't have
that contingency in the amount
is adjusted to reflect that it's
only a single year funding.
Thank you very much Mr Simon
let's go let's take some time to
go through here.
We adding members we should also
note that we're going to see and
catch up clean up an additional
recurring investment in aging
and long term services.
Representative occurs thank you
Mr chairman.
So on line one sixty seven.
to provide funding for
emergencies that disaster
preparedness and planning.
This is.
A one time thing these funds if
allocated and not use perhaps
there's not a disaster would Mr
Chairman would there be the
ability for to be carried over
would that be I a request next
year.
Will.
This is a request it's basically
almost working capital for the
area agency on aging offices and
it appears every year however
it's funded with nonrecurring
revenues to for any reason this
wasn't enough or other other
ways to provide emergency
funding is going to the board of
finance.
Chairman specific Mr Chairman
disaster.
I'm sorry Mr Chairman could you
repeat the last comment so.
Just stated that it's it appears
every year and it's working
capital my question is Mr
Chairman R. in the event of a
disaster there would be funding
should this be depleted for any
reason I feel.
One any agents Mr chairman any
agency runs out of funding there
are there are options including
going to the board of finance
for emergency funding and and
it's of note that for DFA that
record that funding that DFA has
per emergencies has been two and
a half million and you're
looking at boosting that four
million just to take up these
kinds of things one HSD runs out
of money for an emergency stay
focused during sure that it in
the event thank you they are.
For the jacket.
Mr chair the the is on line the.
One sixty eight the committee
so Rader a long term
Sir.
To the aging long term services
department to the key piece of
Rader senior dignity fund I know
that they have talked about
funding some of the services to
senior citizens in rural and
remote areas through the key
piece of a drug senior dignity
further one of the.
All of this twenty million one
of twelve this forty million and
I'm just concerned and I wonder
why was come back to eight
million.
Thank you Representative Jaffe I
think.
The the what we've heard from
the analysts here is that this
is the forty million
Representative an idea about a
long term trust fund that would
be set aside instead through
sort of the conversations with
the agency this is
A desire for more one time funds
that are available immediately a
larger chunk a smaller chunk but
available immediately instead of
a small portion of a spin off
from forty million or whatever
the trust fund would be so this
will be this would be available
Representative Chatfield
available in the upcoming budget
for the department to use in a
flexible way thank you Mr
chairman.
Thank you okay.
Mr chair for prepared to move on
to line our page number sixteen.
We get into the Human Services
Department and at the very first
item on line one hundred and
seventy one you'll see a total
of ninety two point eight
million that's twenty million
dollars in general fund in
seventy two point eight million
in federal funds for rural
regional hospitals health
clinics and federally qualified
health centers and.
You see there's a there's a
significant amount of language
there that you can refer to
in addition online one seventy
two there's a million dollars
for the linkages program I'll
just also note that
In the FY twenty four base
there's a million dollar
increase in recurring and in
addition to a million dollars in
opioid settlement funds and just
so for that's a total of three
million compared with the
current your budget of five
hundred thousand.
Thank you very much
Thank you Mr Simon members
Representative Allison please.
Thank you Mr chair Senator
that funding for the hello Human
Services Department would that
include funding for the tribal
and county health councils.
Mr chair.
That would be intended to help
close service gaps in rural
areas.
There's not enough payment
volume to make a service
potentially viable we think
there's a way through
supplemental payments through
Medicaid match with the federal
government as well as direct
contracts that that might be an
Avenue to help bring more
service delivery that's separate
and apart from the department of
health health council budget
okay thanks for that Mr chair
and the.
My I've got a bill submitted for
financing the county and tribal
health councils it would not
come out of here it would come
up under the department of
health is that correct.
Out of this a special
appropriation Mr chairman.
Thanks for that thank you Mr
chair thank you very much
Representative Allison.
Any other so
Members any other questions here
as they get the new linkages
program this is where we're
putting a very substantial
increase although it's not the
full to the ask from the
executive was.
More than twenty times what the
current budget is for this
program we're putting in a
significant amount although not
that much
Representative Herndon chair I
it and looking at lines one
seventy one seventy nine if we
could please and I'd like to
order a one seventy nine we had
a lot of discussion Mr chair
about the fees that will be in
charge credit card fees for
individuals that were engaging
in keeping up with the payment
and services for child support
and so I see that.
The nine hundred and thirty
three million was taken.
And is that somewhere else to
supplement that the PEUC backs.
Mr Chairman
We'll be coming back to you on
catch up clean up with
recommended increase in the
child support program and our
operating budget.
Thank you.
At the end for one of the
clarification Mr chair if I may
one one seventy eight does that
also apply with respect to the
delays that were being cost in
processing
cases and the amount of funding
that was requested to prevent
that Mister chair Mister
panelists.
I'd have to research that would
Mr chair and representative.
Thank you Mr chair thank you
Representative for an.
Okay
let's move on let's.
A.
Changes not yet okay so yet so
there are there are no we
haven't had any changes to this
members just take a little bit
to look through here.
Any questions.
We'll continue on.
Focus about the.
Line one eighty three workforce
solutions.
No workforce solutions still has
some money tied up from the ETA.
how is the alkaline.
Money is still there thousand
that the distributed or spread.
Mr Chairman representative we
were digging around in the
treasury yesterday and find that
they have received I think a
twelve million dollar transfer
Into an account that they will
need to to continue with the
plan in a request for
appropriations authority for
that.
Okay thank you for that Mr chair
Some of my constituents that
used to work at the mine are
they've been laid off and
they've been still looking for
work.
Who do they call for questions.
Mr Chairman representative of
the workforce solutions
department workforce solutions
department also does have money
that you've already appropriated
specifically to help people who
are unemployed find new
employment there's five million
dollars that you've already
appropriated for that purpose
and the budget on top of what
they normally get through
federal grants.
Okay thanks for that thank you
Mr chair and David M. it's my
understanding that there's also
a up on the Senate side from the
the governor another fifteen
million that the governor's
appropriate are recommending to
be appropriated for workforce
solutions for that same purpose
as well in northwest New Mexico.
Thank you for that thank you Mr
thank you very much.
Thank you very much
Representative Allison.
Okay turn the page quickly
members.
Again Mr chairman on line eight
page eighteen no changes.
Okay.
Mr chairman when we go to
nineteen.
Please.
Mr Chairman on a lot on page
nineteen of the environment
department you can see down
online two thirteen additional
one and a half million dollars
for
Grams to address climate change
including implementing national
ozone standards and on line two
hundred and two hundred fourteen
three and a half million for the
environment department to
For water re use.
Thank.
Thank you Mr Simon members will
take a look through here.
Representative occurs please.
Thank you Mr chairman this may
not even be a question what are.
Team for the pharma Department
to conduct activities to advance
water re use what what exactly
does that mean.
Representative said that because
I can answer right thank you
reserve the the crews there the
New Mexico environment
department is they they do the
much of the permitting now
anyway for this chart from
likely.
S. and others this allows them
to look at water re use
opportunities whether it's
practice water whether it's
water and whether it's produced
water whether it's some of the
waste water this is the funding
that they requested they've had
several positions over the last
couple years in this area.
Thank you Mr it was a little
puzzling to me because you know
in in Albuquerque the the water
forty has a.
Very robust program for water
reuse and is expanding all the
time and so I it almost seems to
intimate that it was.
It's really not so much a new
thing so I that's why I was
confused thank you Mr thank you.
Okay.
Let's go on Mr Simon so if
you're ready for page twenty Mr
chairman on
line two fifteen two and a half
million for a clean up of
contaminated groundwater for at
again at the Environment
Department.
so online to nineteen this
actually addresses and an error
in the LFC recommendation just
so you what looks like a
negative one million really what
happened the LFC recommendation
inadvertently included that is
general fund that was requested
as other state funds and so this
scenario accurately reflects
that
and on line two hundred and
twenty eight hundred thousand
dollars for the the Veterans
Services Department to expand
outreach programs.
Okay Representative Brown
please.
I just read it for you all I.
The one that says.
Is usually that.
All of that we we mentioned the.
Representative agency called.
Thank thank you Representative
from.
let's note that for.
A technical change thank you for
New Representative Allison.
Thank you Mr chair of back to
page twenty and line to fifteen.
Just wondering about the
settlement that came out of the
gold king mine spill and quick
agency received some of the
settlement and how's that going
to be dispersed tend to hold.
Mr Chairman if you just give me.
In order.
So the gold Mr chairman that the
gold king Madam came to the AG's
consumer settlement fund.
And those funds are restricted.
And
I'm gonna have to follow up on
how those funds are getting out
to.
To the intended recipients of
that money will follow up on
that okay thank you Mr Abbey
thank you Mr chair thank you
very much Representative also.
Charles yes Representative
Garcia please.
Thank you Mr chairman just a
comment of nineteen twenty.
Another veterans.
The hundred thousand from
veterans that goes to of energy
integration center outreach as
you want to say thanks.
To the committee.
The staff and four hundred forty
thousand energy New Mexico thank
you thank you very much
Representative Garcia thank you.
In this area.
Okay
The integration
but that was the okay where are
let's move on then to.
Page twenty one please.
So Mr chairman I do not believe
there any changes on page twenty
one.
Will hold up there for just.
It was the page twenty two.
So on page twenty two Mr
chairman you'll see on line well
actually I do line to thirty
nine to forty one together
because they're both for
survivors fund online to thirty
nine for the peace officers as
survivors fund and online to
forty one the firefighters
survivors fund
you'll notice the firefighters
survivor funds from the fire
protection fund
the peace officer survivor fund
is from the general fund but
that's because the law
enforcement protection fund has
experienced revenue shortfalls
and that is why that those are
different also just note online
to forty
there was in the LFC
recommendation a half million
dollars for administrative
prosecution of law enforcement
officers
DPS as said this is no longer
necessary you'll note that it's
not in the executive
recommendation so it's taken out
of the scenario.
Thank.
And
Can you go through the line to
forty three also please.
I'm so Mister chairman
I was under the impression we
weren't doing public education
today that was going to be taken
up by the workgroup yeah that
that's right will we'll mention
this one but at first Mr Simon.
First any questions from
members.
Casein on that Mr Simon on line
to forty one what what we're
hearing is that the four million
dollars for the firefighters
survivors fund the
recommendations that come from
the fire protection from other
state funds because there are
sufficient recurring recurring
balances and that to to book
this expense Mr chairman that's
correct okay great.
Representative Allison.
Thank you Mr chair this is Simon
what did you say about the the
CTE.
So Mr Chairman representative so
the public education workgroup
is going to take a look at the
public education specials
so I I didn't say anything on on
CTE with that still pending and
we for the work group thank you
Mr what we see here on our seats
member and what we've what sort
of in in conversation with the
workgroup is that is adding an
additional
amount of to get up to the the
forty million dollar recommended
it's full career technical
education funding level.
So we're adding that in this
scenario Mr chair you're saying
that they're still further
discussion R. Representative
Allison that hasn't been
finalized by the workgroup yet
but the recommend where we stand
now we would fully fund the full
career technical education
request of forty million thank
you Mr thank you.
Representative turned.
Mr chair I've yeah I'm just
asking about the line to forty
three that and is this going to
be taken up in the workgroup
also disincentive at the
language of state.
Yes Representative permanent it
will.
Okay let's we're gonna skip that
we're we're gonna skip the rest
of the Public Education
Department.
So on page twenty five is the
higher education department
begins Mr chairman.
And I'll just highlight on page
twenty five online two hundred
and seventy one million dollars
to the higher education
department for the college of
osteopathic medicine that was I
believe discussed at the at the
last meeting Mr chairman.
Thank you very much Mr Simon
that did come up in conversation
here at our last meeting as you
said.
So Mr Chairman moving on to page
twenty six I think this was also
an item that came up at the last
at the last meeting of the
health professional loan
repayment fund
that the HFC scenario would
bring that total up to ten
million dollars that's an
increase of five million
For that program.
This revenue and if I can add to
that there's also five million
and the LESC recurring
recommendation for the health
department in addition to this
to and this is a great program
it was is less than a million a
couple years ago so it's grown
rapidly years fifteen million
not the executive request
again because it is a recurring
program the there were some
staff suggested some concerns
about using too much
nonrecurring in this area.
The yes.
Richard question what are in
these Padilla agency that you
know I was just asking I I
wasn't familiar with the
language okay on on on the.
Item two seventy three Mr
chairman it's the same amount
but it specifies amounts for
individual institutions rather
than make it up to the
discretion of the department you
may remember that the department
had a twenty million dollar
appropriation and only allocated
four million so there was a
sense of urgency about getting
the money to work the
specification of the equipment
thank you very much Mr.
K. members let's go ahead and
turn to page twenty seven.
So on page twenty seven Mr
chairman you'll see online to
seventy five the opportunity
scholarship program this
Has an additional fourteen
million for a total of seventy
four million non recurring
that's in addition to forty five
million in US section for
recurring.
Okay.
Okay let's go ahead and keep
going and Mr Chairman online on
page twenty eight.
Sorry the gentleman women please
all these non recurring amounts
were also part of the
recommendation of higher
education subcommittee which you
adopted I think yesterday that's
right.
So Mister chairman and this was
another judgment by this of the
subcommittee the on page twenty
eight my number two hundred and
eighty an additional five
million dollars for graduate
stem education all also note Mr
chairman this.
Line the language was expanded
to not just master's degrees but
also doctoral candidates.
The state and any any questions
here members.
I know we're we're sort of we're
pressed for time online to
eighty Mr Simon do we have any
sense sort of with current
graduate student profiles and
demographics this this is
focused entirely or is limited
only to graduates of New Mexico
high schools do we know what
that pool is right now.
Research.
We would expect that this
funding would be available over
a multi year period that's why
the language extends the
appropriation out to FY twenty
six
so there's probably not a huge
pool but a a large enough for
New Mexico graduates that this
could be beneficial to them over
the next couple of years thank
you very much Mr Slee and I
would just flag I think we want
to do that research but as we go
through the session
there there may be sort of a
tiered system where without
expending balances down too far
if there are graduate students
whom we need to be considering
support for now that we should
be doing.
Okay let's turn to page twenty
nine.
So Mr chairman on page twenty
nine we have an item on to
higher education department
relating to some of the
discussion in the higher at a
subcommittee on Mason lands
community college and the
colleges fiscal condition we
understand that there is some
overspending in in that area
In addition on page two eighty
four page twenty four line two
eighty four the University of
New Mexico there's two point
five million to the university
of New Mexico for native
American studies.
This rabbit and that needs to
say for endowments the native
American studies and this is a
follow up to a five million
dollar investment last year in
the same way and it's also
relates to the travel work and
Martinez Yazzie.
Thank you for that.
The question is here
Representative said accrued.
Thank you Mr chairman of.
Yesterday I
Applaud some of our.
Struggle studies is that is that
it appear anywhere.
University Mexico Mr Mr Mr
chairman it's not in here I am
meeting with them on Tuesday and
I know that the Senate
amendments had a hundred
thousand for that purpose and
junior and will.
Keep looking at it Mr chairman
thank you Mr chairman I I know
that they were students from the
university were lobbying
for funding for Chicano and
Chicana studies or just wanted
to ask a question I saw that
there was a native studies that
thank you Mr absolutely thank
you Representative accrued
representative Garcia please.
Thank you Mr chairman I might be
a little bit off on the deal but
because determine US west of
question on board college of us.
Bill I think medicine thank you
representative Garcia we went
through that one there's been a
million dollars that's been set
aside for that purpose.
Thank you Mr thank you.
Okay let's.
turn to page keep going to page
thirty.
Line two nineties go ahead and
send.
And so on Mr Mr chairman as we
discussed before one to ninety
seven that's where the ten
million dollars for the
reforestation Center went
and
so online three oh six there's a
million dollars to equip and
advocate from agricultural
modernisation facility in Los
crucis our initiating is that
facilities been built but is not
able to be occupied because they
can't furnish and equip it.
In addition there is a two and a
half million online three of
seven for online degree programs
at New Mexico State University
thank you very much Simon.
and members this is a good so
here on line to ninety seven
this is where earlier in our in
our discussions with the ten
million dollars from the EMNRD
on reforestation this is where
that came this money came to at
the agreement of the
stakeholders.
We go forward to thirty eight
any other questions from
members.
I don't see any please consider.
This so Mister chairman online
on page thirty one thirty two
there are no more changes.
A I will I think thank you Mr
Simon let's note on line three
eleven.
Yeah I apologize Mr chairman
that was inaccurate.
I was I was confusing my columns
but we we did talk early about
the water data act and that I
here is a question about that
there's two hundred fifty
thousand dollars online three
eleven Jude New Mexico tech
related to that additionally on
page three eighteen and line
three eighteen line three
nineteen a couple of items to
Luna community college for IT
and our workforce training
opportunities.
Thank.
Date of Representative trick the
how to be a please.
Mr chair
twenty three fourteen to create
created stem graduate research
fellowship endowment and and
that's not funded.
So Mister chairman and
representative I will direct
your attention back to the the
higher education department
there is funding for stem
graduate students but to the
higher education department and
this scenario added to that if I
can find this madam chair a
statewide program and a greater
amount rather than an individual
institution.
Thank you thank you
Representative.
Okay let's let's keep going.
Yeah on page thirty two there
were no changes Mr chairman.
And this is it we we we wanted
to go through a number of these
these highlight the
as we talked about the changes
that were adopted by the higher
educations recommended by the
higher education subcommittee
and then some some additional
sort of
Updates.
Okay
Page thirty three Mr chairman
and then next we're up to I. T.
hello Representative Hern Mr
Chairman before you go on
because this was
so to pass an issue for.
Representative Trujillo I'm just
clarifying and asking for
clarification on line three
thirty eight and where those
that funding appears.
Mr Chairman.
There will be one million
recurring for that purpose.
in the public school report
likely and that was the amount
that L. E. S. C. advised was the
record amount.
Thank you Mr chair thank you
very much for seven.
On page thirty three Mr chairman
we're ready there's an
additional five million dollars
for that transfer to the
computer system enhancement fund
to fund those IT projects and
that's was reflected in your I.
T. report yesterday so that you
really gone all the way through
your of section this section.
Which would take you up to
Really.
The.
Mr chairman.
Very few changes instructions
just answer questions of a.
Section six is a supplemental
section that's the amount that
funds shortfalls and agencies
for the current year secretary
St has won on line three seventy
three four hundred sixty
thousand.
Okay members let's take a little
bit of time to go through these
are where.
The doctor is maybe a shortfall
occurred and we're being asked
sort of make up that shortfall
now
Well as a couple of quick
questions
For the department of homeland
security.
I guess did the question did the
department of homeland security
request in the deficiency or
supplemental appropriations.
I think the answer is no okay I.
They had a last minute request
for about a million and a half
and I thought we did that of not
we probably should bring this.
So it is Mr chairman there's
nothing on this report but we
can look into the into that and
and get back to you on on that.
Our.
That deficiency request didn't
come through the normal budget
request process nor was it
included an executive
recommendation but it appears
that there might be a.
Problem that they finished in
the whole last fiscal year
we're researching that and we'll
come back either on Monday with
an answer or that may be
something that the state has to
take up because we want to
verify agency is a broad St
thank you misstatement the
amount currently under
discussion of recall I recall
million half Mr chairman and I
agree with Mr solely.
Given where we are on the lack
of vetting of that and I I don't
I don't.
Out it's a need to reckon with
but might be better to allow
staff to do further research and
taken up.
Thank you I think we need to we
need to pay very close attention
to what we want to we still.
We're about to send this bill
over to the Senate but this is
something that I think because
homeland security and their
response to disasters is so
important.
If we don't take this up on the
house side right now this needs
to be a priority moving forward
yes Mr chair representative
Cruz.
Thank you Mr chairman it I don't
want to interrupt your line of
thinking my question is separate
from what you're discussing that
that's a correct thank you Mr
chairman are you still a peach
thirty to apologize my lost my
spot thank Representative
because we've we've sort of
moved ahead and we're going
through our.
Food so no we we have moved
ahead if you need to go back to
a page please tell us which page
and number one go back to thank
you Mr chairman it's not so much
that there was a page but I and
looking at page thirty two I was
going to ride a of of of items
that are needed and one of the
things that I didn't see
particularly in any of the
education areas is is the panic
button emergency
Equipment.
Mr Mr chairman the public school
subcommittee will bring a
recommendation for about a half
million for that purpose.
Mr Chairman what is the amount
available now in the past or has
in any but it's been a million
in the past Mr chairman and and
I think thanking the Senate
might do another half of the
chose to do that.
Thank you Mr thank you very much
of the bill.
Representative Sarinana please.
Chairman I paid online.
Line the C. three.
Eighty five so did we.
Reconcile the crime victims
reparation commission.
The.
So this Mr Abbey if you can talk
about the crime this is the
PRC recurring.
So there's a recurring increase
although this request is the
current fiscal year but again
there are there are probably of.
At least a half a million of
junior items for this purpose
which should be available for
the current fiscal year if
there's a ninety thousand
dollars for.
Thank you very much of the order
no.
Okay.
Let's continue yet so Mister
chairman if you want to click
through rate to page thirty
eight that there's will be in
the department transportation.
This this amount
Reflects
The action that was taken
yesterday with regard to house
bill three as well as on line
four hundred and nineteen
additional forty five million
bringing that total to two
hundred and thirty two million
for roadway projects.
And
And.
As I said yesterday took action
on the other items with house
bill three yesterday thank you
very much.
The the.
What will hold this person no.
Representative Brown I'm sorry.
Could catch.
Your project this is the one of.
Is very.
Local communities.
The.
The.
The project.
Right now I.
Questions.
Thank you Mr chair
forty five.
On the line for.
Have it.
This so Mr Chairman
representative brown so the
House Bill three scenario
consolidated the local roads
into line four hundred nineteen
so you'll see in
In the language there is so for
its says for state tribal and
local owned roads making local
roads eligible for for that part
of funding so it's not
specifically to the
transportation project fund
and and that's what happened
there with the forty five
million.
The statutory provisions there.
So Mr Murphy brown so the
statutory
This the statutory section and
online for twenty wouldn't apply
necessarily allowed to two one
four nineteen
because it just it would just
make local roads available for
so it's a this appropriation
would not be a transportation
project fund so that wouldn't
apply.
It I will also say there that
there is a recurring funding
source for the transportation
project fund so that money is in
the department of
transportation's operating
budget and you know that you
took action on yesterday and
that money is there.
The.
I.
The researchers thank.
But thank you very much
representative from.
So yes Mr chairman beginning
online for twenty five of page
thirty nine.
Is Department
I'm sorry yes of the section ten
those are the the funded
transfers
I just highlight line for twenty
five and four thirty.
So this is a swap actually Mr
chairman the department of
finance and administration
raised concerns with using our
money for the rural library
endowment fund so these two
lines essentially swap some of
the appropriation you did last
year for general fund for our
money.
In addition there is on line
number four to seven the
conservation legacy permanent
fund that we discussed before
there's a total of a hundred
million dollars in that line
online for twenty eight you'll
see the water trust fund again a
total of one hundred million
dollars.
On line moving back a couple
lines alligned four to six
you'll see a total of eight
hundred and seventy million for
the severance tax permanent
fund.
And on the line for thirty one
of the tobacco settlement
permanent fund.
Okay.
Yes Representative
thank you Mr chairman on so on
the rule library.
Wherever that was there is on
four thirty
There's money somewhere else
okay that's what I thought okay
thank you just double checking
thank you thank you very much
for you members.
Sure.
K. I don't see any other
questions from members.
Okay I don't see any other
questions from members.
And that takes us to the
conclusion of word of working
through today
So at this point members I think
we have some areas of additional
research that we've asked for.
We've got a couple of technical
changes that have been well
really one major one.
One technical change it's been
addressed.
Projections.
Okay.
Where we're wrapped up on this
now we're going to go to our
language recommendations.
The members yet take this is a.
And I would just say on this Mr
chairman so the DFA staff and
LFC staff took a look at the
language there is a lot of
agreement among the
recommendations
you know we said the the LFC
recommendation over to the
department of finance and
administration and they raised
for for issues that that weren't
on the LFC recommendation that
were on there is
our analysts went back and
looked at that and recommend
three of those four you'll see
the the final one on the last
page I'll just note that's a
twenty eighteen appropriation
which is which is why it didn't
appear in the LFC recommendation
so it's it's a quite old
appropriation
and so we just we provided the
consensus recommendations of DFA
in an LFC for your for for you.
Thank you so there is agreement
full agreement on the first two.
pages front and back and then we
have the one nine consensus
item.
Your
And members on that one
specifically I know there are a
number of things including and
the
The forty million that we're
recommending that would be for
warning Forsman and backlog
issues that might address some
of these.
Any questions on language
Representative Allison.
Thank you Mr chair.
I didn't see anything in here on
the language for that CTE may I
make a recommendation.
First can you ask a
can you go a little bit deeper
into the question.
Okay back on the.
Packet online to forty three.
That was paid.
If the scenario language of the
last sentences.
From this appropriation shall
revert to the career technical
education fund.
And we'd like to add.
Innovation zone and work based
learning initiatives equipment
and technical support.
Okay thank you representative
Allison I would ask that maybe
As staff we take a look at that
language.
And we can look at bringing that
potentially and catch up cleanup
on Monday since it's not
affecting any dollar amounts.
Do that Mr Chairman.
Thank thank you for the
recommendations.
Traffic.
Okay.
So here Representative at more
just a Mr chair mantis this in
the higher education and also
the additional funding of four.
Mental health rooms the exact
language where is that.
Could you please refers to the
line number I don't know that's
what I'm trying to figure out if
it would be and public education
I'm sorry higher education and
the in the that was an
additional movement of the funds
for purposes of mental health
and the support for the
insurance I just I'm just trying
to figure out where is the
language that expresses that Mr
chair at the bank and striving
Mr Chairman you'll find also in
ketchup cleanup a recommendation
for spending opioid Madam.
Chinese from the consumer
settlement fund and there will
be two hundred thousand for
those rooms in that
recommendation thank you Mr
chair thank you Mr panel of Mr
Abbey.
Thank you very much of some
from.
Okay
Representative Alcon sorry thank
you Mr chairman so this the
language recommendations are the
the action item for us.
Thank you that that brings us to
the next step so so we will be
looking to adopt the language
recommendations will also be
looking to adopt this is a
supplemental and special
recommendation for us as a as a
workgroup.
There's one technical changes
we've noted online to thirteen.
The representative from
Representative ground.
There's a few catch up cleanup
items that we're asking for
additional staff research for
for languages relates to Monday.
Yes yeah.
That was the.
Restrict.
That's the.
it any further comments Mr Simon
Mr Abbey Mr Jones this revenue
my only comment staff will hello
hello after this meeting and.
Regroup and make sure we tracked
all the technical things that
came up for example like needing
to add it down once on the
native American studies and
we'll make sure we capture them
properly but I think we can cut
if if you're going to take any
action you could just say with
appropriate technical
adjustments like that.
Okay.
I think at this time then
members thank you all will ask
for vice chair Dixon to make
that motion the DUP this report
of the subcommittee.
Thank you Mr chair I would move
that we adopt the.
This report for the subcommittee
inclusive of technical
adjustments community.
Okay there's a motion and a
second by critics and
representative of the cruise
thirty opposition to adopting
that today.
Seeing none we've adopted that
today.
And.
And now I think members just so
that we're clear let's also by
our Dixon.
Would like to ask if you can
make a motion to adopt the
section five language
recommendations.
Thank you Mr chair I move that
our subcommittee adopt the
language.
For section five the consensus
language.
The non consensus K..
So all of the recommended
language for section Madam
direct.
Yes for the non Kinsey the LFC
recommendation see it.
Thank you so Mister chair I move
that the subcommittee adopt the
section five language items
including the LFC recommendation
on the non consensus I'd.
It's been moved and seconded
percent December seventeen
thirty opposition to adopt in
the language.
And we were up to that.
K. members that concludes this
for today a very big thank you
to staff to the executive staff
to our agency staff for the
extra work members will be
together again in full committee
on Monday morning as we go
through the catch of cleanup
process thanks everybody who's
here today and who's tuned in.
Thank you all very much we're.
