Representative Crowder.
Here.
Representative Dixon here.
Representative Ezzell.
Representative Garcia.
Representative.
Your your.
Representative Lane.
Your.
Representative Lara.
Okay.
Representative Sarinana.
Here.
Representative Sweetser here.
Representative Trujillo your.
Representative Allison.
Representative Anderson.
Representative Chatfield.
Representative Ezzell.
Representative Garcia.
Representative Lara.
Vice chair small.
Here.
Madam chair.
You have a quorum.
Eight.
The committee in the public now
yeah we're not gonna be bumping
our guns on these bills tonight
because we have a hard stop at
five o'clock you are going to
live house bill nine to the very
end I understand there may be
considerable comment them of
these things can roll quickly if
the if the issue is in the
budget we're going to table the
bill I mean it's very standard
procedure so we don't need a
whole bunch of discussion around
it.
So we're gonna start with the
first one which is house bill
one eighty four school micro
provincial project.
Madam chair.
That I was informed by the
sponsor that we can table this
bill all right let's have a
tabling motion I move to table
house bill one eighty four
second we have a motion and a
second to table house bill one
eighty four is there any
opposition to that motion saying
the bill's been table.
All right how about house bill
one six eight disabled veterans
transportation it does have
junior money and.
Representative our Garcia are
you on.
I need to table a motion.
Madam chair I move to table
house bill one six eight.
Again for the benefit of the
public there is junior money
tied to the.
So is there any opposition to
that motion saying bill's been
table.
Okay this next bill house bill
forty three is amended charter
school facility improvements.
Representative Dixon.
I'm thank you madam chair and I
believe that perhaps we need an
additional amendment for this
one.
I think we can move this out
with a do pass is that right
cohost.
Chair.
J. R. bill was amended in the
previous
Committee and it took out the
appropriation.
Okay.
And madam chair I also see that
Representative Garrett is on and
she's the prime sponsor.
But I want you to keep talking
so on house bill forty three is
amended yes it is simply a state
charter school facility
improvements bill and the
appropriation was struck
stricken from last committee run
come from representative of joy
here it and then we're going to
go to committee.
Yes
this bill creates the charter
school facility revolving fund
that's what the amendment was at
the guidance of New Mexico of
finance authorities here Russell
we now have.
A US Senate finance amendment to
put the ten million in of from
the is so from the PSC OC Fund
ballots and that will go to the
charter school revolving loan a
loan fund at NMFA contingent on
the enactment of this bill house
bill forty three is amended or
similar legislation.
Is going to be is there anybody
in the audience that want to
speak to house bill forty three
is amended.
Okay good committee out this
gonna Representative Brown.
Thank you madam chair and or
members of the committee
representative so the house
Education Committee did strike
the appropriation however the
bill title still has the
language making appropriation.
Okay we need to have that we
need to change that so we
journeys.
There is a fund that is in the
bill they take it is
appropriated that's why did that
praise has to stay in there okay
yeah I'm sure that.
The other thing if we do need
the language in the bill to
survive and and go through
because there are statutory
changes made in the bill.
Okay
Representative Trujillo.
Yes I move would do past madam
chair as amended.
We need is we need.
Back up okay we have a motion
and a second reduce passed as
amended is there any opposition
to that motion saying none the
bill passes as amended.
Got a house bill one twenty two.
It also has money in the budget
and should be tabled.
Very very out there that wants
to say anything about house bill
one twenty two.
Matt all righty I need to table
a motion over.
The.
Preparation proper second house
bill one twenty two the table
because the money is in house
bill two.
Is there any opposition to that
motion saying bill's been table.
Okay let's go to house bill one
seventy three three rural
infrastructure crisis response
are.
This bill should also be tabled
but I see that the
representative is here so let us
to make a couple comments
Representative Montoya.
Madam chair committee members
thank you so much is there a
possibility to remove the
appropriation of this is still
have a presentation on the bill.
Representative what is the bill
do.
The bill is a stop gap measure
that is unprecedented.
In the title crisis in response
to a critical right now the only
remedies that world leaders have
by the colonialists the tribal
infrastructure fund whether
water transport and either of
those any of those can be
applied in a crisis setting
within forty five days which is
outlined in this bill.
This is an incredible dire need
in rural New Mexico.
Us all counties in fact all
thirty three counties have come
for you adamant support of this
bill.
I've worked very closely with
the calls the north west in the
north central and they stated
that over thirty six million
dollars this year have been up
in need.
That would be remedied by this
bill.
I believe it is incredibly
important there are
environmental implications that
could cost the state billions of
dollars right now there is
sewage getting ready to move
into tributaries and into the
carpet done and also the Rio
Grande if we don't remedy
projects that we have been
banned dating.
For decades with capital outlay
money.
Okay let me let me just say
something here Representative
I'm looking at the F. and
looking at the F. I. R..
This is the bill.
Appropriates one point six
million dollars from the general
fund to the department of
finance and administration.
Fiscal years twenty twenty two
to twenty twenty five and this
is for staffing contractual
services for engineering and
financial services yeah
financially valuations.
That is correct as stripping the
appropriation doesn't get you
what you need if there's no
money to do this work but let's
go to the audience was there
anybody from DFA that would talk
about yes.
Madam chair I have colonel done
he can come out who can testify
just from the technical aspects
of what this bureau would mean
to serving our critical needs in
rural areas okay this is a
finance committee representative
so I'm going to ask Mr can Tana
to talk about how they're going
to do this work with no money so
let's let's bring you then
please.
Down here there.
He.
Are you there.
Madam chair he assured me that
he was on the call okay all over
this one man Representative
Montoya until we get here okay.
Because I'd be very interested
to hear that response from him
so Representative Crowder and
and understand why don't we just
wait until you know toward the
end of the meeting and we'll
keep will keep Representative
Montoya with general we get in
here okay Matt madam chair if if
I may ask a question as a
freshman so by removing that
appropriation in watching the
process that was unfolding I
wanted to make sure that the
bill would would have a
discussion.
The appropriating of twenty five
million dollars is it is the
true elephant in the room the
one point six appropriation in
my opinion is very very small
but let's move forward and I
apologize but I wanted to ask
that question no no problem it's
one of these things that
what generally happens is that.
We've already gone through one
what we would consider the
policy committee so to speak
your first committee that the
bill is gone through it's been
approved and then it moves to us
and in the House Appropriations
Committee we look at the money
piece of the of the piece of
legislation.
And many times we don't
necessarily tanker with the
Policy piece lesser some major
concern regarding financial
issues.
but it it would not be
appropriate descended bill
forward in less I can hear from
the agency that's going to be
responsible for this war and
they tell us that they can do it
with no money it is not in the
budget.
Okay done I just checked the
city does not have a link I will
get the link to him perhaps we
can come back yeah you're you're
still on we got you for today so
let's see thank all right let's
let's move on then.
Go to the next one which is
house bill one sixty nine very
facility building.
Another one there should be
tabled that is.
Representative Zamora on yes
madam chair and members of the
committee thank you for hearing
me this and is quick because you
don't have the money so this
makes.
Yes my manager this is this is
very process in manufacturing
facilities to comply with the
executive orders the less of the
carbon footprint and address
water savings and reduce energy
issues.
Bill was brought forth because
we believe that there's money
coming in from the federal side
and we would like those
appropriations to go to the
right places and I do have an IT
expert witness former lieutenant
governor Walter Bradley if you
could let him speak madam chair
yes very briefly representative
Walter.
Sir.
This is
but for me.
We do.
Thank you madam chairman members
of the committee this is a and
appropriation that we're working
on a and we we believe that that
we're proposing that it'll be
available before the end of this
session obviously and that's why
we would like to insert some
federal infrastructure money
that has been appropriated to
stay in New Mexico for these
kind of projects and we would
like to get a day pass over to
the Senate where we work for a
work on getting securing that
financing.
Your bill's Mr Bradley and
Mister Moore as of the twenty
six million dollars is
appropriated from the general
fund.
To the regions of New Mexico
State University for expenditure
by the New Mexico department of
agriculture.
Not going to be general fund
well that's what the bill says
Sir.
So we're gonna.
Table this bill because it's not
in the budget.
Yes Representative managed care.
If I could just very quickly say
that would tabling motion
preclude us from taking a look
at a different funding sources
after today is over no it
doesn't but waste of what we
have in front of us and because
there's no other amendments
tied to this we don't have a
choice thank you madam chair I
would before I move to table
simply stated the sponsor and
those who support this that we
should work on whether or not
there is a better description of
the language that would be
satisfactory in the time
remaining and with that I move
to table.
Okay so that may is
Representative Zamora and you
can work with representative
Anders sentence if you might be
able to help you in the next day
or so.
Okay thank you madam chair and
thank you members of the
committee of the committee this
is a this bill is making a
statement and.
And breaking bring it up to the.
The word to the committee that
it costs money to for these
mandates to be Matt.
And as a state I believe we
ought to work with the
businesses in the state that
that you are make a lot of the
tax money for the state and and
support the state in many ways
thank you madam chair and
members of the committee okay we
have a proper motion the
technician do we have a second
second Representative small is
there any opposition to that
tabling motion
we do not see any opposition so
Representative Zamora is going
to work with Representative
Anderson thank you very much
thank you madam chairman members
of the committee okay good house
bill sixty eight.
Thank you madam chair house bill
sixty eight is a public safety
bill and
Happy to provide further
elaboration
and in a nut shell it creates
the crime of criminal threat and
strengthens gun penalty
enhancement.
Okay.
Now this is probably one we're
gonna have to have people were
probably do a roll call vote on
it I don't want to get into the
thick of all the.
All the discussion and it it has
gone through the proper
committee prior to us on the
policy issues which is the house
Judiciary Committee.
And I'm really surprised is
actually here with us are we
usually don't get these kind of
bills usually don't get judicial
height built in here.
They're generally a policy
statement but is there anybody
in the audience that we have
that's going to that one state
something that house bill sixty.
Madam chair we have one hand up
okay let's bring him in.
Okay I'm.
And Mr Scott for one minute when
you're ready.
Yeah members of madam chair
members the committee thank you
for giving me a quick moment to
speak about house bill sixty
eight yeah I'm looking few
slides come into this area also
because there is still couple
attended issues that.
People in the school districts
specifically teachers have a
concern about because of the
making a criminal of children
and further more children that
might speak out of turn to make
a mistake now are excellent
we don't have opposed to the
other parts of the bill which
are great it's just it's all
been mashed together any
appropriations look a little
fussy as it it's also I
appreciate you guys taking the
time thank you to protect thank
you Mr Scott is there anybody
else.
Okay.
Representative Anderson.
Madam chair I've received
considerable response from
constituents are messed and it
would be appropriate I would
move did not pass or no table
I'm sorry table I'm sorry.
Second.
Substitute
Okay what we're gonna do is
we're gonna go ahead and do a
roll call vote to table this
bill
yes is a you supported a tabling
motion a motive no major don't.
But
But my concern is here is that
we should be focusing in on the
money piece which.
Thanks isn't.
Is.
One show here it should even be
in our Canadian guy.
This is not the kind of bill
that should should be in our
committee but what take that up
with.
With others on it so we do have
a table in motion number second
on that list going and run the
roll.
Representative Allison yes to
table.
Representative Anderson yes.
Representative Armstrong.
Yes.
Representative Brown.
Yes.
Representative Castellano.
Was passed.
Yes.
Chatfield.
Yes.
Representative Crowder yes to
table.
Representative Dixon.
No.
Representative Ezzell.
Yes the table.
Representative Hochman Vigil no
to table.
Representative Lane.
Well.
There you go Representative
Lara.
No to table.
Representative Sarinana no to
table.
Representative Sweetser.
Yes to table.
Representative Trujillo no to
table.
Representative Castellano.
The table.
Right.
Vice chair small.
No to table.
Madam chair no.
So you have
Your record better.
Nine affirmative and.
Eight know your.
Eight eight in the.
Yes and nine knows.
Okay already unfortunately then
we have the table this bill this
time.
You go to the next.
Yes I'm sorry I thought it was
nine not to table eight to table
yeah.
Okay we we need people that can
count so let's do it again.
Yes this to table of motive now
is not to table so let's try to
get somebody that can count will
start again.
Representative Allison yes.
Representative Anderson yes.
Representative Armstrong.
Yes.
Representative Brown yes
Representative Castellano no.
Representative Chatfield.
Yes.
Representative Crowder UBS to
table.
Representative Dixon.
No to table.
Representative he's out.
Yes to table.
Representative Hochman Vigil.
No to table.
Representative.
Representative Lara.
No to table.
Representative Sarinana no to
table.
Representative Sweetser yes.
Representative Trujillo no.
Representative Trujillo.
No cable.
Okay
but sure small no to table madam
chair no so it is.
Yes to table and nine nine no.
The bill has not been table it's
nine to it's nine two eight.
Not able Representative small I
would move a do pass on house
bill sixty eight as amended
second second we have a motion
and a second for a do pass.
Let's take the role.
Representative Allison.
Yes.
Representative Anderson.
Okay.
Representative Armstrong.
No.
Representative Brown no.
Representative Castellano.
Yes.
Representative Chatfield.
No.
Representative Crowder.
No.
Representative Dixon.
Yes.
Representative Dow now.
Representative.
Hochman Vigil yes.
Representative Lane.
Yes.
Representative Lara yes.
Thank you for your very
Representative Sarinana yes.
Representative Sweetser no.
Representative Trujillo yes.
I share small yes.
Madam chair.
So I have yes ten yeses and
seven knows.
This bill has received a do
passed by a vote of ten to seven
thank you very much the
presentation thank you madam
chair this the next one house
bill one fifty one is amended.
Madam chair members of the
committee thanks so much or
where it was we were only gonna
be here in my bills today so I'm
relieved that we have a few
years house bill one fifty one
basically.
Create a new judicial salary
funding formula by a tying be
Chief Justice salary to that of
a federal magistrate and then
there are percentages allocated
for the the judicial positions
under under that highest
position and also do couples
magistrate judge salaries from
that funding formula.
Madam chair that the additional
money for these the judicial
salaries to reach that federal
magistrate level has been put in
on the Senate side and I do
believe Mr Valdez has received
proof of that a where she should
have been delivered to him this
morning on page one.
What did the Judiciary Committee
do in terms of an amendment.
Are we just added an effective
date madam chair.
It does anybody in the audience
that one wants to speak to this.
Okay let's go to committee
Representative Crowder.
Thank you madam chair I'm just
curious why they do Google the
magistrates I I don't understand
that I know that's a has a
strong financial component but
I'm I'm curious I have.
Thank you madam chair
representative Crowder as we're
it was included within the
presentations within the policy
committee meetings concerning
this bill that the magistrates
are not having the same
recruiting and retention issues
that our regular judges are
magistrate judges do not have
the same level of requirements
for education and so the salary
formula as it stands is making
sure that those folks and
magistrate judge positions are
being paid very well for the
level of expertise and education
that is necessary and so we
don't have that problem I have
with the magistrates and so in
order to make our state judicial
positions more competitive we
needed to do Google so that we
can get them a large raise while
the magistrates are comfortable
where they are.
Thank you for that the reason
behind my question would still
money the last few years to
incorporate the magistrates in
with the district judges and it
seemed odd that we were spent
two three years putting together
and then they pull the money
here are separated so thank you
madam chair Preciado let me ask
the question.
Right anybody else for
Representative Hochman Vigil on
this bill.
The committee.
Madam chair I move a do pass on
house bill one fifty one as
amended second chair okay we
have a motion and a second for
two thousand one fifty one is
amended is there any opposition
to that motion saying now we
have a due pass motion thank you
let's go to house bill one
seventy one.
Thank you madam chair that's my
second bill house bill one
seventy one makes us several
amendments to the rule error
enhancement act which we passed
last year more portly from the
financial side it adds an
additional five million dollars
to that fund which is created
last year so that we can expand
the grant program and have more
communities participate in.
And madam chair that five
million dollars was put on the
Senate side as confirmed by the
spreadsheets are given to Mr
Valdez this morning okay well we
need to adopt this appropriation
I mean this ammendment that we I
yes madam chair we would okay so
let's move the amendment and
let's make a correction
Representative small.
Madam chair I move the
amendment.
We need to add on this
ammendment line nineteen H. one.
Or do we need to making the
appropriation bill we madam
chair there's a fund being
created all right so we just
have one I know we're doing here
and striking section I we've got
a motion to.
The amendment we have a proper
second is there any opposition
to the adoption of this
ammendment.
Seeing the amendment has been
adopted back on the grill was
leisure the committee.
Alsek.
Motion for the past as amended
Representative Castellano second
by Representative small any
opposition to that staying on
the bill has passed thank you
very much thank you
Representative Montorio.
Sir.
One seventy three.
Madam chair thank you committee
members I have done it Donald
colonel on the line and he is
willing to speak up I would like
very much this is my secret wish
that there will be a do pass
without an appropriation and we
have a statement from done to
keep them.
I can find on house bill one
seventy three go ahead Sir good
afternoon madam chair members of
the committee I hope you can
hear me okay of.
Yes you know local government
division is there a.
We definitely recognize the
importance of supporting our
local communities and whatever
endeavor we may and with that
being said at this point is
definitely needed at that local
level I assure you that with the
staff that we currently have a
local agent we will be more than
apple a prepared to be able to
support this programs for this
effort having said that the
cabbie out is there are some
laws of diminishing returns at
some point you know I would
definitely formally request that
this body as well as a the
legislature and the executive
continue to look moving forward
on the demands placed on this
division as additional funding
continues to come in on the
federal side through general
appropriations severance tax
forms and so forth there is a
point where we definitely need
additional capacity but again to
reassure you all we are in a
position that I feel confident
that if this legislation will be
adopted we would be able to
execute it administer at in a
very professional and efficient
and effective means.
What we have here is allocating
a portion of the severance tax
bonding fund.
To the rural infrastructure
crisis response fund.
This is the general
appropriations act and I don't
know why this bill is not in the
tax committee.
Usually when we're dealing with
bills.
That
allocate a portion of the
severance tax bonding fund.
That doesn't come to us.
But because there's an
appropriation that's being made
here.
You know I am very uncomfortable
with that well let's so let's go
to the committee let's start
with Representative Crowder.
Thank you madam chair and I
heard the plea that this is
urgent was was there any during
your money here our capital
money put into this by any of
the representatives of the rural
areas.
Representative Crowder Joe.
Okay I just cares thank you
madam chair.
Representative Anderson.
Thank you madam chair of.
Share sponsor of several years
ago I had the opportunity to
serve on the board of finance
and in the on the New Mexico
border fans unanswered I
understand we appropriate money
each year for.
Community emerges.
Response.
For some of the issues mentioned
and so my first question is you
have explored the.
border finance for these
particularly urgent right now
got to do something
has been any discussion at all
with that entity for that kind
of emergency funding questions.
Representative Anderson the
particular the particular crisis
events we are addressing in this
bill are not emergency that
would draw on the to the
governor's fund or FEMA this is
looking at durable equipment
this is looking at critical
things that happen in real GDP.
Time that we would address.
And there isn't currently but
timely remedy it takes six
months to eighteen months at the
best we're ready to come down
and that will not do when.
Need for a unincorporated area
is in dire need of a fix so
that's how we surgically trying
to address this there currently
isn't a remedy.
Thank you for that answer I am
are you concerned and appreciate
that perhaps staff comment on
the funding source
Representative being out of the
let's see I think it's severance
tax bond.
revenues which I think would
reduce the state severance tax
bonding capacity is that
correct.
That is correct it is drawing
from the sponge bonds so it's
slightly different than the
other this funds that I cited
earlier colonias travel
infrastructure and others and so
well it it would in effect
reduce that amount when you look
at the expenditure just in my
district alone I can imagine
statewide I believe there are
five point six billion dollars
in in C. O. R. just this last
week it came through as a total
approximately thirty eight
thirty six percent would fall in
this crisis water related events
that happen in rural areas.
So in my opinion you know as a
as a representative we're given
up tomorrow to put about
eighteen bandaids here and there
happened for decades and we can
never get to any remedy this is
not a fixed completely but it's
certainly giving underserved
areas historically tool to work
with and boy did they need it.
Thirty three counties are in
unanimous support of this bill.
Thank you for that are in in
that part of are your comments
madam chair representative made
me wonder about capital outlay
being one of the appropriate
ways in which some of these are.
Urgent needs could be met
question.
Representative that's what this
bill is trying to do its
inappropriately and
appropriations right now and
what needs to happen with this
bill is a gets rolled over and
get three referred back to tax
that is what needs to happen.
We do not know what the tax
committee is doing at this time
with the severance tax bonding.
If we pass a bill like this and
we're not in there framework is
just like them passing general
fund appropriations that aren't
in our framework.
So we're gonna take a couple
more questions and then I'm
going to ask the committee to
roll over this myself the
speaker re referred to the
appropriate committee let's go
to Representative quest'anno.
Thank you madam chair.
And I'm with the Representative
Montoya that this bill is really
important for rural communities
I just wanted people to know
that I'm I stand in favor of
this and I I am I am okay with
the roll over madam chair and
and I thank you I think this is
a very important bill for rural
communities and I want to thank
Mr one Representative Montoya
and Mr king Donna thank you
thank you madam.
It absolutely isn't critical but
it's in the wrong place yes
experience that.
Some earlier bills.
So if we did have some people
that actually took the time to
sit in with HSC for the.
Representative small tells me
that there's three people that
they could just be very brief
but we're gonna roll over this
bill so Representative small
let's bring in okay sounds great
madam chair thank you I'm gonna
first are we're going to first
start with Mister Brett we're it
was a Colfax County commissioner
Mr Stewart please go for no more
than one minute.
Thank you very much madam chair
and representative I just want
to say that the to the dollar
amount is of course important as
money it always is to rural New
Mexico but to to be the bit the
more importance in this bill is
the timing that Representative
Montoya spoke of we had we had
two events hearing Colfax County
that one for the county of one
for the Maniscalco E. that with.
Would you know created emergency
situations and the finances
weren't available either at the
county or at the municipality to
deal with them in a timely
manner which causes us to do
patchwork solutions which
results in.
our a our constituents not being
safe one was an ambulance and
one was the fire tower that blew
down so timing is very important
not just the the money and I
just want to again express my
support for this bill and I
understand that it may not be in
the right committee but
hopefully it will pass and go to
the the house thank you very
much madam chair and
representatives thank you
commissioner next we're going to
go to miss Christine goes to.
This bill.
And then here I am thank you for
giving me this time I am.
A commissioner from Rio Arriba
county up north I have been
along this process with
Representative Montoya going to
the meetings meeting with the
fellow commissioners and mayors
in the northern area I am of
course in support of this we
have had major problems even in
the last year we have had to
take clean water out to several
of our smaller areas to our
villages
you know this past month we had
an outage where some people were
without electricity for several
days generators weren't
available so this is very badly
needed and I am in full support
and I hope you guys will be
thank you thank you so much
commissioner next we're gonna go
to Mr mat.
Yes.
Thank you madam chair thank you
ms a committee my name is
Matthew Gonzalez I'm the mayor
of the village of C. model and
we sent a strong support in this
legislation this is really not
in the toolbox for small
municipalities when these
disasters strike they could be
very.
Yeah sometimes as high as fifty
thousand dollars which doesn't
seem like a lot right a lot gets
appropriate out of this
committee in communities like
seem out on our our annual
operating budget is only nine
hundred thousand dollars so
fifty thousand dollars on any
kind of disaster really it
really affects that budget and
it and it will affect the way
were labeled able to disperse
Services so we appreciate the
sponsoring us for this is an
important topic even if it
doesn't pass this session it's
it's really start an important
conversation about we find
equity to these rural community
so again we stand and support
new and we thank you for in the
time to listen to this bill
thank you so much more we have
to other two more public
comments first is going to be
Diane hoc as from the city of
Espanola.
Diane.
Hello can you hear me yes ma'am
please go ahead for one minute
thank you thank you for allowing
me to speak on behalf on behalf
of mayor Sanchez of for the city
of Espanola we to also one
articulate that we are fully in
support of this what we do have
a crisis situations come up it
is a stretch at times you know
with budgetary constraints and
things of that nature so we do
also want to show our support
for this bill as well thank you.
Thank you very much thanks on
behalf of America and finally
let's conclude with that Mr
Isaac cost of those Mr Chris
others madam chair members of
the committee thank you so much
I'm Eisaku Sato some current
chairman of the native American
democratic caucus representing
or twenty three tribal sovereign
entities in the state of New
Mexico and over seventy two
thousand eight of American
voters we stand in support of
this as we began to to really
address the issues of equity not
just for rural communities but
also our tribal communities when
issues of of capacity start
facing our tribal in our our
rural communities and they can
not succeed at the same level as
urban counterparts we do a
disservice to them so we stand
in support of this legislation
and we hope that it will it will
begin that narrative of of
bringing equity to those small
communities that that have been
forgotten for way too long
thanks so much madam chair.
Thank you very much Mr Carlos I
can.
We're back to the committee
Representative Chatfield for a
quick comment.
Yes I just like to thank the
gentleman for bringing this a
bill of it's very much needed we
need ours rural communities are
for.
They struggle everyday and when
a crisis hits sometimes they're
not able to meet the demand at
foot on so we need to start
early and figure a way to put
some funding to solve that
problem if we can do it now
maybe maybe next year where we
need to we need to work on that.
Rollover this bill
Representative Montoya and I'm
gonna ask you Representative
small to go talk to the speaker
we get back on the floor today
this bill needs to be referred
to the tax committee.
And their needs will work on it
where section seven says one
million six hundred dollars
dollars as appropriated from the
general fund and that would need
to be taken out so if you could
add going to direct you to work
with Representative small is if
you all can get this
straightened out and get it re
referred to the right committee.
Reading I like to think you and
your
folks that testified today.
All right let's let's move on
now our last bill for this
afternoon as I mentioned we're
gonna have a hard stop it I was
going to house bill nine.
Representative are you there.
Yes madam chair I am here.
Well we're all years and again
this is one of those bills that
I am surprised to see in the
appropriation committee but
let's go ahead with your area
what you got sect.
Madam chair house bill nine
would add a new section to the
criminal code great in the
offense and penalty structure
for unlawful access to a firearm
by minor looking at the looking
at the in charge of this
committee in terms of the
finances on and implementing
this up in implementing this
piece of legislation there is no
fiscal impact so it should not
be in the Appropriations
Committee and I'm asking you to
pass it out a new looking at the
chart to the committee on what
would be the finances.
This bill and I appreciate what
you're saying here but I do know
that when our leadership reached
out to the other side and asked
if this could be moved out of
our committee they they did not
agree.
So we're here we're gonna we're
gonna have to discuss this but I
wanted to ask Representative
smaller Sir anybody waiting to
talk about this bill.
Madam chair I do see there are
some folks who do want to talk.
there's.
Right now we're at three
individuals madam chair okay at
the core.
We have three total.
it's gone up to four we're
holding steady at four right now
madam chair okay well we're
gonna hear these for and then
we're going to go to the
committee so let's go ahead you
have before for.
Okay it is slightly increased
let's uh can okay let's what
happening in these situations
now everybody that feels like
they're twittering and tweeting
and emailing to get on board
we're not going to do that so
let's hear to in favor and two
against so the first if you
would represent a small sounds
great thank you very much madam
chair madam chair it for all of
the attendees can you leave your
hand up if you wish to speak
with as manager said we have to
in opposition to and support all
we're gonna first go with
opposition so leave your hand up
if you wish to speak in
opposition.
Okay.
Great okay we'll start with
opposition we're first going to
go to miss terra mica miss Mike
up please.
Madam chair can you hear me yes.
Yes I turned mentioned New
Mexico state director for an R.
eight you're correct this is not
a money bill but there is an
aspect of this legislation that
members of your committee
especially those from rural
areas should be aware of we
oppose house bill nine and just
presented and house Judiciary
this bill does not take into
account the fact that miners in
New Mexico can legally own or
possess firearms themselves in
that committee neither the
sponsor nor the advocates for
the bill could explain how this
legislation.
Excuse me what impact potential
liability for parents and
guardians in the circumstances
so with that central question
unanswered we continue to oppose
house bill nine thank you.
Thank you very much
we're gonna.
Now for our final comment in
opposition to Mr Derek.
Scott.
Yes Sir.
Madam chair members of the
committee my name's Derek Scott
I'm running for sheriff and
Bernalillo county I'm a pro law
enforcement officer and a
firearms instructor I oppose
this bill on a few issues one
being that we're making a new
crime and a lot of things about
new primes as been even imposed
by the.
The ACLU and others Furthermore
that the fact that we have the
storage bill that we've been
talking about giving sixteen and
seventeen year olds voting
rights but now we're on the
other hand saying that all you
can't be around a firearm that
your parents is not sure to use
and you can currently all so
there is a lot of issues in this
bill that we've been trying to
work with us and I've been
trying to get in contact the
sponsor about this but I know
you guys been so busy so it's
probably and so are but I we do
oppose this bill and I know
others behind me and the other
in the farms community say that
this bill is going to be more
detrimental especially for
parents than anything else so I
appreciate you taking the time
to listen to us thank you very
much Mr Scott now we're gonna go
to to in support so please put
your hand down if you are an
opposition please have your hand
up if you're and support we're
gonna go to we're going to first
start with
Miss Regina Griego and then
we're gonna go to Albuquerque
deputy commander Kyle hearts are
first miss Griego.
Thank you am I admitted.
Yes ma'am yes okay good
my name is thank you
Representative and for the
opportunity to speak to you in
favor of of SB nine my name is
Regina Greco and I'm from
Albuquerque for you right.
I'm a retired engineer and an
author I'm also a wife mother
and grandmother and I I want to
tell you about perfect storm
that took place in my family
members all victims of gun
violence committed by my
troubled nappy and happened nine
years ago and it changed my life
correct and many lives for ever
we had been more vigilant about
what have what's happening in my
brother's house bill including
the fact that he cap.
Eight gun and ample ammunition
all unsecured and therefore
acceptable any of his four
children.
Our arms are the leading cause
of death for children in our
state we must prioritize keeping
them safe at home and this will
be a deterrent this will be a
deterrent I know it won't cover
everything you know about no
bill will cover everything I
said as okay I'm convinced my
family members should be alive
today.
The previous passed without.
Thank you very much miss Griego
next we're gonna conclude of the
comment with Albuquerque deputy
commander Kyle hearts are Mr
Hartzer yes can you hear me yes
Sir.
Thank you guys for your time and
thank you to Regina I was
actually on that call and I work
for the sheriff's department for
an entire family of five was
killed by a juvenile who had
access to his parents cons time
and time again these I'm secure
guns are killing the kids and
our state of the deputy
commander over the homicide or
Albuquerque police every single
time we see it you about with
the gun a lot of times it's not
stolen they're getting it from
their own house so used in an
armed robberies they're using it
against their own family members
in malicious ways I am all for
education for gun owners as well
but they're already is education
there's gun safes everywhere the
amount of unsecured weapons that
children have access to even
like the two year old Rio Rancho
is just too high and there is
absolutely no deterrence at all
to not secure these guns right
now so this is a very minimum
common sense law that I myself
am personally are in favor of of
an action right away whether
it's the Howard role for the
break family or the many others
are out there so I hope that it
out passes this committee thank
you guys.
Thank you that we're gonna go
back thank you Representative
small number to go back to the
committee Representative Crowder
stand up did you want to ask
anything.
The madam chair I I appreciate
you allowing the folks to
comment I I just want to say
that I'm adamantly opposed to
this bill right I think this is
the third bill I've heard that
gives benefits to the criminal
and takes away some of the
private ability to protect
yourself that's all thank you
Madam Representative Lane thank
you madam chair just whenever
the chairs.
Reddit promotion that's offering
okay state representative
Garcia.
Madam chair is going to do a
motion review conducted but
Representative thank you want to
okay let's go back
Representative Eli.
Thank you madam chair I move to
table.
Okay we do have a loss okay we
have a motion and a second to
table we're gonna have the
protective role.
Voted yes is the take is to vote
for tabling a motive now is not
stable.
Representative Anderson.
Yes.
Representative Anderson.
Well yes
Representative Armstrong.
Yes.
Representative Brown.
Yes.
Representative Castellano.
Representative yes you I'm sorry
yes yes to table.
Representative Crowder.
Yes.
Representative Dixon.
No to table.
Representative Dow.
Yes to table.
Representative Garcia.
Yes to table.
Representative Hochman Vigil.
No to table.
Representative Lane.
Yes.
Yes.
Representative Lara.
Yes the table.
Yes Sir.
Yes.
Representative Trujillo.
No.
Your small no to table.
Madam chair.
Yes.
Madam chair.
Representative Allison yes to
table.
Thirteen two five.
All right.
Representative the bill is.
Tabling a motion of thirteen to
five we thank you for being here
today the house bill nine has
been table so madam chair I just
want to make one statement the.
The purpose and goal of this
committee was to look at the
financial impact of the piece of
legislation not to look at the
merits of the legislation and
with this having no financial
impact on indicated by the
analysts this was an unfair vote
because it is your
responsibility and
appropriations financial impact
and this is going beyond that
and I'm just saying to you madam
madam chair members of the
committee this the determination
on the end of the of the
marriage to be going before the
house floor and not here on the
phone it's as simple of focused
and misinformation it may have
been presented this is one on
financial impact only and.
Is that it is all right I want
to thank the committee and we've
got our hearts stop at five
o'clock I think we've gone
through all of our house bill's
and that I don't know what the
agenda looks like we're tomorrow
bill if we get any other bills
are lined up.
Not at this time madam chair
pretty cleaned up already thank
you very much and that we'll see
everybody shortly thank you
committee and staff.
Thank you madam chair.
