Here to
representative Garrett Garrett.
Representative Handan
Excellent. Thank you very much.
Okay. Uh, we're members were
going to be quick. Today. We're
gonna start straight with House
Bill 134 is amended. Um, we have
some amendments here that are
being passed out to us.
Chairman Lenti If you can please
briefly explain your bill.
Absolutely Thank you. House Bill
134 is amended. Travel Education
Trust fund bill establishes a
new tribal education trust fund
to strengthen the capacity of
New Mexico's nations, tribes and
pueblos support native students,
This long term investment will
help generate stable and
consistent funding for travel
education for years to come.
HB two already now includes an
appropriation of $50 million for
a travel education trust fund
investment will be managed by
the state investment officer for
the benefit of New Mexico's
tribes. They would make an
annual 5% distribution to PD and
PD within disperse the funding
to tribes.
At this point in time, there was
in fact, an amended bill that
was proposing adopted by the
House Education Committee.
The amendment. I'd like to be
transparent about the process of
developing these bills, and I
need to be able to learn and
listen from all of our Mexico
sovereign tribes.
Yeah.
Okay. Uh, they don't all have
the same needs but they all
deserve to be treated equitably
and in accordance with tribal
sovereignty. That's why this
this bill does not propose a
formula to disperse funds but
instead creates a task force of
tribal representatives to decide
that formula. However, last week
concerns about whether or not
the makeup of this task force
Was questioned about being fair.
So we worked on amending this
bill, which is the amendment,
and that's why when the bill,
uh, navigation Council passed a
resolution requesting such an
amendment, and I believe that
the changes we have come up
with, in fact meet those needs.
The amended bill differs the
sovereign to the sovereign
tribes themselves to determine
the makeup of the task force.
The amendment adds another step
in the process first in the
interim, the legislative
education 30 director will
facilitate tribes to come
together to decide the task
force membership.
Secondly, the tribal he
appointed task force will than
me to decide and equitable
funding formula and then third,
the Public Education Department
will be required to implement
this formula to disperse set
funds.
The amendment also clarifies the
public Education department's
role.
To meet another request from the
Navajo Nation stakeholders. The
bill now says that the public
Education Department must accept
tribal appointments to the task
force, and it also says that the
public education Department is
the implementer of the formula
and not the creator.
With these changes, The bill
gives maximum decision making
power to the sovereign tribes
themselves, rather than
prescribing who should be at the
table. When funding decisions
get made. We believe that as a
respective and deliberative
process to determine the equity
in representation and equity and
fund the funding disbursements
I believe the solution is the
best of all interest is for all
sovereign tribes in the state of
Mexico and is in fact consistent
with the government to
government framework in state
law with that, Mr Chairman, I
was sent for any questions.
Thank you very much. Uh, Sam.
Lindsay. Um okay, members. Thank
you for that.
Ah, let's um we've got some
questions. We're gonna We have a
couple of amendments here in
front of us that deal with the
rest of the core responsibility
of our committee, which is to
address the financial
considerations.
Um, in confirming sure that this
there is a $50 million
allocation currently in House
Bill two for this purpose,
correct.
Mr. Chairman. Yes, sir. Okay. I
want to read out. We have two
amendments. The first is 0.227.
9 to 3.1. Is that what you have?
Mr Chairman asking for me. I
don't have any amendments. Okay,
We're getting them over to you.
Mr Chair.
If we have questions about how
to understand the amendment
points. Can we ask them at some
point? Yeah, well any questions
We'll ask for a motion on the
amendment, and then we'll go
through those for sure.
Okay. Excellent. So we've got
the First Amendment.
Um
This is a 0.2279 to 3.1%.
Alison, do you? Would you like
to explain the amendment?
Thank you, Mr Chair.
Mr Terror.
I was asked to propose an
amendment and this is the
amendment.
I spoke with the Legislature or
the HFC staff.
To verify if this was a
legitimate amendment.
The HCFC staff read and reviewed
the proposed amendment.
And advised not proposing the
amendment for technical reasons
and for lack of accountability
of how the funds would be spent.
Okay. Thank you very much.
Representative. I apologize. It
seems that this, um
This amendment is not intended
to be added today. I apologize.
Yeah, for having it passed out
chair. I apologize. So members
Um
Okay?
Hello. I'm not promoting the
amendment.
Okay?
Uh, hold on just for a second.
Um
Sorry.
Mr Chair. Um okay. We've got the
bill. I think what we might end
up doing here. We've got a
different amendment or 0.1 here.
Let's go to 0.227 Mr Chair.
Yeah, It's a valid amendment
that you just read. 22 79231 was
the one that I was asked to.
To propose.
As I said, I consulted with H F
C staff, and they recommended
not proposing the amendment due
to technical difficulties and
the lack of accountability on
how the funds would be spent.
Okay. Thank you very much.
representative for clarifying
that.
Um yeah. So we're not your We're
not gonna
Ah!
We're not gonna adopted. Thank
you for sharing.
The reasons why that that was
recommended to not have it.
Okay?
Move on moving on. Okay, we
have. Can we move?
House Amendment or House
Appropriations and Finance
Committee. Amendment Number one.
This is 0.227948.
0.1 Mr Chair. I move house
Appropriations and Finance
Committee Amendment one
Okay?
Okay, uh and members. What this
does is, um
This strikes the final page the
appropriation
$100 million from the general
funds.
As is general practice in the
committee will strike this after
the build, and we're going to go
for discussion on the bill.
Everybody's got it. Okay is
Great.
We're going fast. Thank you all
for your patient, Mr. Chair. I
believe we also need to strike
line. 14 on page one. That's
right.
Add that to the
Mr Chair.
Rough, Sam Garrett. This is not
what we voted on yesterday and
House education.
Okay?
That that is the bill that we
have here in front of us is not
the bill franchise. Didn't we
pass the amended yesterday?
This, isn't it?
Okay, So what? I think we're
having a little bit of chairman.
What? We're going to ask your
amendments. Yeah.
So this is the original image,
okay?
Okay?
Okay, We've got confirming
members that we have the
amendment from the House
Education Committee reflected in
our bill. We see that it was a
unanimous vote for that.
Going back to 0.227.
948.1. This strikes the
appropriate in Section three.
On Page eight.
And we need to also strike
making an appropriation online.
14 Page one
Right, right and re number
accordingly.
Okay?
Okay?
So we're situated.
Is there any objection to
adopting?
House Appropriations and Finance
Committee Amendment number one
Removing the appropriation.
Okay. I don't see any objection
to that. So we're going to
remove the appropriation. Okay?
Is there Chairman Is there
anything you or your expert
would like to add before we go
out to public comments, Mr.
Chairman, We're ready for the
public. Thank you. Okay, great.
Uh, first I'd like to ask. Is
there anybody who wishes to
speak in opposition to house
Bill 134.
Okay. Please, come on up, if you
if you wish to speak in
opposition, come on up, please.
Yeah, the best places if you
could stand right behind the
presenters. There's a
Microphone that shouldn't catch.
Let's try it and tells you and
if we can hear, then go ahead,
please. Yeah, the chair are you
able to hear?
Richard. Thank you. Um, so my
name is Albert. He knows about
karate, Navajo nation elected
tribal Council member. This is
my ninth year on the council,
Navajo Nation, uh, were
initially we supported the
creation of and with a
resolution passed by the Navajo
Nation Council. January 31st.
2024 with a vote of 20 out of
the 24 delegates voted in favor.
No opposed, um, that we support
the creation of the tribal
education Trust fund. We were
not provided adequate tribal
consultation. We were first made
aware of this bill when it was
dropped last Tuesday.
Um, And so the Navajo Nation
opposes the task force and house
Bill 134. This was conveyed to
the sponsor. There was multiple
conversations and so I do have
the resolution here. And so our
concern is the comments made by
the sponsor on the position of
the Navajo Nation. We have
concurrence with our Navajo
nation President.
Dr Boone Nygren, or speaker of
the House, Crystal and Curly who
have, um, a joint letters
stating our position that we're
concerned, um, with not only how
this has been portrayed to our
new Mexico legislatures, but in
an earnest effort, we're trying
to make amendments to keep this
bill active. But at this point,
we feel that our voice has been
co opted. And so I do have the
resolution here that clearly
The states.
Navajo Nation opposes the task
force. And if you look at this
bill as it stands before you add
it continues to include, um,
language regarding the task
force. And so we stand with our
40,000 plus Navajo native
students in the state of New
Mexico, and, um, well, now look
at continuing to oppose this
task force.
Development and, um
Will need to know then. Ah, in
terms of what is the future with
the Tribal Education Trust fund
If their appropriation has been
removed, I think you chair
Thank you very much.
Okay. Um, yes, please. If you
wish, speaking after
Get in the chair and vice chair.
My name is Crystal and curly
speaker of the 25th Navajo
Nation Council.
As my colleague stated council
delegate Amber Crotty. Overall,
we did support HB 134 in
creation and the establishment
of the Indian Education Trust
fund.
And also to support
The legislators to fund that
trust fund, however, as delegate
chronic stated, we were hoping
in hopes that there would be
proper consultation in creating
or establishing, or even talking
about the ship Yushin of funds
of these trust funds, So we
asked again, you know, we do
have
A resolution from the Council
Council cancel is the governing
body of the nation as a whole.
So the council does have the
official position of the whole
nation.
So we're here again, pleading
for an amendment to make this a
fair and equitable opportunity
for all of our Navajo students
across this great state of New
Mexico.
So again, we are in an official
stance that we are in opposition
of the task force. Thank you.
Thank you very much. Speaker,
Curly, okay?
Yes, Please come on up.
Thank you Chair. Good evening,
Um, Committee members. I'm Patty
Williams, the registered
lobbyists for the navigation
counsel Office of the Speaker
You've heard from the speaker
and I wanted to talk with you a
bit about the amendment that was
briefly before you and then was
withdrawn. Um,
In consultation for the first
time in the last two weeks about
this bill before it was brought
before committee process. Um, my
clients met with the sponsor and
their expert and explained that
there was a problem with the
lack of tribal consultation
despite the fact that this bill
had problems last year that were
pointed out by the Navajo Nation
and
An invitation to engage and
tribal consultation that did not
happen Last week, my clients had
a meeting with the sponsor and
the expert and left that meeting
with the agreement, they thought
that there would be an
uncoupling.
Between the creation and funding
of the fund and any methodology
which had not been discussed
regarding the distribution of
the fund. That was not the
amendment that came before HTC,
And it's not the amendment
before you now. So until the
fund
Which it
Which the Navajo Nation supports
is uncoupled between from a
methodology or formula in which
Navajo Nation has not had the
opportunity to provide input.
They are opposing the bill.
Thank you. Thank you very much.
Okay. Uh, any, uh, is there
anybody online, which is
speaking of position?
See our committee nodding No.
For those who wish to speak in
support. Please raise your hand.
Okay, come on, up and briefly in
the same sort of fashion if you
could share your thoughts
tonight.
Mr Chairman, my and, uh, madam
Chair members of the committee.
My name is Mark Durant. I
represent Santo Domingo Pueblo
saw north Afonso Pablo and the
Santa Fe Indian school in
support of this legislation in
terms of the legislation, First
of all, and importantly, the
words that we appreciate our
annual distribution.
For the first time in
representative Linda has been
working on lots of legislation
to give one time money to Native
Americans in important areas to
our libraries and for
educational purposes.
Annual distribution means that
we're going to be able to
anticipate we're going to be
able to plan and we're going to
be able to execute those
programs better for especially
our native American Children, So
that's a very important in terms
of the amendment that was placed
in house education the way we're
looking at that amendment, uh,
that it's very, very positive.
In that it is going to allow the
tribes themselves to determine
what is the distribution of that
formula that all that does is
further enhance our self
determination as tribes and our
sovereignty, So we're very much
in support of that amendment,
and we're support of the bill in
general. For those reasons. We
hope you support it too. Thank
you, Mr Chairman. Thank you very
much.
Hmm.
Mr Chairman. I can remember. My
name is Robert Apodaca, the rich
lobbyists for the media
pagination walking Pueblo. We do
support this bill. The president
and the governor are
appreciative, Represent length
of bringing this bill forward.
We do believe it.
Um, brings a huge opportunity
for two all tribal communities
in order to address you know,
education needs, you know
whether it's language and
culture or other educational
initiatives that are not
currently being provided by the
traditional public school
systems. We wholly support this
effort. Also, with respect to
the task force, we believe that
that some of these issues
Um, can be resolved as we move
forward. So, um, it's a
Really important that we get
this bill funded at this point
in time, so that we don't lose
this opportunity. Thank you, Mr
Chairman. Thank you very much,
Mr Robert.
Evening, Mr Chairman, Vice chair
and members of the committee. My
name is Conroy. Gino and I am
the registered lobbyist for the
blows of Atacama and Taus, and
we stand in full support of HB
134 as amended.
Um, problems that are
representative work closely with
your public Council of
governors.
We also passed a resolution is
full support of the creation.
Our tribal education trust one.
And we truly believe that the
amended bill that was voted on
10 to 0.
And House education contains
What we believe is a fair,
equitable way of addressing
The investment that would be
made in the trust fund.
You know, Mr Chairman? Um,
tribes don't have a whole lot of
representation on school boards
or the higher administrative
levels of school districts.
We also don't have a lot of
influence when it comes to
educational policy and the
amounts of funding
For school schools across
The state where our students
attend.
We believe that the investment
and troubled Education trust
fund will complement the
education by providing more
community based programs and
services. More tutoring, more
counseling more classes than
indigenous language languages
more after school programs, more
advanced learning programs was
chair members of the committee
and for those reasons
We asked for your full and
complete support of HB 134 as
amendment as amended. Thank you
very much, Mr Chairman.
Thank you very much.
Evening, Mr Chairman and members
of the committee. I'm Stephanie
Garcia, Richard, State Land
commissioner overseeing 13
Million acres of state Trust
land, and, uh, the vice chairman
of the state investment counsel
overseeing $50 billion of our
state's permanent funds.
Mr Chairman. I'm very, uh
Privileged to today to come
before you in support of this,
these two visionary individuals.
On their historic proposal,
Which Mr Chairman I believe is
long past due. You may remember
that I was a school teacher
before I became a state land
commissioner. And this this sort
of trust fund that we that you
all will be considering today is
something um, I believe just
like our land grab permanent
funds that funds public
education, just like our land
grab permanent fund that funds
higher, Ed.
Is a set aside recurring,
sustainable source of revenue
for something that is incredibly
crucial.
To our citizens. In addition,
the you know the the fund
allows, um
Native communities and their
leadership.
To make their own decisions
about how the funds should be
spent and what is proper in the
education of their Children. So
I stand today in strong support
of this proposal. Mr Chairman.
Thank you. Thank you very much.
Yeah, it's a
Hey, Spencer Willian this year?
Yeah, touching your slow
business. A bus is King.
I think that should change.
Chianese or similar.
My father.
Wilbur Anderson, Willy.
It's from Churchill to mother is
from
It's kind of holiday Willy.
Uh,
Ojito.
By myself and the father of our
Children on my career. I've
worked in a number of
capacities.
Helping
Young people in the higher
education study, working for a
Division one university.
Helping these young people.
Navigate through their getting
their education.
One of the things that I always
I remember them saying to me
Was. It's great to see you here
at this university.
Because we don't have very many
people like you. And so as a
result, as I continue to help
our young people
I always wondered how come we
don't invest in our young
people future?
I later served as its star
director.
The Navajo Nation.
He had over 100. Almost 200
centers across the Navajo
Nation.
These head start centers are
very impactful because they
provide early education.
Our youngest kids.
Those kids at the time. I was
director now High school.
It's amazing to see the growth
that happens in people.
But I think this
You know it's very appropriate
because it sets aside for the
future generations.
And provides for
They're learning of culture and
development, which really needs
to happen.
I'm glad the council passed
their resolution, which supports
the establishment of a trust
fund.
Because that really speaks
volumes that we want to invest
in our future.
Oh, that's to be done. I think
that's another question in
relation to that, but in
relation to the support of the
overall trust fund, it's their
we support that.
Now the whole having worked with
Navajo
It's always hard because we're
such a large tribe.
We have so many people from all
different facets. We have three
different states. We cover
Results when you try to get them
on one page like changing the
course of direction of a big
ship.
It takes a while.
And so immediately asking for a
response from them. It takes
some time.
But I know we will get it
through if we're all focused on
the most important things, which
is our youth.
The Navajo Youth, the Children
of our next generation.
So I thank you for this
opportunity night. Look forward
to your support of this bill.
Hopefully it gets passed and we
can see this Trust fund for
future generations for our
youth. Thank you. Thank you very
much.
Okay. I believe we do have three
folks online, So we're going to
go. We'll try to stick to around
two minutes. Please go ahead.
Thank you, Mr Chair. Members of
the committee
with the A C l. U of New Mexico
here to support HD 134 because
this is a vital vitally needed
investment into culturally
competent and relevant
education for indigenous
students, and they meet our
moral and legal obligation to
these students to provide the
highest quality education that
the Mexican can provide.
And it's really, really
gratifying to see this kind of
investment in our state. Thank
you.
Good evening. Um here and
members. My name is Andrea
Thomas. And I'm a public school
teacher, um, drained in a
charter school in Shiprock. I
have been teaching for the past
13 years on the Navajo nations
in ship rocks are being Navas
students come from a family of
educators. Um, and that was
taught about the importance of
Our future generations. And I
feel that this bill and setting
aside this money will allow for
more opportunities within our
local communities, Um, to make
decisions that we feel with the
best, um
In their educational journey. Um
and so, along with
Just
Not just Navajo students, but
for students across New Mexico.
and you think about us as
indigenous people. I think that
this is the right step to at
least getting to some type of,
um
To make up for a lot of time
where we were not. We didn't
have a seat at the table. And
so, um, I'm in support of it.
Thank you very much. Thank you
very much. Mr Thomas. Yeah. Mr
Chair and members of the
committee. Shane Derek Franklin,
didn't you?
You know, and he's still not
cutting that brushes chain
Twitter cheating that a chain on
it.
Um again. My name is Dirk
Franklin. I am from the
community of Twin Lakes, New
Mexico, which is near to Hachi,
New Mexico.
Ah, and I'm, a former teacher, a
former school counselor.
We support house Bill 134. Thank
you.
I want a, um
Thank you. Chair. Thank you.
Members of the community for
allowing us to speak. My name is
Suzette ask you overly, I have
many years in education. I I
wasn't pageant faculty. I worked
as a school social worker in the
city and now back in my
community of San Osti on the
Navajo Nation, and I support
this good evening Chair. House
committee members, individuals
online, so
Yeah. Shake Claudia Edgewater in
the acting superintendent for
Department of Education. I just
like to concur. And I am in
agreeance with the Navajo Nation
Council and President's office
as they stated that unnecessary
trust fund is necessary. Um so
therefore I am a supportive
house. Bill 134. Thank you.
Mr Chair. Members of the
committee Joseph Hernandez in a
Mr Chair members of the
committee Joseph Hernandez in
the share. We identify ourselves
to our four clans. My first
client is of the Z, a pebble
people.
My, um my maternal grandparents
clan is of the salt people.
This is who I am has been that's
Navajo and I have respect for my
Nakatani's.
You guys are my Natanz.
You guys are our leaders.
And I appreciate the sponsors of
the spill.
And I'm speaking on behalf as
the Navajo Nation. Head start,
VICE, uh, President, Vice
Chairman.
Of the Policy council.
I am serving a five year term.
I'm in my fourth year we have 36
head start centers.
In New Mexico.
Recently state. New Mexico
collaborate with that nomination
has to build the standing Rock
head start center.
$4.1 million facility.
And in
I see the struggle but with all
of our head start centers, I see
the need in our school system
where my daughter goes to
school, and I just want to urge
support for hospital. 134. Yeah.
Thank you very much for sharing
on this. Okay? I believe we have
five folks online well are six.
We'll ask folks to stick to
about a minute and we'll have to
start timing. Since we have some
other bills. We're going to
first go to
We're going to first go to Alvin
Warren Alvin for a minute,
please.
Thank you, Mr Chairman, members
of the committee. My name is
Calvin Warren. I'm the
registered lobbyist for the
Llano Foundation and a trustee
with the Santa Fe Indian School.
Mr. Warren, can you hear us?
Yes. Can you hear me?
He's speaking. Can you hear me?
We? We can't hear you, Mr
Warren. So we're going to go.
We'll come back to you, Uh,
we'll see if they're Yeah, we'll
come back.
Next. We have Aaron Lee Aaron
for one minute, please.
Hello, Chairman and members of
the committee. My name is Aaron
Lee indigenous policy Advocate
with enemy to vote. I'm here to
speak in support of HB 130 for
this bill is a critical
opportunity to increase
Children's access to culturally
and linguistically relevant
education. HB 134 enables tribes
to exercise their sovereignty by
supporting teachers and
educational programs that are of
their own background and how
they see fit.
The trust fund will help to
retain educators who know the
language and bringing amount of
money in which tribes have never
had for culturally responsive
education. It provides for
future generations and we should
support one another in this
endeavor to do good onto our
native students. Thank you.
Thank you very much. Thank you.
Okay. Next, we're gonna go to
tailor Bowie Taylor for a
minute, please.
Good evening chairman. Small
members of the committee. My
name is Taylor Bowie and I'm
here on behalf of Attorney
General Raul Torres, who stands
in strong support of HB 130 for
this bill is an important
investment in our current and
future generation of native
students. And we ask for your
support. Thank you.
Thank you very much. Next. We're
going to go to
Let's do Sarah. Minor Sarah for
one minute, please.
Good evening, Mr Chair members
of the committee. My name is
Sarah Minor Schauble and I am
the outreach and community
relations Manager with New
Mexico. Voices for Children.
Thank you to the sponsor for
your tireless support of tribal
education and for your
collaboration with our States,
Nations, tribes and pueblos. We
stand in strong support of house
Bill 134 as amended because it
will provide recurring
investments in vital community
based resources.
That will help students thrive
and we urge your support as
well. Thank you very much. Thank
you very much. Okay, we have on
our screen here and M CLP if you
could identify yourself and then
speak for one minute.
Yes. Good evening. I'm Mr
Chairman and members of the
committee. My name is Elissa
deal, and I'm gonna attorney
with the New Mexico Center on
law and poverty. A member of the
legal team representing the
Yossi plaintiffs said on behalf
of NMC LP and transform
Education New Mexico We still
enforceable court of this bill
because Native American students
have a right to an equitable and
culturally relevant education.
That in the enables them to
thrive and learn in community
based investments. Um and we
urged the committee for these
reasons and the others given
here today to fully support
this, bill. Thank you. Great.
Thank you very much.
Okay, We're gonna go back to
Alvin Warren Alvin for one
minute, please.
Mr Chairman, members of the
committee. Are you able to hear
me this time? We sure can.
Thank you. Thank you for the
opportunity. Mr Chairman,
members of the committee. My
name is Calvin Warren. I'm a
registered lobbyist for the
Landau Foundation. I'm also a
trustee with the center for
Indian School. We urged the
committee to support this
historic legislation as amended
House Bill 134 will provide us
with an opportunity to invest in
supporting the education of
native students in perpetuity to
truly address the root causes
that lead that have led to the
Yossi Martinez findings.
It will provide vitally needed
funding for community based
education programming. I
appreciate the sponsors
willingness to listen to the
concerns that were expressed
about the composition of the
task force. The Health Education
amendment removes those
components and instead provides
a way for tribes to come
together and develop a proposal
for this task force total
equitably represent all of them
importantly, this would be done
by consensus and in accordance
with indigenous decision making
values. This is a true exercise
of self determination. We have a
historic opportunity.
Mr Chairman, We urge you to
support this bill. Thank you.
Great. Thank thank you very
much, Mr. Warren. Uh, we have a
couple more folks. I'm gonna go
very quickly.
Ah!
Melania Ortiz. Melania, Please
go ahead.
Okay, uh,
Good.
Patricia Corey's
Good evening. I'll, um
I think you will cares. Language
program stands in full support
of this bill this bill and help
us to enable, um
Tried nations and pueblos to
finally
Fully and adequately support the
Native American education for
the education of our Native
American Children.
From all of these nations. Thank
you.
Thank you very much. Now we're
going to go to Celeste Loose,
Seto.
The chicken. Okay? And we're
gonna conclude now with Beatrice
Pacheco.
Good evening Committee. Thank
you very much for the
opportunity to speak very
briefly. I am Dr Beatrice
Pacheco. I am the director of
education from the Pueblo of
Sandia, and we are very proud to
have representative Lent a
speaking on behalf of native
Children within the state of New
Mexico very quickly. I would
like to let you know that state
dollars that have been provided
through funding that
representative Lenti has worked
very hard to procure.
Have, um, and enabled his own
pueblo to reestablish a language
program where we only have 21
native speakers remaining. We
now have 16 people working daily
on language in order to preserve
a language that is dying. This
is very important funding. It
makes a tremendous difference,
and we are very grateful to
representative Lent to and ask
for your support.
Great. Thank you very much.
Okay, We're going to conclude
the public comment there that's
very robust public comment. We
really appreciate it now We're
gonna go to questions from
members.
Okay, I'm gonna go first to
represent pedigree than the
representative Chatfield.
Thank you, Chairman and thank
you for the presentation and the
bill.
I'm I'm confused about some
things.
The first one was the
amendments. We got out so I can
guarantee you we got rid of 30
questions just in that, okay.
And so I don't want to belabor
this. I would like to have some
offline conversation.
Representative went to with
respect to this, but
Um and I want to clarify before
I go any further.
That many ways my questions
don't mean any disrespect. It's
clarifying for me, so I
understand.
Where we're at in the state.
When we deal with this, I don't
sit on house education. I don't
set
Uh, I don't really deal with P
d. I deal with my
superintendents. My school
boards, So this is a little bit
different for me.
Chairman and representatives.
What's respect to this? Is there
a
Fun reform fund anything out
there?
With respect to education that
all 89 school districts have
similar access to
Right now, Mr Chairman and
represented pedigree.
Absolutely. That's where ped
sends all their money now to all
the school districts on behalf
of our Children.
Thank you, Chairman and thank
you representative for that so
I've I've heard arguments on
both sides.
Um, from
Tribal neighbors Look at this
differently.
My question is
Why is separate five just for
tribal
When the focus within the last
few years has been on D E. I
When we look at
Equity and inclusion.
So bill that separates that
Help me chairman and
representative to do that, And
I'm not in any way trying to ask
anything other than educate me.
Mr Chairman. If I may represent
Pettigrew, That's a great
question. And so when our
Children and I think you can
probably, uh
Recognized the issues with this
as well. Mainly rural, tribal,
rural leave their homes to go to
school. It's often a one hour
bus ride one way.
And so when they leave that when
they leave their home for the
day, and they leave their school
for the night for the weekend
for the summer, oftentimes what
happens is that they go back to
their rural part of the state or
for the reservation, and then
they stop learning. Unlike their
peers that may live in a more
urbanized area can go down the
street and go to the public
library or do other things and
and and so at this point in
time, it was thought that
To affect
Greater outcomes for our
Children. Those that continue to
be amongst the poorest in the
nation that why should we not
continue to create better
capacity within tribal
communities to provide services
like after school programming?
Language programming culturally
appropriate programming for them
to be able to have that type of
continuing learning ability.
Furthermore, to have the ability
to hop on a WiFi connection and
and and continue to learn that
way as well. So I think there's
a there's certainly, um, a
discrepancy here in the state
that it's it's it's. It's a
urban rural divide. In this
case, it's an urban, rural
tribal divide them for our
Children still don't have the
same access is and some cases
luxuries if you want to call
them that
To continue to be able to learn.
But in this case, learning is
done best within their own
communities where they don't
have to go another one hour to,
perhaps in some cases, the
nearest McDonald's sit in the
parking lot and and grab a WiFi
connection. And, or, uh, they
can continue to learn in their
communities where they can be
warm in the winter. Cool in the
summer and being a safe space.
You need to learn.
Thank you, Chairman. And thank
you, Uh, Chairman
Um
For that answer.
I feel like that still exists in
rural
New Mexico.
Whether it's tribal or non
tribal
And that's the I guess where I'm
getting to in the crux of this
fund.
Why isn't this a rural fund?
Not a tribal fund. Hmm.
And chairman. I'm gonna end with
that.
I would love to have more
conversation offline, but I
needed to get my mind wrapped
around where we were going with
this so I could have further
conversation.
Thank you for presenting
category next. We're gonna go to
represent Chatfield, please.
Thank you, Mr Chairman.
Mr Chairman. This is the second
time I've seen this bill.
You know, in in education, I
supported it wholeheartedly.
And, uh,
Probably still do. There's a few
things couple of things I want
to talk about as far as
Procedure process and that would
be to you and some other things
out here.
You know, So what I see is like
my county has 610 people.
And, uh, Leo County probably has
a lot more.
So
Well, I'm looking at the Navajo
Nation, which covers three
states.
And then I'm looking at the
pueblos and stuff and
So there's probably a lot more
people.
Yeah, you know, on the
neighborhood nation, right? So
I'm
Being an outsider. I don't I'm
not sure of how that votes
provided up. I really am unaware
of what the contentious issue
is. I know it has to do with who
gets to make the decision. Who's
who gets on the task force. I
think that
So
When I came on this committee, I
was told that we did not deal
with content.
We dealt with. Is there money in
the
House Bill two.
We deal with content in
education.
We deal with funding and this
and funding only in this. Uh so
my question to you. Is that
true?
They, UH representative
Chatfield Funding is our first
and primary focus.
We've allowed conversations and
questions as members have them,
but funding should be the basis
of our decision in this
committee, so we're gonna vote
yes or no on whether the
Funding is in house built to so
so that kind of narrows it down,
right?
It's a simple question, then. Uh
so
Second question on process.
Once we wrote
Once we get the answer is it is
the funding and House Bill two.
And we vote.
Does the wording. I know we we
oftentimes tabled the bill.
Sometimes the wording moves on
sometimes awarding stays in this
incident. Will the wording move
on to the Senate and be have a
chance to be worked over worked
on and negotiated with some of
the parties that are not happy
with the word wording?
Currently? Absolutely,
Representative. Thank you, Mr
Chairman. That's all I wanna
know. Thank you very much.
Next. We're gonna go to
represent Montoya.
Thank you, Mr Chair and
Chairman Lenti. Um, I do
appreciate this legislation. I
agree with the legislation.
Um, I think this is a good fund.
I think the purpose
Is a good purpose. Anyone who
has
Been around.
Um native schools.
Represents people who their
Children are in native schools.
Um there is a need and I
understand why there is a
separate fund.
I understand the creation of a
separate fund.
Um, but Mr Mr Chair and and
Chairman Lenti.
My concern are
Numbers.
A certain set of numbers.
Um, And that is
Um, over. I think it's almost
75% of all Children in schools
across New Mexico.
Our Navajo. I know that the
second largest school district
in the state
Central consolidated schools.
Only behind Albuquerque, Public
schools, the second largest
school district.
Outside of that school district
that doesn't include gallop.
That doesn't include
Uh, Farmington schools.
As tech schools and Bloomfield
schools where there is a large
percentage of Navajo Children.
My concern is what I heard
expressed.
Today by the speaker of the
Navajo Nation Council.
And I heard yesterday directly
from the president of the Navajo
nation is not that there's not
support.
For this bill.
The concern.
It is.
Representation.
The concern Mr Chair is
How equitable would be defined.
I see Mr Chair and I and I and I
appreciate Chairman Linta and an
attempt in the amendment.
To try to address
Equitable.
Mr Chair and and and Mr Chair.
I think that's the problem. I
think this is very close to
having an answer.
Once again. I've heard I heard
many folks from
Uh, the nomination which my
Children are of the Navajo
nation.
I heard even divided from some
of the parties because they
understand that this might be
This is a chance.
That exists today. This year
that might not exist in the
future. And I understand that is
the pressure here.
But there there is time.
And so, Mr Chair.
And chairman Plenty.
I don't think we're there yet,
And I think it's very close, and
I would hate to see
I'm gonna have to. I would have
to vote against this as it
exists, because, um
It is something that I that I
can't ignore. I can't ignore the
numbers of the Navajo nation is
not only the largest tribe in
the state of New Mexico, it's
the largest tribe in the United
States.
And and I'm afraid that that the
concerns that were expressed Mr
Chair to me.
Where that
Long experience has been
Even though they're the largest
tribe and maybe because they are
the largest tribe.
Uh, many times there.
Representation is
It is.
Really cast aside.
And so
I would suggest Mr Chair I felt
from the beginning of this
presentation today that we're
we're not quite there.
It seems like the room was
fairly divided when I'm looking
at the Navajo Nation.
Tribal council.
And the president's office.
Which has been our experience
are very seldom.
In unilateral agreement income
in in in lockstep with each
other.
Um, what I'm hearing today is
complete Agreement Exactly what
I heard from the speaker today.
Is exactly what I heard from the
president.
Yesterday, which is
We are very interested in this
legislation.
But it needs to be right.
At first
Not that we can pass it down the
road and hope that it gets
right.
So, um, I I'm not going to be
able to support this as it is.
Um, I'm and and as a matter of
fact, I might suggest that that
But we could we could table this
today.
Give a couple more days for
negotiations and maybe
There could be some sort of
consensus.
Because that's what legislation
in the past that we've had from
the tribes and pueblos and has
been
Very unified.
Today. I'm not seeing that I'm
not seeing
That there is that kind of
agreement.
And so I would hope to see that
we could get this fixed
Definitely before it gets to the
house floor.
Um, but I just don't think that
we can ignore that.
Almost 75% of all the Children
who are in tribal school who are
tribal members that are in
public schools.
Our Navajo. I just don't think
we can can ignore that.
I think that's a that really is
The one thing I just can't get
past. So I do appreciate this. I
look forward to support this
legislation.
I just cannot until I hear
Some sort of unified voice from
the tribes and the pueblos. So
thank you, Mr Chair. Thank you
were gonna go next episode
Luhan, please.
Thank you, Mr Chair.
Thank you, representative. Thank
you, Governor for being here
today in front of us and
bringing forward a really good
piece of legislation. I believe
I've been hearing about this.
You know, for years now and and
Hello, you've come together and
all the all the work that you've
you've done to get us to this
point.
And
I just find myself in a place
right now, as a decision maker
and as a someone who has
Worked with or amongst our
tribes and nations and
understanding their process and
procedures and respectfully how
we approach
The sovereignty of those of
those nations and those
Those tribes and their
Councils and how appropriate we
have to be when we go to them.
And work things through.
So I speak here in reverence and
respect to to you and all those
that have come and support this
bill and those that don't
support this bill.
And my question to you is
How are you planning to work
this out Easter chair amongst
And in the most respectful way,
because I know before us, our
leaders and I would just like to
ask that question, Mr. Chair,
Mr. Chairman, Representative.
Thank you for that question, You
know, undoubtedly that 65% of
the native Children in New
Mexico are in fact, Navajo, so
obviously
The Navajo brothers and sisters
that I spoke out in opposition.
That their Children will, in
fact be the biggest
beneficiaries naturally, right?
And so I think the effort is
done in in in that vein to also
represent
Uh, native New Mexico
altogether, right? I represent
the number of chapters in my
district, and I'm cognizant of
that. But yet the same time to
be fair to the smallest
sovereigns.
With equally similar needs and
the same amount of of of
resources as few as resources
that they do have
It's not an easy task. That's
why the amendment was proposed
in the way that it does, where
it takes out prescriptions in
the initial bill of saying.
Problems will have three
representatives of the task
force. Navajos will have three
Apaches will have to
We took that out completely
based on the discussions that we
have, and we we provided it now
to provide
In many cases, full travel
authority to determine
Task force.
And distribution.
And so there's nowhere in here
now where there is prescription
by anyone in the state, whether
it's p e d. L. E S C. This
Legislature that will determine
task Force membership.
The number of task force members
that are provided and or
distribution numbers. We
delegate that rightfully so to
the tribal leaders amongst the
23 puzzles, nations and tribes.
So that's the beauty of the
amendment. That's why I think at
this point in time, that's
likely why in the Education
Committee passed unanimously
And so the point being here is
that
We don't want to be produced
prescriptive in the legislation.
We recognize that all tribes
have have an equal share to be
able to somehow be represented
in this task force, and then
they'll figure out the
distributions themselves. That's
not for us to figure out and
that's why the memo was proposed
and accepted.
So Mr Chair that would allow for
future
Um
Interactions and decision making
amongst everybody.
Equally, Mr Chair, Mr Chairman
and representative. Absolutely.
It provides an opportunity for
tribal leaders themselves to
meet this summer to determine
again. How many seats do they
want to task Force who gets how
many seats who sits on those
seats? Once that's done, then
that task force then the
responsibility of them would
then to talk to me to talk about
The distribution formula of this
trust fund.
Okay. Thank you, Mr Chair. I
appreciate those answers. I just
feel in all honesty and from
From the depths of of where I
come from, and and and my
experience that
I feel like we're making a
determination here that
I am not comfortable with
because I There's there's more,
um, conversations amongst our
sovereign nations to have
And I want to be respectful of
that, and we're talking about
process and procedure, and I
really want to thank
Representative Chatfield because
we are the committee that or the
numbers and dollars and putting
all that together, But we also
have these comments. We are also
Um
Responsible for for holding why
we make these decisions.
And, um, Mr Chair. I just feel
like
I feel like I'm conflicted. I
want to be completely honest
with you. I want to be
completely honest with you and
with public and everybody
I know this work that you've
been doing because I tend to L.
E S C throughout the years and,
um, even before that for
Six years prior to
With my work in the Senate, Um
And I know the issues and I know
where we are and where we're
moving. And these are these are
good policies, but I also feel
and in my complete honesty that
that I feel conflicted here
because I want
I want to be completely
respectful of the process and
when we have our sovereign
nation nations working on policy
And working together that they
come together and to to
collaborative um, meaningful. Um
Commitment.
And I feel that I just want to
be completely honest with how
I'm feeling about this. And I'm
feeling conflicted, Mr Chair and
thank you for letting me speak
If you wanted to add anything,
um, representative lent to that
and
I just have to be completely
honest. Thank you. Thank you,
representative.
We'll go next to represent
Garcia Robson, Garrett, and I'll
have some questions.
Thank you, Mr Chairman, Mr
Chairman.
You know,
the
Both sides speak and I cannot
see why there is such a
division between another nation
in the in the pueblos.
You know, I wish that
These arguments were talking
about what have been settled.
Before we got to this point.
Because you know now people are
between a rock and a hard spot
represent both another nation
and I represent pueblos.
And you know that puts people in
a in a robot position, but to me
This conversation would not be
happening this way right now, Mr
Chairman.
This argument. Shipments settled
way before this.
You know, I'm not in education
at all. And what happened and
these committees? One committee
doesn't know what the committee
is doing. You know, I'm in grand
quotation, Mr Chair.
Education doesn't know what
we're doing A transportation
And vice versa. We don't know
what you're doing in education,
and you know to me.
Before we would vote on is their
funding. Was there not convict?
That was that's what we voted
on.
And you know, and I wish you
guys were taken into
consideration.
To iron this problem out before
we have to sit here and then
pick and choose who we want to
help. You know, at the end of
the damaged German, we know that
all kids need help.
That that's a that's a given in
unearthing must secure and Mr
Care
who is gonna
Created task force.
You know, there's there's
concerns on the Navajo nation
that they won't have enough
representation on this task
force. And I don't know, uh
Who makes who doesn't
Could you answer that, Mr
Chairman?
Mr Chairman and representative
in the amendment approved,
describes all of the authority
of who creates the task force to
the 23 pueblos nations and
tribes. Their leaders determine
who will be in the task force.
Good. Good. Mr Chairman and Mr
Chairman, you know, I talked to
the Navajo Nation president
yesterday or day before and he
had the same concerns.
You know who
It's gonna get what
You know, the Navajo nation is
The biggest
Reservation in the United States
and my my concern coming back to
the same thing Who was gonna is
it gonna be a fair shot for
everybody?
Where is the funding? Go for
everybody. That kind of stuff.
you know you have. I mean, 23
pueblos.
I think in Mexico and how many
how many students you have in
the 23 point, Mr Chairman.
Mr Chairman, representative. The
breakdown that I have currently
is that about 65% of students in
New Mexico or Navajo and 35% are
Pueblo and Apache.
But do your point representative
again? We relegate all of that
authority to determine
membership on the task force.
To those 23 pueblos.
The pueblos Apache nation and to
the Navajo nation. Their
leadership determines who will
sit on that task force.
Once that's determined
It's amongst themselves
determine who's going to do
that, right?
That task force of who they
determine and sits on there will
then determine the distribution
formula for this trust fund.
Not anybody else.
Thank you, Mr Chairman. Mr.
Chairman. You know what really
concerned me was
The Navajo Nation did a
resolution that they were not
included in all the
conversations. And why. Why is
that? Why would they come up
with that?
Scenario that they were not
included.
Mr Chairman.
Mr Chairman, representative. We
had a discussion with them last
week.
With the same concern.
And all I had to say was that in
each of our of our conversations
with any of the 19 pueblos any
of the patchy nations and with
the Navajo Nation we've had open
discussions and dialogue in
different settings.
And, uh,
We rock I wrongly assumed
That the Department of Education
was acting on as an agent upon
their tribe.
In in in in our interactions.
And so that being said all other
tribes at this point in time.
Support the concept. Support
that the move forward support
the amendment.
Uh, but to this point
I cannot answer.
To any other question that you
might have about.
About the wise in terms of in
terms of communications.
Thank you, Mr Chairman, Mr
Chairman, but you know, it's all
coming back. Mr. Chairman to
they just I just heard the
conversation from these people
here that they were not included
in all the conversation. Now I
can understand in my head
Why would they say they weren't
included Miss German and you're
saying that they were included
in our conversations? Maybe Mr
Chairman and representative, so
we had a tribal education
Community institute held in
Albuquerque, New Mexico,
September 26th and 27th with all
of the tribal nations in this
state represented and so
There is conclusive evidence
here that in fact, there was
communication had about about
paths forward.
But then again, I mean, I can't
comment upon how in terms of
what that when that happened and
how it gets back to the
leadership where maybe
communication as well, one last
question, Mr Minister, Eamon, I
think we have these
conversations last year, Didn't
we about this dream bill wasn't
done on last year.
Mr Chairman, representative. We
had a similar bill, but it was
it was comprised differently.
You know. Thank you, Mr Jeremy.
Mr. Chair, you know, just
concerns me.
Oh, why It's so divided.
You know to me, It's really I'm
looking at both sides of it, and
I'm not picking and choosing any
side because I do represent both
sides of it.
So I put them in a real tough
position.
And you know, I wish again
Search terms Chairman that you
guys would have had these
discussions before we sit in
this club room right now and
make decisions That's gonna hurt
somebody or help somebody
without being said Thank you,
Mitchell. Thank you. Thank you
very much for representing
Garcia. Next, we're gonna go to
represent Garrett, ranking
member are been strong and
Allison
Garrett, please. Thank you, Mr
Chair. I strongly, um, support
this bill, and I am grateful to
the chairman for coming to the
house education twice. This is
actually the fourth time I've
heard the bill and I feel like
in good faith. You've made
changes. I want to remind
everybody that having a
representative from every tribe
and Pueblo is kind of like the
U. S. Senate.
Whether we're Rhode Island or
work, California we have two
senators. I feel that's the, um,
the task force that's going to
decide the representation
the representation and the
ultimate dispersement has to if
you read on Page seven, has to
consider student count elements
for the dispersement. So thank
you for your willingness to work
with everybody.
Uh um, All of our
Negotiations and discussions as
every single person on this
committee.
Ah knows don't always go
perfectly, but we in good faith,
try to negotiate and come to
solutions. And just a final
word. I lived in East Asia for
eight years, the Chinese Koreans
and Japanese internally and
externally have been going
through things for 4000 years,
So I hope that this gets worked
out more quickly. Thank you, Mr
Chair. Thank you. Ranking
member. Armstrong, please.
Thank you, Mr Chairman. Thank
you for your comments. It's it's
always interesting. Um
To hear.
That you know, we're here to
make decisions on the budget
only.
But then when we allow public
comment
And we hear all we hear
different things. It's hard not
to get into the guts of the
bill.
So
You know, it's making me get
into the guts of the bill. So,
Mr Chairman, I'm curious as to
If you if you know, Mr Chairman
and representative, why is the
Navajo Nation
Against this bill. The way it's
written and let me just
Preface that a little bit with
I'm looking at the at the way it
was just the disbursement
formula Task Force the way it
was. And now the way it is, and
and I'm seeing at the amended
version it says it makes in. Um
it makes l E s c responsible for
determining the T E T F task
force membership.
So yeah.
Do the
Does that? Do the tribes get to
decide Or does the L. E s C get
to to decide?
Mr Chairman and representative,
so from the original bill, and
then in regards to the reason
why we went to an amendment is
because we were not willing to
provide a substantial number of
more seats on the task force to
the Navajo nation.
And so the compromise was. Let's
create a method to which were
not prescribing in legislation.
Number of seats.
For a task force.
And so at that point in time we
developed this kind of method in
regards to how can we then
provide
Our tribes.
The full autonomy to determine
membership.
The number of members they would
have in a task force. And then
once that's determined then
district, then disbursement
formulas and how that's how
that's determined the L. E S. C
as it's drafted in this piece of
legislation, they don't have
oversight over this process. The
L. E S C director
Has, um
Allowed herself to be a
facilitator, neutral
facilitator, and that was done
because it's not p E D. That's
more political. The TSC director
was hired by both the House and
the Senate, both both Senate
Republican and Democrat members
back when she was hired about
three years ago. And so we felt
her to be the most in tune in
touch, unbiased individual that
it could help facilitate.
Convening this, these these
tribal leaders together and then
then have to talk about it about
who and how many seats each
tribe will get. Thank you, Mr
Chairman, and thank you,
representative for that. That
clearing that up for me and so I
kind of see it as
Let's look at the Legislature.
You know the majority.
Has control.
And the minority.
Doesn't
And so when you get if there
were safe there was
independence. They may be a
smaller, even smaller and that
and that pool
So, Mr Chairman.
And and representative
Uh, I'm from Magdalena, New
Mexico. My friends and neighbors
are on the Alamo Navajo
Reservation.
Um so I'm torn.
Like almost everyone here has
said Mr Chairman and
representative. It puts us in a
tough position.
Um
But ultimately the Alamo Navajos
are my friends and neighbors.
So, um
Just needed you to know that.
Thank you, Mr Chairman. Thank
you. Thank you. Member.
Armstrong, seven. Allison,
please.
Thank you, Mr Chair.
I'd like to make a
clarification.
I got the proposed amendment.
At 830 last night when we were
at dinner
I was really surprised when I
read through the email that it
had my name at the bottom.
When I had no participation in
dressing up.
The amendment. Uh, the reason
why
I went to the lfc was because
I saw where the amendment struck
everything, almost everything
except the title from the first
page.
It struck everything from page
two through Page eight.
It struck everything. So the
only thing that remained was
basically the description of
what the bills intent was to
build a trust fund.
It had no clarification as to
what to be done after the crust.
One was built.
There was no detail.
Who was supposed to do what
There was no description as to
Going past building the task
force.
There was absolutely no detail.
That is why I consulted the, uh
HFC staff because I wanted to go
with something that could be
carried something that could
produce results. The
Amendment that I was given.
Was not going to produce
results. All it was gonna do was
built a task.
Built a trust fund.
So after we build the trust fund
Who does what
With with the money.
It was not in detail.
It was a dead end.
That is why I consulted. Like I
said.
Uh, the analysts from the KFC,
and that's how I determined that
I would not run with that.
Um
The amendment.
I
In dealing with setting up
members for the task force.
Sometimes.
Having the higher number has its
disadvantages.
Today as we're going through the
final 30 days of the session.
We get a lot of good ideas.
From my colleagues across the
aisle.
I support them. That's why I get
ridiculed for voting the way I
do sometimes.
Because I agree with the idea
that they present it is good.
But what happens?
The majority defeats it.
That's the disadvantage of
having more members on a task
force in my mind.
That it could work to their
disadvantage.
We talked about unity.
When we talk unity. We're
talking about everybody having
an equal voice.
That's why in my morning
presentation this morning I
spoke about the five fingered
being
We are all five fingers being
We should not criticize one
another.
Because we're Democrats and
Republicans.
We are all human.
We are all five fingered beings.
Let us compromise.
Cooperate and collaborate.
I am for building discussed fun.
Let's do it together.
Thank you, Mr Chair.
Thank you, Mr Presenter.
Thank you very much.
Representative Allyson. Um, any
Represent Montoya for a second
time. Please be brief. Please
have a question. Thank you, Mr
Chair.
Um
Once again as I've been reading
the amendment versus the way the
bill was initially written.
Um, I believe that you are
meaning, um, chairman to make
this better, but I think it made
it worse.
Uh before
The Navajo Nation had three
Of eight positions.
On the task force. But now if
we're seeing all 23 nations
Tribes or pueblos will have a
voice.
It now seems that the Navajo
nation will have one.
Purse. One representation of 23.
It actually seems as it it got
worse.
So please get to a question. So
I guess Mr
Chair.
And Chairman Linta.
Is there Some proposal to get
more buy in between now and the
time this gets to the House
floor?
Mr Chairman and representative.
Where you talked about in the
amendment.
We are looking at utilizing
tribal core values that tribal
sovereignty to allow tribes to
come together.
To talk about what
representative Allyson talks
about in terms of the five
finger people where there are no
No, no one is better than the
other. And that's the trust that
I have that I think Oz tribal
members we all have in the
places that we come from, and
the communities that are all
tribes in this state.
And so from now until it comes
to the House floor.
To the point. Mr Chairman. I'll
try to make this brief to the
point that that represent.
Alison talked about in the
amendment that he was
He was forced to to bring to
this committee.
It. You know, he you know I'm
I'm I'm I'm wide open. We were
going to talk about this. But
then at the end of the day, you
know it wasn't okay. I mean, you
did your due diligence, as
should anybody else does. So I
think the opportunity is always
going to be there.
But obviously we have to make a
point that no nation is above
the other, especially when it
comes to tribes.
Thank you very much. Thank you,
Representing Montoya. Next,
we're going to go to represent
Brown, please. Thank you. Mr
Chairman. I actually don't have
a question, but I think it would
be very helpful if we had a
committee sub on this bill.
So we can kind of keep straight
exactly where we are at this
point.
Thank you. Thank you Represent
Brown.
Um
Okay, uh,
A few brief questions first, uh,
represent lengthy and just sort
of confirming There's $50
million currently in the budget
for this appropriation, correct
or for this item, Mr. Chairman.
Yes, sir. Okay.
Ah, and there are not any other
attempts that we know of Mr
Chair that are
Guiding how that would be set
up. Is that right? Mr. Chairman?
Yes, sir. Okay, And so
Um, the You know, this is an
imperfect process. I think we
acknowledge particularly in a 30
day, sort of sprint.
That to do. Much of the detailed
work is difficult.
Um, I asked
But one about the money because
it's important is that well, Let
me ask this Is that the first
time that there's been this
large of amount of funding
dedicated for this person
purpose in HB two after it's
crossed over from the house, Mr
Chairman, yes. Ever in the
state?
Great. So, Mr. Uh, I think
members we've you know,
imperfect process short
timeline.
Difficult to do some of these
things.
Those are all challenges, and
it's fair, on the other hand for
the very first time after years
and years of work, there's $50
million that will go directly to
table education departments.
that is, you know, the
Legislature has finally and I
think we can be proud of the
budget Committee for setting
that aside.
Those details to come are going
to have to come. And so I think
Um, given the clear
Example of the amendment that
we've brought to house
education. I think what I see is
the clear willingness to
continue to work.
We're gonna go ahead and try to
bring this to a vote today,
Understanding? Uh,
representative NT. It sounds
like you are fully committed to
continuing to work with
stakeholders on implementation.
Is that fair to say, Mr Chairman
100%.
Great and I we heard a number of
different speakers. I want to
again emphasize Thank everyone
for being here today. We're
closer than ever. We've
dedicated resources, but
It. We do have to have some
structure for those resources
less than be up entirely to
someone like the Public
Education Department.
Uh, too, because if we're unable
to agree, and the money stays in
Then it may be up to, uh than
our ability to sort of shape
that outcome for which we have
more ability in this process
could disappear.
And in the worst case scenario,
the money if there's no guidance
for it.
There could be, um, less impetus
to keep that in the final
budget. So for all those
reasons, I think understanding
there is a need to move forward.
Thank you very much again,
thanks to everybody for taking
their time.
Can we go ahead and call the
roll, please?
Sure.
Oh,
Okay?
Uh, we'll vote on that motion
first.
Vote of Yes tables, The bill a
vote of no, and we're back on
the bill.
No to table.
No.
Garcia.
Representative Garrett No.
Representative Herndon. No.
Pass.
It will go back to our civil
home, Please. Representative
Luhan.
No explain.
Okay, well, we'll save the those
for for the final vote. Thank
you all. Now, let's we'll go to
a vote on
Well, um
Let's have a motion to pass
house Bill 134 as amended twice
as twice amended
Mr Chairing. Move that the
committee
Do pass on house Bill 134 is
twice amended. Second, it's been
moved and seconded. Can we
please go to the vote?
Yes.
Yes.
Yes.
Yes. For representative Allyson.
Yes, Explain.
Right, and we have three to
explain their vote. And if
there's more, please catch me,
I'm gonna start with represented
Chatfield Garcia then represent
Wuhan. Chatfield, please. Thank
you, Mr Chair.
Mr Chair. I I supported this
strongly and education and I had
to see the division that came
back here and the only reason I
voted for the tabling is, you
know, bring it back up. Let
everybody work out their deal,
But I strongly believe that this
committee should only look at
whether the numbers in the
budget I mean that we've kind of
got drug into working on the
structure of the bill. When
really, what we should be
looking at is
Whether it's it's the money is
in the budget or not. I will
tell you that the how that on
Capitol Hill Washington D. C.
The houses my population, the
Senate is by state. It looks to
me like the structure of this
board, uh, is by
By tried
Each tribe having the same
representation and not by
population, So that's I mean, I
think that's what you guys are
working on. And and, uh, just
look quick. Look at the numbers.
The spin off of this is not
going to be a lot for for that
Many tribes that huge area it's
not a lot, so I expect to see
you coming back one a little
more money in there.
To really do the job that you
guys expect to do. We need more
money.
But before we get more money
Gotta send. Let them fight at
home. Thank you, Mr Jeff. Thank
you represented Chatfield
represent Garcia, please. Thank
you, Mr Chairman.
You know I've ordered yes. My
concerns are been in
appropriation for eight years
now, and we have never voted on
the structure of the bill We
have always voted on the money
there. There's the money. Not
there.
The middle region of ordered.
Yes, Mr Germany, because I care
about her kids.
You know, we cannot stop process
over deliberation over what? We
don't even have an idea of what
we're doing here.
I really don't and you know,
we're forced to do a corner.
Unfortunately, about big corner
of between a rock and a hard
spot.
Guy, Reverend. These people
represent these people.
You know, and
We should know legislators
should ever be put in a position
to have to choose between one
side or the other, especially on
education. You know, Mr
Chairman? I like I said, I voted
yes, on it because I did not
want to sit our kids back
because at the end of the day
Mr Chairman Linta.
I hope you guys fix this before
it goes on the floor because if
it's not fixed, then we're gonna
have another problem because
there will be a minute on the
floor.
And you know, because it's not
right for
One or the other to not support
our kids. Thank you, Mr
Chairman. Thank you Represent
Garcia.
Thank you, Mr Chair. Um
Again.
I would agree with remarks just
made by representing Chatfield
and Garcia. But
From my position.
It's It's from a heartfelt
please. I want you to come
together and work on this. This
is what we always do.
This is what we always hear.
This is what we always respect
and I always come from a place
of respect, especially working
with our sovereign nations. When
there's a disconnect like this,
Mr Chair. I don't think it
belongs here with us making
these decisions, especially in
appropriations, as mentioned.
So my challenge to you, Mr Chair
and two is to go back and work
this out.
Because
We are serious about what is
going on, and we're serious
about
Did.
Miss connections and and the
detrimental effects of our
education system that has been
going on far too long for all of
our native Children.
So this is my challenge to you
Don't
Don't put this before us like
this again because
This is the responsibility of
all of our sovereign's to come
together and work together on
especially on this issue.
And I'm passionate about this
because I know how desperate we
are to fix things. And I know
that that is where you're coming
from and where we we
We want to help, but this didn't
belong here. Mr Chair and
We want to do everything we can
to to support and help and
that's why I voted. Yes, and
I'll continue to vote. Yes to
help our
Our kids and our education
system.
Please. This. This should have
brought been brought to our
attention before we convened
today. Thank you. Thank you very
much, Uh, present pedigree. Did
you want to explain your vote?
Ah!
Please do not do that again. I'm
sorry. I'm sorry.
Thank you, Chairman.
Understand the intent.
I've heard some comments on
explaining their bills.
I want to be crystal clear.
Just because we've always done
something a certain way doesn't
make it right.
I'm really good at concrete.
Probably one of the best in the
400 mile mile radius of wherever
I'm at.
By teaching people.
How do you use concrete
correctly?
And I get often.
Response from people. Well, I've
never done it this way. I've
never had this problem. Well,
you've been lucky for
40 years.
Because this is what concrete
does.
I say that example. But just
because this committee has never
Pissed. Oric Lee talked about
the content of the bill.
Mr Chairman, Mr Chairman.
Um
It doesn't make it right.
Really to build. We have a two
committee process for a reason.
The only reason I'm going to
look at the money is whether
it's here or there.
Okay, That's why am I here?
Oh, it's there. You know what
Committee approval. Let's go.
No.
We need to talk about the
content. We need to give the
ability to people that are
presenting a bill when it when
there is some opposition.
Public comment or from
One sign of the other.
To correct it before it actually
gets to the bill. That's the
reason why we have to bill
process right. We go through two
committees on purpose.
And so with that
I will say one of the statements
chairman that we heard tonight
was we want to give our schools
in this case the travel schools
to be able to make their own
decisions.
Praise God that we are saying
that because we've been saying
that in rural America rural New
Mexico
On the long
In our P E. D.
Doesn't listen to us. Thank you.
Thank you very much. Okay. Thank
you very much. We appreciate the
conversation again. I want to
say thank you to all who
attended for this item today.
Okay, We're gonna go quickly.
We're going to have to roll a
number of these items I would
like to try to get through
253 Is there an amendment
authorship?
Here. I'm sorry. This is it's
gonna be another long
conversation.
I apologize. Chairman. I've
profusely apologize, Mr Torres,
Miss car as well.
Uh, I think we're going to have
to take this up on Monday.
Uh and I apologize.
Thanks.
Okay, members. We have the we're
gonna roll that to Monday.
I was filled to 53. I've been
informed by the vice chair. We
can There's agreement to table
house Bill 120.
House Bill 210 and House Bill
174 can have a motion to table
Those bills. So moved. Okay.
It's been moved at table House
Bill 120 House Bill 210 and
House Bill 170 for there. Any
opposition to that motion,
saying then tabled.
Okay. Um, well, let's take on
house Bill 195.
Yeah.
Okay. Great to see you, Miss
Russell. Thanks for being here.
We're going to go straight to
House bill.
To 10 or Excuse me, 195. Thank
you, Mr Chair. I believe that
there is or is there an
amendment being No amendment for
this wonderful man. Thank you,
Mr Chair. We are here this
evening with me. Marquita
Russell, the CEO of the New
Mexico Finance Authority, and
Daniel were with, um
Advisor to the governor on
housing issues. Um House Bill
195.
First off there is funding in
the budget.
Okay. Funding in the budget. Um,
second, um, that their house
Bill 195 does two things. It
makes adjustments to the
Original Opportunity Enterprise
Fund, based on suggestions that
have come back from the
Opportunity Enterprise Review
board. Those policy
recommendations have been
through the New Mexico Finance
Authority Oversight Committee as
well. And so those are
encapsulated in the belt. The
second part of the bill is
setting
Up a housing development fund.
Which will support housing
development infrastructure
across the state. It adds two
additional members to the review
board with expertise in housing.
um and adds the director of the
mortgage finance authority as
well.
Um, the funds will be
segregated. Um, And with that,
Mr Chair, I think we would stand
for questions. Great. Thank you
very much. Is there anybody who
wishes to speak and opposition?
Anybody who wishes to speak in
support.
Kate, Please come on up. Please
be brief. But thanks for
sticking with us tonight.
Mr Chairman, members of the
committee. My name is Dan Weeks.
I represent Burn Leo County,
Bernalillo County.
Albuquerque City Housing
Coalition. So this is an
excellent bill. It's an
innovative way to get some
additional funding for housing.
A couple of things I'd like to
suggest is that
Yeah. Housing development
partner definition include
public entities.
We have a lot of problems
getting infrastructure from the
public entities in many areas of
the state.
Cities and counties often can't
afford to do the infrastructure.
So to the extent that this would
help that I think it moved a lot
of programs for
No, not enough money, but it's a
lot. Thank you very much.
Mr Chairman, Randy trainer with
the New Mexico home builders
also was appointed to the
governor's Housing Investment
council that represents Dixon
was also on and, um, I'm I'm
excited that we're doing this.
I've been talking about housing
for years, and you know it got
to the point where I quit
talking about it.
Because nobody seemed to care.
And so I don't care why we're
talking about it now. I'm just
glad we're talking about it. And
so, um, two points I just want
to make today Is that the
investment counsel was had a
good representation of housing
All all spectrums of housing and
two items that we had termine
from the very start.
We're problems.
And one was or housing problem
is simply a production problem.
We're not producing enough
housing across the board.
Period.
And to, um
Local governments are the
gatekeepers to housing that
control the flow of housing in
our state.
And that the process is that the
industry has to go through to
provide housing are just
antiquated.
And they add significant cost to
a home that nobody gets any
benefit from you. Don't get a
bigger house. You don't get
better countertops, better
appliances. You just get a
bigger mortgage, and I would
just like to encourage the
Legislature to encourage our
local governments to take a look
in the mirror.
And if they're really concerned
about addressing housing,
there's a lot of things they can
do to lower the cost of housing
by simply doing things more
efficiently. Thank you very
much. Thank you very much.
Mr Chair members of the
committee. My name is Chelsea,
Canada, and I'm, the director of
public policy at the New Mexico
Chamber of Commerce. The state
chamber has been a strong
supporter partner and advocate
for the creation of the
Opportunity Enterprise Fund
based on successful work in
other states. We've been excited
to hear the demand for the fund
and continued investment into
the fund from the Legislature
support continued investments in
expanding the use of the fund to
help with housing development.
Which is crucial for workforce
development.
Voters agree. In fact, at our
annual business day in Santa Fe
this week, we unveiled our
annual Voter Pulse survey when
voters were asked which two
priorities they believe should
be the highest when allocating
budget surplus funds. The third
most popular choice was
Prioritize housing affordability
after crime and education. Thank
you. Thank you very much. Okay,
we have
Three folks online. We're gonna
go briefly first, David
Saavedra.
David for one minute.
Thank you, Mr Chairman and
members of the committee. My
name is David Saavedra and I
serve as the director of affairs
and as a registered lobbyist for
the New Mexico Association of
Realtors organization proudly
represents the 1000 dedicated
realtors spread across the state
operating in all of New Mexico's
legislative districts. Today, we
stand firmly in support of House
Bill 195 and extend our
gratitude to the sponsors for
bringing forth this crucial
piece of legislation. We're all
acutely aware of the
availability and affordability
of housing have become pressing
issues.
Both nationally and within New
Mexico.
We commend the proactive
measures and provisions outlined
in House Bill 195, which
promised to help increase New
Mexico's housing inventory.
Thank you. Thank you.
Okay, Now we're gonna go to
DiVall Westfall for one minute.
Good evening Chairman Committee
members on
chamber comment. Pleased to be
here and support the House Bill
195 this bill as thinking for
it's all about partnering with
this mindset sector to create
and planned, affordable and
workforce housing. It's about
providing a mechanism to make
loans about 40 years development
partners.
It's not beating up the
oversight board and expanding
that works powers to include the
down when he partner project
ability and assistance. We need
more housing and encouraging
well, that is partnerships with
the private sector to get it is
just a win. Win the urgency
support going 95. Thank you.
Thank you very much. We're gonna
conclude with build New Mexico.
Please.
Go ahead.
Yes, Miles Miles Conway and the
executive officer for the
Northern New Mexico Builders
Association representing Los
Alamos, Rio Arriba tiles. Colfax
more of San Miguel Santa Fe
counties. We also in strong
support of this We are in the
Federation of the National
Association of Home Builders,
which has provided a lot of data
which we've shared with
committee members showing the
outrageous gap in what a home
costs to construct versus what a
median income family can afford
any of Mexico's county so
This is a great and new idea to
create a nimble fund to unleash
the capacity for the private
sector development community to
contribute and produce housing
for New Mexico's workforce or
emitting middle missing middle.
those who cannot qualify for
affordable housing.
But just don't make enough to
afford a median cost home. So
thank you. We stand in strong
support. Thank you. The members
of the committee and the
sponsors for the hard work they
have done to bring this bill
forward. Excellent. Thank you.
Okay, that brings us to the end
of paella comment. Is there a
motion
Oh, sorry. Seven. Luhan. Thank
you, Representative Chatfield.
Several home, please.
Thank you, Mr Chair. Um, So as
I'm looking at the F I, R, um
information. I just have some
questions on
The funding. Um, Mr Chair? Um
So can I get the real numbers of
what we've secured in the house
for this bill? Mr. Chair? Thank
you, Mr Chair. Thank you,
representative.
There is $175 million going to
this, Um
Going to an M F a 100 million
for the commercial component,
which has been up and running
for two years, with past
evidence from this last year,
and then 75 million going to the
Housing Development revolving
fund.
Thank you, Mr Chair. So when you
say commercial what and as I'm
reading through this, and how
does that How does that
applicable to affordable
housing, Mr Chair?
Thank you, Mr Chair. Thank you,
Representative. The Opportunity
Enterprise Fund currently
applies for commercial
development. And so that's the
existing component of the
Opportunity Enterprise Fund. We
are adding to it a housing
development revolving fund as
well. So now there will be two
entities one commercial and one
housing. So Mr Chair of the
division would be 100 million to
the commercial and in 75 to the
housing
Which would include the 75
million would include the
affordable component. Is that
correct, Mr Chair?
Thank you, Mr Chair. Thank you,
Representative. Um, the 75
million will go towards
accessible workforce, housing
development. And this is
separate money from what is
going to M F a for affordable
housing.
Thank you, Mr. I'm trying to
make sense of that. Because as
I'm waiting for the F I r r.
It's really kind of focusing on
affordable housing. So what
percentage will go to affordable
housing when you're talking
about these? These these
separations of these dollars? Mr
Chair?
Thank you, Mr Chair rep. Luhan,
Um, in this case, the
legislation defines workforce
housing as the priority. Um, so
there's no differentiation
within the money it always for
the same purpose. The workforce
housing is defined in the
legislation is housing that
served below market rate housing
that serves people who make too
much to qualify for existing
affordable housing programs but
below the entry level market
rate housing so really focusing
on a gap.
Uh, in in the housing market,
and I would point out that this
these funds work very
differently than the typical
subsidy funds that you would see
through the New Mexico Mortgage
Finance Authority and the
Housing Trust fund where these
are short term funds that are
recycled relatively quickly. Um,
rather than necessarily being
vested in a project for often 30
or 40 years.
Thank you, Mr Chair. I
appreciate I appreciate that.
Okay? And I do. There is a huge
gap and there's a huge gap Put.
What are your What are your
measures going to be to
determine?
What is affordable for those
Mid income.
Families, Mr Chair.
Mr Chairman, representative that
will be determined pursuant to
rule. So this piece of
legislation directs the
opportunity. Uh, Enterprise
Review board. It's got a new
name under the statute to
develop rules to divine those
things that you're talking
about, so it'll go through
public promulgation process.
Thank you. Mr. I appreciate that
answer as well. I'm also seeing
here Mr Chair in the for the
current version of the General
Appropriation Asset Act also
contains 44.5 million transfer
to an M F A to carry provisions
to affordable Housing Act.
To acquire, build and
rehabilitate affordable housing
for people statewide, including
those with behavioral health
needs and victims of domestic
violence. Can you explain that
Mr Chair?
Again in
Thank you, Mr Chairman. I
believe that there's a small
error in House Bill two and that
the money is intended to go to
the mortgage Finance Authority
for affordable housing, not to N
M F A. So there's our names are
so similar. There's just there's
a word missing in that
appropriation. The $44.5 million
is intended to go to the FAA,
Thank you, Mr Chairman. I
believe that there's a small
error in House Bill two and that
the money is intended to go to
the mortgage Finance Authority
for affordable housing, Not to N
M F A. So there's our names are
so similar. There's just there's
a word missing in that
appropriation. The $44.5 million
is intended to go to M F a. Not
an M F A o Mr Chair, but the
stuff that we This is a mistake
in this, er, Is that what you're
saying? Mr. Chair? Mr Chairman?
It's a mistaken house Bill two
under the current. It's just got
a technical
That's needed.
Thank you, Mr Chair. Um
Makes me want to dig a little
bit deeper, Mr Chair when we're
having these mistakes, um
So okay.
Let me I'm sorry Mr Chair were
due to the last conversation.
I'm a little heated, but, um
Okay. I'm just I'm just reading
throughout this f I r all the
consistencies with affordable
housing house shows through the
rules. Mr. Chair. Are you going
to determine those where those
sites are going to be throughout
this day? I mean, it's $75
million in a lot of money for
these projects if I'm not
mistaken, Mr Chair, Mr Chairman,
The eligible uses of the new
housing fund are twofold. One is
the workforce housing, which
predominantly will be the
Defined by rule all the elements
that we talked about The other
is infrastructure to support
affordable housing so that it is
not contemplated in this rule at
all, or in this law that we
would do vertical construction
of housing for affordable
housing purposes that happens by
the mortgage Finance Authority.
Mortgage finance Authority does
not do infrastructure, however.
So this allows for
infrastructure for affordable
housing purposes, and there is
no death. There's no direction
in this law to say how much goes
for the infrastructure for
affordable housing versus
workforce. We anticipated to be
primarily workforce housing, but
obviously we don't know yet. I
appreciate that. Thank you.
These are the things you know
This is what I'm trying to
decipher. And we're creating
something new, and I know that
we've had some discussions about
the enterprise.
Fund as well and
And getting that started in an
honest way. And what would that
fund actually does? And now
we're changing things up? I
think we need to
Um
I need to understand a little
bit more with this because there
are
There is other legislation being
proposed for.
Big amounts of money to and I've
been asking about a
comprehensive analysis of how
this is all coming together and
where we're gonna be. We're
gonna be focused. Are we going
to do rules and it would be
started if we're going to use
these funds and more rule? Um,
places just like we did with the
capital. Um
P E E D Capital Outlay where we
have focused in their rules that
have decided that
Funding for workforce housing is
is primarily focused on rural
communities.
Is that when that would be
decided, Mr Chair
Mr Chairman, I suspect that that
will be handled by policy of the
Opportunity Review board and
would largely be driven by how
much money is available and what
kinds of projects Mortgage
finance authority needs.
Support assisting. Yeah, and I
just want to be very supportive
because of the needs and and and
I always am in a in a place
where I'm speaking from my
constituency here in Santa Fe.
Where we have some of the most.
you know, need, even though
we're not technically the rule
communities, but we are the
workforce. Um, areas and we
don't have our workforce
currently living here and so I
want to make sure that we're
going to be, um
Contemplating what that means,
And I appreciate that. We're
focused on that. That mid level,
um income and I just have some
concerns and I wanted to be
Um, the forthcoming about that.
Thank you, Mr Chair. I
appreciate the time thank you
very much. Representative Luhan.
Next we're gonna go to represent
Garcia, please. Thank you, Mr
Chairman. Thank you, Mr. Make
sure these loans just for
developers.
Yes, it says I It says it right
here to provide housing
development loans, and that's
pretty self explanatory, but
that the only people who can
apply for these loans
Mr Chairman. Yes, it would be
loans to for profit or not for
profit housing developers.
And thank you for that, Mr
Chair. In other words, an
individual cannot apply for
housing through this right?
Mr Chairman, That's correct.
Thank you. That's all I have is.
You want to clarify? Thank you
for coming.
Thank you very much for some,
Garcia Garrett for the motion.
Mr Chairman, I move that do pass
on house Bill 195.
There's a motion their second
Okay, It's been seconded. Is
there any opposition to adopting
that motion?
Okay. Please show represent
Pettigrew and opposition.
I'd like to explain that teacher
okay, uh, explain that and we're
gonna conclude after this
pedigree.
Mr Chairman, representative.
I look forward to having this
conversation on the floor.
There's a couple of pieces
Today that
We're talking about number one.
The reliability of department
room making is questionable
right now. I think we proved
that on House Bill two
yesterday the other day with
respect to 180 days, verse 10 8
versus number of hours.
Um The other thing is that
Um
Um, as we go into this
I'm clicking off in my head. How
many different departments
Have funny Nick capability for
infrastructure for low moderate
medium income homes.
And why we need another one.
Help out with that.
And so I look forward to this
good debate. How why? And how?
Chairman
We can't use low guard and Lita
and while we can, because I do
it all day long in my neck of
the woods.
Thank you.
I'm looking forward to it. Thank
you. Thank you Represent
category. Thank you. Okay,
members that's going to conclude
us for tonight's staff. Uh,
there's the 100 Bill party.
And what's that?
Well, yeah.
Yeah.
No, You're fine. Okay with that
we're adjourned.
