Hey, we're gonna try to okay.
Excellent were so the
Our microphones are working.
We're going to stick with that.
Um, I believe that our Webcast
may still not be working. I
wanna remind everyone though,
that our zoom broadcast is
working. Zoom is also recorded
and zoom is also how folks can
participate by a public comments
should they so choose.
And in order to sort of keep us
on track and keep us moving.
We're going to go back and we're
going to get started again. Uh,
we again note that our zoom we
would ask people to tune in via
zoom to watch remotely into
participate remotely, should
they so choose.
Thanks for bearing with us,
Thanks to our staff again. We're
going to go to representative
Garcia.
Please.
Thank you, Mr Chairman. Thank
your honor for the presentation.
Today You are in my district and
I appreciate what you're doing
for us, and you know, your honor
and the question of you and I'm
going to take this opportunity.
Since all so many of your honors
are in here today are really
look at doing a veteran's court.
You know, we have over 100,000
veterans standing Mexico.
And you know, a lot of veterans
need help other than to get put
in jail for things that happened
during the war time. And you
know, I'm asking, Never judging
here to really look at that. And
if you need any help with that
would be more than that to try
and help.
Thank you, Chairman and
representative Garcia. Thank you
very much for that. But I will
tell you is I've had an
opportunity to speak with our
program Director for the
treatment courts, and there is
an interest in pursuing
expanding the treatment courts
into the area of veterans. One
of the things we have to do is
make sure that, um
There is a sufficient need for
it, and we would be happy to sit
down with you and discuss it
further. So thank you for the
question.
Mr Chairman and your honor.
Thanks for that. And you know, I
appreciate all your honors of
are here today because, you
know, I know you have a tough
job and you have budgets to
worry about, But you know better
than to really important.
They're important to me, and I'm
gonna keep on pushing that
button as much as they possibly
can. As long as I'm here. Thank
you, Mr Chairman. Thank you.
Thank you very much. Represent
Garcia. Thank you, Chief Judge.
Okay, uh, members that does it
for our questions will go to
Vice chair Dixon for the motion.
Thank you, Mr Chair. Um, I would
at this time move the UFC
recommendation, which is the
same as the executive
Okay. It's been moved by Vice
Chair Dixon, second by Rep. Sam
Garcia and representing vodka.
Is there any opposition to
adopting that motion, saying
none. Thank you very much. Thank
you, Judge.
Okay, We're gonna now ask the
fourth judicial district to come
up.
Judge J. Goes
Mr. Please go ahead and I think
our Webcast is back up now as
well. So we are firing on all
cylinders. Mr Chairman, members
of the committee. We will now be
discussing the fourth District
Court. I'm joined today by the
honorable Chief Judge Flora
Gallegos, the business unit for
the agency's 234 behind tab too.
The LFC and executive
recommendations both fully fund
the agency's slight increase in
personnel. The increase in
contracts to cover the increased
costs for drug and behavior,
health boards and the slight
increases in the other category.
Analysts reached consensus on
all performance measures and
targets and the executive fully
funded the agency's expansion
request for two security
bailiffs. The LFC recommendation
does not
I'm not turning that over to
Mario, Mr Chair Committee
members as Austin said only
different theories to new FTS
equaling 98.2.
$1000 for the fourth Judicial
District Court that was
requested and recommended by the
executive for Security in the
courthouses and recommended by
the LFC, So I will pass it on to
the Chief judge. Thank you so
much.
Thank you. Good afternoon. Chair
and members. My name is Florida
goes, I am the chief judge for
the fourth judicial district
that encompasses more of
Guadalupe and San Miguel
counties with me is our CEO
Vidal Martinez. I am asking
today that you all approved the
recommendation. Security is very
important around the state to
all of our courts.
Our San Miguel and more of a
magistrate. Courts have no
security personnel right now.
Um, we have equipment and
personnel to man it and we
believe it's very important for
all of our employees to feel
safe going to work and being at
work. Um are other requests do
encompass. Uh
Find it, uh, financing the new
behavioral, health or mental
Health Court and N B h. I is
located in Las Vegas, so
creating a behavioral health
corps was very important to us
to be able to to
Provide both treatment and
services to this population.
and, um, that request would
allow us to go from those, uh,
services being covered by grant
funding and actually, into our
budget. Um
Yeah, And so well, I myself and
Mr Martinez stand for any
questions. Thank you very much.
Thank you, Mr Martinez also be
being here. Thank you, Chief
Judge. Are there any questions
from the committee?
Brief. I have a quick Oh, madam
Chief judge in terms of being
able to hire for the positions,
One of the things that we've
heard is that it's challenging
to have like security personnel
in more rural areas.
Ah, would these would you
contract with local law
enforcement or how do you
anticipate in? How do you
propose filling the positions?
We believe we can actually
higher for both of those
positions because they're in
more to and Samuel. We've gone
from hiring bailiffs to hiring
security officers, so they're
able to actually be trained to
do more than just security.
Um, which also allows us to be
able to use them to assist with
the clerks with monitoring or
other things within the court,
which I think is a cost savings
to the court. Thank thank you
very much.
Okay. I don't know that there
are any other questions. I
think, uh, we'll go ahead and
ask for the executive
recommendations.
Thank you, Mr Chair. I would
move the executive
recommendation.
Okay. It's been moved by Vice
Chair Dixon, second by
representative Garrett. Is there
any opposition to that motion?
Saying none. Thank you very
much.
Okay?
Now ask for the second judicial
district.
Judge Ward When we get to you
please feel free to introduce
members of your team.
Mr Chair Committee members. We
are now in the second Judicial
District Court covering
Bernalillo County Business Unit
232.
And the revenue. The executive
recommendation is higher by the
LFC by $1.4 Million. The
executive fully funded the
agency's requested base increase
and their expansions.
While the LFC funds five of the
six requested expansions and a
portion of the base requested
increase.
We reached consensus on
performance measures and like I
said the executive backs the
expansions as they were
requested as a whole.
Causing for the $1.4 million
difference.
Mr Davidson will now add what?
Anything he needs to thank you.
Mr Chairman of the committee
don't have anything to add right
now. Turn it over to the chief
judge.
Thank you.
Mr Chairman, members of this
honorable committee. My name is
Marie Ward.
And I'm honored to be the chief
judge of the second Judicial
District Court, located in
Albuquerque, Burn Leo County
Here with me today is Catina
Watson, our CEO Molina, our CFO
and Dasha Jura, our financial
supervisor.
I would like to take a moment to
express my appreciation for the
hard work of our analysts. Mario
and Austin. Um, and the
cooperative efforts that, um
they're always invested in
looking at the budget of the
second.
You're asking today, This
committee adopts the executive
recommendations. The executive
recommends fully funding all of
the general fund request, with
the exception of some additional
funding.
That is needed for the
foreclosure settlement program.
Which I will address, Um in just
a few moments.
Um, I do want to note something
specific about that foreclosure
settlement program. While the
funding for that program is
significant, um, I just want to
remind this honorable body that
it is a statewide program that
the second judicial district
serves.
And I'll talk about more about
where we've expanded to That's
far.
As most of you know, I represent
the largest district court in
the state. We have 30 judges,
369 employees and 40% of the
entire district Court caseload.
Our mission is to provide access
to justice, resolve disputes
justly and timely and ensure
independent protections of
rights and liberties guaranteed
by the U. S. Constitution and
the laws and the Constitution of
the state of New Mexico.
In order to meet that machine
and our obligations to the
people of New Mexico. The
judiciary must be funded
appropriately.
To that end, the second fully
supports the requests for
funding for AOC.
In fiscal year 23, the second
judicial district, Talbots 168
jury trials.
And we estimate that if
Um
Yeah, as well as the AOC expert
fund, and the jury fund is not
funding funded. It will prevent
approximately 85 jury trials.
To date.
We have We have exhausted
500,000 in fiscal year 24 for
jury trials.
In fiscal year 23.
That was over a million dollars.
In fiscal year 23 51,000 was
spent in the second four expert
costs.
For the district attorney and I
love PD.
And here today we've already
spent over 32,000 of those
funds.
I will also note as I said
before you all last year and let
you know that we have really
ramped up jury trials. I think
our numbers show the same.
We are also heading into the
period of our dockets in our
criminal division.
Where we are going to see more
complex and lengthier trials,
the trials that are set right
now or two weeks, three weeks,
someone little bit more. So we
are really in the height of the
jury obligation.
And while our numbers might have
just because the trials are
fewer there longer, so the time
required to payments for jurors
will remain the same, if not
more.
As it relates to our pretrial
service program.
That would mean the 24 hour
monitoring would cease and we
would have to return to passive
GPS monitoring. I don't think
anybody wants to do that.
As I noted the recommendation.
We are asking that the
recommendations of the FAA or
the executive be adopted.
Lfc recommendations are less
than one third of our total
request, which also includes
statewide funding last year.
The Legislature and the governor
saw fit to, um, provide the
second with $736,000 for the
foreclosure settlement program.
We're very grateful for the same
today We've been able to take
steps in implementing the
program.
And Dona Ana County. Chavez Lee,
Eddie Grant, Luna, Hilda, Go,
Torrente Support to Sierra
Can Tran Colfax Union? Hurry
Roosevelt
Otero Lincoln.
Um and we will continue to
expand statewide.
We often see these cases that
are brought to us in
foreclosures where people are
addressing issues around death,
Divorce disease, disability loss
of employment.
This program meets Lynn Lenders.
And homeowners where they are in
the moment facilitate
discussions that lead to, um
majority of individuals who
participate in the program being
able to retain their homes. The
success rate for fiscal year 23
for homeowners who fully
participated was 91%.
We are asking that the D F a
general fund recommendation.
Um, but if that is adopted, we
would need an additional 307
from the mortgage Regulatory
fund.
If this body sees fit to adopt
the LFC recommendations.
The second is asking for 142 in
general fund 400,000 from the
mortgage Regulatory Fund and LSC
recommendation placed 400,000
specials. We would ask that we
moved from Section five to
Section four so that full
800,000 would be in the mortgage
regulatory fund.
And
As it relates to our additional
requests.
I'm sure it's no surprise that
our employees at the second are
the backbone of the justice
system.
Much of what they do every day
can be taxing and emotionally
and physically dreaming.
The other comes to court. It's
under very difficult
circumstances.
They are typically very
stressed, uncertain and confused
about processes.
And our staff doesn't amazing
job in trying to assist people
in these difficult
circumstances.
When we don't take care of our
people.
By having enough staff that
result in turnover poor customer
service and an inability to
retain quality individuals.
In order to reduce this issue.
We need to have sufficient
staff.
In that regard. You're asking
for 142,000 for two court
services support staff to use
this floaters helping multiple
divisions, including our jury
division.
Which I've always already
noticed. Exceptionally busy
right now.
In addition to the increased
jury trials we have are also
increased the amount of grand
jury time for the district
attorney significantly.
We're asking for 183,000 in
General fund for three judicial
specialists in our clerk's
office.
There needed to keep up with
increased caseload. As you can
see, there's been a significant
increase in filings. There's
certainly a significant increase
in the number of people that
walk through our courthouse.
We've had to, um new criminal
judges. We are very grateful for
the same, but we have not
received additional clerk staff
to help support that additional
workload.
We're asking for the same
respectfully.
We're also asking for 156,000
for two additional support staff
for self help center.
They assist with ascribing
program that assist individuals
who cannot read or write.
Which provides access to
justice. In addition, this staff
Ah is burdened with a number of
increased mediations, which is
wonderful for the public, but
it's it's a large volume to keep
up with
As it relates to pre trial
services. We are asking for
455,000 to begin transitioning
21.
Pretrial employees from contract
fund to general phone.
This is a multi year effort.
This year, it would be for four
pretrial service officers and
one supervisor.
County who has been very helpful
and funding the pre trial
program.
In the second judicial district.
Has indicated that they would
like to make those funds than
available to help serve our
specialty courts, and we've seen
a significant increase and
D A. S and L A P D s referring
individuals into those programs.
We have asked for funding for
software development developer
to a sister with our systems
that would improve public
access.
Court wide training. Finally, I
would like to to highlight the
need for our mandatory increases
that we are required to pay for
our work force Investment plan.
As well as the health insurance
premiums.
In the amount of 345,000
Recommended the full amount.
Again. I can't emphasize enough.
This is mandatory.
LFC did recommend 129,000 and
discretionary funding.
We would have to use that
discretionary funding for these
mandatory increases.
And we would still be short
216,000.
I appreciate you giving me this
extra time given the large
budget of the second judicial
district. Um and we stand for
quick, Thank you very much.
Chief Judge Ward. We're going to
go first to represent Garcia,
please. Thank you, Mr Chairman.
Your honor. Thank you. I noticed
on your flyer. You have a
veterans treatment court. Can
you briefly room briefly? Tell
me what
Going on with that work.
Currently that court is being
championed by two of our judges.
Um, we're in the process at this
time of hiring a program
manager. Um right now that
program manager would help
Veterans Court and, um, the
adult drug court program.
My hope is with this
reallocation of the pretrial
funding and freeing up some of
the county funds. We can move
that to full time for veterans
Court as well as possibly
looking at assisting with
navigators and other programs.
And so it's up and running. Um
and we're making efforts to grow
it at this time.
Thank you, Your Honor. And Mr
Chairman, I think what you're
trying to do for veterans really
Appreciate it. Thank you.
Thank you very much represented
Garcia, Vice chair. Dixon,
please.
Thank you, Mr Chair. Thank you,
Chief Judge. Word for the
presentation. I have some
questions for the analysts, just
as I'm trying to figure out
exactly where the differences
are. I thought I read at some
point, Mr Chair that, um
Lfc recommendation was funding
five of six
Of the positions.
Maybe what? You Yeah, Madam
Chair. Um, If you look at the
it's gonna believe it's page for
for the for the dip sheet for
the second District Court,
you'll see the attorney
Associate position is funded and
then you'll see for the term to
Perm pretrial services. There's
going to be for pre trial
service people within that
348.4.
So that in terms of the diff
sheet is the five of six the L C
recommendation does not
recommend that pre trials
pretrial service supervisor, so
that's five out of six.
Mr Chair and Mr Davidson. So
that's one of that's one of the
Q differences. Um
And there's a total difference
of one point about 1.4 million
between the recommendations. So,
uh, one full time position of a
pretrial services supervisor. Um
and then can you just bullet
point for me what The other
differences are
Madam chair. I can get those
full details back to you. I
think if I could maybe answer it
in totality, the L C
recommendation takes into
account The actuals versus
operating budget difference that
the court has. If you look at
volume two page 24 will see that
the operating budget of the
second District Court is 32.5
million. Other actuals was 27.8
million. So the L C
recommendation takes into
account that
Difference.
Um, thank you, Mr Chair. Thank
you, Mr Davidson. And and could
the District court elaborate on
why that difference existed in
terms of the actuals and the
operating budget?
Mr. Chair, representative Dixon.
Or CFO will look at the
documents and
But, you know
Thank you and Mr Chair, while
um, while they're doing that, um
You know, I definitely would
like to have a
Very crystal clear understanding
of the differences in general, I
have a concern. Um
And the concern is I want to
make sure that we are
Adequately supporting, you know,
the busiest largest
Um
Court in in this state where we
know, Um we've invested a lot of
funds for pre trial services,
and it really is critical to
making sure that, um
Public safety for the rest of
the state. Uh, you know, does
rely on
How
Virgilio County and the second
judicial district is operating.
So, um
This may be better for a follow
up, but I really would like to
have a
Um, more precise understanding
of the differences. Thank you,
Mr Chair. Thank you. Very much
Nicer. Dixon represented
Herndon, please.
Thank you, Mr Chair, and thank
you, Your Honor and Mr Terror,
One of the things that I think
is important to point out with
respect to public safety. Um
Judge Ward did show that the 24
hour monitoring of ankle
bracelets would be specifically
affected.
That's a huge public safety
issue, and I also wanted to
point out Mr Chair is that if we
look at the filings that are
processed by the second Judicial
District, 530,020, 23/474 and
2022 in terms of asking for
increased personnel in the
clerk's office support staff
just to name two of several
items, But one last item, Mr Mr
Chair is the foreclosure
settlement program.
Keeping people in their homes.
getting people to sit down and
talk in this very cold weather.
It's great for them to be in a
home rather than out on the
street, so I would follow up on
representative Dixon's requested
We could look at some additional
reasons and maybe make some
adjustments if possible.
Thank you very much represents
Herndon. Um
Um
I think great questions. I don't
see any. Oh, sorry, bro. Save
Garrett. I apologize.
Yeah, Yeah. Mr Chair and thank
you for the presentation and
taking time to follow up with
this.
Yeah. Can we follow up? Um, as
someone who's been a juror
there? I mean, people don't
realize just having someone
marching you around, takes a
body who knows what's going on
the self help. I personally have
referred lots and lots of
constituents is becoming
increasingly important for the
people representing themselves.
So yeah, if we can have follow
up that would be really
appreciated.
Excellent. Thank you very much
for Garrett.
Okay, Chief. Jazz? Yes, Ward,
please.
Absolutely.
Um, yes. So we're gonna get with
Austin. We've had zero reversion
for the last several years, and
so
We're not really sure the
differences in the actuals
Um you know where where they're
coming up with that at this
point, but we'll get with him
and get back to you.
Excellent. Thank you very much.
We appreciate sort of that
follow up, I think following the
committee's questions and the
request we're gonna ask for the
LFC recommendation, as vice
chair. Dixon represented Herndon
to collaborate with you all on
this. We know our time is short.
But there are clear imperatives
that we need to follow with the
committee.
Working, Make sure your
supported Chief Justice or chief
judge, um, while at the same
time sort of saying within. Ah,
sort of a healthy budget
increase.
Was that go to vice chair Dixon
for the motion. Thank you, Mr
Chair. I would move the LFC
recommendation.
Okay. It's been moved by Vice
Chair Dixon. Second by represent
Garrett. Is there any opposition
to that motion, saying none.
Please show represent Figueroa
and opposition.
Thank you.
Okay, Now we're gonna go to the
Mr Chairman, members of the
committee today we'll be
discussing now the first
District court, you will find
them behind tab to with the
business unit 231 Joining me
today is the honorable judge
Brian Bid sheet. I hope I
correctly beach I, but I answer
to anything I apologize, Chief
said the LFC and executive
recommendations both fully fund
the agency's request.
The LFC and executive
recommendations differ that the
LFC recommendation fulfills the
agencies, personnel contracts
and other category requests or
the executive recommendation
moves 80,000 from the contracts
category and places it in. The
personnel will now have idea
that counterpart explained that
Mr Chair Committee members.
Thank you. Austin just went into
flag. What? That even though
they're the same, the difference
of 80,000 between the 203
hundred's was there was a real
Areva Magistrate D wi
coordinator that was requested
in the three hundreds, but it
should have been 200 requests
Since it is personnel. It is an
issue I worked with with the
agency after the submission
deadline.
So not to speak out of turn, But
if you take the exact right
there'll be one less budget
adjustment to do during this,
uh, year with that all kick it
off to judge beachside.
All right. Well, good afternoon.
I apologize. I'm microphone
challenge in the best of
afternoons, And this seems to
not be the best afternoon. I'm
I'm here with Kathleen V. Hill,
our chief executive officer.
Uh,
As I've understood it, and maybe
I need a slight clarification.
But as I've understood it both
the D F A and LoC
recommendations fully fund are
requested budget.
So with regard to that I am
happy to answer any questions
that you have. But I did want to
take a moment to just stress.
What's not on this piece of
paper, and that is all of the
reliance that might district has
on funding that's been requested
by the AOC in order to function.
Uh sometimes it sounds as if
these are disconnected budgets,
But I wanted to stress to you
that, for instance, in my
district much against Santa Fe,
Rio Riva and Los Alamos counties
Oh, we have quite a few jury
trials brought to our district
from all over the state. Uh And
so those are fairly long and
complicated civil jury trials.
in addition to the criminal
trials that they get done, And
so with that if we run out of I
don't have money in my budget
for the jury fund.
So while my entire budget is
being approved, that's a hole in
it that you wouldn't see and
that is very concerning to us,
Um, we've been doing jury trials
at a clip greater than pre
pandemic and continuing to grow,
and we would not be able to do
that without that funding.
Similarly, Santa Fe County has
believe it's true. The busiest
magistrate court in the state
that is a pure magistrate court
as opposed to Metro
Or that sort of set up and the
warrant enforcement is what
makes their work possible in
saves countless hours of law
enforcement efforts in terms of
Doing what would otherwise have
to be done by law enforcement,
So that's huge for my community.
Sorry.
Blasting you on occasion. Um,
Similarly, with pre trial
services, you'll note that in my
budget request single biggest
increase is to make sure that we
have pretrial services, judicial
specialists and the lead worker
in there to essentially take
over what have been AOC funded
functions and put them in our
budget as calm
We need that. But
We also need that 24 7
monitoring in order to make that
service that everyone I think
agrees we need and recommends
actually valuable to the
community or as valuable as it
can be. So that is something
else. We would not have, Uh,
without it, Um And then,
finally, I just want to say as
well.
On the security and fiscal
oversight. I do have unique
pleasure, and I guess that's why
I'm going last of being within
walking distance of the spine
building.
And as a consequence, I walked
past the Supreme Court and Court
of Appeals all the time.
And I see
That they are lacking in
security for particularly what
you know the sorts of matters
that they here and so I do urge
out of collegiality for others
in my branch and and respect for
what they do over there, and
some of the very difficult hot
button issues they consider.
Please consider that as
additional funding as well, if
you have any questions about my
actual requested budget.
Um, there's recommended. I'm
here to answer them and happy
to, um
Or anything else. Thank thank
you very much, and thank you to
all the courts for reinforcing
with some of the other things
that we've heard.
Are there any questions? Look to
my right.
Look to my left. We'll go to
Vice Chair, Dixon. Thank you, Mr
Chair. I would move the
executive recommendation.
Okay, It's been moved. Is there
a second?
Okay. There's been a second by
representing Figueroa. Any
opposition to that motion?
Seeing none. Thank you very
much. Thank you All ok?
Hmm? Um, members, we're going to
move to the Bernalillo County
Metropolitan Court.
Alright, Mr Davis. Mr.
Seemingly, do you want to start
this off? I do. Mr. Chair. We
are an agency to 44 the burn Leo
County Metropolitan Court.
Um, the another straightforward
one LSC and executive
recommendations, both fully
funded agencies requests with
recommendations, funding
increases in the personnel and
contract categories and the
decrease in the other category.
There were no expansions
requested, so that was easy as
well. And we reached consensus
on performance measures.
Arson doesn't have anything to
add. I will pass it off to the
staff to Chief Judge Joshua
Sanchez Sanchez. Thank you. Go
ahead, please afternoon
chairman, members of the
Committee, Metro Court Judge
Joshua Sanchez, the chief judge
of metropolitan Court. I am
joined today by our CEO Lisa
Low, our CFO Erica Perrin and
Nicholas Steckler, who is our
financial analyst.
I know we have our D. C. E. O s
online who've been texting us
and emailing us watching today.
Melissa Garcia, Rachel Monarch
and Becky Kaplan. It's an
amazing team that I get to work
with, and I'm really lucky to
work with the people on this
team That makes my job extremely
easy.
Um, just really quickly. I would
ask you to fully support the AOC
request. Metro Court relies on
funding from AOC for the
reimbursement to our jurors
Without them getting the proper
funding. This would prevent us
from paying jurors for their
service and their mileage. In
addition, the AOC provides the
monitoring the GPS monitoring
for after hours of pretrial
services.
So again, we would ask you to
support those AOC
recommendations, and I also want
to make sure and let
representative Garcia No, we do
have a veteran's court and you
and all the members are more
than welcome to ever join and
sit in on a session to see how
it works in Metro Court.
And I'll turn it over to Lisa
Low, Our CEO who is going on her
first year as CEO and doing an
amazing job. Fantastic. Thank
you, Chief Judge.
Please go ahead.
Thank you, Chief. Good
afternoon, Mr Chair and
committee members and, uh, on
behalf of them at Burnley all
County metropolitan Court. Thank
you to the L S E N. D f A for
taking the Metropolitan Court's
request for funding into
consideration and thank you for
your recommendations just to
reiterate what chief Judge
Sanchez said the AOC has
provided funding for over 11
hours. 11,000 jurors summons at
Metro Court in FY 23
And we anticipate that number to
increase significantly in FY 24
in FY 23 They also assisted are
felony pre trial supervision
unit with after hours
supervision of defendants who
have the GPS unit installed.
For the Metro Court budget. We
are asking that you follow the
LFC s recommendations and also
asking that you take our
specials that we were not
recommended that we're not
recommended into consideration
as we own our own building.
These requests are specific to
the unique needs of our court.
We're asking that you reconsider
our funding request for a
special appropriation for
Mitchell Court for a phone
system replacement.
Currently we need to replace the
infrastructure that is critical
to the court sponsor vist
throughout the court, which
includes emergency services for
our active shooter, alert system
and access to 911 equipment is
at the end of life and failure
to the hardworking cost several
days to weeks to replace as the
parts are now obsolete, making
it harder and harder to obtain
parts.
We're also asking for
reconsideration of funding for
our seek your wiring switches
and switch panels. This will
allow us to upgrade our
infrastructure for the secure
Badge Reader system, which
ensures the safety and security
of our judges and staff.
As the court has grown, our
security needs have grown and
currently our system loses
communication and locks, judges
and staff in the courtroom and
insecure areas.
Um, with that being said once
again Thank you for your
consideration, and this will
allow us to serve the public.
energetic eight cases in a
timely fashion. We appreciate
your reconsideration for the
highly important requests, And
with that we stand for any
questions that you may have.
Thank you very much. We're going
to go first to represent Garcia.
Thank you, Mr Chairman.
Judge. Thank you for for a
member of veterans. And thanks
for all the help you're doing,
because it's very, very
important to me. Thank you, sir.
Thank you.
Thank you very much for
President Garcia.
Any other questions.
Members will be taken up
specials in a separate part, but
thank you for sharing. We have
been discussing specials along
with other budgets.
Okay. I don't see any others
will go to Vice chair Dixon for
the motion.
Thank you, Mr Chair. I would
move the LSC recommendation for
adoption.
Second, it's been moved by by
sure. Dixon, second by represent
Garcia there any opposition to
adopting that motion?
Seen and thank you very much,
Chief Judge. Thank you.
Okay, Now we're gonna go ahead
with the administrative office
for the district attorney's
Visit its members. This is
agency code 264.
Mr Davidson, when you if you can
start us off once were obviously
had the folks there. Please
direct us to the relevant
materials as well.
Within the volumes.
Mr Chairman, members of the
committee, you'll find this
under tab to with the agency to
64 Mr Chairman, the chairman
said, and you'll find it in
volume two page 60.
The executive recommendation is
1.5 million higher than the LFC
s recommendation.
Differences exist in each of the
budget categories. Executive
recommendation is higher than
the LFC s in each of the
categories. Executive
recommendation is 241.5000
higher than the personnel 1
million higher in the contracts
and 263.7000 higher in the other
category.
The analysts reached consensus
on all the performance measures
and targets for the agency on
our turn it over to Mario.
Mr Chair Committee members.
Thank you, Austin as my
counterpart just mentioned
there's a lot at $1.5 million
difference between ours and
there's the exact and lfc the
biggest difference would be in
the contractual of about a
million, which I believe is for
the case Management software
system that administrative
officer the DA's users.
Um, but also changes in the
personnel and other um, appears
that LFC kept them flat in the
personnel from last year's
operating budget, so I will hand
it off to the director of the A.
D. A Mr Henry Valdes. Thank you.
Good afternoon, Mr Chairman.
Members of committee. My name is
Henry Baldies. I'm the director
of the Administrative Office of
District attorneys I have with
me. My fiscal officer Philemon
Gonzalez.
Um and I want to thank you for
your time and attention to this
matter. Um, the A O D A
certainly appreciates the hard
work of all the analyst, but we
appreciate the
The recommendation of the
executive. The executive
recognizes that the
Uh, increases are necessary to
keep a low d a operating the
case management system A o D A
is statutorily charged with
developing and maintaining a
statewide case management system
for the district attorney's That
system was first developed in
2003.
Went live in 2006 and as
anything that is over 20 years
old. It was run down. It was
having problems. Um, and it
wasn't working as efficiently as
it needed to work, which
impacted the performance of all
the offices. Um
Two years ago. This legislate
yourself it to fund a o. D, A
two
Purchase a new CMS system.
Um, we went through the
procurement process and, uh,
hired a company by the name of
journal Technologies.
To develop and implement the new
case management system, uh, that
will be used through the entire
state. Uh, the reoccurring cost
to that is most of the
difference between the L. F C
and the D F a recommendation.
So we would like that to be
funded. That will be
approximately $900,000 a year to
fund
Ah, the licenses and the upkeep
to the statewide CMS system.
The same s system.
Is going to be needed more and
more as the case management
order.
Spreads to other jurisdictions
and makes the timeframes shorter
for the processing of all civil
cases. So, um, I'd like to
report that I am happy to note
that we are have already gone
through the phase of awarding
the contract and are working
closely with journal
Technologies.
On implementing the new CMS. Um
Management system for the state
of New Mexico, the other
category that's very important
is currently
A L D a
Maintains the telecommunication
systems for the office. The
emails that outlook we currently
use Microsoft 365 the teams
To continue to fund that That's
the other
Chunk of money is to be able to
have the licenses so that the
offices communicate more
effectively and communicate with
each other. And indeed
With any other, uh
Entity that they need to the
teams function really has a lot
of
Um, amenities that weren't
available to
Officers before you know the
ability to share documents
amongst offices amongst people
within the office and edit those
documents. The ability to, uh,
video call
The ability to have any
immediate transcript, which can
be used in witness interviews.
things of that nature and so
it's necessary. We have been
funding that, uh, the office is
really had been funding that
that through vacancy savings and
wherever they could, uh, this
would put the funding at a o D A
so that the offices can use
The funding given to them for
their needs. And so that's the
other big expense one further
area.
That
The executive funded that the
LFC recommendation did not is in
the area of
Um
Being
A O. D A is charged with
Providing training for all the
district attorneys and not only
the attorneys, but for all the
disciplines within the district
attorney's offices. As such, we
have about four
Programs that we present for
conferences. Um
Two of them. One focuses solely
on D Wi one focuses solely on
domestic violence. The other two
are general
Uh, and one of them focuses in
all disciplines. Victim
advocates support staff
administrative staff of the
investigators. Um, and those
conferences we have been paying
for what was called the district
Ernie Fund, The D a fund.
The D. A fund was populated by
worthless.
Check fees.
Administrative fees a were
collected for collecting
worthless check and pre
prosecution diversion funding.
The Legislature removed the
Ability.
To charge for pre prosecution
diversion fees, or at least took
away the specific authority for
the district attorney's to be
able to collect that fee.
Um, that happened.
The Legislature made of one time
appropriation.
To replace the money that we
have lost. We haven't seen that
appropriation since that was
done three years ago.
So it is really the D. A fund is
going to hold. Nobody writes
forces checks anymore. Nobody
writes checks. Nobody.
Collects worthless checks. So
our soul the biggest source of
funding had been the pre
prosecution diversion. Uh, that
has been eliminated. And so the
Uh, executive recognized that
and awarded some funding so that
we can continue to put on the
training. And with that, Mr
Chairman, I know it's been a
long day. I stand for questions.
Thank you very much, Mr Valdez.
Are there any questions? I've
got a couple Well, let's go
first to represent them.
Chatfield.
Thank you, Mr Chairman.
So I was looking at you at the
sheet here, and it looks like
the recommendations are pretty
much the same except for
personal benefit to them.
Um, personal services, personal
services and employee benefits.
So then I wonder, why would they
be different there in the same
everywhere else? I got out our
volume three and I looked for
transfers and diversions, and I
see that you transferred
$218,400, which is a 11.4% of
your
Personal services and employee
benefits and reverted about
24,000
So
That's true
bar history there.
That's not terrible. I'm just
saying I'm looking here and I'm
deciding. Why did
Why did we come up with a little
smaller recommendation on that
one on that one line item when
we had the same on others?
And I'm asking you if it's
possible.
There is that there was a some
transfers out to other
functions.
Maybe you had a little
Some unfilled vacancies. There
was a transfer and a reversion.
Oh, Mr Chairman, Representative
Chatfield. I will say that, uh,
with regards to vacancies
A O D A is not a very big
agency. Um
And so we don't have the types
of vacancy savings a lot that
you see in some of the district
attorney's offices, but we did
have to long time vacancies for
programmers, programmers, um,
computer programmers, uh,
At the salary that we offer for
that position. It was very
difficult for us to recruit, uh,
individuals to fill those
positions. We were often trying
to hire people that just
graduated from college or just
graduated from a school that
that has that. And so there was
some significant
Vacancy savings in that area. We
have since filled those
positions and so we don't
anticipate that going forward.
Thank you, Mr Chair. Thank you
for that. And thank you very
much for present. Chatfield.
Ah, Mr Always going back to the
technology piece. What we see is
that there was a $2.5 million
appropriation made in in, uh, I
believe it was fy 22 perhaps fy
23.
We have
And
Yeah, You sort of explained to
us that of significant Perhaps
the majority of the difference
is mostly through technological
licensing and sort of other non
personnel like non people fees.
Is that right?
Uh, Miss Chairman. That's
correct. OK, thank you for that.
Uh, what we also have and what
I'm told by our analysts is that
$2.3 million, a significant
amount of that remains unspent.
Is that accurate?
Mr Herman. That's correct. We
have also asked for authority
for language to be able to
extend that award because by the
time
We did the
Uh, RFP.
And you know we did request for
information and we did the
request for proposal we finally
have executed the agreement to
retain journal Technologies. Um,
we're gonna need that money and
that time for them to be able to
Take their product and make it
workable for the state of New
Mexico. Even though it's it's a
product. It's not plug and play.
They're going to have to make
some a lots of changes, not just
for the state would district by
district to make it ensure that
it works for for each district,
And so, um
We do anticipate using all that
we've asked for that.
Uh, extra time to be able to use
that funding and we are working
towards meeting the milestones
in the contract, and thus far we
are on point.
But but that's okay. No, thank
thank you for the I appreciate
very much the explanation. Uh, I
think it It's a very free I
would say we appreciate the need
to sort of have time to
implement.
The almost a million dollar
recurring cost that what I'm
hearing is associated with that
future technological
implementation seems pretty
extensive and pretty pricey.
Um and
So perhaps there are things that
we need to look at in specials
to make sure that you can
implement these systems
appropriately, but sort of a
future recurring costs for
technology that is yet to be
implemented is is pretty tough
to justify a very significant
recurring increase for when we
don't even have it.
And yet, although we want to be
good partners, but I just want
to explain some of the questions
and thought process.
Uh, I don't see any other
questions.
Okay, I'll go ahead and ask for
the LFC recommendation.
Thank you, Mr Chair. I would
move. The committee adopts the
LFC recommendation. Okay, It's
been moved by Vice Chair Dixon,
second by represented Sarah
Nana. Is there any opposition to
adopting the LFC recommendation?
Casing. None. Thank you very
much, Mr Valdez. Thank you, Mr
Chairman. Thank you. Members of
Committee. Thank you, Analyst.
Okay?
Ah alright members. We are going
to
Go get going with our district
attorney's again. We're going to
stay or go to our district
attorney's We're going to go
sort of farthest traveling in as
we did with our district judges.
So invite the third judicial
District. Uh um, district
attorney buyers.
It will go. The third, then
district attorney loose with the
fifth, the sixth and then the
12th.
Mr Chairman, members of the
committee.
We will now be discussing the
third judicial district attorney
Joining me today is the judicial
districts. District Attorney
Gerald Buyers Business unit for
the agency is 253.
The LFC executive
recommendations differ both the
bass recommendation and
expansions. The LFC
recommendation is 122.7000 lower
than the executives
recommendation.
The L C recommendation is
100,000 higher than the
personnel category than the
executive recommendation.
Both recommendations fund the
agency's requested increase in
the other category, and both
recommendations keep the
contracts category flat with the
prior year operating budget.
The executive recommendation
fully funds the agency's
requested expansions. The LFC
recommendation does not
alternate over to my counterpart
Mario.
Mr Chair Committee members.
Thank you. Austin, As Mr
Davidson just said the key
difference here would be the
expansions. There's 133,000 for
a lead investigator and 89,000
for a senior legal assistance.
Although the LFC came in a bit
higher on the General Fund for
Personnel. The executive thought
the case made for the expansions
was was good and strong, given
the issues that this part of the
status facing, so we ended up
recommending that and that would
explain the 122.7 difference
between LFC and the executive
with that I'll turn it over to
the Mr D. A Gerald buyers.
Thank you, sir. And good
afternoon Chairman. Small and
members of the committee. My
name is Gerald buyers. District
Attorney Third Judicial District
with me today is my chief
financial officer.
Juliette Lucero.
And we would request that this
body. Um
Approved the recommendation of D
F a specifically in support. Of
those two additional positions
that we believe are critical to
our ability to meet the needs of
the criminal justice process in
our district.
We would also note that
The reasons for, um, for the
request for those additional
positions are are noted in our
presentation materials.
Which include the fact that our
district recently was
Recently had a
Case management rule employed in
imposed on us on our district,
not unlike with the second
judicial district and as a
result of that case management
rule, our office is facing a
number of different challenges
with regard to the efficient
processing timely processing.
And meeting the time
requirements of that case
management rule.
Ah, it and these requirements
are the kinds of things that are
personnel intensive, as well as
the necessity for additional
electronic digital support. That
is the basis for our bringing
the third judicial district into
the 21st century with regard to
our initiative on prosecutor by
carpal were also requesting that
you
Approved the recurring funding
of $55,000 for the cost of that
that particular software is
going to allow our prosecutors
to do things which CMS will not
do and which, as we had heard
from a prior presenter, um they
are in the process of adjusting
the case management system and
going to a different
Footprint as it were for the
entire state.
And so we are in need of that.
Also the additional problems of
cross border narcotics
trafficking.
Human trafficking.
As well as the proliferation of
illegal guns in our district are
creating additional stressors on
R, and they're catalysts for
additional crime in our
district. We will note that
there have been there's been an
increase in juvenile offenses
while our overall homicide rate
is down the number of of of
situations involving juvenile's
has increased.
And also the number of
situations involving juveniles
with guns has increased and
these additional resources are
necessary for us to effectively.
Um, bring matters forward. Our
office also supports the various
treatment courts, which are
district is also a pilot project
for something that is coming up.
And so we're a partner in all of
these developing areas, but as
the second largest district in
the state of New Mexico we
definitely thank you for your
support and and in vision on on
supporting our initiatives to
bring justice to our
communities, and with that, I'll
stand for questions. Thank you
very much, Mr Attorney.
Uh,
Representing hurting please.
Thank you, Mr Chair, and thank
you, Mr District attorney with
respect to the case management
rule that has been imposed upon
your office was that imposed by
the court? Um, Chairman and
Representative Herndon? Yes,
That is correct, ma'am. Uh, it's
a It's implementation date, I
believe was June 14th of 2023.
And it was effective
immediately. So thank you. And
Mr Mr Chair and Mr District
attorney so that if you don't
comply, you might be found in
contempt of court. Is that
correct?
That is correct. I'm sorry, Mr
Chair and representative Herman
Herndon. That is correct. There
are sanctions and subsection s
of LR 3-303, which does provide
for contempt of court as being
one of the sanctions that the
courts can impose. So thank you,
Mr Chair. Thank you, Mr D. A so
that justifies a evidence based
reason why you need to have that
expansion.
And the additional funding for
that implementation by the
court.
Mr. Chairing Representative
Herndon? Yes. Yes, ma'am. Thank
you. That is correct.
Thank you, Mr Chair. Thank you.
Mr D. A without additional
information.
Thank you very much.
Representive, Herndon.
Ah, okay. Briefly, District
Attorney what we're showing
here, which is positive is a
very low funded vacancy rate.
0.5%.
Making sure that we have the
same numbers between the LFC and
and the D F A, which is $31,000.
And so it seems like some of the
challenges of hiring folks. Mr
District Attorney. Have those
been familiar. Have you been
able to address those challenges
more successfully Chairman small
and members of the community
Committee? Yes, that is correct.
Our vacancies have decreased
because of the frankly because
of the additional funding that
this body has provided and made
available to us so that we can
make prosecution something that
is attractive to newer.
Ernie's and veteran attorneys.
We've had some attorneys come
back to our office. Other
attorneys are choosing to stay
with prosecution. And that is
that does account for the change
in the numbers. And Mr Cherif, I
might take this this
opportunity. We received a
request from the secretary of
state to support their
recommendation for additional
funding to
Cover attorney's fees in the
case of Republican Party of New
Mexico versus Torres, a case in
which the third Judicial
District attorney's office is a
party and I would just tender
that to to the body. Okay, thank
thank you for that. Thank you.
Great to see Mr Lucero here. Um
so okay, um, members, There are
a number of differences on the
district attorney's
I think we're going to probably
hear similar stories in a number
of areas I want to sort of. I
think we need to take the LFC
recommendation. For all we're
going to have to ask staff to
look because there is we've seen
progress in this area where
we've asked for funded vacancies
to be brought down many cases,
we're going to see that we don't
want us to spend the time sort
of sorting winners and winners
right here.
Um, just to explain a little bit
on that side of things, but we
know that your prosecution, um
your approach is critical, as
all are the district attorneys
in here. So just say that after
that, with that, I would ask for
the LFC recommendation.
Thank you, Mr Chair. I would
move the LFC recommendation.
I'll go ahead and second that is
the
Any opposition to adopting the
LFC.
Asking staff to look at this and
work with our district
attorney's, uh in individually
for updates, OK? See no
objections. Thank you, Mr
District Attorney.
Thank you, sir. That
Okay, We're gonna ask District
attorney loose.
To come on up.
Okay, Mr Simile. Go ahead.
Chairman, Small committee
members. We now have the fifth
judicial district attorney. It
is agency code 255 for the
revenue. The executive
recommendation is $502.8000
higher than LFC is
recommendation.
The executive is higher by close
to 300,000 in the personnel
category and 205,000 and the
other category the only
difference by 1.3000 in the
contractual category.
Both recommendations fully fund
the agency's requested expansion
requests.
And we have reached consensus on
performance measures so
Mr. Davidson doesn't have
anything to add. I will pass it
on to district attorney loose.
Please go ahead and please feel
free to introduce members of
your team.
Good afternoon, Mr Speaker,
Members of District Attorney
Diana loose from the fifth.
That's Chavez, Eddy and Lea
counties I have with me today.
My CFO Diana Switzer. I have my
district office manager Brent
Kelly and I have my chief
deputy, Patrick Melvin, who's
out of my Carlsbad office. I
want to say thank you for the
funding that you've given us in
the past.
Um, And today I want to ask for
the D F a recommendation and I
want to explain why, um
The
Money that I was removed by the
LFC recommendation. Actually,
it's funding for a request for
Axon are evidence dot com, um,
to be able to access, body worn
camera and other videos from law
enforcement and to have cloud
storage, That's one
The second one is furniture for
our Carlsbad courthouse offices,
and so let me go into those just
briefly separately, uh, the
funding for axon I have over 13
law enforcement agencies in the
fifth Judicial district in the
three counties. They all have
different programs. They all
have different ways of getting
us.
Body worn camera, the biggest
request that we have from
defenses all video, the highest
number of motions to suppress
for not timely disclosing that
video from the defense is based
on video. So I'm asking for that
funding. Specifically, the
evidence dot com is $115,000.
It's not a lot in the, uh I
guess the overall picture of the
budget remaining is furniture.
Let me talk to you about
furniture. You all funded 1/4
judge for Eddy County That judge
has been in office. Thank you
for that. We needed that judge.
And so our office someone that
proposed the idea that we moved
to the first floor out of the
second floor of the courthouse.
Because our floor mirrors the
court floor and they could
create another courtroom. The
fourth judge doesn't have a
courtroom at all. And so how are
you going to do? More jury
trials? Right? You're not so
we're moving in and moving. Part
of our furniture is really old
and it has come apart in trying
to already move some of it. So
that's our furniture request. We
understand if we don't get
furniture will
Tape it back together, Ranil it
back together. We will do
whatever we gotta do, because
we've got to have desks, right?
Uh, but it's not a lot of money.
in the scheme of things. I
understand that you're probably
going to adopt LSE
recommendation, but I'd like for
you to consider, uh, somehow,
maybe in negotiating with the
however it works. The conference
with the Senate, if perhaps
happening could be put back in.
We are also asking that you
support any funding request
coming from the sentencing
Commission for funding for the
recruitment retention for
attorneys. Um, that has been
very positive in us keeping
attorneys uh and, uh,
recruiting, So thank you for
that funding.
Ask you to find the request from
the Ministry of Office of the
District attorney for the case
Management system.
We all are waiting. Probably not
very patiently for that new
system to start in what we think
is 14 to 18 months from now, we
would like for that to be
sooner. Um, and then I would
also add, Um then I would
support the feeling for the
courts for Juries.
We don't do the the we maybe
third highest for jury trials in
the fifth, but we definitely
have a backlog from Covid. We
also have a backlog due to lack
of interpreters. You all
probably heard a little bit
about that. Um me. Jury trials
have been canceled for the last
few months in the fifth due to
not having interpreters for the
non English speaking jurors.
Who appear for jury service that
day. They're canceling the
trials the day before.
I was told today and a homicide
trial that started in Lovington
that we would not have trial on
Wednesday, because if you need
any esters were selected, there
were no interpreters.
We? This is not justice for
anyone, so I would ask you to
find interpreters. Uh, in like
my, um, brother district
attorney from the third, Mr
Byers. The fifth is your
attorney was party to we were
sued in that lawsuit. They were
asking that you support the
funding That's in the secretary
of state's budget already.
They made the request for all
parties. That lawsuit predated
myself. I in being when we were
sued, Uh, did Mr wires as well
Uh, And with that I would stand
for questions. Thank you.
Thank you very much district
Attorney loose. I'll look Yes,
please represent brown, please.
Thank you, Mr Chair. Good to see
you, Miss Lewis.
Well when I graduated from
college, and before I could
afford furniture, I sat my
dinner guests on Samsonite
suitcases.
So I don't know why the court
can't just buy suitcases, but I
just of course.
Mr Mr Chairman and Ms loose.
I am kind of startled at the
difference of half a million
dollars in what's been
requested and what is being
suggested by lfc. So, uh, Mr
Chairman, I would ask that this
budget request be reviewed again
by our committee. Um, I know we
had testimony. Not that long
ago.
From miss loose about the needs
in the fifth judicial and they
were technology and a whole
bunch of other things. And so I
don't believe our district
attorneys are asking for fluff.
I think they're asking for what
they need to do their jobs. And
so I just again request we take
a good hard look at this again.
Thank you, Mr Chair. Thank you
very much. Representative Brown.
Go to represent pedigree. Then
we'll go to represent Montoya
represent Pettigrew, please.
Thank you. D A for being here.
Thank you, Chairman.
I guess my primary question is
if we don't have the
interpreters, how do you
How do you deal with that issue
right now?
And Mr Chair, Representative
Pettigrew, Uh, healthy courts
are handling it is if we have a
jury trial, and we don't have
interpreters for a non English
speaking juror, they've been
canceling our trial. They have
not been going. I've heard in
other districts around the state
that they're following a
procedure from a reported
decision by Justice Daniels.
Um, to make reasonable attempts,
And if that would have them,
then they excuse those non
English speaking jurors, but we
certainly need interpreters. And
I know this Supreme Court is
trying to get interpreters to
help with this problem, But I
think funding is maybe another
request for making with
Thank you, Chairman. And thank
you, dear for that, um, so it's
the D A s responsibility.
To hire the interpreters.
Mr Chair representative
Pedigree? No, it's the courts
The administrative Office of the
Courts takes care of the
interpreters for jury trials all
across the state.
But it's the trials that are
being vacated if you don't have
them, and so that affects the
prosecution that affects the
defense that affects
Witnesses victims in cases.
Thank you, Chairman and thank
you. D A S o.
Hmm.
What are the potential
backlashes of excusing non non
English speaking German for that
from the defendants?
Or from you not from the
prosecuting side, but from the
defendant's side. With respect
to not having, um
Variety of different
Different ethnicities on the
On that, But what are the
potential issues and have you
seen any of those chairman?
Mr. Chair represented Pettigrew.
Um
We've only had one case where
that's been done in the court
made a record in a funding. Uh,
that all reasonable attempts
were made. The case was old, had
been delayed before and
continued, and, um, it was going
to be that was going to be a
short trial. Maybe 1 to 2 days
Inn. So I made that finding
Ah, but the others in the fifth
have just been the trials have
been
Continue to be vacated for that
reason, because of that very
concerned and so we don't know
what those ramifications could
be. Um, there's a clear
procedure set out in the Supreme
Court opinion in New Mexico and
I believe our judges are trying
to follow that. But certainly
they could revisit that. So
that's why I bring the issue of
we need.
We need funding for
interpreters. I recognize you if
you just don't have people
applying. You don't have people
applying for the jobs right?
Perhaps funding would help
similar as it's helped us with
attorneys. Thank you.
Thank you, Chairman. And thank
you. D a so
That's the one of these cases
that are being extended. Maybe
not just in your district and
other districts. How many of
those
People are
Repeat offenders that may
The out on the street because we
just keep continuing the case.
Do we have that potential issue
in the state of New Mexico right
now?
Mr. Chair, Representative
Pettigrew. Certainly that is a
possibility it is a concern
would be concerned for a judge
continuing to hold somebody, uh,
you know, for a long period of
time, but they have to balance
that can that safety of the
community If they're being held
pretrial detention, So certainly
it's a concern. And so I know
you've heard from a lot of the
justice partners.
Um and we're all trying to make
all the parts work, uh, together
because we
We are. We all have to have that
funding in order to make the
whole process worked. Well,
thank you.
Thank you, Chairman and thank
you for your answers. With
respect to that. I think there's
several different pieces of
this. But chairman. I think that
that's definitely something that
we need to go back and look out
with respect to that one Last
question, Chairman
Um
Zero training that our
interpreters go through. That
gives us some level of
confidence that they're actually
interpreting correctly.
Mr Chair represented Pettigrew,
The interpreters that are
employed for the military's
office of the courts.
Our court certified. There is a
specific program that they have
to go through and they must test
and pass that test in the
certified so that that is one
reason maybe why they're not as
many. There's probably the cost
of the course they have to pass
it, and then they have to want
to, you know.
Live in the state of New Mexico
ride. Come here for that kind of
work.
Sorry, Chairman. Uh, one
question leads to another. With
respect to that, Um, Chairman.
What's the timeline to go
through that kind of training?
Mr Chair representing pedigree.
I just read a letter by and I
don't know if it's an
interpreter's association. What
exactly the title is, but they
sent out a letter to the All of
the district attorneys in New
Mexico asking for support, and
it did say in there some of that
information, but I don't
remember, but it's a lengthy
Of course, it's it's several
weeks.
Thank you, Chairman. Thank you.
D a list for for playing along
with those questions.
Thank you very much for
presenting pedigree. Next we're
gonna go to represent Montoya,
please.
Thank you, Mr Chairman. How you
doing? District Attorney Good to
have you here today? Um,
briefly, could you you mentioned
in passing
Um, The idea is request for the
case Management.
Software, so I I think we're
going to hear
Probably from a parade of D s
are going to say the same thing.
That that you did. So I just
briefly, um I did speak to the
chair. We're gonna
I'm gonna get with the D A and
See the time frames.
When the recurring costs would
begin and all of that, so it
will be a little more discussion
about that. So
Um, didn't have a chance to
really chime in on that earlier.
Um, but I just want to let you
know going to be Henry. I'll be
sitting down with you to go over
that to see
Specifically about that request.
It seems like this is going to
go way beyond just the D a
office and it's going to go to
every
D A s office in the state. If we
don't find that, so I'll take a
look. We'll We'll take a close.
Look at that.
Um
Mr Chair. Uh,
As well.
Not really sure when the
appropriate time to have
mentioned this, but Bill was
dropped today to try and, uh
Uh huh.
Take all of the D A s, um
Hey.
And connected to the
Um, district Court. Uh,
District court pay for judges,
justices or judges.
And
Find a way for that just to be
attached, So I know every year
every other year we come back in
here and we have to deal with D
a pay and it, uh sometimes we
get it and sometimes we miss it
and we have to come back in and
address that I think would be a
lot easier if we just attached
it to
A similar size budget a similar
size.
Uh, um, staff that is managed.
so just just to make sure that
it's on the radar of this group.
That that is going to be in.
There shouldn't be
Much of a
Difference, but it would make it
where in the future we don't
have to continue addressing this
as a single line item issue, it
would just be attached to a
district court, a district
judges pay or a Metro court
judges pay who
Once again managed
About the same size of staff
across the board. So, um
I wasn't sure if that was
appropriate during the A D. A
discussion, but I just want to
make sure that this committee
knows that that that would have
an effect and we would need to
know about that. So I believe
Representative Sanchez dropped
that earlier today. Did you sign
on and representative Luhan as
well? So
Um, but Mr Mr Chair and and
District Attorney loose. Um, I
would imagine Parade of folks
are gonna come up and mentioned
again.
That that software is it going
to be important going forward,
so
Hopefully, we'll get a chance to
address that.
Okay. Thank you, Mr Chair.
Thank you.
Are there any other questions?
Okay? I don't see any other
questions. District Attorney
lose. I wanna, um
Briefly sort of go back and I
want I want to note that you are
funded vacancies have dropped
Uh, um, has again how has it
been hiring attorneys with
believe it's a 6% pay
differential and rural areas.
Is that right? I Mr Chair. Um
with that I'm funding that we
got for that, Uh, we have been
able to hire. I can't say that
That's specifically the reason
I'm almost all of the attorneys
We recruit to the fifth or from
out of state.
And so if
Economy is that helpful and
other states that benefits us?
Okay. Thank thank you for that.
Um, and committee members. This,
uh, includes, I think roughly
about a 16% increase from fy 23
to FY 24. So it seems like those
increases. It's not. We're not
saying the job is done, but it
seems like
Very, very hefty increases and
substantial investments have
been helping at least recruit
more folks to to your office
into two district attorneys in
general.
Okay and district in so now.
As we're going to go through
this really a big part of the
focus specifically within the
district attorney's office is,
is it Would you say that it's
fair to like, really look at
technology?
Now that we're making progress
on workforce, is it really
technology that's big component.
Mr Chair? Yeah. In members of
the committee. Yes, it is. That
is huge. Um, we're not all we
need our case management system.
Our files are electronic. So if
if our case management system
stop today, my office
Would really have a problem.
Some districts have paper files.
We do not
Um, bed, the other component. I
talked about evidence dot com to
have the body worn cameras. I
know there are a few districts
who have guides either special
funding or grant funding due to
have that.
Every day. A district needs that
we all deal with body worn
camera. We all deal with
surveillance video. We all have
multiple law enforcement to deal
with. And so certainly
technology is definitely the
focus that probably now that
we've got
Funding that helps us have
higher salaries and recruit.
Okay, Thank thank you very much.
District Attorney. I hear the
committee members. I think we're
going to have folks.
In a short time period. Look at
these, but we may have to re
prioritize or look for ways to
support the technological
investments because members you
know, we've successive budgets
of of well over 10% increases on
an overall budget basis. Very
aggressive investments as is
appropriate in our district
attorneys.
And as we've talked about, as we
sort of reach more of a revenue
plateau, as opposed to revenue,
sort of way that continues to go
up and up and up our ability to
make these very aggressive
general fund increases is going
to be more and more difficult,
So we'll ask for the L. C
recommendation. But
representatives
This is a really I think we're
going to see this across all of
the district attorney's progress
from the district attorney's and
things that the committee and
the Legislature of set.
Continued funding needs and some
pretty big challenges meeting
those general fund increases.
Thank you, Mr Chair. I would
move the LFC recommendation.
There's a motion. Is there a
second?
Okay. It's been moved by
representing Dixon, second by
representative Garrett. Is there
any opposition to that motion?
Okay, please, Uh
Okay. Please show represent
Pettigrew and representing Brown
and opposition.
Thank you very much. District
Attorney loose. Thank you.
Okay. We're not gonna ask the
sixth Judicial district.
District Hitori Renteria.
Mr Chairman. Members of the
committee will now be discussing
the sixth District attorney
Joining me today is the sixth
District Attorney Michael
Renteria's hope I got that
correct the business unit for
the agencies to 56 executive
recommendation is 350,000 0.3
higher than the L C
recommendation.
The recommendations differ in
each of the budgetary
categories. The L C
recommendation is higher than
the LFC recommendation by
196,000 in the personnel.
36.9000 in the contracts and
28.4000. In the other category.
Analysts reach consensus on all
performance measures and
targets.
Executive recommendation
fulfills one of the agency's
expansions. DLC recommendation
does not recommend either on
alternate over to Mario, Mr
Chair Committee members. Thank
you, Austin as Austin said Our
differences total about
$350,000. The executive tried to
stay as close to the requests
within reason with the DA's in
the courts.
To respect the separation of
powers three branches of
government.
Ah, but often did a good job but
saying what differences were so
I'll pass it over to district
attorney into the air. Thank
you.
Mr Chairman, members of the
committee. Good afternoon. Thank
you for the opportunity to be in
front of you here again this
year.
Yeah, I know. We're all coming
with our wants and desires as
far as budgets and mine will be
no different, but I'll try and
make it as concise as I can. But
first, I'd like to start off by
introducing two members of my
staff that are here with me. My
CFO Vanessa Cardenas and also my
HR administrator and special
programs director Jenny Basara,
and I really appreciate all the
work that they did to help
prepare me for this.
I understand you all have the
handout. I pray you do. Um, and
it gives a real good summary of
what we're trying to do in the
in the issues that were missed
that they were facing before. I
forget. I should say I fully
support the ODS funding
requests. I hope you all will,
too. I know how important the
technology is. I know how
important the CMS system is. I
can share with you all of the
districts suffered from repeated
and regular. It seems like
deadlocks and other things that
really hamper us.
And and so I know we've been
working to try and improve that
area so that people that are
employed to work in our offices
are able to do the job and do it
fully. But without that
technology, I know it would be
even more insufferable than at
times we feel it is so I just
wanted to mention that before I
forget, Um I know that him and I
made an expansion requests for I
think a couple of positions I
wanted to just share with you.
And I'm sure a lot of you
already know.
The Volga grants for victim
witness advocates. It's been
reduced this cycle, at least
from my district. I don't I'm
assuming it's for everyone else
by 50% also devour. We have two
positions for our that our
advocates one That's Avoca hours
going down 25% this year, so I
have to make up that difference
to keep the people that I do
have employed.
I currently have five advocates.
I need 1/6. I have a supervisor
who is in charge of training the
monitoring them and doing those
things, but I really need a six
and that's why I made the
expansion request for 1/6.
I also need an and another
investigator. I have three
counties. I have two
investigators for granted. Luna.
I need one for Hidalgo, not only
because of the caseload and how
things are growing, especially
the violent cases that require
more hands on work from my
investigators, But I have also
expanded our pre processed
diversion program and by by
that, and what I mean, is this
enough? Gotta veterans program
in place it kicked off in
November.
I've got a D V program that's
associated connected to that as
well as a substance abuse
program and last we're trying to
fit in mental health because it
all seems to follow under the
same umbrella and my community,
just like I know a bunch of
others. It's a It's a growing
problem where we have mental
health issues, and they lead to
criminal activity and the
competence city comes up.
People feel like those people
get away with everything. And
why can't you guys do more
etcetera, etcetera, So we're
trying to do more. We're trying
to be responsive in the
diversion programs and other
accountability programs that
we're implementing. So that's
That's another reason why the
expansion request included an
investigator. Um I wanted to
also add
That
Like like the others. And I've
never heard Heard how lfc is
seems to be the what? What's
what's going forward for us. I
still like to request
respectfully that you consider
adopting the executive or the
recommendation for the sixth.
Uh, it would really help me as
far as those expansions not only
in personnel but as well as
programming.
And with that I would stand for
any questions. Thank you, Mr
Chair. Thank you very much. I'm
gonna look for a questions first
to my right.
Kaye, CNN.
Uh, to the left, Okay. I don't
see any. Okay. Thank you very
much. Thank you for going
through and again. I think we're
sort of coalescing around focus
and investments around
technology in looking for where
we can do additional work there
this year.
Was that Vice chair, Dixon.
Thank you, Mr Chair. I would
move the LFC recommendation,
Okay. It's been moved by Vice
Chair Dixon, second by Robson
Garrett their opposition to
adopting that seeing nothing.
Thank you very much, Mr.
Chairman. Thank you. Thank you.
Okay, we're gonna now invite the
12th judicial district.
After following the 12th will be
going to the asking the ninth,
the eighth and then the 11th to
come on up.
Uh um.
Okay?
Mr Chair Committee members were
at the 12 Judicial district
Attorney
Agency 262.
The executive recommendation is
$546.3000 higher than the LFC.
The executive is higher in
personnel by 420,000 higher in
the contracts and 100 and 22,000
higher in the other categories.
Um
We reached consensus and all
performance measures, so that's
probably something that's
incorrect in your different
sheets, But we both fully
expanded our
Accepted the expansion request.
If socialism anything that I'll
pass it on to district Attorney
Scott Key, Thank you.
Okay. Thank you. Good afternoon,
Mr Chairman and all members of
the committee. My name is Scott
Key, and I'm the district
attorney for Lincoln and Otero
County.
To my left is our CFO Stacy
Madison.
Um and, uh, in the the audience.
We have Sarah Gan, who has just
been hired as a H r person and
we invited her to come up here
because last year we
specifically requested
assistance on an expansion for
for her.
Um
Because of our need for
recruitment and retention.
And so we are very thankful for
that help last year.
Uh are highlights of this
presentation is really to ask
you to consider the executive
recommendation. Um, those
recommendations are closer to
some of the areas that we're
going to have shortfalls You've
heard mention from other, uh, D
A s in this presentation
regarding the
The vocal grant the Haida grant.
Those are two areas that are
being reduced over the last few
years, and we need help on the
General fund to pick up the
differences in the loss of
funding from those grant
agencies because of the great
need, obviously having victim
assistance.
And hide up prosecutors and
secretaries to handle the drug
prosecution load.
Uh, Also highlights in that
executive budget is $20,000
request for victim witness
expenses and this is a very
similar issue to what you heard
from some of the District court
judges to include UM Chief Judge
Andrew Schneider, the chief
judge of our district, who who
talked about the AOC budget
regarding
Jury expenses. So this is a
related cost of change. Uh,
By all appearances that AOC is
changing what can be paid by AOC
on our witnesses and victims
come into jury trials.
There's been a change of
I thought as to what is
authorized by law. Apparently,
I'm not privy. It'll of the, uh,
the arguments for and against,
But I can tell you that that has
left us with the shortfall of
money in order to pay for travel
costs, meals and lodging for
victims to come to
Hearings other than jury trials,
so in those hearings, such as
pretrial detention motions,
preliminary hearings, uh and
probation violation hearings. We
have other hearings that are not
being covered by AOC. So we're
fully Congress in of that
shortfall, and so we are.
Additionally.
Supporting AOC s request to
boost that that line autumn to
make sure that our jury trials
go smoothly.
Um, and the last
Executive that
Recommendation that we see is,
uh, a, uh, 9% increase in health
premiums that I haven't heard
any talk of that yet, but
certainly, uh, at this point in
time, our budget cannot sustain
that type of money. So with that
judge, I'm gonna
Call you judges, but you're all
esteemed colleagues. I'll stand
for questions. If if you have
any for me or for Miss Manson.
Excellent. Thank you very much.
District Attorney Key look first
to my left for any questions,
CNN out. Look to my right. I
don't see any. Uh, I wanna ask
briefly, District attorney Key.
It seems like the funded and we
I remember last year were sort
of
You emphasized the
prioritization for the HR. Uh,
person, which is great to see
that you filled that position.
We're still shown, um, an 8.8%.
Funded vacancy rate again. All
the caveats. This was a couple
of months ago, sort of a
snapshot in time.
In it shows roughly about
$420,000 of vacancy savings.
Has
Uh, what is the status of hiring
being able to utilize your
budget to to fill some of these
funded positions?
Mr Chairman and all members of
the committee great question
because that's the problem with
all the districts is recruitment
and retention. I will tell you
with anticipation that we have
for employees starting in about
a week. Not attorneys, though we
still have five vacancies for
attorneys fully funded.
And so our efforts with the HR
persons and other members of our
offices to go to law schools
around New Mexico and we have a
trip planned for Washington, D C
to go to the National District
Attorneys Association convention
where there there is a, uh, job
fair that we once again will
Will attempt to attend and to
recruit and retain people, So I
think there is some good news.
The attorneys position. It's
it's tough going to even get
resumes, quite frankly, so we're
going to have ongoing issues,
but certainly
Certain. Certainly some of the,
uh, help that we've had with
grants and
Some of the 6% funding has it
has assisted in making sure that
our current staff of attorneys
have signed on for sure for
another year. Uh and we're
hopeful that that will remain in
good standing for for all of us.
Thank, thank you very much, Mr
Attorney Key and thanks to our
staff, want to note and thank
you and congratulate you.
There was a 17% vacancy roughly
this time last year, and so it's
$730,000 in unused P s and D. B,
So we see the progress. We want
to celebrate that progress in
appreciate you sharing some of
the challenges that remain very
much want to say Thank you, Mr
Chairman.
Okay. Uh, we'll go ahead and ask
for the lfc recommendation and
go from there. Thank you, Mr
Chair. I would move the LFC
recommendation.
Okay, There's a motion.
Case in second by represented de
la Cruz. Is there any opposition
to adopting that motion?
Saying none. Thank you very
much. District Attorney. Thank
you very much.
Okay, Now we're gonna We're
going to the ninth.
Then the eighth than the 11th.
Mr Chairman. Members of the
committee will now be discussing
the ninth Judicial District
attorney Joining me today is the
ninth Judicial District Attorney
Quentin Ray. The business unit
for the agency is 259.
While the recommendations are
overall similar, the executive
recommendation is 37.1000 higher
than the LFC recommendation.
This difference is entirely
housed in the other category.
Both recommendations fully
funding agencies requested
increases in other contracts.
The executives recommendation is
37,000 higher than the other
category. Analysts reach
consensus on all performance
measures alternate over to my
counterpart
Thank you. Alison. Chairman, Mr
Mr Chair. Members of the
committee like Austin said. We
have a $37,000 difference just
in the other category for some
items that the agency wanted. So
with that we'll pass it on to Mr
D. A Quentin Ray.
Thank you, Mr Chairman and
Committee members. Just first
off. Thank you. Thank you for
last year's increases from my
secretaries to investigators,
the victim advocates those
razors go so far for your
people's families in New Mexico,
So thank you, Um, also just to
kind of hit on all the bases. We
are into supportive, getting
more money for interpreters for
the courts.
Ah, funding that jury pool money
as well as the CMS system for
our state D A s office is and
that's a system that doesn't
just function for the
prosecution's benefit. That's
also our system for the defense
bar to access our discovery on
cases and to look at police
reports. And so it is a system
that benefits the entire justice
system. And so we would ask for
that funding as well.
Um the increases that we are
asking for have to do with
hiring contract attorneys as
well as a digital marketing
campaign. Um, I don't understand
all the details of it, but it's
uh, geo fencing, and they target
law schools, and so we're pretty
excited about that. It's really
supposed to take off after the
February bar. Um and really try
to hit some people that are
hopefully
Willing to come to Mexico and
workforce.
Um, Lastly, I know it's the end
of the day. I know. Uh, you said
that there's gonna be lots of
you know you don't want to get
into the winners and losers of
it all. Well, I just was gonna
throw out a suggestion. In my
experience. Um, when you tell
everybody no.
They all kind of get mad at you
guys.
So I would suggest you tell one
person Yes. And then they will
all get mad at me and you know,
I would be willing to deal with
that and handle that.
Um And so, you know, if you need
a punching bag, let me be that
punching bag for you and I'll
take take all the blame but
otherwise, thank you for
anything and everything You're
willing to give us and I'll
stand for questions. Thank you
very much, Mr Attorney, right?
And if you are the final
district attorney that could be
a perfect strategy in the middle
Could be tough. Thank you very
much. I want to look first to my
right for any questions.
Look to the left briefly. I want
to note again.
Improvement in your funded
vacancies. I think that's
positive to see. We're told that
it was 17% last year. It's come
down substantially this year. So
congratulations on that. Uh,
finally, um, it seems like what
you're describing again, maybe
sort of a focus on technology
with a recruitment piece.
Uh, yes, Mr Chairman. So sorry.
It's so hard for me not to
stand. I'm so used to standing
in front of the judges. It takes
all of me to stay sitting. Um,
it is. It's, uh, I don't
understand the technology side
of it, but it's through LinkedIn
and social media. Um, and it's
you know, when people talking
about law school, Okay. Hey,
it's supposed to trigger and
it's kind of scary. The A I big
brother approach of the digital
world.
And how much they can pick up,
But that's the goal of it. Is
anybody you know, within a
certain geographical area of a
law school, Um and they talk
about law for it to trigger and
then try to personalize and hit
them with ads to get them to
check out our page, and that's
the goal is to get him to our
landing page, and then we gotta
sell them once we make contact
with us.
Thank you very much for that. It
sounds intriguing, um and and
just again, noting that that
that may be most appropriate
through sort of more technology
focused investments, knowing
that we've again done a lot of
this work around the personnel
that we see you really putting
the work.
Okay, I would then go ahead and
ask for the LFC recommendation.
Thank you, Mr Chair. I would
move the LFC recommendation.
Okay. It's been moved by Vice
Chair Dixon, second by represent
dela Cruz. There any opposition
to adopting that?
Okay, seeing none. Thank you
very much. Yes. Thank you, Mr
Chairman and Committee.
Okay?
We'll ask the eighth, uh,
judicial District.
And our illustrious chair.
District Attorney Montoya is
great to see you. Please feel
free to introduce members of
your team when we get over to
Mr Chair coming to members were
on the eighth Judicial District
Attorney Agency to 58. The
executive recommendation is
61.9000 higher than the LSE
recommendation.
We found the agencies expansion
requests, while LFC
recommendation focuses on the
base requests
Recommendation for the personnel
category is 164,000 higher than
the record recommendation for
the executive.
Both fully fund, the agency
slight increase in the contracts
or funding the increase in the
other.
The executive recommendation
fully funds. The agency's
requested expansions and the LFC
does not.
Pass it over to district
Attorney Marcus Montoya. Good
afternoon, Mr Chair.
Madam Vice chair Committee
members. Thank you for lying us
an opportunity. We present you
before you here today. I'd like
to introduce my district office
manager Victoria Bransford and
my special projects director
tomorrow. Howard there in the
back, and please allow me to
begin with a big thank you
because your investments in the
a judicial district attorney's
office over the last
Um, for years during my
administration have really born
a lot of fruit. We
Ms Bransford is going to scold
me after this because I'm not
supposed to say it out loud, but
we have only one vacancy. Um and
we are fully staffed had been
over. I think, 10 or 15 years.
Last year we came to you asking
for an expansion for I t We feel
that those two positions
immediately. They got straight
to work they built in
redundancies connectivity. A lot
of I T
Talk that goes right over most
of our heads over at the
judicial district Attorney's
office and your recommendation
is a generous appreciate your
continued support. Um and all
investments D a criminal justice
wise because your recruitment
retention monies, um when a long
ways and allowing us at least in
the eight to bring an attorney
from Washington to keep some of
our attorneys in place there in
the eighth as they grow their
skill set to become much more
marketable, and they have been
approached and recruited.
Go elsewhere not just in the
private sector but also for
other state agencies. And so
we're able to keep them. So it's
again. A lot of just thank you
for that.
Um, Additionally, the one
difference? Uh, you know that
we're going to be asking between
your recommendation and the
recommendation. It's not about
the number. I don't want to
necessarily the bigger number.
It's the expansions. Um, I can't
imagine having to come here for
probably the next four years
unless something occurs. That's
unforeseen. But the expansion
one of the victim, assistant
coordinator
And then another for lead
investigator and for many of you
that might have seen in the news
this last calendar year. The
eight dealt with the middle of
the town Memorial Day shooting
where we had 58 people shot five
people dead and trying to
coordinate that much.
Evidence. Um, that doesn't many
witnesses there was many victims
is a near impossibility. It's a
near impossibility. Um, some of
our victim's families. We're
learning about hearings and what
was happening with cases before
we were able to contact them.
And so, um, corralling that much
evidence to be ready for a
preliminary examination.
pretrial detention hearing in a
small district with limited
resources is again near
impossible within a 10 day
period from a massive
Of undertaking like that, Um and
I don't want to be a doomsday
scenario type of individual, but
you know, it's as many of you
well know, have heard probably
more so than we have. Um, the
Prospect of just Middletown
Midday shootings is ever
growing, and we were ill
positioned to deal with
something like that. And so
we're not asking for fluff. And
for what we don't need. These
two expansions would be
immediately put to work and for
good purposes because we are
also the first district to
charge Benny's bill.
When we had a 14 year old shoot
a 13 year old school starting
two weeks later, and the victim
outreach necessary to not just
reach the victim's family, but
also, those students in a small
community was massive, and we
didn't have the resources or the
network to do that, um, lacking
11 position who could also
oversee a lot of the other
victims, outreach and
coordination. And so we tasked
our
Special programs director Miss
Howard with her network and
resources to coordinate that
effort, But it's still again
that took 2 to 3. Weeks out. Um,
and they need a little bit more
prompt response and service. So
these really are
Citizen oriented request that
we're making. Um I guess that
being said, um I don't have
anything else to add, except
again much gratitude and things
to this body, and, uh, observing
and witnessing many of this
committee members work during
the summer year round in every
corner of the state instilled a
lot of confidence that your
recommendations are taken
seriously, And for that I
appreciate in central questions.
Thank you very much district
attorney months later and go to
represent Sanchez, please. Thank
you, Mr Chair. Uh, like with
other D A s. I think this is
another minor Add. We need to
look at when we consider. Thank
you, Mr Chairman.
Thank you very much represented
Sanchez.
Okay. I don't see any other, uh
We're still months away, Please.
Um, thank you for your
indulgence, Mr Chair. This is
more personal than anything
else. I just want to ask the D A
F, uh, were you adopted?
Mr Chair.
Madam Vice chair, representative
Montoya, I if you have any
knowledge of my family, Leo
background, I hope so. I was
just wondering because his hair
is way too nice for Montoya.
Oh,
right. Okay. Uh, are there any
other questions? Seeing none
were gonna ask from the vice
chair for a motion, please?
Thank you, Mr Chair. I would
move the LFC recommendation as
we've been doing, Uh,
Thank you Continued attention.
Okay. Is there a second?
Okay. It's been saying by
representative Luhan, certainly
opposition to that motion seeing
none. Thank you.
Yes.
Thank you very much.
Okay, We're gonna see District
Ernie, Ted row there.
We're going to the 11th Judicial
district, starting with Division
one.
Mr Chairman, members of the
committee. We will now be
discussing the 11th district
Attorney Division one Joining me
today is the district Attorney
Rick Ted Row. The business unit
for the agency is 261.
The executive recommendation is
390,000 0.4 higher than the LFC
s recommendation.
The recommendations also differ
in the contracts category that
are similar in the other
category.
The executive recommendation for
personnel is 454,000 higher than
the L. C s recommendation.
The L. C recommendation 63.6000
higher than the executives
recommendation and contracts.
Recommendations both fully fund
the agency's requested 96,000
increase in the other category.
Both recommendations fully fund
the agency's requested vocal
funding. The LFC and executive
did not recommend the agencies,
Other expansions on now turn it
over to Mario.
Chairman committee members.
Thank you, Austin. I don't think
I have anything to add to that.
So that's it onto Mr D. A.
This attorney general. Great to
see you. Thanks for being here.
Mr Chair. Thank you. Um, and
thank you for this opportunity.
I would like to thank the
members of the committee here.
We did see a lot of you during
the summer, So it's great to see
you back here with the good true
representatives. Not a lot of
those senators over here bugging
us. So good to see you all, um
To be honest with you. I
couldn't really tell you which
wreck I would like.
Um
Of course, everybody wants more
money to do stuff. Um, my
concern is what I really wanted
was the ability to add some
positions.
And I tell you that because of
trying to think outside the box.
Right now. I'm sitting at about
a 20% vacancy when it comes to
my attorneys Just lost one last
week, I lost the deputy who took
a job as the workers comp judge.
Um
What with no resumes to replace,
um the recruitment retention has
helped me retain some younger
ones.
But other ones that are looking
at judgeships or looking at
different things there. They
flat out, sat there and told me
I'm not going to take this
recruitment contention until I
know more about what's going on
there.
So
Hey, it's helping. What doesn't
help is again in our state.
We've got one law school.
You guys wanna an idea? Let's
talk to New Mexico State about
getting a second law school
here, you know, you and M puts
out maybe 100 to 120 lawyers
Year for us.
The PDS need that number alone.
The D A s need that number
alone. Plus, we're not bringing
them in there. They're not
coming.
Professional certification that
the bar exam
The license that goes with an
attorney or not coming to the
state of New Mexico. Right now,
it's just as simple as that. So
that's where we're hurting and
what I really wanted to be able
to do is look and think outside
the box. Could I add more
investigators to help with stuff
could I add?
Paralegals to helpless to help
the attorneys. Unfortunately,
Sam one college up in Farmington
doesn't have a paralegal program
anymore. So we're
How am I going to recruit
apparent legal?
You know to to come up to our
area, so it's been a lot of
recruitment issues for our area.
You know, we're not a major hub
when it comes down Interstate.
We don't have an interstate
going through us like others do,
Uh,
Durango has an airport an hour
away, but no direct flights
anywhere, you know? So so we
don't have a lot of those
luxuries up in the four corners
that make it attractive for
people to get their especially
professionals, and we're
suffering from it. So what I
want to be able to do with our
budget is being able to sit
there and say, Okay, I'm gonna
change that position or two,
apparently Gle or I'm going to
add somebody in here that can
help this attorney
Get their caseload down because
I can't get that attorney in
there yet. Um, so that's the
bigger thing when it comes to
what we want to see the ability
of our office to do, and that's
to make changes. Um, I think a
couple of them have forgotten
it. I'm going to try not to. I
would like to say yes, the
courts. We need to make sure we
got jury trials happening.
And the interpreter issue that
came up but I'm also really
going to emphasize the D
administrative Office of the D A
s needs to get this computer
system done for us. That is a
must the D A s have met and
talked about it. It is an
absolute must for us from a
statewide position for us to
have that system up and going.
So I know I have heard it
mentioned that you guys will
talk about it, but I would like
to stand in full support along
with my other, uh, D a s in
emphasizing the need that that
needs to get done and finished
And going with that I would
stand for any questions and
again. I thank you all for your
time and your efforts here in
Santa Fe
Thank you very much. Mr
Attorney, Ted Row look first to
my right for any questions.
To my left. Uh, I'll ask just
briefly, Um, district attorney
to clarify, Are you proposing
sort of turning attorney
positions into investigator or
paralegal or other positions? Or
is this a view noted the
challenge with hiring attorneys.
It's sort of new positions on
top of or trading some existing
positions for others that may be
as easier to recruit.
Mr Chair. Thank you, Um, a
little bit of both. To be honest
with you, Um
We are very concerned with case
management rules that are coming
out. I'll tell you right now, if
I'm down for attorneys were not
ready. We can't do it. Um, so so
there's a found of maybe doing
both. Maybe we look at okay if I
got four. If I could get two
attorneys and then I, You know,
we do the Jake us and we changed
the job titles and descriptions.
We'll look at that.
So, but to answer your question,
I think it's a little bit of
both. Thank you very much for
the feedback very much
appreciated. Thank you for the
emphasis on the case management
system again. I think we heard
earlier.
Yes. 2.3 out of $2.5 million
from an appropriation this
legislature made remains
unexpended there, so I think
it's something that's coming
through where we all have an
interest in making sure that
that gets utilized the vast
majority of that, whether it's
two or three years has remained
in spirit.
Okay, we'll go ahead and ask for
the lfc recommendation. Um, go
from there.
Thank you, Mr Chair. I would
move the LFC recommendation for
the time being. Okay. It's been
moved by vice chair Dixon,
second by representing Montoya.
Is there any opposition to that
motion, saying none. Thank you
very much. District Attorney.
Mr Chair.
I apologize, Um
Nor normally.
I forgot to introduce my guest.
So at this time, I would just
like to point out that my CFO
Amy Han is with us, and I would
like to thank the analysts for
their help from us, and I'm
sorry I missed that earlier.
Thanks. We can always take the
time to give it thank you very
much.
Absolutely.
Okay, We're gonna go now to, um
um, our Division two
For
Judith for the 11th. I don't
know that that they're here.
Thank you very much. Mr Valdez
for stepping in the
Mr Chair. Committee members were
on agency to 6511 Judicial
District division to McKinley
County.
The LSC and executive
recommendations differ by
$76,000 different to spread
across each of the categories.
Lfc s 47.9 hiring personnel
executive is 55,000 higher in
contracts and 69.9000 higher in
the other category.
The agency did not request any
expansions and the analysts have
reached consensus on all
performance measures.
Pass it on to the agency.
Mr Chairman, representative. I
don't have anything to add in
terms of the agency. I just
think that maybe some context
for the LFC s recommendation for
this agency. This agency has had
a large reversion in comparison
to its operating budget and has
a very large vacancy rates. So I
think those are things that were
taken into consideration and
it's certainly an outlier.
In regards to the other day, So
thank you. Thank thank you very
much, Mr Davidson.
Okay. Thank you for stepping in,
Mr Valdez. We don't expect
anything unless you'd like to
offer anything additional, Mr
Chairman, just, uh
I did expect Ms Martin to be
here.
Um, she had communicated with
our office as early as early as
as late as this afternoon. This
is gonna be here. So I'm
actually concerned because I
don't know where she's at. I do
just to bring a little, um
Context. To what
Um Austin was talking about is
there is a really high vacancy
rate and the
The 11th division to, um
The district attorney. There is
Had a really difficult time.
Trying to recruit and maintain
staff in Gallup.
Um And I think, uh, if she were
here, she would certainly ask
for the recommendation.
Thank you very much, Mr Wilders,
and we certainly hope that
everybody is okay and safe.
Okay. Are there any questions?
I don't see any questions.
What advice chair.
Thank you, Mr Chair. I would at
this time move the LFC
recommendation.
It's been moved by Vice Chair
Dixon second by represented
Herndon. Is there any opposition
to adopting that motion?
Seeing then.
Thank you.
We're gonna continue on We're
going to ask District Attorney
Wellborn. Thank you for coming
on up.
This is the seventh judicial
district.
And of course, please feel free
to introduce the members of your
team who are here.
Okay? And let's hold on Just one
quick sec. We're getting some
different sheets passed out for
the seventh. That will make sure
you have members have before we
kick it up.
Everyone good.
Thank you very much for Marty,
Uh, will go ahead, Mr Siviglia,
if you can kick us off here
Well, go go on.
Mr Chair Committee, members of
the seventh Judicial district
Attorney to 57 is the agency
code. The LFC and executive
recommendations both fully fund
the agency's request. They
fulfilled 107.2% $107.2000
increase in the personnel
category and the increases in
the contract, another category.
There were no expansions and no
disagreements on performance
measures, so pass it on to
district Attorney Washburn.
Good.
They're all
They go. Afternoon, Mr Chairman,
members of the committee. I'm
Clint Welborn, the seven
traditional district attorney,
which is Katherine, Sierra,
Socorro and Torrance counties.
Uh, this is my 24th. House
finance hearing in this is Mr
Mauldin, my CFO. This is his
28th hearing.
Uh um.
Those recommendations Lfc, an
executor of the same, uh
I happy to report that the help
that the Legislature gave us
last year in the years previous
has enabled us to fill attorney
positions. Uh
And prior to Christmas. We were
fully staffed. We did have an
attorney leave right before
Christmas. And since January
we've had investigator retire.
Ah, we have a new attorney that
will be starting in February.
And we're currently doing
interviews for new
investigators, so hopefully
we'll be fully staffed again. We
are asking to fund a secretary
position, which is a position
where I have, but its unfunded.
That position would be, uh,
placed in Socorro to help with
the caseload there, and also
with the CMS Case management
system.
And, uh,
With that I'll stand for any
questions.
Thank you very much, Uh,
district turning Wellborn. Ah,
any questions?
I don't see any
Okay?
Thank you, Mr Chair. I would
move the LFC recommendation.
Okay, It's been moved by vice
Chair Dixon, second by represent
Vladimir. Is there any
opposition to that?
Saying none.
Thank you very much onto the
25th hearing coming up.
Thank you very much. And
congratulations on filling the
positions. It's really
incredible to see
Kate, we're gonna now ask the
10th judicial district.
And again say, thanks to Mr
Valdez for stepping in
Mr Chairman. Members of the
committee will be discussing the
10th judicial district attorney,
the business unit for the
agencies to 60.
The LFC and executive
recommendations both fully fund
the agency's request. Both
recommendations, funding
agencies slight increases in the
personnel contracts and other
category agency did not request
any expansions in the analysts
on consensus on all performance
measures and targets turned over
to Mario. Mr Chair. I have
nothing to add.
Mr Chairman, Mr. Rose could not
be here. And I was aware of
that. Um, he did ask me to read
this short statement.
I apologize for not being able
being able to make the budget
hearing on to express my
appreciation for each other
analysts and members of the
committee for all their hard
work and careful consideration
you put into the state's budget
every year.
The 10th additional district is
doing well and requested a small
increase of 37 K.
To its base budget. Both LFC and
dfe have recommended adoption of
our question, actually
appreciate your consideration as
well.
Tim Rose. Thank you very much.
Okay. Committee members will go
straight for emotion. Thank you,
Mr Chair. I would move the LFC
motion recommendation. Okay,
It's been moved by vice chair
Dixon, second by represented
Chatfield. Is there any
opposition to adopting that
saying none. Thank you.
Kay. Now we'll go into the 13th
Judicial district.
As district attorney Romo thanks
for coming up.
Mr Chair Committee members were
on the 13th Judicial District
Attorney Agency Co. 263
executive recommendation is
$590,000 higher than the LFC
recommendation.
This difference is solely house
and the personnel category and
there's no expansions and no, um
um disagreements on performance
measures. So if Alice
Pass it on to district Attorney
Barbara Roma
Good afternoon.
Mr Chair, Ms Vice chair and
members of the committee. My
name is Barbara Romo. I am the
district attorney for the 13th
Judicial District, which
includes Sibella Sandoval in
Valencia counties.
Um, I also want to start by
sincerely thanking the committee
members for all that you do for
the state, and particularly this
committee. I know it's a very
difficult committee and we do
all appreciate your efforts. And
I also want to thank the two
analysts, Um, for all their hard
work, I would like to introduce
also my chief financial officer.
Miss Anna castles to my right.
She is responsible for, um,
making sure that I have remained
fiscally responsible for three
years, and I appreciate her for
that.
Ah, we are asking for the full
recommendation of funding from D
F a
Um one thing that I would like
to stress is that that money is
going to go completely to salary
and benefits. You'll notice that
our other categories have
remained flat.
Um It's very important to me and
I take my fiscal responsibility
very seriously. And in that
regard, I can tell this
committee that I reverted even
less this year than I did last
year. Last year. I think I was
at 3%. This year. We reverted.
Um $1.5000, which is one less
than 1%.
And in addition to that, we've
had zero audit findings for the
last two years.
The reason it's important that
we can We found that these
vacancies we unlike some of the
other districts that you've
heard from, we are not fully
staffed, and we have not been
fully staffed were up a little
bit from last year, but we still
have 12 vacancies and 11. Those
of those vacancies are attorney
vacancies, and that's the reason
that our attorney caseload is so
high.
It's it's
Right now it's over. It's 289.
That's the average with
That's the average caseload for
attorney and if it if the D F a
funding was received, um we
would be able to fill those 12
positions and the caseload would
decrease to approximately 190,
which is still high, but it's
It's better and and I do want to
emphasize and I know it's it's
late, and I appreciate y'all's
patients meeting the last one.
But, um
The reason that it's It's so
important to to fund the A o D a
request, uh, to get that general
technology up and running. Um I
ask you all to take into
Consider it Nation what happened
today?
When the video feed went out.
It's a big disruption, right?
Imagine that happening in 14
different districts.
And how many multiple courtrooms
It. It causes causes chaos, and
it really is important that that
all of those, um
That that that mattered does
Get taken care of in whatever
way that we can take care of it.
So again. I thank you all for
your hard work, and I will stand
for questions. Thank you very
much. District Attorney Romo,
uh, gotta straight towards some
Garcia, please.
Thank you, Mr Chairman. D A, uh
You mentioned that your vacancy
readers 20.
1%
Yes, sir.
That's correct, Mr Chairman.
No, there's a $590,000
difference between one another
and you know, I talked to LFC
staff for a little while ago.
And
The D A. Said that the they
reverted $1000.
The L C staff said they had
reverted a million
And you know it might be a type
of error.
And I asked the LFC staff with
that had any bearing on this
$590,000. You just said it would
So you know, before we make a
decision could we re revisit
this Because it's a lot of
money, you know, and and run
rule in New Mexico. It's really
hard to get attorneys to begin
with.
And and to have that much of a
cutting funding.
It is going to be devastating
And you know, Mr Chairman, if
you could do we could do that. I
would really appreciate that.
Thank you very much represent
Garcia.
Um
Other other? Yes, represent
Baca, please.
Thank you, Mr Chairman. And
thank you for that. I'm going to
echo what I said earlier.
It's you know the vacancies. You
guys also have such a high
caseload. And when we look at
the types of cases you guys are
dealing with. There's some of
our more serious cases. So we've
got to clear up some things. I
do appreciate that. We're going
to take a look at that.
But I do. Thank you. District
Attorney for what you do. And,
uh, you know, as I said, before,
I do think that just like with
these others, we have to take a
serious look and make sure that
they have what they need to set.
Thank you very much for absent
Baca Briefly. District Attorney
Romo, I want to ask, Um, what
I'm being told. It's roughly
about $865,000 requested
increased focus around three
positions.
Is that accurate?
That's not completely accurate,
If if I could have my CFO
explain that she can talk about
the numbers easier than I can
absolutely.
Members of the committee. We
currently have, um, a 15%
vacancy rate, which is and, um,
11 of those are attorney
positions and three are support
staff.
Okay, Um
And for the
Uh, okay. Um And and I'm trying
to understand. Thank you very
much in terms of the requested
increases that meant to address
attorney positions, support
staff positions or is that how
do you break that down? Just so
that we know.
I I'll start by saying it's
mostly for attorney positions
and I we do recognize that
that's not going to fully fund
all 12 positions. Our priority
is for attorneys, although we do
need additional support staff,
but the additional funds we know
that fund all 12, but we also
are realistic.
And we've been looking at the
trends and what we can
realistically expect to hire.
Um we're not getting the
applications we've had. I think
I pondered this as I listened to
my colleagues.
About
Why some of them have been able
to reduce their their
Vacancy rates and all I can tell
you is that I without doing and
in depth, sociological
experiment. I do know that our
location is somewhat unique.
Our counties are spread out very
far.
It's hard to get someone who
listened to metro area that
wants to live in one of those
other two areas, number one and
number two. More importantly,
because we're located. We have
more competition from the other
D A s
You know they they can live in
Rio, Rancho and working
Albuquerque. They can work in
Santa Fe. They can work in the
You know they they can live in
Rio, Rancho and working
Albuquerque. They can work in
Santa Fe. They can work into
seventh. We get that kind of
competition. And you know, we've
we've done what we can. And I
will say you're the refunds. The
retention funds have helped to
retain some people, but, you
know, unfortunately, like two of
our vacancies right now are from
Two attorneys who retired in
December. So you know, filling
those is going to be a little
bit more time consuming. Thank
you for that.
I thank you for that. We're also
showing 400 basically $420,000
in vacancy savings in which I
guess if this was pre December,
so that's likely increased with
the retirement of those two
positions. You just Yes, please.
I just wanted to reiterate, um
Of those vacant positions with
the funding of the 600,000 is
not going to feel all 12, but
it'll feel about six attorney
positions at the assistant trial
level level. Um
Basic salary. Okay, we recognize
that we are having a hard time
recruiting. So rather than ask
for full funding of all those
vacant positions, it's like if
we can have half of that, then
we can at least hire six
attorney positions. Okay, Thank
thank you very much. Thank you
for going into a bit more
detail. Okay? I don't see any
other questions. Members again.
We're
Broadly looking trying to build
on the increases that we made in
district Attorney's knowing that
our revenue has plateau owing
and that our ability to make
general fund commitments as
being
Constrained, but broadly
members, please rest assured
that we want to do continue to
make the new investments that
we've done over the last few
years with that, we'd ask for
emotion.
Thank you, Mr Chair. I would
move the LFC recommendation.
Okay, It's been moved. Is there
a second?
Case, second from representative
Luhan moved by Vice chair Dixon
turning opposition to that
saying none. Thank you very
much. District Attorney Roman.
Thank you for your team.
Absolutely. Thank you. Sorry.
Okay, We're gonna ask the fourth
Judicial district now, Uh,
District Attorney Clayton.
Mr Chair. Members of the
committee will be going to the
fourth Judicial district
Attorney Joining me today is the
fourth D. A Thomas Clayton
Business unit for the agency is
254.
The LFC executive
recommendations differ by
28.8000 executive recommendation
fully funds, the agency's
request executive recommendation
for the contracts category is
38.9000 higher. TLC's
recommendation.
You'll see recommendation takes
into account the agency's
request for funds to help
recruit and retain staff through
the offices. Rural location
resulted in the L. C
recommendation being 10,000
higher and the personnel
category.
Both recommendations fully
funding agencies slight increase
In the other category. Analysts
reached consensus on all
performance measures and targets
alternate over to Mario.
Mr Chairman. Nothing to add to
hear from Mr D. A
Uh, good afternoon. My name is
Tom Clayton, Mr Chair and
members of the Committee. Um,
with me. I have my CFO Cristina
Chavez and, uh, for someone to
say Thank you, Uh, we represent
We, um
Mora County, Guadalupe County,
San Miguel County.
Um we're in the heart of north
Central New Mexico, Um, God's
country as we call it.
Now, um
Or small in population, but
we're big and land size.
Um well, first I want to talk
about the successes. I think the
retention the funds that we did
receive. I want to say thank
you.
It helped retain some of our
attorneys.
Not all of them.
But it did help.
Um, I have 11 ft. Ease for
attorneys.
Currently five vacancies.
That's where I'm having my
struggles. My successes are my
support staff is probably top
notch put him up against any
agency anywhere in the state.
Anywhere.
And we have and there are the
core of my office. So we have
one FTE vacancy with the sports
staff.
But the struggle is the
attorneys as you've heard from
the other turn Other D A s
Um
So with that, I mean, we had 10
attorneys at one point and I
lost three within the last six
months, one to retirement, one
to the courts and went to
another, a state agency.
And it's It's really resources.
Compensation.
That's where it's coming down
to.
And so that's the struggle that
we're facing, Um, the other
issue. I just wanted to bring
your attention is the issue of
fentanyl. It was it was
addressed. I think during the
presentation of one of the
courts, I think Judge Shannon
Robinson know Shannon Judge Jeff
Shannon out of the eight
judicial district.
Fentanyl is hitting our
community. It's hidden hard.
And because of that, we're
seeing an increase in narcotic
cases.
That's turning into an increase
in caseload regarding that go to
trial.
Um, I I will tell you the trials
and in my district are going up
and so we're seeing that so
you're feeling it with the
courts? Juries? Um, pain jurors,
Um, interpreters, things of that
nature in my district, and I
can't speak for any of the other
districts. But I can tell you in
my district public spenders
office.
We have contract attorneys in my
office in my district. That's
it, and they're struggling.
Their caseloads are up.
So you know, it is, as you know,
Chairman is Excuse me. President
Montoya talked about the
judicial system. The courts
public defenders if we're if one
piece is missing, then almost
are feeling it.
So I am an employee. You to look
at funding the courts
adequately. The public
defender's office adequately.
But in last year I would be
remiss if I didn't tell you the
D. A S office case management
system CMS. Is he sensual
without it As as, uh, D A. Romo
indicated.
The system goes down, as you all
experienced earlier this
afternoon, as mentioned by the
Romo.
We all feel it.
And and that is significant. And
if that goes down through the
entire state, it's problematic.
So I asked, um, that you look at
that. Look at that closely, um
You know, r o D office and
director and his staff have been
doing a fabulous job.
It is a struggle with technology
as it is it advances. You know,
this system has been in place
almost 20 years. So I asked you
to do that. So I'll stand for
any questions. Thank you very
much. District Attorney Clayton.
Um look first to my left for any
questions.
Then to my right, Sanchez, Mr.
Chair again. Uh, I'm glad we're
revisiting a lot of these
budgets, and I just wanted to
make that quick comment. I want
to support
District attorney. Thank you.
Excellent. Thank you very much.
Representative Sanchez in Thank
you. District, Ernie Clayton.
Again. We see progress on the
funded vacancy piece and really
hear the emphasis on technology
investments and pointed out, but
it's a great example that we
sort of experience that and to
think about how
Those interruptions can impact,
especially in judicial
proceedings. Okay, we're going
to ask for the LFC
recommendation and continue to
work across all of our district
Attorney's Thank you, Mr Chair,
I would move the lfc
recommendations,
Okay, It's been signed by
ranking member Armstrong. Is
there any opposition to that
motion saying none. Okay. Thank
you very much. District
Attorney.
Okay, We're gonna ask the second
judicial districts. District
Attorney Bregman to come up. I
also want to thank the district
Attorney. I know you've been
here, uh, the entirety of the
time and
Short travel, but you've been in
the audience. So there we go.
Please feel free to introduce
members of your team when we get
to that point as well.
Mr Chair Committee members were
on the second Judicial district
Attorney Agency to five to the
executive recommendation is $1.5
million higher than the LFC.
It is. The increases for
agencies requested increase its
attorney base, the difference
between the executive and LFC
recommendations exist solely in
the personnel category.
executive recommends an increase
of 2.8 million to go towards the
hiring of attorney positions.
Both recommendations fulfill the
decrease in contracts and other
categories.
We've reached consensus on
performance measures and both
recommendations fully funding
agencies expansion request Pass
along to District Attorney Sam
Bregman.
Mr Chairman, members of the
committee. It is an honor to be
in front of all of you all
today. Thank you for that
opportunity. I do want to
introduce some of my amazing
staff. That's here by district
manager Andrea Martinez, chief
Deputy District Attorney Josh
Boone, Deputy District Attorney
Victoria's LeBlanc, and that's
just to name a few. There's a
few others out there, but I'm
grateful for this opportunity
and
And I don't have to tell all of
you the challenges that
Albuquerque has been facing for
the last several years when it
comes to crime.
But I think I want to take this
opportunity to tell all of you
all the good things that the
attorney that the district
attorney's office is doing.
In Berlin, Leo County.
Number one as you can see by the
handout that's up on the screen
right now. I'm just some very
basic things.
We had. We did twice as many
felony trials as we did the year
before, and we had a 10%
increase in the conviction rate.
Um, our conviction rate in
metropolitan Court, which
handles thousands of cases was
at 81% or pretrial detention
motions. We filed more and were
granted 10% more of them.
Um
I'm really proud of the entire
office in the work, they're
doing diversion.
Over 2400 cases were diverted
out of our office, including
385 participants in our in
house.
Prosecution diversion program on
average out of that program,
95% of the participants
successfully complete the
program.
One of the things I'm most proud
of, and certainly it is in large
part of the people that are here
with me. Today is our ability to
hire and dealing with the
vacancy rate that we did just so
you know.
In the last 12 months or offices
hired 49 attorneys and we've
hired 40 to support staff for a
total of 91 individuals working
in Burnley of County District
Attorney's Office, which makes
up almost one third of the
total, Um, authorized positions,
and that's where I come to this
point.
Um, this legislature is
authorized a toll of 337
positions. What I asked for in
my budget was to simply give me
0% vacancy budget because given
the opportunity I will do it
currently only have 23 attorney
positions left, but I have
slowed that process down. I
pulled up on the reins and said
Whoa!
Because I don't want to violate.
Obviously a budget in a huge
way. Um, and that's why I'm here
today asking for a 0% vacancy
budget.
Um, I can do this in two months.
If you give me the opportunity,
I can feel my attorney positions
every single one of them, and I
can assure you that we have
shown what we've already been
able to do. Byron Buying 12
months hiring 46. We have people
that we have interviewed that
are waiting to hear from us
right now.
There are a ton of attorneys
that want to work in a great
district attorney's office in
the middle of this beautiful,
wonderful state.
Obviously they got a lot of work
and they know it. We have a lot
of work down there, but it's a
great place to work. I want to
continue this opportunity if
given the choice between the LFC
and the executive, Of course, I
want the executive because it's
giving us more opportunity to do
just what I want to do. Let me
just kind of end with this on
why it's so important.
To be able to get fully
authorized positions fully
funded.
When I took this office or a 10
prosecutors doing homicides.
They had an average of 50.
Cases apiece.
That is just way too many cases.
Homicide prosecutors. These
aren't of course cases you pick
up the file and walk off the
court. They take a tremendous
amount of preparation.
We've reduced that number
substantially and where its way
down into the thirties and
twenties. Now that makes a big
difference because that at the
end of the day is what I really
believe is doing justice
providing a jury.
With good evidence. Good facts,
good witnesses prepared cases to
let the jury decide guilty or
not guilty and at the end of the
day
Better cases are presented with
less caseloads and more
attorneys. We can accomplish
that. I'm happy to answer any
questions that you all may have,
Mr Chairman. Thank you.
Absolutely. Thank you. District
Attorney. Thanks for your team
being here today. Uh, go first
my left. We'll start with
Mandela Cruise.
Thank you, Mr Chairman. I don't
have a question for the D A. I
just want a couple of minutes
work.
He has hit the ground running
and and all the cookie burly, Oh
county and somebody's greatly
needed and just want to express
my appreciation is John. Thank
you. Thank you. Thank you very
much. Representative dela Cruz.
Next, we're gonna go to
represent Luhan and represent
Montoya. Thank you, Mr Chair. I
think he was a D A for being
here. I just wanted to ask a
little bit more about your
diversion program. What is
What is expensive that how are
you? Growing it, Mr Chair.
So we
Unfortunately, there's plenty of
opportunity because obviously we
are focusing on
Trying to keep people who
normally would not be in the
criminal justice system if it
were not for drug addictions,
perhaps mental health issues but
mostly drug addictions, first
time offenders that do not have
a history of any kind of violent
Criminal activity, but rather
Or out there. Whatever type of
crime it might be at a low
level, nonviolent crime and we
are to our justice for form unit
in our office when we screened
the cases, we talked to the
version about every case that
comes in to see if it's
appropriate. So we we send them
to them. We have
For lack of a better term off
probation officers within our
office that actually, um follow
them. Make them come in check in
with them. They have to do
random drug test. I will say
something while you're on it,
and just
This is an important issue.
And you've heard about all the
support about the courts they're
asking for. I wholeheartedly
support every bit of it. The
public defender's office the
entire criminal justice system,
but right now in Bernalillo
County
A drug court is at capacity or
mental health quarters. That
capacity are opt in court, which
deals with addiction as well. Is
that capacity are young adult
court is at capacity. There is
no room. They're not taking
anybody else right now.
Um, So our diversion program
we're still taking it. We
anticipate over 500 people
coming in, but I just think it's
really important that we
continue to give people an
opportunity to stay out of
criminal justice. Let him get
the treatment. I know this
Legislature knows that this
committee knows that as well as
anybody. I just can't prosecute
completely your way out of the
issues with fentanyl and in the
drug addiction that's going on.
I hope I answered some of your
questions a little bit. Thank
you. I I'm happy to believe that
we need to grow our diversion
programs and they are working
and I think that's the take home
message I'm receiving from you
as I am with other diversion
programs, But it's not enough.
Just one small piece of the
puzzle as we're looking at
repeat offenders and putting
people back on the street
streets were repeatedly I think
that was what we we heard and
understood during the interim
hearings we had and how
That is impacting just the
amount of work and just how much
more work you need to do. Thank
you, Mr Chair. Thank you very
much. Represent 100%. Montoya,
please. Thank you, Mr Chair and
D a bregman. First off
compliments to what you've done
in a short period of time. I
appreciate that. I think
everyone around the state of New
Mexico appreciates how quickly
Kind of turn the office around.
Um
Also you're hiring, um, that now
I know why all the other days
are having a hard time hiring.
They're all going to your
office. Um, to that point, um,
Mr Chair. Maybe you could
continue recruiting and just to
go beyond your number and just
Direct them to other parts of
the state chairman. I would be
happy representative, I would be
happy to do that, given the
opportunity, So I appreciate
that. Maybe we have a rapid
higher throughout the rest of
the state, and maybe your office
needs to help our other D A s
with rapid hires.
Um one last small doubt. Mr
Chair, Go. Astros.
Yeah, but then you're upsetting
Montoya. We're now going to go
to Vice chair Dixon.
Thank you, Mr Chair. Um
District attorney Bregman Um
Couple of things that I'd like
for you just to touch on that.
I've heard you know that that
you've been working on in the
second judicial district, which
I think is helpful when we talk
about your staffing.
And vacancy and and the need for
additional folks. Um
What is the impact been on
having members of your team step
up on some of the shoplifting.
Cases. Sure, thank you for the
question. Certainly the biggest
stressor on the staff as far as
and Mr Chairman, representative,
um
Before for those who don't know
we had, officer um
Prosecuted misdemeanor
shoplifting cases in
metropolitan court. In other
words, officers would be the
ones prosecuting cases.
Um not because the officer's
fault, but it certainly wasn't
working with a 15% conviction
rate. So many cases being
dismissed. I remember 30 years
ago when I was assistant
District attorney. Our office
prosecutes shoplifting. Now we
have 14 prosecutors in
metropolitan court that until we
made a change in policy, we're
doing nothing but dws domestic
violence for the most part.
With the exception of some
other sometimes obscure type
cases, um, that we would enter
appearance on But now we're
entering on every single
misdemeanor case. I want to
believe that 160
about 263 misdemeanors since
September, 1st in metropolitan
Court that we've entered our
appearance on. That's a lot of
them now, at the same time.
In those those metropolitan
courts, the different
courtrooms. We have a prosecutor
assigned to that or so there
there anyways. So when those
shoplifting cases come up on
their docket, they're able to
work with him. But the amount of
discovery is pretty intense when
it comes from the retail outlets
from the businesses that are
being the victims of
shoplifting, and we have to
gather all that.
So the so the pressure point has
been on our staff support staff,
the paralegals people that
gather up the discovery people
that make sure we disperse it
all out to the proper defense
counsel and everybody else.
That's where that pressure
points. Ben and I point out
that, um, we if given the
opportunity, we will hire more
and more support staff to
There is an abundance amount of
work. I opened 14,000 cases this
last year and that and that was
after not taking about 3000
cases so that were referred by
law enforcement because we
didn't believe they met certain
standards, so there's a
tremendous amount of work. And,
um, if I won't gripe about
anything you all do. I think
your job is so amazingly hard
and I will respect anything and
everything you do will just go
back and grind with whatever we
have to do. You'll never hear me
complain or blame anybody.
In this room or anybody in the
courtroom.
For what happens except the
criminal. Perhaps so at the end
of the day, I just want you to
know I'm grateful for just the
opportunity to tell you that if
you want the platinum level down
there and burn Leo County
Please give us the funding to do
it. You're still always gonna
get the gold standard, I
promise. But if you want the
platinum level, give us the
chance. Thank you, Mr Chair.
Thank you. District Attorney
Could you also talk a little bit
about the special supplemental
and deficiency? I know that
we're we deal with those
separately. But, um
The requests for the second
judicial district attorney deal
with, um, staffing, uh, and
shortfalls. And so I'm just
wondering if if you can talk a
little bit about that, let me
first address the deficiency. I
believe that was some last
fiscal year. And if I speak out
of turn, I know Andrea. Correct
me, my wonderful district
manager.
Um, as you all know, I got a
appointed in the middle of this
that last fiscal year when I
took office and I assembled the
team, the attorney general took
much of his HR and support staff
with him. No blaming going on
there. That's fine.
But it turns out there was a
Critical.
Um, air not accounting there,
but input air wrong.
To the tune of close to I
believe it was a million
dollars. Um
The
Checks and balances. You would
think that were in place didn't
always work, and I am not. I
don't mean to even do that.
Our analysts have been great on
both sides. But apparently there
was a miss with the FAA that
should have caught that We would
not have known it until we go
all the way through and at the
end, we find out
It was a it was a mistake by
close to a million dollars that
was inputted in the previous
administration and the FAA and
everybody else, said
Marked up the books and you can
explain better, perhaps Andrea
than I can, but it seemed like
it was fine. Then we discovered
and, of course, that result
That's the result of the
deficiency now as far as the
supplementals concerned.
Um, Andre tells me I'm gonna run
out of money. If you don't get
more money. If I want to hire
anybody else, I want to keep
hiring people. That's what the
supplementals for all this is
for people. Now I understand the
technology requests from the
rest of the D A s around the
state and certainly support that
in the D a support all that. But
my requests and um is pretty
much all about people.
And that's why I need that, Um
We
We do better when we have more
people working on prosecuting
cases. That's what the
supplementals for
Thank you, Mr Chair. Thank you.
District Attorney. So are you
having to offer higher salaries?
Um
Do you get people? I'm just
wondering what the for the
supplemental to make sure that
you don't run out of
Funding. Yeah, I'm sorry.
Sorry. Interrupt you, Mr
Chairman, Representative. Sorry,
don't you and
Um
So we're trying to get to our
authorized staffing levels.
And in order to do that.
We need
To have him fully funded and so
in order to do that, in this
next time for this fiscal year,
I can hire him.
And so that's what I'm asking A
supplementary might explain that
correctly.
Mr Chairman represent. Thank
you. Thank you, Mr Chair. Thank
you. That it That's very
helpful. Um, I know that we've
discussed for all of the
district attorney offices. Um,
sort of the need to
Take a closer look and work with
our analysts to sort of figure
out where there are areas that
we can be close to more closely
aligned. Um and what? I just
want to point out and I think
you have been doing a tremendous
job in your new role. And, um,
you know,
Public safety is an area that,
um you know, I particularly
cared about and I know this
committee has made substantial
investments and, as has the
whole legislature, and I think
what we've been talking about,
Um, you know, particularly the
last couple of days is the
important role that every
Part of the judicial system or
the criminal legal system plays
um and how it's really important
that we
Adequately fund so that each
part of the process works well,
so that when we pass laws that
changed penalties or do
different things, Um we are
making sure that things are done
in a timely and efficient manner
as well. So, um, that is all I
wanted to say. Thank you, Mr
Chair. Thank you very much, Mr
Dixon.
District Attorney Bregman want
to just thank you for shouldn't
you know, showing the work as it
is? Or as it were a compliment
to you and your staff for seeing
upticks and really crucial
areas, And I think we appreciate
sort of seeing what the
investment is doing. And you
sharing with us. Sort of the
metrics. By which you
Serve the community and by which
we all hold ourselves
accountable. So thank you for
that and would echo what the
committee members have said,
which is where continuing to
push in this area, knowing
again, reiterating that our
ability to make large general
fund additional increases is
being increasingly constrained.
But we hear you and I think we
very much see
By the vacancy rate by you know
the output all different metrics
that your office and your team
is working exceptionally hard
and with a lot of success.
Was that will go to the vice
chair.
Thank you, Mr Chair. I would
move. The LFC recommendation has
been moved by vice chair Dixon,
second by representative like
Cruz. Is there any opposition to
that saying none.
We're gonna go on. Want to call
it the first just judicial
district. Thank you. Thank you
very much.
Can we leave?
We will not keep you any longer
Your choice.
Good evening. Thanks so much for
being here. Thank you for I know
you've been here for the entire
time. So we thank you for that.
Let's go. Yeah.
Ah, Good evening, Mr Chair
members of the committee. This
will be the last agency. We will
discuss the first district
judicial attorney.
I'm joined today by the first
district Attorney Mary Carmack
outweighs sorry.
I'm not joined by the time
joined by chief Deputy District
Attorney Jennifer Pageant Macia,
you
The LFC and executive
recommendations. Fully funding
agencies request both
recommendations fully fund the
agency's request for 100,000 in
the personal category for an
unfunded vacant attorney
position.
Analysts reached consensus on
our performance measures and
targets and the agency did not
request any expansions on
alternate to Mario. Mr Chair. I
have nothing to add, so I will
Take it out to the deputy
district attorney.
Thank you, Mr Chair, Madam vice
chair and members of the
committee. Good evening again.
I'm Jennifer Pageant. Macias. I
am managing chief deputy at the
first Judicial district
Attorney's office. I'm I'm with
our chief financial officer,
Ms. Brenda Real Martinez. I need
to give her a slight plug. This
is her 24th year. Um, and as she
nears nears retirement 25th
25th
Yeah, uh, And and so she's she's
been before you a number of
times and so we do have some
incredible institutional
knowledge at our disposal, which
I hope you take advantage of
today. And of course I'm not.
District attorney Karmic out
wise. She wanted me to send her
regrets. She had an out of state
medical appointment that could
not be rescheduled. But she
will, of course, make herself
available for any questions that
the committee members may have.
I hope to end on a very easy
note. We are recommending a
nearly flat budget that has both
the mutual recommendations of
the executive as well as um, as
well as the legislative
recommendation. We are asking
for a slight increase of
$100,000 that is to fund a
existing vacancy that is
currently unfunded. The rest
remains the same, and and for
that reason we have to say thank
you.
We have come before the body and
the last couple of years under
under the leadership of District
Attorney Carmack all wise and
and had some pretty massive
asks. We've asked for
improvements in in Discovery
software you funded last year
gave us the ability to, um
integrate and implement axon or
evidence dot com. We, of course,
had the support of our law
enforcement, Uh, public
defenders.
And it's really made things a
little bit easier. There's of
course, some some hiccups. But
as far as getting the
information into the hands where
it needs to be, it's been
incredible. We have you've also
funded a data project and we're
looking at where we worked. Are
We're working with the New
Mexico school of, um in from
technology and minds.
And they are working at building
an integrated data system. We
are just now in the phases of
building that out, hopefully
will be implementing the first
phase in the next couple of
months. You've also given us
room to grow. We've been able to
add positions, Attorney position
support staff positions and
really pumped resources into our
Rio arriba community where we've
been able to have the rural
differential that is allowed us
to recruit and sustain.
Attorney growth and reduce
caseloads significantly, So
thank you.
And of course I stand for
questions. Thank you very much.
I'll go. I don't see any
questions. We'll go to observe
Luhan for the motion.
Mr Chair. I move we we move the
LFC budget.
Okay, There's a motion. Okay,
It's been saying by ranking
member Armstrong. Is there any
opposition to that motion,
saying none. Thank you very
much. We have adopted that.
Thank you, Mr Chair, Madam, Vice
chair members of the committee.
Okay, members. Thank you. That
brings us to the clothes for
today. Is there any public
comment in person?
Please come on up.
Okay?
Yeah, sure. Chair. Please Go
ahead. Thank you, Mr Chair.
Madam Vice chair. Can you hear
me? Okay. Thank you.
My name is not Dean. I know
you're here from me often hear
from you after in, and I
appreciate that.
Um, is it to my fault, okay.
This is not an out of any
agency. It is not an out of any
service provider. It is simply a
fall through the cracks
scenario.
It's a heartbreak, an adult
under a 10 year guardianship.
Under their parents both before,
during and prior and
Hard to during and after the
guardianship ended, both parties
were charged with
Battery and hustled member to
one another.
On multiple occasions.
Um, the excuse me, It's just a
hard case.
Both had significant
disabilities.
There were multiple evictions
after the final eviction just
this summer.
The
Guardian parent.
Has to wait in the car.
We now have an adult with
multiple disabilities who has a
history of evictions. Ah,
severe.
Thank you disabilities on every
in every field. What we don't
want to see is a mental health
treatment Guardianship, which
would all the result from, say,
a court ordered evaluation or
hospitalization.
Um
This case came to me after adult
protective services did
everything that they could do
for three times the amount of
time that they are charged with.
Responsible for helping to
Intervene in a case they're not
case management.
And so
Falling through the cracks his
touch for every entity in every
agency. But the awareness factor
is what is so important and that
is why all of these reports and
all of your work and all of our
work is so very, very essential.
And, uh,
Without
Knowing that someone does not
comprehend what they're yes,
ma'am. In two, they really don't
have the capacity to protect
capacity could potentially be
demonstrated.
But you're not necessarily acted
upon. Thank you very much for
your time for your again Heavy
lift for everything that you're
doing and remain. Thanks a
resource If I can be that to
anyone so much, Thank you very
much. Uh, we don't have any
public comment on zoom so
members that wraps us up for
today. Thank you for very much
on a very, uh
Heavy day a day, I guess where
there's now been explosions in
Albuquerque at the U. S
Attorney's office. So so, uh,
members want to thank you for
your attention, support and
commitment to our judicial
system. Thanks very much.
Unfortunately, I don't think I
don't know. I hope we all hope
that nobody is injured in that,
