Hernandez.
Representative Herndon.
Representative Herrera.
Representative Little.
Representative Little.
Representative Lu Han.
Representative Pettigrew.
Representative Pettigrew.
Representative Sanchez.
Representativearana.
Representative Sariana,
Representative Silva.
Representative Vincent.
Vice Chair Dixon.
Chaon.
We have a forum. OK, great. We
have a quorum of members. Thank
you so much, uh, Director Sale,
thank you and director of
writing. Thanks very much, uh,
we're gonna jump into the
ketchup cleanup scenario, um,
we'll go through these line by
line, and um uh after we adopt
this today, uh, LFC staff will
be on a very tight clock to
create an entire bill, so we'll
say it now and I'll say it again
directly.
Interestingly, I want very much
extend a thank you to you and
your entire staff. Uh, they have
a very big task ahead of them,
and we're, I wanna just say also
thanks to members for adjusting,
making sure that we can do this
while also keeping the rest of
the business of the building
going. With that, uh, we'll go
to, uh, director Bri.
Great. Thank you, Mr. Chair,
members of the committee, good
morning. It's nice to see you
all this morning after a late
night for us. Um, we're gonna be
starting with the HAFC ketchup
cleanup scenario. It looks like
this. It's about 3 pages. It
should be the first thing you
see. Um, after we go through
these changes, director Cely's
gonna run through the general
fund financial summary, which
assumes these changes, so we'll
dive in with a line item one. I
do want to note on this sheet,
sometimes you see.
on these sheets the full amount
that will be appropriated, what
you're looking at here is just
ads. So for example, on, well,
it's not a good example, uh.
So, for example, on line 8,
that's for the animal welfare
Trust Fund. That's 2 million
additional, so that's in
addition to what you've already
moved, so just to clarifying
moment there because sometimes
your sheets read a little
different.
So with that, we'll go ahead and
begin with line item one is for
the administrative office of the
courts. This doesn't spend any
money, it just includes language
there that's in red for you. It
says including purchase of a
data system, so it allows the uh
AOC to have some flexibility to
purchase a data system for that
purpose.
Number 2 similarly for public
defender department, this is a
little confusing, um, but this
does not spend any money even
though you have the amount of
money there in the other state
funds. This is just moving and
existing appropriation for
attorney recruit recruitment and
retention from the supplemental
section of the bill, so section
62, section 5, and that just
gives them a little more time to
spend it.
Number 3 is for the taxation and
revenue Department. This is $3
million in general fund to
replace their legacy tax return
software you all may recall this
was their number one priority
for their C2 request, so this
gets them, uh, more than halfway
there for that request.
Number 4, Mr. Chair, is for the
Department of Finance and
Administration. This is $250,000
for the mortgage Finance
Authority to administer a credit
worthiness program, um, there's
been similar programs like this
at MFA and it sort of helps uh
landlords and tenants. If a
tenant, you know, um,
Maybe does some damage to a
property. This would allow a
landlord to recover some of that
cost from MFA.
Number 5 is a brand new item, so
this is $4 million to Department
of Finance and Administration
for the law enforcement
recruitment and retention fund,
uh, several members flagged that
uh the funds you all
appropriated from last year, the
department's starting to spend
those down, so this adds a
little more. Number 6, also for
the Department of Finance and
Administration, uh, this adds a
little bit of language to that
New Mexico match fund
appropriation.
Uh, so there's 2 million uh
earmarked for the council of
governments, uh, for capacity
building grants, and this would
just allow them to include a
feasibility study for
incorporating a community in
Otara in Donana County if
legislation went through for
that purpose. So it just allows
them to use that money should
that legislation go through.
Number 7, again, Department of
Finance Administration, uh, if
you all recall when we adopt
specials and supplementals. We
did a $10 million chunk for
local capacity building for
public safety, uh, this reduces
that by 2.4 million, so there's
still around 6 million in that
bucket, but this would help sort
of pay for uh the law
enforcement recruitment and
retention increase on line 5, as
well as an item you will see.
here in a little bit below.
Number 8, we covered this a
little bit in our preview for
DFA. Uh, this would increase
that appropriation to the animal
welfare Trust Fund that's
proposed in House Bill 113 by $2
million bringing that
appropriation up to a total of
$7 million.
We have a quick question, uh,
ranking member Chatfield
Representative Chatfield, uh,
that trust fund is associated
it's created by uh House Bill
113, and it would give
distributions, I believe, to
local governments or um
different animal welfare
programs I might expand, uh,
director Brian, Director Lee,
ranking member Chatfield. This
is meant for sort of spay and
neuter for pets, yeah, for
shelters to help uh rural
communities.
that. Got you. Thank you, Mr.
Chair.
Uh, Representative Herndon, I, I
just wanted to clarification in
terms of this ketchup cleanup,
so we had a budget for each one
of these organizations, then
they submitted supplementals or
what is this?
From. So that just for
clarification for us.
Yeah, of course, Mr. Chair
Representative Herndon, so you
all have done quite a few uh
adoptions at this point. So you
adopted agency budgets and then
we did sort of ketchup cleanup
to those subcommittees, um, and
then you adopted specials and
supplementals. This is anything
that didn't make it into those
other two things you adopted. So
a lot of these are existing
specials and supplementals that
you've already seen that are
being increased a little bit,
um, some of these are attached
to legislation that might come
before this committee.
Um, and some are flags that
we've talked about from
committee from members.
So Mr. Chair, just for purposes
of clarification with respect to
these, if we're seeing something
that's not there, do we have the
opportunity to object and
change? Uh, thank you, uh,
Representative Herndon, this is,
uh, the final part of our work.
There are a number of different
items to go, I would urge
members to let us go all the way
through, ask what clarification
questions. There are this
represents a great deal of work
and uh essentially upward
revisions on a number of
different priorities for
members.
Thank you for the explanation.
Thank you.
OK, uh, let's keep going.
Oh, sorry, I represent Verre. I
apologize. Mr. Chair, did you
want us to wait till the end of
this to ask questions, or should
we do it now? Um, these are sort
of clarification questions, but
feel free to ask for
clarification.
I, I just wanna make sure on um
on the um excuse me, line 6,
that feasibility study will be
to for the DFA to look at maybe
another uh organization or
nonprofit that would do a better
job of uh
Grant writing assistants in, in
maybe the south central area, is
that what that is for? I just
want to clarify that Mr. Chair
Representative Herrera, this
language change doesn't do that,
but uh.
What you're referring to, DFA
will have the flexibility to
give this capacity money to
organizations other than cogs,
so other economic development
organizations. Thank you. Thank
you, Mr. Thank you very much.
OK, let's keep going.
Great. Thank you, Mr. Chair. Uh,
so next is item number 9. This
is for the Office of
Superintendent of Insurance.
This is $10 million for the fair
plan, as you all recall, the LFC
recommendation had about $49
million that was removed in what
you adopted for specials and
supplementals, there was some
concern from members, uh, that
this was an important program
tied to important legislation.
So this adds 10 million back in
there, um, considering that.
Uh,
uh, Representative Vincent.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. I was
looking at that this morning and
so will all that money go? Will
it be the backstop for the fair
plan program or where does the
money go? How is it spent, this
chair?
Yes, Mr. Chair Representative
Vincent, this as it's written
would be the backstop for the
fair program, it's not earmarked
for a specific community. Uh, we
ran this by the superintendent
of insurance, and she was
comfortable with it. Thank you.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Thank you
very much, Representative
Vincent.
OK, let's keep going.
Great. Uh, Mr. Chair,
Representatives, item number 10.
Uh, this is where we're sort of
paying for some of the additions
here, so this is a reduction of
$11 million to the site
readiness appropriation for
economic development, so that
goes from 35 million to about 24
million, still a good amount of
money for those priorities, um,
to, to redistribute to some
other areas. Item number 11 also
for economic development.
Apartment. This is for a talent
recruitment and retention in
public and private sectors, uh,
focused on emerging high yield
and high tech fields, $10
million.
Number 12 is $7 million for the
department's local economic
development Act, LEDA, uh, that
was at $0 in LFC and it was a
high priority for the
department, so there's a little
funding there.
Item number 13 is $2 million for
creative industries grants. This
is an existing program, um, you
all added $2 million already in
uh the special appropriations
you adopted, this would increase
that to 4. we spoke with the
department and they would have
the capacity to get all $4
million out in a year.
Item number 14 for energy,
minerals and natural resources
department. This is just a
language change. You all
approved $20 million in
additional funding for Mnerd for
uh forest health. This would
add, um, including $300,000 of
that $20 million to contract
with NMDA in coordination with
DCA to develop an archaeological
field school education program
statewide.
Item number 15 for the
Department of Cultural Affairs,
another language change, uh,
this was flagged by several
members of this committee to add
more flexibility to that Los
Lucero's language, enabling them
to uh use that fund for economic
development activities as well.
Mr. Chair, before you go, uh,
we're gonna go to Representative
Garrett and represent Ferar.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Amanda, on
number 11, talent recruitment
and retention and public and
private sectors. I don't quite
understand that you want are we
talking about individuals,
companies, what? Uh, Mr. Chair
Representative Garrett, uh, I
believe this is for individuals,
and I think the idea, uh, this
is an existing program that
they, uh, the department would
be able to recruit.
uh graduates from higher ed
institutions, work with other
institutions to try and get
folks into those, uh, high
yield, high demand careers.
Thank you.
Representative Herndon, please.
Thank you, Mr. Chair, with
respect to item number 15 and
the 500,000 that's going to
appropriation for feasibility
studies. What is that, madam,
Mr. Chair, Madam Presenter. Of
course, Mr. Chair Representative
Herndon, uh, so this is written
a little confusing, and that's
my mistake. So the total
appropriation that you all
approved is 40 $500,000 200,000
of that is uh eligible for
feasibility studies.
So that would go to the
department and they could decide
which feasibility studies they
do. I know there's several
pieces of legislation for
various feasibility studies for
new museums in different um in
different communities. So the
department would have some
flexibility to do those
feasibility studies should those
appropriations pass.
Thank you very much.
Thank you, Representative.
Uh, let's keep on going.
Great. Uh, Mr. Chair, our next
item here, number 16 is also for
Department of Cultural Affairs,
uh, and that's an additional
500,000 for direct grants to
rural libraries, there was some
concern that that 2.5 figure
wouldn't cover all uh rural
libraries, so this increases
that to a total of 3.
Uh, Mr. Chair Representative,
next item number 17 is for the
livestock board. Uh, this is
attached to legislation and it's
for management of free roaming
horses, uh, contingent on that
legislation passing, that's
House Bill 284 carried, I
believe, by Senator Woods and uh
Representative McQueen.
Item number 18, Mr. Chair, is
for aging and long-term
services, um, this is just
language only and it authorizes
that grandparents raising
grandkids funding that you all
approved for 3 years, which was
the original intent to just fell
off of our language sheet.
All right, Mr. Chair. Moving on
to page 2.
Item number 19 is for the
developmental disabilities
Council, that's $229,000 for a
supported decision making
program, so programs outside of,
you know, strict guardianship,
this would support the
department and enjoy those.
Item number 2 for the healthcare
authority. Uh, this is a
language only change to that
existing appropriation, um, and
it just adds to the very end in
red, including for juveniles, so
this was something that was
flagged by uh the children,
youth and Families department
secretary and others that this,
uh, medicated assisted treatment
and other programs that you all
are making investments to,
should be eligible for juveniles
as well.
Item number 21 also for the
healthcare authority of this is
a spend item, so we're reducing
that $36 million appropriation
by 8 million for some other
behavioral health items you'll
see down here that still leaves
it at 28 million, which is still
a very healthy amount for uh
these programs.
Item number 22. 0, yes, Mr.
Chair, I think.
Uh, Representative Do please and
Representative Brown. Thank you,
Mr. Chair. Thank you, Amanda.
And are these one-time
reoccurring or grow. The, the
healthcare authority. Mr. Chair
Representative Doo, those are
one time, one time. Thank you,
Madam Chair. Thank you, Mr.
Chair. Thank you, Amanda. Thank
you very much. Represent Brown,
please.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman, uh
Amanda, sorry, that's kind of
loud, um, um, also line 21, um.
The reduced appropriation now.
Does that apply to acute care
centers and community, um,
certified community behavioral
health centers. Mr. Chair
Representative Brown, it's that
same line, yes. OK. All right.
Thank you. Thank you,
Representative Brown.
OK. Um, let's keep going.
Great.
Uh, next one is going to be for
a language only change for item
number 22. This is for the
healthcare authority. There is
some language, uh, that's been
in the healthcare authority for
several years now, but it reads
that the authority, uh, shall
reduce or rescind eligibility
for the expansion adult category
dependent on federal funds. This
would change that to May, um,
just giving the department a
little bit more flexibility in
how they handle that, and this
was requested by the department.
Item number 23 for the workforce
solutions department. Uh, this
is $1 million to promulgate
rules in consultation with the
early childhood education and
care department for a program to
support new parents.
Item number 24 for the
Department of Health is for
enactment of Senate Bill 219 or
similar legislation, and that
should say contingent on its
passage.
It's a technical correction. Um,
and that is a bipartisan piece
of legislation going through the
Senate right now.
For research on uh PTSD
medication, I believe.
Item number 25, um, this is
where some of that 8 million is
going from that spend down on
item number 21. This is $6
million for an upstream opioid
prevention program over 3 years,
so the idea is a program that
would sort of prevent opioid
addiction before it starts. Uh,
this is an evident space program
that there's been quite a bit of
research on.
Number 26 to the Department of
Health, $300,000 for the
obesity, nutrition and physical
activity program.
Item number 28, this was flagged
by several members. This is $1
million to the crime victims
Reparation Commission for
victims of domestic violence.
Item number 2 we'll go back to
item number 27. If you could
note that one direct. Oh yes, I
apologize, uh, Mr. Chair, oops,
you're right, I skipped, um,
item number 27 for the
Department of Corrections. Uh,
this is supplemental funding for
the department $500,000. This
was a request from them, and
that is non-general fund. It's
from the penitentiary Income
Fund.
And Mr. T,
number 28. Is this an additional
1 million thank you for the
clarification. It is.
All right.
Great. Um, item number 29 for
the Department of Transportation
who you all heard yesterday.
This would be $5 million for a
rural air service. I know this
was brought up yesterday during
their hearing. The department
received some money for this
last year, and they've really
started to spend it down, so
this would re up that fund a
little bit.
Item number 30, Mr. Chair, for
the higher education department.
Uh, this is $2 million to expand
an existing workforce program
that the higher education
department does, um, it's for
department approved credit and
non-credit based workforce
development, so it's direct
student support for individuals
who were in those workforce
training programs.
Item number 31 for the
University of New Mexico. Uh,
this is.
$400,000 to pilot a law
enforcement academy at UNM
Gallup branch, um, it would fund
the pilot for 2 years, and this
was the top priority uh of that
branch.
Item number 32 also for the
University of New Mexico,
$200,000 for the learning and
working environment office?
Uh, item number 3 for the
University of New Mexico. This
is 1.8 million for the quantum
Institute, which would include
500,000 for first year
fellowships. And I do want to
note for um this one as well as
the last one. These were RPSP
requests uh from the
institutions, as you all have
heard several times now, the
recurring uh our recurring
spending capacity was very low,
so this with the department's
approval gives them one time.
funding to get those RPSPs off
the ground without putting it
into their recur. Item number 34
also to the University of New
Mexico. This is $2 million for
resident pay increases. Uh, I
know you all have heard a lot
about resident pay for doctors
there, so this would help there.
Item number 35 for New Mexico
State University, uh, this would
be $2 million for an institute
of artificial intelligence and
machine learning. This was the
new president's top priority
when they testified before you,
so this adds a little there.
Great. Thank you. uh.
Oh, great. OK.
Great. OK. Um, so our last one
on this page is item number 36,
also for NMSU, and that is for
the NMDA New Mexico grown
approved supplier program
$430,000. I know this was
flagged by several members as a
priority.
Yeah, thank you, Amanda. So what
is the total budget for the, you
know, I, I know they wanted
about 2.5 million, and I know we
were all for that is how does
this compare with that, Mr.
Chair, Representative Herrera,
are you talking about the New
Mexico grown approved supplier
program. Yes, uh, yes, Mr. Chair
Representative, this is a little
confusing because you've seen
this in several budgets, so I
believe in the PED budget, the
request was 2.2 million. This
portion would go directly to
NMD.
to help stand up and support the
services. So this is not in the
PED budget, this is in the NMDA
budget for 430 is the total, but
it's it's all there. That's what
you're saying, OK, thank you.
Thank you
and then.
Thank you, Mr. Chair and thank
you, Amanda. I'm actually going
back up to workforce solutions
on 23.
What, what is this early care?
What is this early, early care
and education department program
to support new parents.
Yes, Mr. Chair Representative
Dao, so item number 23, um, this
is potentially related to
several pieces of legislation,
this committee, as well as
others have talked about uh
different ways to support new
parents, including something
like stipends for new mothers.
Um, I know there's bills that
have to do with this, um, so
this would allow the workforce
solutions department to at least
stand up a program and start
promulgating rules should any of
those pieces of legislation go
through.
Thank, thank you, Mr. Chair. And
so it's separate from home
visiting. It's a, it's a stipend
for new mothers. Is there an age
limit, Mr. Chair, or Mr. Chair
Representative Doo, this is kept
very broad for that reason, so
should, um, it would depend on
if any legislation went through
in relation to it, but no age
limit and Mr. Chair and Amanda,
how would you know if it was
dependent upon legislation.
Mr. Chair Representative Doo,
um, this is not, you're right,
this does not have contingency
language um related to any piece
of legislation because there are
several pieces of legislation. I
think you might have one that
would do something like this. I
think there's others that would
more closely relate to home
visiting, so this is just, uh,
should anything go through, they
would have some support.
Thank you. Great. Thank you,
Representative Representative
Herndon, thank you, Mr. Chair,
and, uh, Mr. Chair and
presenter, I just want to take
you back to item number 30, just
for a clarification, please.
This is for expansion, uh, a
pilot program to include
students enrolled in department
approved credit base, um,
Uh, uh, classes, so I'm just
trying to figure out if this
would include interns that would
be working in mental wellness
rooms within our high schools
throughout the state as a part
of a program that's being
developed in addition.
Uh, with
Higher education supporting
those students who are in
college. Can you explain, Mr.
Chairman, Representative
Herndon, that sounds to me like
something this would support,
but I will go back and look at
the exact, uh, what's
encompassed in that existing
program and get you a better
answer. Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Thank you very much. Great.
Thank you very much. OK. Uh,
we're on page 3 of 3.
Great, Mr. Chair.
Alright, so your first line on
page 3 is 37 for New Mexico
State University. This is 1.2
million for the Asakia and
Community ditch Fund. This was a
priority for several members as
well.
Item number 38 is for uh New
Mexico Institute of Mining and
Tech, and that is $2 million for
an enhanced marketing and
recruitment program. Again, this
was one of their requested
RPSPs, uh, similarly, item 39
for NM tech is $1 million for
student and community wellness
center planning, another top
priority of that institution.
Item number 40 is $1.5 million
for seismology equipment in the
Bureau of Geology and Mine
Resources also at tech, also one
of their top priorities.
Item number 41, Mr. Chair, is
450,000 to Mesalands Community
College for their nursing
programs.
And then, uh, Mr. Chair, we get
into some of our fund transfers.
So your first fund transfer is
item number 42. Uh, this is for
the local solar access fund $20
million. This is contingent on
House Bill 128, and this was
already in that big pot of money
for the community benefit fund.
So this just takes it out of
there, um, and puts it as a
separate line item instead of it
being buried in that big uh $250
million fund.
Next, Mister Chair is item
number 43. You all approved, um,
a big sum of money, $100 million
for trade parts, trade ports
contingent on passage of House
Bill 19. Um, this reduces that
by just a little bit by 10
million, so still 90 million in
that item.
Uh, item number 44, another fund
transfer. So this is where we
see some of that spending from
the community benefit fund. So
again, that was that big pot of
money that was about 340, 350
million when we came into uh
HAFC from the LFC rec, uh, this
in addition to what you all
approved from specials, takes
that to still a little bit over
$250 million so still quite a
bit, um, but we spend a little
here for some of those other uh
prior
authorities that are related to
the bill.
Item number 45, uh, this is also
related to that public safety
appropriation that you all
approved in specials and
supplementals, um, it had the
word humanitarian in it, uh,
this would just strike that word
humanitarian to make those funds
more easily available to those
counties, which would be Luna
Hidalgo and Donana County.
Item number 46 is $40 million.
Sorry,
we've got Representative
Vincent.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Just to
clarify on 42 before you go any
further, uh, for the local solar
access fund contingent upon
passage of House Bill 28. So
would that mean that would that
make it to where a community
people, New Mexicans can put in
for that to get solar projects.
Uh, Mr. Chair Vinson, I believe
that's right. I'd have to pull
up the bill and and uh uh
director for uh schools to be
able to do that. Schools only.
Yes, thank you. I thought that
was gonna help me not to amend
one of my bills.
Hey, it's good to look for. Uh,
OK, other questions?
OK, let's keep on going.
Great. All right. Item number
46, Mr. Chair, to the
Environment Department. This is
$40 million for the strategic
water supply program, um, this
was in the executive
recommendation for $75 million.
It was not in LFC, um, it was
not in the HAFC special scenario
and it was flagged by members,
so this adds $40 million for
that.
Um, item number 47 for the
taxation and revenue Department.
This is a technical correction,
so you all adopted House Bill 3
yesterday, um, and House Bill 3
in order to match the numbers
for House Bill 2 and House Bill
3, this reduces 500,000 of other
state funds.
Item number 48 for public school
support. Um, so if you all
recall, there is a hold harmless
in the HAFC scenario you
adopted, um, this would reduce
that hold harmless from one year
to or sorry from 2 years to 1
year, so you all would have the
option to do it again next year,
um, by $5 million and then right
under that line item, you can
see where that $5 million goes
still in public school support,
so item number 49 would be $2
million for.
special education initiatives
and then item number 50 would be
$3 million for the STEM network,
which I know is a priority of
this committee.
in
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Thank you,
Amanda. I, I know that we really
wanted 6 million for SIM
network, and, and I get that
this is a big lip from 0, so I,
I appreciate that. Um, I know
that we had 30 million in the
PED budget for the Office of PED
to spend $30 million on a
one-time appropriation and uh I,
we put a lot of money into math
this year, trying to strengthen
that programs in the state, but
if you don't have a strong stem
network that reaches out across
the
State and and helps, you know,
teachers working together and
superintendents working together
so that you have a a really
strong forward push in math
education. I, I, it, it won't
work. You, you've just got to do
that. So I'm, I'm recommending
that you take um 3 million out
of that one time PED
appropriation and put another 3
million here, but that's just
my.
Thank, thank you, uh, Rosin
Vedetta. I think this is, uh,
let's go to Representative
Garrett, and then I'll have a
couple of good.
OK, thanks and ditto on
representative um Herera, but
so, and I understand I'm 48
originally Districts wanted 3
years to hold harmless. We did
too. Now we're back to one with
the understanding that we would
repeat the hold harmless for FY
27. Am I understanding that
right?
Mr. Chair Representative
Garrett, yes, it would be up to
this body, but.
Thank you. And then, Mr. Chair,
I know originally they wanted 4
million for special ed
initiatives, the budget we saw
like 24 hours ago or whenever it
was 2 million, so now we're
adding back to 2 million, so
it's 4 million.
OK, thank you very much.
Great, thank you, Representative
Garrett. Uh, ranking member
Chatfield.
Number 46.
Uh, to the environment
department for strategic water
supply program, $40 billion.
What, what is that for? Uh, Mr.
Chair, Representative Chatfield,
this is related to legislation,
um, I'm not the expert. I do
have the bill in front of me,
but it would, uh, be related to
brackish water, I believe. Yeah,
the this and we'll add this on a
technical, um, this needs to be
a technical correction to
reflect HB 137 or similar
legislation.
Um, Mr. Speaker, I can speak to
that.
Um, briefly, and then I, we have
another question.
I'm carrying that bill, uh,
representative Chatfield for the
governor and uh they've really
put that money into it it's now
calling for 75 million into
brackish water treatment for
municipalities and cities who
and the communities who would
like to uh get brackish deep
brackish water 2500 below the
surface, and, and it's to help
communities that can um
have access to that kind of
resource, uh, implement that
program.
Thank you ranking member
Chatfield.
Uh, additional questions?
Represent Hunt, please.
Oh
Like the accent for example the
corner of my eye, I guess,
um.
Yes, so my question is gonna go
to line item 49. Public school
support for special education
initiatives, what is that why is
that open ended?
Mr. Chair, Mr. Chair,
Representative Lujan, uh, that's
the way it was, uh, requested.
That's the way it was on the
high level in both the LESC um
and the executive.
It sounds really because
Where, where I'm, I'm making a a
comparative Mr. Chas with a
developmental disabilities and
buds, uh.
Ombudsman
Is in the, the current
legislation with the special
education, um.
um, builds, it's out there is to
move that it's my understanding
to PED is that this is not
included in this or open-ended
language for this is that.
Correct, Mr. Chair. Yeah, Mr.
Chair Representative Lu Han, um,
my expert frontier director Sele
said it could be because of its
broadness.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. I think we
need to, I want to flag that to
just do a comparative so we can
figure that out. Thank you.
Great. Thank you for that flag.
Uh, OK, um, let's keep on going.
All right, Mr. Chair, we're in
our final stretch here, um, so
item number 51 yesterday, you
all saw a language
reauthorization for the
Department of Information
Technology. Um, this would add a
little bit of language to that
reauthorization, um, for it's in
red there that says including
compliance and project
management, so potentially they
could use that funding for the
GIS, uh, project that was
flagged by members.
Um, and then, uh, item number
52, this is your grow transfer
adjustment line that directorle
is gonna go more into when he
goes over the general fund
financial summary, uh, but this
just adjusts the spending that
we did with the growth fund.
And then item number 53 for the
healthcare authority, um, this
is all other state funds from
the Healthcare Affordability
Fund. This would add $22.3
million in other state funds for
insurance marketplace
affordability programs. Uh, this
was the department's number one
priority in this area and this
gets them to their original
request, um, and then item 54
also for the healthcare
authority, um, for healthcare
affordability fund program.
s uh, this is $10 million also
from the HCAF, and this would be
more flexible so they could use
it for small business premium
reductions or some of their
other programs there.
Uh, Mr. Chair, I'm all done.
Great. OK. Uh, let's keep on
going. Let's go to director
Salif.
So, Mr. Chairman, if you want to
turn to your general fund
financial summary.
is an important document. This
is your balance sheet. It tells
you where you're at with uh all
your revenues and your expenses.
So you can see at the the top on
the far right for FY 26.
Revenue increases year over
year, uh, only projected at
2.6%.
At $13.6 billion.
You can see the appropriations.
Right in the middle of the sheet
between recurring and
non-recurring.
Total 13.7 billion, which means
you need to draw from
Reserves a little bit, which you
normally do for
Uh, non-recurring spending.
There's another 965 million.
And FY 25 in that blue bar.
For FY 25.
And the bottom line total.
On the estimated FY 26 reserve
totals would be 31.2, you came
into the session, uh, with an
overall surplus, uh,
Of 33%.
With the 30% reserve target
coming out of the session. On
the next page,
These are the details of the
different accounts that make up
your general fund reserves.
The operating reserve.
The appropriation contingency
fund, there were transfers into
this fund in the LFC
recommendation that stay.
Um, for
Disaster allotments.
The state support reserve fund,
there was a transfer in there.
Uh, to pay for the holding the
unit value flat. You see that 40
million coming in, 40 million
going out.
To grow
Account this, the action that
you would take on the ketchup
cleanup item is simply making
more funding available in the
operating reserve rather than
the grow fund.
And then your rainy day fund,
the tax stabilization reserve.
Which constitutes the majority
of
Your reserve accounts at almost
23%.
Of the 31.2%.
Overall
So total general fund balances
that you're setting aside in
this recommendation at $3.371
billion.
With that Mr. Chairman, I'd be
happy to answer any questions.
Uh,
any questions from the
committee?
Repent down please.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Thank you,
Charles. So when we say that
non-reoccurring appropriations,
including specials and
supplements from last year are
going to be encumbered this
year.
Are we
we're not considering them in
this year's budget because they
were appropriated last year.
That's correct. You did that in
FY 24, but we want to make sure
we account for that.
Uh, booking of those
appropriations.
OK. Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Thank you, Representative Lohan,
please.
I just want to say it incredible
work and to to end with a
31.2% reserve. Thank you.
You know,
uh, Duncan, please.
Thank you Mr. Chair. Um, going
back to the Amanda's worksheet,
uh, quickly, can I ask a couple
questions on that? Sure.
Um, on line item 2, the public
defenders, um, it's still going
to be used for attorneys,
correct?
Uh, Mr. Chair, Representative
Duncan, yes, that's for
attorneys. OK. Thank you. And
then the next one.
Um
Yes.
Let's see here. I'm gonna go,
I'm gonna go to.
Mandy, you're gonna have to tell
me.
House Bill 113.
Bluehn's gonna.
Gonna throw something at me, Mr.
Chair, so.
Um
And uh in section 7.
Is she getting anything like
let's, let's.
Get, get us there quickly. I
imagine we're headed to the
floor soon. Section 7 providing
persons with essential resources
necessary to care for animal
animals in a person's custody. I
have a hard time wanting to
sport that simply because if if
you're 200 and it, it goes on to
say 200% of the federal poverty
level. If you're at that level,
And we're spending money for
animals. I have a hard time
supporting that. I'm sorry on
that. And then the last one, Mr.
Chair, is, uh,
Lane 43, the trade ports. I
thought the ask was 70 million,
not 100 million.
Uh, Mr. Chair, Representative
Duncan, uh, I, I'll make a
comment on the animal welfare
trust fund first, just as a
note, um, this would, this would
put money in that fund should
that legislation pass. But that
full legislation with the bill
and all the provisions will be
in this committee still for your
full consideration. So for items
like that, you'll have another
shot at that, um, and then for
the trade ports funding, um, the
original bill was GRT, uh, your.
works essentially, which the LFC
and uh you all Mark is recurring
spending. So what the 100
million or now the 90 million
does is basically upfront spend
that at 100 million or 90
million, so maybe 45 a year or
however the department wants to
administer it instead of doing
that recurring GRT spend.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Thank you,
Amanda.
Great. Thank you very much,
Representative Duncan.
OK, I don't see any other
questions. I want to add my
thanks, uh, for really committee
this is a new committee, a
number of new members, you've
performed extraordinarily well,
folks have worked super hard.
You've worked, uh, sort of
really above and beyond, so just
personally, I want to say a very
big thank you. Secondly, uh,
again, to thank our staff, all
the DFA staff who participated.
We've worked to make this a more
inclusive and participatory
process, uh, and we appreciate.
you guys diving in. 3 members,
this is sort of a, we're getting
closer to like that halfway
point, there will still be a
great deal of work to do with
the budget. We're sending our
Senate colleagues, or we will be
sending our Senate colleagues a
budget that where they have uh
substantial non-recurring room
with which to work uh with uh on
their end and to continue
collaborating with stakeholders
and we've done a very good job.
They will have
Some as we had a very much
smaller amount of recurring
funding to dedicate, so we're
being able to send our Senate
colleagues a budget with room to
work while staying very
financially responsible,
ensuring that uh future
legislatures will have the
opportunity to do this sort of
detailed work and not sort of
spending it all at one time.
With that, um, uh, I don't,
yeah, I think we'll go to the
motion, um, here, and then
probably go down to the 4.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. I would
move that the committee adopt
the proposed ketchup cleanup
changes and the adjusted general
fund financial summary.
There's motion from Vice Chair
Dixon.
Second, from represent Herrera,
is there any opposition to that
motion?
Saying no position that motion's
been adopted.
Uh, our LFC, we're gonna appoint
a quick technical committee, um,
appoint ranking member
Chatfield, Vice Chair Dixon, to
work with director Seli,
Director writing on any
technical changes. Um,
And with that, uh, we're
adjourned. Thank you all very
much. Give a big hand to staff.
Chair, um, point of order,
sorry. Um, are we gonna take
public comment?
Thank you, Chair.
Great question. Uh, is there
anybody who wishes to make
public comment.
OK. Uh, anybody online?
Mm
