Here.
Representative Ezzell.
Representative Garcia.
Representative Hochman Vigil.
Representative Lane.
Representative Lara.
Here.
Yes good
Representative Sarinana here.
Representative Sweetser.
Representative Trujillo.
Representative andpercent.
Representative Ezzell.
Madam chair can you send the
link to Representative is trying
to get on.
Representative Garcia.
Your.
Representative Hochman Vigil I'm
here madam chair I'm sorry I'm
having problems with the audio
on my computer but I'm here.
Representative districts we Sir.
Representative Trujillo.
Sure small.
I'm here.
We were thirteen Representative
Anderson is here.
All right I didn't hear.
Rampone and is now on.
Representative madam chair
representative resale just came
to my office and asked for you
all to please send early she is
here.
Madam chair this is Mike I just
said Representative Ezzell link
so she should be able to access
now.
Okay very good.
Well I think we do have a quorum
on our first bill this after his
house bill one sixteen and I
see Representative Maestas among
us here he's going to talk about
his amendments and
Well last someone to move the
amendment that will go back on
the bill so Representative Moul
Maestas.
Thank you very much of Madam
chair honorable members this is
house bill one hundred sixteen.
And it adds a up stop person to
Legislative Council Service but
more importantly it develops an
ongoing statutory revision
program.
Are creating the position within
the council and providing duties
and what it does is it'll allow
someone to devote how to percent
of the time to build drafting
and identify.
Of chapters and articles in
statute that may need to be re
numbered or that our our kicker
old language needs to be removed
or when reconciliations need to
happen it will not affect any
policy or bill.
it's just it's more of a
compilation of the situation we
all.
I'm gonna out work on the Senate
side to get an additional
appropriation for a four eight
council but for now I ask that
the committee consider language
moving up moving the and that
last paragraph where the money
are derived from our.
A cash balances at at
Legislative Council.
I think we all understand the
amendment and basically it's a
very simple amendment what it
does is it removes the funding
stores from general fund to
provided cash balances which
because of the nature of this
work so it's like it's very
appropriate can I have somebody
live in them for discussion I'm
of the amendment for discussion
madam chair.
For a second.
Small and Lara.
Okay now we've heard the
amendment do we have any
questions on the matter
Representative Anderson thank
you madam chair Madam chair on
the hundred thousand dollar
taken from the Legislative
Council cash balances my
question is what is that cash
balance today.
Thank you madam chair of.
Representative Anderson I do not
know and like I said on the
Senate said I'm gonna try to
Adam appropriation for this but
but up but if not the cat cash
balances would would cover it.
I don't know the exact one of
the of the balance as of now.
Okay then of this legislative is
Legislative Council aware of
that we are appropriating money
from their cash balance
question.
Madam chair of the runners and
yes let's council was made aware
of it.
The requested the amendment and
then I had a conversation with
the director
What what's tricky is let's
council can't advocate for any
bill normal this new position
advocate for any bill so it's
going to be up to me to advocate
on the Senate side but the other
fully aware of it.
Okay Madam chair I'm trying to
be quick here who will assist up
person report to the what's the
the compilation commission for
to the Legislative Council who's
your boss.
Thank you madam chair
representative understood the
director of Legislative Council.
Then my only final question is
if we put that person on this
commission should we make them
non voting.
Thank you madam chair
Representative Anderson so just
going back to my previous
question the person will be
hired by the Director
Legislative Council will work
under the Director Legislative
Council but will sit alongside
that director on the New Mexico
compilation commission I think
that's appropriate this revise
our statutes will bring their
expertise to the table and we
definitely want to make this
percent of full fledged member
the competition commission this
bill is in lieu of recompiling
the statutes in their entirety
every twenty five years.
We can institutionalize this
problem.
All of.
Excuse me representative I want
to help us focus on the
amendment so I need questions
specifically on the amendment.
Madam.
Specifically on the amendment I
think.
I'm wondering well when I was
one hundred commission
Interstate Stream Commission the
secretary was not voting it
seems to work really well I'm
just concerned whether the
current members of this
commission of like the idea of
of perhaps an employer employee
relationship where we just say
non voting question.
It's not part of the amendment
okay amendment deals with the
source of funds so let's let's.
Yes I am I'm sorry I was wrong
all right anybody else on the
amendment.
Is there any opposition to the
motion.
Okay there's no opposition the
amendment has been adopted let's
go back on the bill and we'll go
back Representative Anderson go
ahead Sir.
Think question to the sponsor
please.
Representative Maestas you're
more like you madam chair
colleges thank you madam chair
of the vendors that was one of
the concerns of in reading one
of the FY ours
all definitely speak to members
of the compilation commission to
get their opinion.
I definitely want them on the as
a member but a non voting member
maybe the maybe the way to go
but all all all all of let you
don't let you know between now
on the floor now and that will
be willing to consider that yes.
I'm glad you're willing to
consider it and the it's it's
not a big thing but I just I.
I think maybe with this addition
maybe it's not a bad idea
particularly considering the
funding source so madam chair
thank you very much.
Representative program.
Thank you madam chair to keep my
comments really brief and just
let madam chair and
Representative Maestas know that
I I really see a lot of problems
with the way this bill is
drafted and perhaps the
representative would would like
to discuss with me some of my
concerns offline.
Madam chair representative even
just the use of the word reach
out the word choice every visor
of statutes seems to imply a
function of that person whoever
that is hired to do this I think
a better word is reviewer of
statutes are in but anyway there
are a number of problems but I
do have one question madam chair
with your indulgence
Representative Maestas so
apparently the purpose of this
is to make the statutes more
accessible understandable and
usable and briefly
chairman my assistant manager
could could you explain how this
will end up with statutes that
are more accessible
understandable and usable in
terms of real life.
Thank you madam chair
representative brown well as you
recall from the the Kerr control
act bill of last year every time
we.
For the folks to sit on tax and
go through the tax bills there's
there's the there's the chapter
the article the paragraph and
then there's the point one point
in the tax code there's like
twenty fifty six point fifty
seven so if the if the
compilation commission back in
the day recompiled our entire
statute statute back in nineteen
fifty three nineteen seventy
eight what did they do it in two
thousand three it you know yes
we could two reasons one is the
other computers made it easier
to do work searches and and and
and and made a much more
understandable and usable and
then the expense the cost of re
compiling all of the chapters
all at once so if we can do it
on an ongoing basis with
particularly Act particularly
statutes particularly maybe even
a chapter to.
Up from time to time that it
will be much more understandable
readable usable and and frankly
easier to amend the difficulty
with the liquor control act bill
that we did last year was it is
so difficult to amend this
existing statute because just in
statute is so.
Messed up in terms of its
compilation
so I think I don't know if it'll
be more accessible but it
certainly will be more
understandable and usable.
Sh.
Representative so I agree with
you that the statutes are really
not in very good condition in
terms we do layer on layer and
rarely make the fine tuning that
we need to do to make it
I'm not sure understandable but
just to to maybe avoid some
conflicts that we have our
statutes and so I I think
there's a valid function here I
am again I would prefer that
were a review or a statutes
rather than revisor because I
think the revision component is
something we as legislators to
do through legislation so madam
chair thank you very much thank
you Representative Maestas.
Representative Crowder.
Thank you madam chair and then
the thank you Representative
requests for that I would
question on page two.
Line six recess the statutory
revision program shall be
performed in consultation with
the compilation commission.
But I don't see anything in here
that requires the commission to
approve it before so submitted
to the speaker or to the
Majority Leader.
it is that a request how do you
read that madam chair and
jealous.
But I just don't see a
requirement and I think it
should be required to have
commission approval.
Thank you madam chair
representative Crowder.
I'm glad you brought that up on
now on that same page.
Our pair of paragraph the.
Line sixteen to twenty one that
was removed.
Because it's kind of like a
given you know the speaker
assigns bills to committee the
the floor leader assigns bills
to committee.
This would be brought to the
attention of eight council and
probably leadership or maybe the
chairs of judiciary prior to
each legislative session.
the statutory rate revise our
will will consult with the
competition commission because
the competition commission as
you know is charged with with
recompiling R. that particular
act when we when we when the
governor signs bills into law.
But I don't believe the
competition commission.
Should.
Should vote on or decide what
the revise our shows us the
revise it will say you know Hey
I caught this in statute I
caught that in statute you may
want to consider a bill.
The compilation commission is on
the backend.
Putting in the putting in the
when the bill becomes law
putting it into statute in the
proper sections and subsections
so.
So I think that's why it's
written that way.
Thank you madam chair and
representative I decided to
read.
Performed in consultation with.
The kind of indicated to me
there were some kind of an
approval process which I think
would be appropriate
if they said yes you're right
let's do that let's do it this
way.
it just say more appropriate so
I I agree with my colleague that
that there are some things in
here that are written a little
bit differently than than the
plain language seems to indicate
so but thank you that's all my
questions thank you Madam.
I don't think anybody else's
hand up on this.
Let's go to the committee that
Representative small was
pleasure the committee thank you
madam chair I would move a do
pass of house are one sixteen as
amended.
We have a second.
In the motions I'm sure okay.
Motion and a second
is there any opposition to that
motion Anderson is no.
Okay we have I'm let's go ahead
and call the roll is too hard
for me to figure it out from the
new pictures so let's call roll.
Representative Allison yes.
Representative Anderson no.
Representative Armstrong.
No.
Representative Brown no.
Representative Castellano yes.
Representative Chatfield.
Representative Crowder the.
Representative Dixon.
Representative Ezzell.
Representative Garcia.
Yes.
Representative Hochman Vigil
yes.
Representative Lane yes.
Representative Lara.
Yes.
Representative starting at yes.
Representative Sweetser.
Yes.
Representative Trujillo yes.
Representative Dixon.
Yes.
I think you're small yes.
Madam chair.
Yes.
We have
The permit six in the negative.
Thank you for.
I'm sorry twelve in the
affirmative and six in the
negative.
All right with that being the
cannot Representative Maestas
you have an amended do passed so
thank you very much for being
here this afternoon thank you
madam chair members.
The next bill that I have on my
agenda is house bill one
nineteen do we have
Representative Romero.
I'm here madam chair.
All right let's go ahead is
there any amendments to this or
is it just
as it is as it is madam chair.
Being.
All right thank you madam chair
hello Committee on house bill
one nineteen is going to amend
the public school capital
improvements act you may
remember this from the twenty
twenty session is house bill two
fifty four and is carried by
Representative Chatfield it's
going to adjust the amounts
included through the minimum and
maximum guarantee adjustment as
well as the programs used in the
calculation so basically public
schools around the state will
get more for capital facilities
if you look at the LFC analysis
column J. has the percent match
if you wish to look through your
district every district is a
winner as far as their
facilities on this bill
it just depends on the to
Millett so with that madam chair
all stand for questions.
Okay I do have a couple
questions before I go to
committee I'm looking at the LFC
half an hour.
In the money comes out of the
public school capital outlay
fund so my question is what is
the FY twenty three revenue
projection and same for twenty
four.
For that.
Is is this talks about how much
we're gonna be spending that how
what is that projection DD nor
do I have an expert that can
help.
I do I do have an expert with me
madam chair Joyce finally
legislative education study
committee.
Madam chair we have a three
hundred ninety five million
about in that fund for the
upcoming year.
That's not what I asked I asked
what the FY twenty three revenue
projection is going to be for FY
twenty three and twenty four
because what might my question
is Representative when I look at
the synopsis of the bill and it
says on that last
graph the bill also provides an
additional distribution from the
public school capital outlay
fund the districts imposing a
local SB nine levy.
You'll statutory provisions
requiring districts to
prioritize listening SB nine
funds for erecting serious roof
repair deficiencies and
authorizes the public school
capital outlay are counseled to
reduce the nines to our state
distribution is if funding is
insufficient so I I need to
understand what that needs.
Madam chair I don't know I think
the study with the stand up if
he wishes to CENIC can you help
us with this go ahead.
Yes madam chair thank you if you
look on page three.
On the F. I. R. and you go to
the third paragraph the.
I'm committed bounces in the
public school capital outlay
fund are projected to reach.
Three hundred fifty nine point
six million.
For fiscal year twenty to and
then the council anticipates
about seven hundred ninety five
point four million.
By the time we get to fiscal
year twenty six so there
significant bounces and that.
I understand the money but my
question is there's also
significant expenditures against
that bond I mean the way this
I'm on the committee all the
oversight committee I've been on
it for a long time and the
settings are been in the works
for a long time I just don't
understand if there's
significant money and there why
would it say at the bottom of
your FIR on page one two read
user SB nine state distributions
if funding is insufficient so is
that insufficient on the local
start or insufficient on the
state side.
Madam chair the bill does
include a provision that allows
the state distribution to be
reduced if for any future
reason.
The fund as Ishant provided.
Okay that's all I needed to know
what's going to the rest of the
committee just awesome hands up.
No more hands up now they've
been down
Mated General.
We'll go ahead.
Madam chair election I carry
this bill last year and I think
you're really pretty much talked
over what I was going to what I
was going to say you know it's
only for school to have a
military already in place and it
increases the amount that they
are able that the state sends
back to the school and I know
that there I'm not a you know
sending those guys know a lot
more about what the other draws
on that funding you know so you
had already talked about when I
had my hand.
All righty.
The body else the other
questions Representative small
thank you madam chair I move a
do pass on house bill one
nineteen second.
Okay we have a motion and a
second is there any opposition
to that.
State line you have to do yes
Representative Romero.
Thank you madam chair.
Okay the next bill that I have
here is fast bill fifty seven
well I have in front of me
Representative Romero you're on
and I don't see any.
Yes is it supposed to be it is
the madam chair.
So house bill fifty seven you
remain may remember this last
year as the transportation hold
harmless to pass those committee
it's taking the pre pandemic
numbers of ridership and
applying them to this upcoming
school year there wasn't
amendment in the house Education
Committee to include there are a
few charter schools that were
not in operation the pre
pandemic this would include them
for ridership
this upcoming school year so
madam chair all stand for
questions.
Representative Chatfield well
just gonna move would do best
for the questions await.
Madam chair I'd like to ask just
briefly yeah I mean come on
Representative Trujillo let's
wait till I call on it let's go
to Representative small who has
a question.
Representative thank you very
much madam chair thank you Mr
chairman Romero for house bill
fifty seven
What have we seen with regards
to transportation coming back
into in person schooling.
And and how how it is
yeah first with that one.
Mr chairman and madam chair.
Madam chair representative small
we've seen a decrease in
ridership on what most of school
districts are are looking for
with this is some sort of
certainty into headed into
another uncertain here as far as
ridership the next year so that
was really the impetus behind on
this legislation.
That thank you madam chair and
and thank you chairman momentum
and so.
If ridership.
What happens if ridership
continues.
Who
How does the the guarantee of
funding.
Different from ridership how
will that affect
How.
I guess what I let me just try
to quick scenario and thank you
madam chair chairman momentum
if routes for for school
transportation or no longer
needed how would that work under
this legislation and how does
this legislation make those
necessary.
Madam chair and and
Representative small also wraps
star are assigned at the local
level this would just be as
terms of ridership the amount of
students in the school that are
are taking public
transportation.
I don't know where I stand
now I I think it that it does
madam chair Mister chairman
Romero and
there there are no funds that
are.
Allocated as part of this
legislation as that's correct
right.
Madam chair that's correct okay
thank you very much madam chair.
Thank you thank you to all
right.
Representative Crowder.
Thank you madam chair and thank
you for presentation
Representative this is a
hospital fifty seven have any
impact on the dollar amount that
was proposed in house bill two
and three that the already
passed the house and went over
to the Senate is there does this
affect that number whatsoever.
Madam chair we're just talking
about the distribution so no
there was no so stated dollar
amount necessarily.
Okay so we're rearranging the
chairs on the deck we're not
adding chairs are taken off or
anything like that.
Madam chair that's correct
Representative okay thank you
madam chair thank you
Representative.
Representative Garcia.
Thank you madam chair a.
Does this so have any effect on
extended learning time for a
districts.
Madam chair representative
Garcia doesn't that's a separate
appropriation.
Okay that's the only question I
have madam chair thank you.
Representative Chatfield does
your hand up to make the motion
RT at another question.
Madam chair I just had a little
bit of input you know some of
the school their own.
Some schools on their own buses
and the some of the tools they
have contractor that owns the
buses and so late when the then
you pay the contractor I mean
the contractor has to make that
payment on that bus whether the
kids run in or not and that
their payments computed a little
bit on mileage a little bit on
the number of students and the
field is separate so you know
they they have a that payment
whether they are whether
school's in session or not.
Okay.
Select committee is there any
other questions.
Representative I think it was
chat.
Here that's correct.
Madam chairman of the best.
Thank
and the second
opposition to that thank you
have a due pass representative
Romero thank you thank you madam
chair.
Okay next we have house bill
ninety six in order by
Representative Gail Chasey is
Representative here okay all
right let's so let's go to the
amendment I need somebody to
move the amendment.
Madam chair I move the amendment
thank you okay we're more for
discussion purposes and house
bill ninety six on page one line
thirteen and fourteen structure
he can appropriation and then on
page six.
Striking section ten which is
the appropriation okay so we've
made the amendments.
Any questions on the amendment.
Yes madam chair okay go ahead
Representative Anderson and well
we'll have Representative Chasey
and.
Madam chair my questions
Sanchez perhaps the chairman of
in brief we have a motion on the
house floor today that we're all
familiar with that
Representative outcome brought
and madam chair I would be
curious are we are satisfied
that we don't run out of a mark
of another.
Option on the poor if we strike
the appropriation question.
The budget.
What.
Ninety six.
This.
Turman Jr.
Intervention program active but
it was in the lead budget I
thought that when they get in
trouble because I gave the wrong
information so is that is that
is a budget.
Are we can't hear a bill.
Know your muted sorry I'm out of
the committee she can help you
thank you.
You hear me now yes we can okay
on the last page of FIR you'll
see that there was one million
dollars to the Department of
Health to establish this.
So it's in the budget for this
year one million dollars in
there.
All righty so that helps answer
Representative Anders spins
question are usually when the
Graham has money in the budget
we district the appropriation
because generally the bill
language needs to go forward so
let's go back to Representative
Anderson on the amendment thank
you madam chair the information
answered my question and our it
reconfirms my belief that of
striking the appropriation does
not in any way shape or form
suggest a bill needs to go back
to rules thank you madam chair.
All right so we've heard the
discussion on the amendment.
Proper motion proper second on
the amendment we believe the
amendment is there any
opposition to that adoption.
Saying go back on the bill
Representative Chasey.
Thank you very much madam chair
appreciate the hearing here
today
I actually have two folks from
the City of Albuquerque who
might need to answer questions
for you David Martinez and Jerry
Bachicha they may be and you are
participant
Attendee list there will only
let them talk if we have
questions so okay.
Instead you Representative.
At the earlier hearing.
I'm we had serrated
Neier who's the chief
administrative officer and she
described the program in
Albuquerque they've had a pilot
program not funded by state
dollars that hundred ninety
three percent raise as right on
it's.
There's a.
The grant would go over the
excuse me the appropriation
would go to the Department of
Health.
Apartment of health would take
applications from cities or
counties or governmental
entities that could be tribes it
could be a County could be a
city and I think we fixed it so
that city and county in the same
area could H. apply separately
they can apply together or
separately that they couldn't
have to in one area.
The whole idea is to intervene
with the very high risk
offenders and get them to stop
offending and get the guns off
the street so I think you'd
probably like maybe fairly brief
and.
That I would like to just begin
with that see if you have any
further questions.
Ninety three percent success
rate as I said in terms of.
The people who have been
Part of the intervention program
who have been offenders are not
re offending.
Okay.
All righty
If you do have an extra we could
let that and then if they want
to add just a couple more
sensors doing we are those
experts.
Martinez or Jerry the teacher.
Madam chair are trying to let
Jerry procedures and so.
Purposes Richard.
Okay.
Let me just say well this but
you just being added that there
is Department of Health would be
allowed to have a three percent
over had to so that they could
afford to administer the program
it will be coming out of their
current staff.
Okay.
This so Jerry if you go ahead
make a couple comments.
Sir thank you thank you on.
Chair woman Lundstrom and
honesty members of the committee
mining stirred the teacher on
the violence intervention
program director for the
Albuquerque violence
intervention program and I am
here today to talk about the
violence intervention program
bill and actually our program
that spearheaded of the bill so
the V. I. P. fund bill promotes
evidence based or evidence
informed violence reduction
initiatives which seek to
interrupt the cycles of violence
and retaliation
in order to reduce the incidence
of homicides shootings and
aggravated assaults and we're
asking for nine million dollars
for the entire state of New
Mexico as
Representative Chasey pointed
out the our program has a ninety
three percent success rate
because of our very intensive
client centered Kerr led model
of support
and with me today I have
commander Jones and Jones who is
from the Albuquerque police
department and he can also
answer any questions because
this is a multi disciplinary
effort getting includes the
police department community
based agencies community
individuals certified peer
support workers and
so the dust and other actually
unprecedented collective of law
enforcement agencies that.
This is the most risk for twice
for being involved in the cycles
of gun violence in the City of
Albuquerque on.
Already I'm going to ask the
sponsor since the money is in
the budget do you need the
language of this bill to move
forward.
It's my understanding that we
need to madam chair because the
department of health leads
guidance on the administration
of the grant program.
Want to be very sure that it
gets all over the state.
Okay let's go to questions start
Representative Crowder.
Thank you madam chair thank you
Representative for renewable but
sure I I redid their original
request was for ten million.
Gentle lady a minute ago said
that was nine million I think I
heard bill say earlier in the
budget we had one million.
But I I I kind of remember it
the one million was trimmed down
to three hundred thousand at one
time so okay we.
Can we send down how much is
there and the reason I'm asking
is if this is a great program
and there's a million or less I
don't know how we're going to
make requests.
Chair that.
Madam chair I might.
Bill during the the the FY are
is incorrect.
There is no.
H. two sixteen of house bill
two.
Twenty five million dollars.
Express our furniture department
of finance and administration.
It says transfer nine million
dollars department of health.
Your status criteria
distribution of grants
supporting violence intervention
programs thank Y..
Understanding that was our
understanding thank you I
appreciate that I there's some
other program they got trim down
and I had it my mind that was
this was that was built that it
was a million that that that's
what kind of caught my attention
so.
Thank you madam chair thank you
okay.
Madam.
Yes madam chair just to clarify
from what I understand is there
is one point seven million in
recurring and nine million in
non recurring the budget
currently.
Find that on page four.
The next question was going to
Representative Sweetser.
Thank you madam chair and thank
you Representative Chasey my
only question was on your
comment about you want to make
sure that this will go statewide
and I see on page four line
seven at least twenty percent of
the total amount should be
awarded to counties or
municipalities with a population
of five hundred forty thousand
or greater.
Why that number and what
counties would be getting twenty
percent of that.
Thank you madam chair and thank
you Mr this is obviously
targeted at the Bernalillo
county area where we are having
clearly from all.
Data all of the evidence are the
greatest problem and it is where
we started the sh.
The pilot study so it was
targeted.
We up here but we did not want
this program to be limited to
the Rio Grande quarter or just a
large city.
So thank you for that and thank
you madam chair when we were
talking about a million or less
than a million I thought what
twenty percent is going to.
But but now that I hear there's
nine million in non recurring
that probably is still plenty of
the other eighty percent for the
other thirty two counties so
thank you for that and and one
more question madam chair the
pilot project is the funding for
that now depleted.
The City of Albuquerque would
have to answer that.
So this between John.
Albuquerque could answer that.
Jerry is the is the highlight
funding exhausted.
Madam chair and just do members
of the committee on the the City
of Albuquerque has a very strong
commitment to continuing to fund
our program however our purpose
is funded at the very lowest
levels of staffing
possible.
The success in our program lies
in having extremely intense of
date today sometimes our to our
interactions with the folks that
are at highest risk for being
involved in the cycles of
violence that means that the
majority of them from ours
statistics over the last almost
two years now have co occurring
disorders they have on
I'm gonna interested now I just
need to go is the pilot program
funding exhausted.
The pilot program funding is
exhausted but the city has
committed to funding this okay
that's what we needed to know
thank you very much next
Representative Anderson thank
you madam chairman just one
question of the sponsor of this
bill in the state and how the
eighty twenty cut will
will.
Impact one point seven billion
in other words is it going to be
AT twenty both recurring and non
recurring or is it going to be
of one point seven perhaps going
to.
Hello is there any more
any goes the bill including in
a.
Calculation for how recurring
and non recurring will be
allocated in the grant program
question.
So.
Thank you very much for that
Representative Anderson madam
chair the whole issue of
recurring and non recurring is
one we hadn't dealt with and
although I know we're all
familiar with the fact that
sometimes we think we're making
up an appropriation that's
recurring and DFA stores that
nonrecurring so that's a that's
to be determined.
Thank you madam chair that's my
question.
Right anybody else
Representative small madam chair
I move a do pass on house bill
ninety six as amended.
We have a second.
Representative Ezzell.
Yes ma'am I did have a question.
Okay speak where okay I will.
Madam chair and representative
on page three of the bill under
new material section five this
is the department shall receive
an overview applications looking
back in your definitions us all
the department the department of
health.
That's a pretty broad statement
right there when it says the
department shall receive you
application also on page four.
Line two hundred number one in
regards to what Representative
Sweetser rest.
Grant award should be made to at
least two counties.
So the determination is going to
be made from the department of
health with a minimum of a two
counties but then twenty percent
of that will go to the one big
population area.
How is this going to be based is
it going to be based on need or
whoever turned in their
application first ever how's
that determination that we may.
Madam chair representative is
all that's required is that the
it.
The city that tried that this
apology how do you needs to
develop.
Submit a grant proposal with
clearly defined measureable
objectives to improve public
health and safety.
And have a comprehensive
violence reduction strategic
plan and a description of how
they would use the money and
have an array of community based
services that can help them
carry out the work so they would
be judged on the quality of the
proposal.
So madam chair and
Representative Chasey all of
this is to be the grants will be
then awarded by the department
of health and to me on page
three section five first slide
the department that's a pretty
broad statement right here that
will I know that there's lots of
people that do work for the
department of health and various
agencies and our that.
Little troubles may madam chair
thank you very much.
Representative Garcia.
Thank you madam chair up
Representative you mentioned
that forty percent of the fund
will be going out I guess
base should be allowed to get my
correct.
Twenty eight.
Twenty percent as well yes.
Your muted.
I'm sorry.
The reason I'm asking that
question is up I just talk to
the DA and the thirteenth
judicial district and we have
right now the company's got
about a hundred thirty five of.
How much is my correct.
Right but.
Madam chair no Representative
the reason I'm asking is the
thirteenth judicial district
right now we have forty six on
the sides that are pending and
for you guys to take twenty
percent of the pot in all other
districts have to share it we
have just as much problem into
smaller districts and we'll be
doing all good grief how is this
a fair assumption on we're doing
the percentage wise.
It.
It's really just based on
population.
As I said before.
I appreciate your concern about
your area
Everyone.
All of the attention right now
is how Albuquerque seems to be
driving the states statistics
the negative and that hurts us
in so many ways so I think
that's why that was.
Madam chair no Representative I
appreciate that but in reality
the smaller districts have the
same problem that the agree does
other than you have the greater
population with my Bible nation
in my district is not even a
quarter of what I'll do you have
but yet we have have the does
have as much up problems is the
City of Albuquerque's I've madam
chair.
So Madam chair representative
Garcia what is it we do million
available.
Madam chair representative I I
respect that and and that's
would but the at the end of the
day we still have.
Just as much crime just as much
violence in our small
communities and for all the rest
of the state to share eighty
percent it's a little bit on
offer judgment that's all it was
and had madam chair thank you
madam Representative.
Representative small for the
motion that appreciate that the
committee raised their hands
before.
Do that so I don't have to go
back again let's go to
Representative small for the
motion thank you madam chair I
move that are passed on house
bill ninety six as a million as
amended.
Second.
In a second proper motion proper
seconded.
Is there any opposition to this
motion role.
Representative Allison yes.
Representative Anderson yes.
Representative Armstrong.
Well.
Representative Brown no.
Representative Castellano.
Yes.
Representative capital.
Representative Crowder.
Representative Dixon.
Representative is out now.
Representative Garcia.
Yes I have concerns will.
Representative Hochman Vigil.
Cherry Representative Dixon but
yes.
Representative Hochman Vigil
yes.
Representative Lane.
Is that I know.
What is no.
Thank you Representative Lara.
Yes.
Representative Sarinana yes.
Representative Sweetser no.
Representative Trujillo yes.
Chair small yes.
Madam chair.
Yes.
Are we have eleven in the
affirmative and seven in the
next year.
We've heard the vote counts
Representative Chasey your bill
has a do pass motion so thank
you very much for presenting
today.
Thank you.
Everybody if we could look for a
house bill one twelve that's
being introduced by
Representative Miguel Garcia and
we'll go to the bill sponsor I
don't see any amendment so we'll
go through the bills are going
here Representative Garcia thank
you madam chair and my witnesses
are in the the panelists section
and that is Matthew Propst join
Ansley and I don't know effect
about that us all right R. A. G.
E. that is in the attendee but
we want to bring him over if he
is in the attendees section
madam chair and members of the
committee also one twelve as
amended makes an appropriation
of nine hundred and seventeen
thousand eight hundred dollars
from the attorney general's
consumer settlement fund to the
local government division of the
department of finance and
administration to provide the
improvement and renovation of an
existing facility or the
expansion of integrated
substance use disorder programs.
In the last thank us some you
can't County area madam chair
for the last two years I have or
with the attorney general's
office.
key legislative initiatives
initiatives and identifying
quality substance use project
for funding from the AG's
consumer settlement fund which
is starting to be enraged by
settlement monies from opioid
manufacturers for their over
prescription of opioids in
particular oxycontin and
fentanyl this over prescription
has led to thousands of overdose
deaths throughout the United
States madam chair the HSD is
applying these opioid settlement
monies substance use and opioid
treatment abatement and
remediation initiatives in our
state.
The project identifying house
bill one twelve is exactly that
is exactly that manager I'd like
to yield to one of my expert
witnesses at props.
Was a New Mexico treasure
bringing quality health services
to our professionals and
communities described program.
in the legislation at.
Right here.
Thank you madam chair yes my
name's approached on the chief
quality officer and medical
director for the central family
health.
We are a federally qualified
health center that serves seven
counties of northern New Mexico
San Miguel moron cool Colfax
Harding what that tells in Rio
Arriba.
We have been fighting this fight
for many many years decades now
and have now found a better way
integrated substance use
disorder treatment which takes
trauma informed care in response
and integrates our services with
more medical and behavioral
health departments we've sent
dental not only internally but
also externally with with
community partners our programs
are outpatient based what
working with inpatient services
and other type of rehabilitation
services in our service area
this program will allow us to
increase capacity not only to
enhance and expand our city.
By fifty percent to roughly one
thousand patients we treat today
to add another five hundred
patients over the course of the
next five years but will also
improve the quality and the
outcomes of our services thank
you very much madam chair.
All I would also like to you of
the joy and state.
Very briefly.
Yes madam chair good afternoon
everybody I'm just here in
support of mass proposal if this
funding is allocated I am
representing the county and we
do understand that as a
nonprofit they would need some
nonprofit agreements and a
fiscal agent for the services
and the county is willing to
look into that.
Anybody from the AG's office.
Are you there.
Chair barely got tied up.
I'm gonna have Representative
small us send a text message to
him well the committee is asking
questions
make sure he's good with us
taking consumer settlement
funds.
A good program
So let's go to the committee on
any questions for representative
Garcia on the bill.
Do we have any questions.
Representative Armstrong go
ahead.
Are your muted Representative.
I am thank you madam chair my
apologies I'm.
Thank you madam chair thank you
Representative for bringing this
bill forward I heard this in the
help committee and I was curious
if any of the my concerns that I
brought up to about.
Ownership of the building and
putting this kind of money into
a building that wasn't owned by
the county and how several of
the questions I brought up I'm
not sure you remember but have
those been only be alleviated.
Madam chair
yes they have and and madam
chair
the AG is on board with this
project is a partner in this
legislation
in case you you can't get a hold
of them Representative Armstrong
I did follow up with the AG's
office in regards to your
question the health committee.
And we we clarified that house
bill one twelve is not a
violation of anti donation but
that the devil is in the details
in San Miguel County working
with the nonprofits and clearly
be finding the consideration of
implementing the initiative and
just as we all know madam chair
of the AG is involved in a lot
of settlements that many times
call for the consumer settlement
fund making disbursements to
personal individuals you know
and if we were to use general
fund monies that you that be a
violation of anti donation.
Yes Representative of ours and
we did take care of your
question and are moving smoothly
in regards to making this
initiative happen.
Thank you madam chair thank her.
Okay there's going to other
committee members
Representative Crowder.
Thank you madam chair Madam
chair representative I noticed
in our FY are under performance
implications it talks about the
attorney general's notes that
New Mexico counties
municipalities.
I should be receiving funds from
any opioid related settlements
that are directed to those
entities
Can you speak to about that a
little better are we
anticipating that that those
funds are forth coming and
they'll be coming your way soon
or or what exactly does that
mean.
Madam chair Representative
Crowder very good question.
And if they need was here Hey
this that of the settlement
monies that are coming in from
mobile manufactures fifty
percent will go to local
governments and fifty percent
will go to the legislature.
And that currently there is a
settlement that what that came
in in February twenty twenty one
to the tune of two million
dollars that was the mackenzie
settlement.
And that wasn't even a a major
league player that was a little
PR firm.
That kind of pushed out the
benefits of all of our
oxycontin and fentanyl in terms
of the of the over prescription
but to specifically answer your
question the AG has established
a policy that are these tens of
millions of dollars that'll be
coming in for settlement monies
from opioid manufacturers fifty
percent will go to local
governments fifty percent the
legislature.
Thank you madam chair
representative I I guess I just
is the read the next line it
says it is the offices
understanding that counties
municipalities will be receiving
their own settlement payments as
a result of the state settlement
with four of the major opioid
defendants and that made me
think that that we may be
stepping in front of something
that is scheduled a program to
happen anyway in order I was
just curious thank you madam
chair.
Representative Lara.
Thank you madam chair thank you
representative Garcia I have a
I'm a really quick question I
was looking at the very short
bill here which is nice I like
the short bills but where is our
where is the accountability
piece in your Representative
Garcia whose ideas are gonna be
reports sources are going to be
our any data collected or or is
there gonna be any other any
other systems of accountability
built into this madam chairman
Representative.
Madam chair and Representative
Lara and I would think that the
AG would have some type of
structure built in to the
disbursement of these funds for
specific projects such as the
one that we're bringing forth
and there is no need to kind of
spell that out in the
legislation
and actually you know we have
the fiscal agent some you got
County making sure that there is
that proper distribution and
proper
reporting in terms of how
expenditure in is being applied
to the renovation
of the of the expansion of this
Integrated substance use
disorder program.
Thank you Representative thank
you madam chair so then the
accountability piece falls on
the on the county resident when
we did that the county miss
madam chair and the and the AG's
office okay thank thank you
Representative thank you madam
chair.
Representative Castellano.
Thank you madam chair I just
want to thank Matt groves and
Joyo and for bringing this
forward up you know San Miguel
if we can get our treatment
center going to Sierra County we
will be the.
Regional treatment center for
the northeastern part of the
state madam chair so all I just
want to commend them for
bringing this forward.
Thank you by thank you madam
chair.
Okay do we have any other
questions.
Representative small for the
motion all right I guess I'm a
little disturbed that when we
are talking about in ages the
budget that they don't have the
time to show up to committee
hearing that's that that's not
cool one now you're you're up
called in front of the
Appropriations Committee so
let's go Representative small.
Madam chair I should I I share
the same concerns but will move
a do pass on house bill one
twelve.
Thank you okay we have a motion
proper motion proper second is
there any opposition to this
bill.
Based
passed thank you representative
Garcia thank you madam chair
members.
The next bill I have in front of
me numbers this house bill
ninety seven we have
Representative Matthews Hochman
Vigil Trujillo unseren Jana who
is going to is going to talk
about this bill I will Hochman
Vigil okay let's go
Representative Hochman Vigil.
I thank you madam chair members
of the committee house bill
ninety seven establishes the
rural health care project fund
it's house at the New Mexico
finance authority and it is to
make rural health care project
loans to those rural health care
providers who can apply and
qualify for the loan
I don't we don't have any
amendments madam chair and I do
not believe that there's any
money and house bill two for
this bill so I will probably be
asking the committee to table at
this time but the cabbie out
that we are working furiously
with the advocates to bring it
back next year and hopefully
have some additional moneys
attached to the fund.
It was going to Representative
small for the motion.
Madam chair I move to table on.
We have a motion and a second.
Addition to that tabling motion
saying nine thank you very much
our legislators were bringing
this for.
Thank you madam chair.
All right the next bill and and
I want to read this off to this
is the sponsor house bill one
fourteen the Bernalillo criminal
justice data sharing.
House bill one oh three C. N. M.
Madam chair studio house bill
one oh nine unemployed worker
boot camp training.
House bill forty one.
Water trust fund.
And house bill one seventeen New
Mexico historic women marker
initiative involved
Indicated our staff that they
want to have these bills tabled.
Is there anyone that disagrees
with that.
Hands up so I'm gonna go to
representatives of all to make
the tabling motion on the
following bills.
House bill ninety seven house
bill one fourteen house bill one
oh three house bill one own nine
house bill forty one.
Your house bill one seventeen.
Representative small madam chair
I move to table the those bills
that you just mentioned.
That.
We have a proper motion proper
second for tabling of bills are
just listed is there any
opposition to that motion.
Thank.
Of the bills that were listed
have been table.
Now we can move to house bill
one twenty four as amended that
we Representative Brown.
Thank you madam chair and
members of the committee house
bill one twenty four proposes to
add judgeships one in the fifth
judicial district and one in the
thirteenth judicial of judicial
covers eighty eight and Chavis
counties and the thirteen Civil
assembled once here madam chair
we did discuss this during our
budget building process and so I
won't I won't say any more than
and we need to say on this
except that we do have an
amendment and it I believe it's
been passed out.
The amendment Representative
brown and chairman of the
amendment to house bill one
twenty four is amended thank.
The second Representative
Anderson so let's talk about the
amendment Representative Brown.
Thank you madam chair so warning
is in this amendment step one is
to strike the language in the
bill title that says making
appropriations and then the
second action is some districts
section for its entirety and
madam chair I think we have a
few words that that stayed of
online where that need to be I
think it's just a technical
error we need to strike the
words on pages one and two comma
and begin with a capital S. on
the word strike so the strike
section for its entirety.
Okay so our staff you got that
this amendment doesn't have
everything in it.
With.
Okay.
So is there any questions about
the amendment.
I was so.
Madam chair if I if I may
it's correct that there is
funding in the budget but
unfortunately not enough funding
quite each of these new judges
will need to have a court
monitor and when the budget was.
Posed LFC took a lower number
did not include the monitors and
they are necessary for the
judges to have a hearing because
they keep the official the
official record we're not gonna
do that now Representative.
He done on the Senate side west
manager and I was going to and
at that that we are in touch
with the Senate finance
committee shortly here with
leading no we need to that
funding but for right now we
just wish to start the amendment
in the bill.
All right we have a proper
motion a proper second on the
amendment Syrian opposition to
the amendment.
Thing now and it the amendment
has passed let's go back on the
bill is there any questions of
the Representative on the bill.
Representative small for the
motion madam chair I move a do
pass on house bill one twenty
four as amended.
As as amended second
Representative Anderson is there
any opposition to that motion
saying none we have a due pass
thank you very much as.
Thank you madam chair and I'd
like to thank judge James Hudson
the chief judge of the fifth
judicial for being are standing
by with us this afternoon thank
you.
Thank you a judge let's go now
to house bill one oh four
Representative Dixon are are you
on.
Or Sir no Serrato.
I'll be sending this one today
all right let's go to
representative Linda Serrato
pays and it you do have an
amendment yes I do would like
that to to to number at two two
number and I want to talk about
your number thank you madam
chairman the to to to number is
two two two four four three
point one.
And what the amendment does is
it simply expands the businesses
allowed to participate in the
program beyond the scope of the
economic development department
subjected so maybe fund
different businesses for example
so the Mexico there's excellent
video games that are being
produced cosmetics etcetera and
be helpful the for these
businesses as well and I'm happy
to talk about the bill in total
briefly this would create a
framework for the for the
venture capital program within
NMFA The New Mexico five hundred
and we're gonna talk we're going
to work on the amendment first
like to have somebody move the
amendment for discussion I'm of
the amendment for discussion
madam chair thank.
The motion a second so back on
the amendment everybody on page
four line eight.
After state director chair of
the line strike line nine in its
entirety instruct one to go
okay.
All righty that's pretty simple.
We have any questions on this
ammendment.
That has any question she
explained it to us hi is there
any opposition to this
amendment.
Seeing none we haven't heard the
amendment drive that back on the
field representative thank you
madam chairwoman committee so
what this bill does is creates a
framework for the venture
capital program within the
Mexico finance authority that
allows the NMFA to provide
relief capital to Mexico
businesses support businesses
that are emerging or expanding
and businesses that are creating
job opportunities well it also
allows the NMFA to work with and
make investments in venture
private private equity funds
early stage investments as
mentioned it will report
annually on its investments and
it is already included in the
LFC budget for this fiscal year.
It's going to the committee for
questions do we have any
questions from the committee.
The jets here to look at the
FIR.
And madam chair if necessary I
do have you smiled for is the
chief economist for the LFC on
hand as an expert witness.
Okay.
I don't see any hands up are we
good with this bill the way it
is since we funded it already.
Madam chair of the past.
Okay we have a motion for the
past we have a second thank you
madam chair okay we have a
proper motion proper second is
there any opposition to a do
pass motion.
I don't see any opposition so we
do have a due passed as amended
or house bill one oh four thank
you madam chairman the committee
thank you everybody.
Now we're on house bill ninety
two.
Representative Hochman Vigil
thank you madam chair members of
the committee house bill ninety
two deals with magistrate judge
retirements and madam chair I
apologize I don't have a pre
drafted amendment because there
was some question as to whether
or not language is needed or we
should start the appropriation
but I do have crop of
clarification now that we will
just go ahead and strike section
three of the bill which is the
appropriation there is some
funding for this madam chair
members of the committee
although it is not the level
stated in the bill at this
moment but we are working on
that the Senate side and again
we still need that language.
Representative Sweetser for the
no not if you read out the
amendment for us.
Thank you madam chair so the
amendment would strike on page
one line fourteen making and
appropriations and it would
strike on page six line
seventeen through twenty three
section three.
Okay that is the amendment was
introduced Representative
Sweetser is our second to that
amendment.
Representative Anderson let's
talk about the amendment any
questions.
Representative Crowder is that
on the amendment on the bill.
I'm sorry but you're yes it's on
the bill.
Okay we have any opposition to
the amendment saying now the
amendment has been adopted let's
go back to the bill
Representative Crowder.
Thank you madam chair I'm just
here I can't remember how much
money was for the
Districts in their retirement
fund.
With the sponsor be able to
update me on that please.
Madam chair representative
Crowder after visiting with
members in the Senate right now
to be about twenty million
dollars for both the magistrate
and the a judicial retirement
funds.
Thank you for that answer you
know how much of it is for the
magistrates along.
Madam chair representative
Crowder I do not I apologize
okay just your staff about your.
All righty let's go
Representative Anderson yes the
question thank you madam chair
will this is Bob it is my
understanding is that the of the
bill bails out the
judicial the twenty million
number is a number that
contemplates bailing out both
the judicial and the magistrate
is that correct.
Madam chair representative
Anderson that is my
understanding yes it is my
understanding of Madam chair
representative that those are
the two at.
Our funding.
arguably the most insolvent of
the pension funds and para is
that correct.
Madam chair representative
Anderson although I do not
profess to be an expert on the
status of various funds within
the ERA of testimony on this
bill previously has made that
statement that these are to me
most under what under water
funds that we have within the
program.
Thank you because that was my
understanding of the testimony
as well of final comment or or
is perhaps then this is the
third year out of the past four
when we take in general fund
money and bailed out our our
pensions it is that correct or
actually I have the knowledge
correct but it's a question.
Madam chair representative
Anderson although you already
know the answer I will answer
yes.
Thank you thank you good luck
with your bill thank you madam
chair thank you.
He also has a questions.
Representative small.
Madam chair I move a do pass on
house bill ninety two as
amended.
Thank you madam chair.
Proper motion and a proper
second review passed on on the
bill as amended is there any
opposition to that do past
lotion.
So we have a due pass as amended
on your bill Representative
thank you madam chair members of
the committee.
The last thing I have on my
agenda is House Energy
Environment and natural
resources committee substitute
for house bill one oh one and
there is an amendment is going
to talk about that.
I am madam chair.
About the amendment first okay
we're doing is stripping the
probation this bill does have
money in the budget a cut on a
couple places and we have a
eighty thousand dollar money
from our junior bill.
All right Sir talking about
striking making appropriation on
line thirteen page one
page two strikes section two in
its entirety.
OK a motion
Amendment I'm of the amendment
madam chair second.
The motion proper second on the
amendment for the option is
there any opposition to that.
Motion I don't see any so the
amendment has been adopted back
on the bill Representative
small.
Madam chair I move that do pass
on the house energy and natural
resources committee substitute
for house bill one on one as
amended.
The motion and a second do we
have any questions on this.
Madam chair I do have one
question so this is I'm working
with Senator Woods on this and
he said he didn't think we
needed the language so I'm not
sure how you want to proceed.
We don't need that language is
simply need to table the bill
because the only reason we would
move it across.
For that for this.
So.
Two more questions in here and
I'm gonna go back and small or
the other motion is going to
Representative Chatfield.
Just a having worked in this
business for a while on this
talk a little bit about what the
industry faces we have for many
years had a plant material
center at Los Lunas Department
New Mexico the NRCS plant
materials center would go
throughout New Mexico and they
would gather caught from the
called would say would gather
seed from the willows and the
right over IT of native plants
they would plant them it
containers that were
appropriately
sized to do right there in
restoration so when the so
conservation district and others
needed native plants that were
with thrive under native
conditions will go down and get
a
we got their last toured cotton
wood poles last year.
Their top up plan program the
person that does that has
retired and is is they've just
greatly.
drawn back what they do.
As far as raising raising native
New Mexico plant material so of
the one of the when I would ask
them why they should they do
want to compete with private
enterprise but I I don't see any
private enterprise taking up
that the.
Taking up that slot in my in my
question is this does this
program raise only Connor for
seedlings or does this program
she to raise our native cotton
wood poles native cottonwood
seedlings will Kylie willow's
All the stuff that the we used
to get down at Los Alamos.
Can you answer that please
thank you madam chair at
actually need my expert for that
one all I know is that we're
doing a State Bank and in a
nursery and I'm not I don't know
the specifics do you want me to
I'm we have a couple of experts
on.
doctors experts on I just based
on what was said earlier we're
probably going to table lives
but I think it is good to
discuss.
Those experts thank you madam
vice thank you madam chair it's
a doctor Josh was Sloan.
Okay we'll bring him in and
while we're doing that was
better represented and
understand for question.
Thank you madam chair I believe
that of of a table in motion
today will not.
It's our thank you of the
passage of this legislation
So I just wanted to offer that
clarification of because of that
may be the act the the best
action and
would cause me to
well for that instead of another
motion thank you madam chair.
Experts there was the question
to server on the
Three years did you hear that
question can you.
Madam chair and Representative
Chatfield yes the proposed
reforestation Center would
produce some of that larger
stock and of the species you
mentioned.
Great thank you madam chair.
Okay.
We recently have a different
motion it sounds like it makes
sense that we go ahead table
this I'm a little nervous about
that.
I think we probably better we're
language along because.
All right if we're creating a
center.
That means is not there right.
It's not there there might be
some problems in getting that
there are so I don't know I mean
I'm gonna go to the sponsor on
that we want to do I am.
We do have an MLA but
If you think we should keep it
going I'm okay with that Senator
Woods did say he didn't think we
we didn't we needed to but I I
think you know better I would
really.
When you recommendation madam
chair.
Representative Crowder for
question.
Thank you madam chair just a
comment I had a conversation
with Senator Woods this morning
and he did say very fine to
table this bill.
Go back to Representative small.
but I'm sure.
Right go ahead Sir I just want
from Senator Woods it is assumed
it checks and they said no I
hope not so.
I think you're exactly right
madam chair.
Of net he is decided this point
it be better to to keep the
language.
Small.
Chair I move the do pass on a
house energy and natural
resources committee substitute
for house bill one oh one as
amended thank.
The motion and a second is there
any opposition to that motion.
Thank god we have a due process
and it already I think that
completes our agenda for today.
will be at the all of the chair
tomorrow we're going to try to
make it right after the floor
session that that seems to
change I prefer us meeting in
the afternoon and then in the
evening if we can do that so
we're gonna hang loose on the
bills will here tomorrow should
be posted.
Thank you for a good day today
and I understand we'll be back
on the floor at eight thanks
everybody thank you madam chair
thank you.
