Representative Ezzell.
Representative Garcia.
Your.
Representative had it up.
Representative Hochman Vigil.
Representative Lane.
Representative Lara here.
Representative Sarinana.
Representative Sweetser here.
Representative Trujillo.
I chair small.
I'm here.
Madam chair madam chair and I'm
here.
We have a quorum.
Trujillo is here I got your.
Okay thank you very much
everyone our first on the agenda
is Senate bill one thirty three
we're working from the revised
agenda and I'm gonna ask
representative Garcia to go head
start on that.
Madam chair I have an amendment
for this bill I move the the
amendment for discussion the
amendment number is zero point
two two zero eight one two point
one Madam chair.
Okay
has the amendment been
distributed and.
Can we put it up madam chair I
think it has been distributed.
Okay can we put it on share
screen staff.
Madam chair yes if you'll give
me a moment I will get that up
for us okay great.
I just want to remind the
committee that this is the bill
that we had done the dummy on
three twenty five.
A couple of last week I think it
is was when we got our our dummy
bill out of HFC.
And
The Senate bill miraculously
moves through quickly and so I'm
going to ask the representative
to speak to the amendment or if
you have some experts account
will let them out.
Madam chair I do have an expert
of the director of aviation
provided Mr right all you
available.
Mr I'll are you on.
Madam chair I believe he's in
the attendee.
Ramallah promotion now.
This is the end.
Can you hear me now and we can
and we'd like you to explain
what this ammendment does.
Okay.
The reference to have.
Is striking section two of the
entire deal is section two is
the purpose of action and that
was
Senator Morris at the Senate
floor a couple of days ago and
that does not change any of the
bill at all it's simply a
purposes clause the rest of the
bill is that sufficient
explanatory that it covers the
purposes and what it's supposed
to do without section two.
Okay what what is what are you
telling us in H. here.
Subsection H..
If that's under subsection four
H. what that does is it promotes
the deal key aviation Division
to spend up to ten percent of
the fund balance as of July
first of each year.
For infrastructure.
Known for structured is allowed
except for that ten percent
balance each July first of each
fiscal year okay
So we have moved the amendment
to seconded that amendment
discussion for was that you
Representative small.
Yes okay so the amendment was
moved by Representative Garcia
and seconded by Representative
small for discussion we're on
the amendment is there any
opposition to this amendment we
can take it down now please.
Chair K. scroll up or we can
read I please.
Okay go ahead scroll up.
You need an explanation on that
Representative Crowder.
We can LCS with expert to talk
about it.
No I I just needed to I could
read the bottom of it so I'm I'm
good thank you all right okay we
can take the amendment down now
please because go back is there
any opposition to the amendment.
Saying the bill is been amended
back on the bill Representative
Garcia of madam chair of Senate
bill one thirty three as amended
twice related to aviation and
that.
At the Rohrer service.
That meant act making in our
creation madam chair house bill
thirty three creates a new pro
aviation program program within
the department of
transportation to support their
service in rural parts of the
state of New Mexico.
ManageEngine for any questions
okay committee were on Senate
bill one thirty three and we
heard the described we for the
description we've already
amended it is there any
questions on this bill
Seeing now to go to
Representative small for the
motion.
Madam chair I would move at a do
pass on Senate bill one thirty
three as amended.
Second.
Okay who was second place
Anderson okay Representative
Anderson is second for Senate
bill one thirty three as amended
is there any opposition to this
do passed motion.
Saying that there is a do pass
on Senate bill one thirty three
as amended.
I'm sorry to interrupt you but
Senate bill one thirty three
still has an appropriation and
it and the The appropriation is
in house bill two.
That's correct its in house bill
two are you saying that we need
to strike the appropriation
that's correct madam chair okay
section.
What section is down.
Madam chair it's online to our
page one line twelve strike
making appropriation.
And.
Yeah we need to strike sections
seven in its entirety and then
right number.
All right I thought this
ammendment was ready to go
college as to the committee
I would not put this bill on if
the amendment had been ready to
go so let's go back to the
committee we hadn't we hadn't
done said that there's a do
passed yet so we can take up a
second amendment I'm gonna ask
Representative small to put that
for basically what it does on
Senate bill one thirty three it
strikes the appropriation.
Thank you madam chair I would
move that we strike The
appropriation and all language
referring to that from Senate
bill one thirty three.
Thank you for from a second from
Representative Castellano so we
have adopted the first amendment
and now this is the second
amendment which just simply
strikes the appropriation is
there any opposition to that
motion.
Seeing none we've just struck
the appropriation back on the
bill let's go back to
Representative small on the
bill.
Question.
Chair I would just I think I
would question please Christine
Trujillo okay
Go ahead.
Chair so striking the
appropriation means that you
don't get the ten million
dollars.
Know what it means is by
striking the appropriation we do
that with every bill that's
already in the budget.
This this amount of nine million
dollars is already in house bill
two they need the language for
this now so we don't need to add
the Appropration to use because
it's already in house bill.
Go ahead.
Madam chair with all due respect
that that was struck on the
floor.
I think the ten million dollars
was struck when it was on the
floor.
Okay well that was the house
bill that was the dummy that we
did we've never had this bill on
the house floor this is a Senate
bill this is coming from the
Senate to us it'll be heard on
the health of our.
The Senate bill did not track
with the house bill that we
moved off of the house floor so
now we'll.
Thank you.
Thank you madam chair I would
move do pass on Senate bill one
thirty three as twice amended.
Second.
We have a second Representative
Anderson is there any
opposition.
To do passed twice amended
amended Senate bill one thirty
three.
Saying that we have a due pass
all right let's go to the next
bill.
Which is House Bill three twenty
six.
And I'm going to ask Rachel to
talk about that for us because
she's going to need to do a
verbal amendment on it so go
ahead Rachel morning madam chair
owning members of the House
Appropriations house bill three
twenty six we talked about
briefly I believe on Friday it
takes the education technology
notes geo bonds the two mill
property tax levy which is
referred to as Senate bill nine
and the ten mil property tax
levy which is referred to as
house bill thirty three and
allows those
Property tax revenue sources to
be used for teacher housing
explicitly.
So I think we discussed on
Friday there's an old agency
opinion from the nineteen
eighties that
Relates to SB nine and geo bonds
and the interpretation of the AG
at that time was SB nine and G.
O. bonds could not be used for
teacher housing well we did get
an email back from PED I sent an
email request on the behalf of
Gallup McKinley schools this
last week asking PED to re visit
revisit that interpretation
given some statutory language it
makes more sense for you guys to
handle this incident so this
this issue so that you don't
have
Competing interpretations by
different agencies and
I think this will handle it
moving forward so these for
revenue sources are able to be
used.
Madam chair do you want me to
talk about where I think the
where the bill needs to be
amended.
Yes please.
On page five.
One twenty two.
this should read and I will send
your committee secretary the the
what what exactly what needs to
be inserted but it should read
maintenance of public school
buildings compact.
Including teacher housing comma
or public school or
prekindergarten grounds and the
rest of that the rest of the
information there so it's
insertion after buildings of a
comma.
Including teacher housing comma.
And that will make sure that
this tracks with language that
the Senate just adopted in house
bill six doing the same things.
All right if your number house
bill six was the impact aid bill
that
I went through this committee as
well as the house floor and was
approved in Senate education
today there is a number of
changes to it which were good
changes
we work very hard on that bill
and now it's moving on to the
Senate finance committee but
there's a component inside house
bill six that we thought was
important enough after speaking
all of you last week about the
need for funding for teacher
edges there was conflicting
problem apparently with an H. G.
opinion.
And so we're trying to just
clarify that we're trying to get
beyond that in other words so we
are able to use funding for
teacher housing
That was the discussion so this
is an independent bill if for
some reason house bill six
doesn't make it doesn't get get
through the Senate and after to
the governor this is a this is a
helper so to speak when it comes
to being able to pay for teacher
just and it was a lot based on
what you all said last week I
didn't realize there were that
many teacher judges throughout
the state but when you all spoke
up it was clear to me this is a
statewide issue.
So with that discussion let's go
to I don't know if we have
anybody in the audience at this
point do we make that once talk
about this.
Madam chair I don't see anybody
at this time.
Advise if there are anybody the
races are and.
Okay then go to the committee
and that's go with the
Representative Ezzell.
Madam chair thank you very much
whenever you are talking about
these teacher edges are we
talking about current ones are
within the school district be
able to.
Have these constructed.
And are they going to have to
follow the public
What might translate here where
any any maintenance or repairs
that happens on these teachers
did I have to follow the
guidelines that are set forth by
following the.
The.
Jeez I'm sorry I'm drawing a
blank here chair representative
are you talking about the public
school capital outlay council
process.
Probably yes.
Madam chair representative
The dollars so so each of these
provisions requires a resolution
be submitted to the voters and
the voters vote upon intended it
accept education technology
notes by constitution you guys
submitted to the people and the
people approved an education
technology network can be
implemented by school district
without a vote of the
their electorates.
Issues I think with what was
included in the resolution
existing resolution districts
would still be required to meet
that the specified purposes than
each of the resolutions for
current taxation under any one
of these acts but for New
New session seven at technode SB
ninety two thirty three or new
issue of geo bonds they could
include your housing and that
could to build new teacher
housing or to take care and
maintain existing teacher
housing okay there is no
requirement with any of the is
acts to actually go to the
public school capital outlay
council and and go through that
process but these revenue
sources used as local is.
To match PSC of the State funded
projects and we have just
started on the counselor.
Mr Burciaga and myself sit on
that council along with.
Six other people and we just
started.
Workers teacher housing adjacent
to awarded public schools.
All right thank you very much
for that response.
All righty.
But do we have any do we have
any other questions because I'm
going to ask Representative
small to move the amendment
excuse me Representative Allison
go ahead.
Your muted.
My hand the.
You don't know that's my hand.
So from the screen sorry it was
over here your name sorry about
that
all right we didn't have your
hand that so let's move the
verbal amendment that Rachel is
proposing can I get somebody to
do that please madam chair I
would move the verbal amendment
proposed by director got Joe.
The second from Sarinana.
Okay is there any opposition to
the verbal amendment.
Saying none back on the bill.
Representative Anderson go
ahead.
Thank you madam chair just real
quick madam chairman to the
sponsor of.
Verification on when we talk
about teacher housing
Being included.
By the house or whose couldn't
you know we talking about of a
mortgage payment are we talking
about a title are we talking
about rent question mark.
So.
Madam chair representative that.
That would be it honesty by bond
counsel so
I don't think we're anticipating
a rentals you know renting says
in a community but rather using
your school district Landen
building housing that is owned
by the school districts that's
typically how things are done so
you have
on tribal lands the tribal
leadership will enter into a
fifty year lease state with the
district and allow them to build
teacher housing on site adjacent
to a school I think you've got
you guys heard on Friday that
there are
A number of districts that also
that that aren't don't have the
same challenges with housing
estate tribal districts do but
they have their own their own
challenges are also purchasing
housing or building housing on
their.
Teachers.
Thank you thank you for that
answer madam chairman I think
that answers my question thank
you.
All right do we have anybody
else.
Okay seeing what's pleasure of
the of the.
Many on this bill I move just
past the three two in a six as
amended second thank.
Sure our.
Madam chair thank you the sun is
a substitute for House Bill.
Three twenty six.
K. to be about so you have a do
not pass on three twenty six of
the second.
As.
Thank you madam chair thank you
Mr Valdez I apologize I move a
do not pass on house bill three
twenty six and I would move a do
pass on house appropriations and
finance committee substitute for
house bill three twenty six as
amended second.
Okay we have a motion
Representative small and a
second by Representative brown
is there any opposition to this
motion.
Seeing this substitute has been
passed I'm gonna ask you of the
Representative Syriana and
Representative Lara would take
the lead on this as we go
through the house floor process
and Senate and all that business
and you all are closer to
education and I am sure would
appreciate it if we could as I
said the in one of our meetings
we always try to play to our
strengths and those people that
are closest to some of these
things need to be the people
caring those bills so if you all
would I appreciate that thank
you so just make sure you all
sign off on it too so there's no
problems about you presenting.
Okay let's move on.
Senate bill one eleven amended.
Representative Trujillo you're
gonna do that out yes thank you
madam chair.
Senate bill one eleven is simply
making appropriation to the
department of finance and
administration for the land bank
power so to hire Mexico licensed
professional surveyor and an
attorney who specializes in
property law I have an expert
witness are to do what are to
let that if you wish if you wish
him to give you more space
information that wasn't of
larger appropriation madam chair
and members of the committee but
it was stricken and now
of the the money is simply one
hundred thousand dollars that
was donated to the junior money.
Okay so Representative there is
junior money for this one okay
Let's let's go to our to do our
our agency and as you know there
you are would you like to make a
couple of comments on this bill.
Thank you madam chair of the
committee members of the
committee again my name is R.
two point eight I'm the program
manager for the New Mexico land
grant council and what this bill
aims to do is just provide some
additional resources for the
council to be able to.
Increase the amount of services
we provide for land grants the
legal services answering
services right now the council
does appropriate portion of its
budget towards those services
for land grants there are very
much needed but we don't have
enough resources to do them
justice and that's the purpose
of the appropriation in this
bill.
Madam chair representative for
questions okay do we have
anybody Mike in the audience of
my has got their hand up or
anything on this bill.
Not at this time manager.
Okay we do have some questions
Representative Trujillo we're
gonna go to the committee let's
start with Representative
Anderson thank you madam
chairman madam chairman I'd like
to ask the sponsor or the expert
either one when I hear about of
the additional funding of.
Of I think a hundred thousand
dollars
and I think of the cost of
surveying and
of legal services I I think Gee
whiz of this really seems like
an under funding situation
however madam chairman I heard
that already funds are going to
Fund surveying and legal within
the budget that the council
currently has so my question is
is if this bill passes in that
will additional one hundred
thousand dollars to secure how
much of an addition is that what
the council is currently
spending on of legal services
and survey question thank you.
Thank you madam chair and
Representative Anderson.
this is the council that really
works hard and uses its money
very wisely the very limited
funds that it gets very wisely
a lot of times the work that is
done is donated time but this we
if you'll recall in the original
bill this was asking for a
million dollars appropriation
obviously that was unavailable
so the the folks who were
helping move this forward we're
able to receive the donated of.
A junior money at a hundred
thousand dollars and then I'm
gonna let our doodle.
Give you more specific
information but I believe that
this is going to help move this
forward up if you if you may
madam chair more to speak.
Thank you madam chair
Representative trio
Representative Anderson the so
currently the council has two
contracts one with the in New
Mexico legal aid I'm at contract
for this current year is forty
five thousand on a legal
services and we also have a
contract for servicer receives a
twenty five thousand with this
appropriation would allow us to
do is cover one of those
positions specifically through
of the appropriation and then
we'd be able to the sort of
utilize that the additional ones
we have to continue to provide
the other service with with the
money that we do have in our
budget currently.
Thank you for that answer just a
quick follow up to it if I
understood correctly of the
forty five in the twenty five to
seventy thousand dollars a year
for the services the additional
one hundred thousand dollars
would make available then one
hundred and seventy thousand
dollars for legal and surveying
did I calculate that correctly
Sir.
Madam chair representative
correct and and we will probably
get a small increase but we do
have some some additional junior
monies that are coming to the
council so we'll be able to
increase that really what we
were looking at with the the
million dollar appropriation was
the original bill was spread
over five years and so the
intention was two hundred
thousand a year to go for those
two percent specific positions
and so we we in our upcoming
budget we should be able to
actually commit meet that mark
with this or does.
Thank you for that madam chair
of just simply one concluding
remark and that is of the
council should always remembers
that up
HB two junior moderate money
should be considered
nonrecurring and of therefore
keep that in mind as you expand
those subs going forward madam
chairman thank you very much I
concluded my questions.
Representative Brown.
Thank you madam chairs and
Representative so.
The fiscal impact report refers
to a one hundred million dollars
appropriation and one of the the
paragraphs and that threw me for
a loop I understand it it's
looking at the boxes though on
that it's it's more like a
hundred thousand
madam chair and representative
so I'm I'm just still a little
bit confused you're asking for a
hundred thousand individually.
And what what is the cell now of
the appropriation plus junior
money are you getting anywhere
close to the hundred thousand
that was originally asked for.
You madam chair and
representative brown I'm gonna
let a total respond to that.
So madam chair Representative we
do actually.
In terms of the.
If I could cover the question
you're asking if we have in
addition to the hundred thousand
what other funds are available
in terms of G. appropriations.
Madam chair representative and
Mr Archuleta so the
the fiscal impact reports as the
original ask was for it looks
like
for FY twenty two hundred
thousand and that would be
recurring out of the general
fund.
So with.
The junior money that's been
promised where are you now.
Okay I understand Madam chair
representative I'm so.
My understanding is the junior
appropriation we do know that on
your marks to separately for
this senator Linda Lopez put
fifty thousand dollars on in
junior money and then I
understand we we have some
additional junior money that's
not specific to
to the lawyer surveyor of
restriction or or or language in
Senate bill one eleven that
would give us an additional I
believe one hundred fifty
thousand and so the that's those
are junior appropriations
specific to the council and then
this bill specifically earmarked
for those two positions we do in
the council have additional
unfunded sort of position or
needs that we have within the
council for example we do need
to sort of increase some of the
services that we provide in
terms of natural resource
management the land grants that
we work with throughout the
state collectively manage
approximately two hundred
thousand acres of COVID land I'm
so that's sort of one of the
that the priorities of the
council this is a new towards
working on in addition to use
work with within that context
trying to start up some.
You conservation I take core
projects within those ninety
communities to help absorb some
of those you and so any any
monies that the council receives
that are in excess of that are
used for the purpose of funding
the attorney of the server
position would put towards those
priorities.
Madam chair representative and
Mr chair so it's it is it
correct that you would be adding
a full time equivalent lawyer
and of F. T. E. surveyor.
Use state agency staff Madam
chair representative it depends
on if we can can do that with
that being the the that
nonrecurring funds we may have
to do one position hired one
position a contract so it just
depends on if we'll have them be
a contracted position or it'll
be a full time position in the
long run madam chair
representative would save us to
to have the position I'm just
because we do have enough work
for several years out terms of
being able to have a cost
savings right now on the
contracts that we have their
hourly and so we just the might
not of ours we actually get to
work are are less on the
contracts that we would for
position.
Madam chair representative so I
was kind of leaning against this
bill after after looking at the
material I would prefer contract
arrangements rather than adding
FTEs but I just heard you say Mr
chair what is that you have a
lot of work that's needing to be
done that will stretch for a
couple years so I guess I'm
leaning more towards supporting
the bill thank you madam chair I
appreciate it.
Are you.
Madam chair you okay let's go to
Representative Crowder.
Are you muted Representative.
Thank you madam chair my
questions are very similar to
Representative Brown questions
are I was curious if they were
contract employees or if they
were a full time FTEs a judge
just based on the cost of a of
an attorney the cost of a good
survey or a contract would seem
to make more sense to me that
that full time employee that's.
Okay good return your a good
server is going to cost a lot of
money and so.
I don't I don't know that you're
gonna get there if it's a full
time employee so and the only
other thing manager I'd I'd like
first to have a roll call vote
of this please.
Thank you madam chair okay we'll
do a roll call let's go to
Representative Herrera.
Thank you madam chair and
members of the committee I just
want to add I have the most land
grants in my district in the
state and Land Grant council is
an amazing organization that
does a lot of good for very
small amount of money and
this these surveyors are
desperately needed and and I'm
I'm glad.
I'm glad to sponsor Brandt
legislation Ford and I just urge
everybody to consider this thank
you.
Okay.
Just go back to the committee is
there anyone else has a
question.
Representative Chatfield go
ahead.
Thank you madam chair you know I
I just a question grant to the
markup you.
So this bill should be used.
This bill appropriates thousand
dollars for a surveyor in the
larger.
What I just heard was that you
wish maybe a surveyor or maybe a
lawyer or maybe for some other
activities so I'm not.
Sure what is authorized by the
wording in this bill do we have
a hundred thousand dollars.
Our server here and the lawyer
or are we going to.
Our world spending the money on
you know so I'm just in the last
year.
Chair.
Clearly stated that that based
on the amount of money that had
been committed that they would
have to reach thank if it would
be the full time lawyer of full
time work surveyor and I think
he clearly stated that
they would end up having to
contract it rather than than
that of hi are you the one full
time so I I think with that
response.
We're able to or they're able to
use that money a little bit more
specifically of the because of
the limitations of the funding
and I will defer to our to our
Q. one step more.
Thank you madam chair group
playing recently and we we also
have a our base budget is about
three hundred thousand dollars
of receiving general fund
appropriations so questions part
of our base budget will go
towards funding what whichever
position isn't funded either
through a contractor through a
direct higher and then within
the other sort of aspects that I
mentioned are based on
additional budget we have
already so those are just sort
of the line of work that we do
in this hundred thousand dollar
will just help us to utilize
that specific money for the.
Or the survey or or potentially
a little bit of both and then
we'll supplement that with the
other money that we have in our
basement.
Thank you madam chair I guess my
my what I was wondering is this
do we need is also the ordinance
as follows.
Thank you madam chair.
Okay let's go to representative
Garcia madam chair I just wanted
to know motion if you're ready.
Okay is there anyone else that
has any questions saying I'm go
ahead Representative Garcia and
this will be a roll call vote go
ahead big advance moved chair.
Okay.
We have a two passed motion on
Senate bill one eleven as
amended is our second on that.
Second for Representative
Herrera.
All right let's go ahead staff
will take the role.
Chair
for.
Then.
Go ahead.
Senate bill one eleven there is
funding and second house bill
two that was added by the Senate
for a hundred thousand dollars.
There's thousand dollars in
junior for this purpose as well.
Two hundred and fifty thousand
injured here for the land grant
council programs so I do believe
that this is covered and I don't
know if you want to pass this
bill within appropriation medic
madam chair.
We don't want to pass it with an
appropriation and aunt because
that runs into the issue we've
been trying to get straightened
out on an earlier bill.
But
so let me ask since the money's
already there is this language
needed.
Representative Trujillo.
I'll defer to our total okay is
the language really needed in
the US Census already in the
fight it's in the budget.
Yes.
You mean in terms of the the
specifics of of of what the bill
states that will do.
Yes.
so madam chair if if if it's not
necessary if if we don't have an
issue with.
With those funds that's a
legislative question I'm not
sure the answer in terms of the
technicalities of it.
Now generally if something is
already in the budget or it's
already funded in junior and
there's something that's not
specifically needed we just go
ahead and table the bill and
that's what we were actually
going to do with the senator has
she you know been able to join
us because it's already in the
budget and if you and you're
saying it's not.
You know dire straits lead so.
We don't really need to move it
you know.
So let's go to
That that bill is up to your
account great appropriation bill
only okay so we don't really
need to because.
It's already in the budget.
So I'll just go Representative
Crowder.
Thank you madam chair I was just
curious the other thousand it
the Senate voted to hospital to
is that recurring or
nonrecurring.
I have no idea Madam.
You know bill let him answer
I'm looking up for a put it.
Okay let's have a look at that
if it's recurring or
nonrecurring I have no idea so
let's look here but madam chair
if it's going to be tabled I'm
I'm fine with that I I just care
students got a we're gonna vote
on it I'd be curious
if we're putting out something
that's all one time money that
complicates things in my mind
school all right let's go to
Representative Brown.
Sure I I would agree that the
bill should be tabled I think
that if the bill passes it
really restricts how the money
can be used the language here is
to hire one New Mexico licensed
professional surveyor and one
attorney so I I think if we want
to provide some flexibility is
better just to table the bills
thank you.
Okay back to Representative
Trujillo.
Yes madam chair I'll defer to
our total and see what he wants
us to do.
Defer to what the committee
wants to do and so at this point
it's table at them okay.
Yes
it's already in the it's already
in the budget Representative
Brown is sent you may be
limiting yourself also if this
language gets through.
So.
It's not that the idea or
anything state that it's already
in the budget.
Okay so I need I need to
all turn it into motion please.
Madam chair based on the fact
thank you madam chair based upon
the fact that there is
sufficient funding and just the
three seven seven I would move
to table S. B. one one one.
Second.
Okay we have a motion and a
second to table the bill
but I wanted to ask bill is a
recurring or nonrecurring have
you found out.
Sure no but David is is tuned in
here he would probably know
right off the top.
David Abbey are you can hear me
I'm sorry yes Representative
madam chair yeah can you tell me
if the funding that we've been
discussing is recurring or
nonrecurring.
On the on the land grants yeah
how was that book from the
Senate find it right now as we
speak so.
Well try to.
I've been looking madam chair I
can answer quite this.
Madam chair my understanding
from the sponsor Senator Lopez
was that the hundred thousand
those but by the Senate is going
to be recurring but I I don't
know if that's good for.
What ends up happening is we can
we can ask for does legislators
but at the end of the day it's
going to be DFA that books that.
We can ask for it makes all the
sense in the world but at the
end of the day if they don't
want to put it in reoccurring it
doesn't go a reoccurring but I
don't I don't know about this
issue I have no idea what
they're going to do.
I can answer that now madam
chair okay go ahead so we've
got.
In the recurring section of
junior we have fifty per Land
Grant council programs and one
hundred.
To support the operations of the
land grant Council and fifty to
hire contract.
Hi.
With the survey or target so we
have the base amount which I
think you are earlier was about
three hundred thousand and then
we have two hundred thousand
in in June your for the council.
Okay.
We do have a motion we have a
tabling motion and a second is
there any opposition to that
motion.
Saying this bill Senate bill one
eleven as amended has been table
thank you very much.
Okay can we now go on to Senate
bill two oh four which is
Senator Padilla I see that he's
in so go ahead Sir.
Thank you madam chairwoman and
thank you members of the
committee I come here with the
Senate bill two oh four this is
been a twenty four to thirty six
months efforts I will tell you
that the house of
representatives
maybe a couple of changes to
this legislation back in two
thousand nineteen when we first
attempted this move everything
that happened to the legislation
in the house of representatives
that you're as good baked into
this version of the legislation
the legislation also went
through multiple
Senate committees in nineteen
and it's simply died in the last
fifteen seconds of the nineteen
session I I say that because I
just wanted you to have that
background in terms of the
overwhelming support in the
house of representatives as we
were moving through
the bill essentially does a
couple of critical things a
company called sacred wind which
services a large portion of our
western in northwestern New
Mexico I happen to be founded
and created after the real
telecommunications act which was
passed through this and created
through this legislature so as a
result they don't have a way
that the public regulation
commission's way to to properly
regulate this this company they
are very innovative they've done
a lot of remarkable things for
their constituency and for the
people that they serve they do
that in a way that that manages
cost
this particular piece of
legislation places them and
because of their size because
what they do whether located
your places them takes them up
whether and puts them in the
real telecommunications act like
I said it was enacted back in I
this company really is in a
world have to handle the
regulatory filings and their
demonstration for public for
support that they may need for
services that they provide that
to the tune of over a million
dollars over just a couple year
period we're as a typical rural
telecommunications companies
expanding somewhere between
twenty five and fifty thousand
dollars to to do the very same
thing the balance of that money
you know the you see how
innovative they are in all the.
And things that they've done to
bring.
And this is one of my Madam
tribe or to mention this is one
of the bills and my broadband
for all package this year it on
the chairman or vice chairman of
the science technology
telecommunications interim
committee and that this is one
of the pieces I bring in this
year to to to work on some
regulatory step but essentially
gives clear direction to the PRC
on how to regulate this company
and by providing that clarity
allows for safer when you
continue to be innovative the
bill has been endorsed by the
Navajo Nation president Jonathan
as did deliver a letter to me
with that endorsement the
eastern agency president Johnnie
Johnson and also Chris descente
I've only recently match but he
is the executive director of the
Navajo Nation telecommunications
regulatory commission the bill
ensures fairness it cuts waste
and it's going to dramatically
improve connectivity and one of
the lowest broadband
connectivity areas of the state
madam chair I do have that I'm
gonna ask her to speak very
briefly the executive vice
president for external affairs
at state route when Catherine
Nicolau if you would permit me
look for say a few words sure.
Okay we take a brief statement
please.
Good morning madam chair members
of the committee can help but I
was determined communications
thank you for the opportunity to
present in your committee today
we thank senator Michael P. as
well as all of our support in
the house and Senate so
basically Senator Padilla said
state grid wind is the only
rural telecommunications carrier
in the state that doesn't
receive on going PRC USS support
and it's just because of the day
that we opened for business I
was interesting and very madam
chair the keep for yourself in
the committee to no I think it's
legislative grid winds service
territory is one of the hardest
to develop telecom
infrastructure on in the
country.
And our customer base is one of
the lowest income populations in
the country so that's why it you
know it seems logical that we
have to jump through more hoops
than other companies
specifically regulatory hoops
and then every dollar that we
spend on these regulatory
processes doesn't go toward
customers voice and broadband
infrastructure it is for these
reasons madam chair and members
of house appropriations and
finance that we ask for your
support on Senate bill two four
but I do stand for questions.
Thank you madam chair will stand
for our read like to to go
forward is there anyone Mike in
the audiences got their hand up
to speak to this bill.
Yes madam chair we have about
four I would like to speak.
Okay let's go ahead and bring
him in.
One minute place.
Thank you madam chair this is
JT.
Register lobbyist for the
greater Albuquerque chamber of
commerce which supports this
legislation and believes will
help to increase access to
reliable broadband throughout
the state this year has shown us
the importance of reliable fast
internet and how difficult life
is without it when it's are we
need to stay connected for work
school friends commerce in our
community so Senator Neville
tool for along with other
broadband legislation supported
by the chamber that is being
considered and acted upon the
session will help us continue to
make progress in improving
broadband connectivity
throughout New Mexico thank you.
Okay Mister Royce so no go ahead
Sir.
Good afternoon madam chair
members of the committee my name
is Roy Soto and I'm a registered
lobbyist for the Microsoft
corporation during this pandemic
we've been working with sacred
way is to bring much needed
connectivity to previously on
shore chapter houses on the
Navajo reservation we're
extremely proud of this
partnership we Schecter was
using to take different
technologies and branch we were
able to get up the system this
legislation will level the
playing field and provide much
needed resources for sacred was
to continue to bring broadband
connectivity to unserved areas
in the area.
By urged committee for to give
press to send a bill to for as
amended and thank you senator
the operations legislation for
thank you madam chair of.
Thank you very members.
Thank you Sir Mr rob black
please.
Thank you.
Thank you madam chair members of
the committee on rob black
president and CEO The New Mexico
chamber of commerce we're in
strong support this bill because
it will assist in brown but
broadband deployment in New
Mexico a key priority for the
chamber for years comment he
shined a light on consequences
of insufficient broadband and
highlighted those inequities now
more than ever the Navajo Nation
needs reliable telecommunication
services internet connectivity
to internet can activity to
thrive also in line with our
economic priorities is finding
ways to make New Mexico's
regulatory environment more cost
effective and efficient this
bill eliminates unnecessary
regulatory costs incurred
through the PRC which can then
be saved and used to build more
infrastructure to better serve
the Navajo Nation hi speed
internet that we we appreciate
your time and thank you for your
support.
Thank you Sir Christopher
Vincenti please.
Good afternoon everyone thank
you madam chair and members of
the committee my name is Chris
Representative the executive
director of the Navajo Nation
telecommunications regulatory
commission I'm here to say of
course first of course foremost
thank you to Senator Padilla for
sponsoring this and we just like
to echo what president as well
as vice president lines are
estimated to be through the
letter in support for this US
this point for the passing of
the specific bill.
It also works second one has
done has been extremely
phenomenal and we can just we
can't say thank you enough
because even at the peak of the
pandemic their teams are still
out in the field still just
trying to find creative
solutions just to try to keep
the the public connectivity as
well as provide public access
points at the chapter house is
so when it comes to coming up
coming up with innovative
solutions thank definitely the
way to go thank you so much.
Thank you Sir Johnnie Johnson
please.
Mr Johnson.
Okay madam chair we can go to a
the tech centennial's please.
Good afternoon chairwoman
Lundstrom and members of the
committee to take us on the
honest executive director for
the New Mexico exchange carrier
group the enemies you need is a
telephone industry association
of eleven and come but real
companies providing voice and
internet service to customers in
rural areas of New Mexico we
support Senate bill two oh four
for all the reasons stated we
want to think Senator Padilla
for sponsoring the legislation
without this legislation sacred
windows not eligible for access
reduction payments because the
company as was noted in a
previous statement was not
established prior to the
enactment of the rural
telecommunications act in
nineteen ninety nine as a
general matter the enemy C. G.
Lee selling come rural telephone
carriers should be treated the
same and Senate bill two oh four
does that by amending the rural
telecommunications act to define
additional provisions under
which carriers can apply and
receive support from the state
rural universe universal service
fund and specifically the bill
would address circumstances
under which a carriers such as
sacred when yes compare well to
other recipients of access
reductions support payments
thank you madam chair members
the committee for the
opportunity to speak with you
today and I ask for your support
on the bill.
We have a.
This is Johnny Johnson can you
hear me now yes going.
This is Johnny Johnson from so I
I chapter chapter president
eastern agency council
president.
Of good morning or good
afternoon
here and stand support center
built to for as all stated
before me its troop and I
support and I stand behind
secretary when and we ask for
your action to support of sicker
wins.
And I think
Senator Padilla for bringing
this to the table thank you.
Thank you madam chair we have
three more speakers if we could
go with mark Fletcher please.
Thank you madam chair and
members of the committee I'm
Marc Fleisher registered
lobbyist for thank you with the
communications and I sent from
my computer in support of SB two
oh four I want to then Senator
Padilla for bringing this
legislation forward the same
legislation was sponsored by
Representative of Wonda Johnson
and Anthony Allison and Senator
Padilla in twenty nineteen with
house bill three eighty five in
past two committees in the house
the house floor into committees
in the Senate all unanimously
only to die on the Senate floor
and Sonny died this bill will
allow PRC to treat sicker when
communications on an equal basis
with other rural telecoms sector
winter's Navajo Nation the most
rural and poorest area of the
state and the loss of support
enjoyed by every other rules
telecom is not available to the
community that these are the
most we strongly support
encourage members to support as
B. two oh four thank you.
Thank you Sir can we go now to
Virginia Ballenger please.
Thank good afternoon state
leaders thank you for the
opportunity to speak I'm
Virginia Ballenger business
owner in Gallup and former
chapter official.
A native American people at the
grassroots level the struggle is
real in this day and age we are
still struggling to get on the
information superhighway.
With each generation we seem to
be able to climb one more rung
on the ladder to reach the
American dream.
Companies such as sacred wind
communications are the types of
companies that understand our
struggle they care for the
community I have worked with
sacred wind communications as a
former chapter official for red
rock chapter south of Gallup and
I have come to know state could
wind genuinely cares for our
Navajo communities Senate bill
two oh four will allow them to
reach more families with
telecommunication services I
strongly recommend support and
passage of Senate bill two oh
four thank you.
Next Jason Espinoza our last
speaker in support of the bill.
I'm madam chair members of the
committee Jason Espinoza
registered lobbyists with the
New Mexico technology council
the technology council these the
internet as a vital tool for
people's access to information
and empowerment with the rapid
evolution of technologies are
rising consumer demand for data
and the rapid growth of the
internet of things the tech
council believes the
policymakers should promote
greater broadband connectivity
and this bill does the very
thing so we urge the committee
to move the bill long thank you.
Is always my cruiser anybody
else.
That's on that chair okay thank
you very much when we go ahead
and go to committee we're gonna
start with Representative
Herrerra go ahead.
Thank you madam chair thank you
sponsor I'm just curious I'm I'm
a big fan of sacred wins and
John but Dolly I just want to
know how many of the rural ISPs
are included in the in the real
universal service.
Thank you madam chair and and
that Representative at the
moment actually there is always
economic I think there is a
possibility of up to fifteen
this would just add one more to
that scenario.
Thank you madam speaker and
thank you
Senator at I also wanted to know
this this provision also
Find for a hello and it may not
rural electrical costs they
included in this in this
definition.
And and that madam chair and
Representative that to to.
I.
I'm sure like the rest of us I'm
at that defer to my experts but
I don't believe so because
legislation is specifically for
this one purpose at the moment
we don't want to open up the
whole Pandora's box is governor
can use to send.
Please go ahead.
Madam chair representative at at
at thank you for that question
it does not in its specifically
does not Representative because
we're talking about I lex
incumbent local exchange
carriers and what that means
Representative is is that an
incumbent has what's called the
obligation of last resort
there we are a provider of last
resort and that means that we
cannot cherry pick customers we
have the delineated service
territory that comes to all of
us from the federal government
so it is a boundary and we have
to absolutely Sir the children
the elderly the families in that
service territory we must find a
way to get them service and so
it is our we are the incumbents
in our service territory just as
the other fifteen are lex are
and so it is specific to
incumbent local exchange
carriers because we have that
obligation to Sir.
I thank you
thank you madam chair and as
sponsor and and witness some.
I and I'll get back to you later
and I'd like to get a list of
those if you could email me a
list of the providers that are
carried under this legislation
thank you we we will do so madam
chair.
Representative Garcia thank you
madam chair of Senator by the
thanks reuse legislation up if
this happens of this legislation
will through how much of that
improve service for people out
in the reservation.
You madam chair and and
Representative I I can't
necessarily give you a
percentage or a but what it's
definitely going to do is to
further expand their ability to
provide services
they have on their own brought
additional you heard from miss
our earlier that they have
brought they have some of the
most challenging topography in
the state of New Mexico to reach
so they have decided not to just
go with land lines or or cell
phones or or this or that they
they're bringing in towers the
you heard from the in that Mr
Soto over at Microsoft we have a
partnership with them to use
white space and other things of
that nature any number of
options that really throwing all
the spaghetti on the wall and
see exactly which one sticks so
they can reach so many people's
as possible I I believe that the
enactment of this legislation
madam chair representative
allows that innovation to
continue in other parts of the
state are going to learn from
this this this thing as well so
that they can try those other
avenues and been used to to
expand service.
madam chair Senator I I because
I didn't have actually won an
old percentages I just wanted to
make a point that this will
improve services Robert people
often will make richer yes Mr
chairman and madam chair Mister
Representative and
Representative gets madam chair
Representative I mean Senator as
you well know I represent the
Navajo Nation I have a one on
a black Monday slipped on my
district and I know I also
Representative chapters out
there and the people are in dire
need of the connectivity and I
really appreciate your efforts
and I look forward to supporting
you as much as you can thanks
Senator thank you madam chair
Representative.
Representative Anthony Allison
please.
Thank you madam chair.
It's great to see the people
from sacred winning in first of
all I want to thank Senator
Padilla for bringing this
forward as was mentioned it's an
extension of it the legislation
would introduce backed and
twenty nineteen
before I go any further I'd like
to maybe ask Senator Padilla if
you can take on some of my
legislation that's currently
stalled.
Looks like he's the one that
makes things move and so
but with that we strongly
support this legislation I
strongly support this
legislation because as
highlighted by the onset of the
pandemic well we really need
reliable internet and the I have
worked with the the state could
do in person on some issues and
they are the most professional
people and just always so
transparent and all that they do
for a with the help that they
they have given us they've even
run some line one one lines into
a portion of the Navajo Nation
that people thought was not
possible to do so I'm really
looking forward to working with
this team to bring the Navajo
Nation into the twenty first
century so with that of the
Navajo Nation stands behind this
legislation and thank you again
Senator Padilla for bringing
this forward thank you madam
chair.
Thank you madam chair thank you
Representative.
All right let's go is there any
other questions from the
committee.
The committee representative
small.
Thank you madam chair and move a
do pass on Senate bill two oh
four.
Sure.
Okay we have a motion by
Representative small second by
okay Representative Allison we
have another question
Representative Anderson.
Chairman I pressed the wrong
button I apologize thank you.
All right we have a motion and a
second is there any opposition
to that motion.
Seeing on the bill has a do
pass.
Thank you madam chair and thank
you members of the committee
thank you okay now.
Is Senate bill forty two and
that would be Senator Stewart go
ahead.
Thank you so much madam chair
and members of the committee
Senate bill forty two tries to
help deal with solvency issues
for our ERP Fund.
Over the last fifteen years we
have had many stakeholder
meetings the the educators in
the E. R. B. fund now have
really rained in a lot of their
budget they're called does not
begin until the age of sixty
five.
That's been in place since
nineteen eighty four for new
members starting after twenty
thirteen their Cola does not
begin until sixty seven.
R. Cole has been tied to the
solvency of the fund since
twenty thirteen so that colas
that retired educators get on
average is a little bit more
than one percent of the fund
needs help now
member contributions have been
ten point seven percent for the
last six years but our employer
contribution rate is fourteen
point one five now you compare
that to pair up whose employer
contribution is seventeen point
two four but we've passed Senate
bill seventy two two years ago
that made that go up regularly
the last two years and for the
next two years it will be at
nineteen point two four percent
so there's huge gaps in between
these two systems and forty two
attempts to change the employer
contribution which is now at
fourteen point one five percent
to go up one percent a year for
the next four years even if you
did that a pair would still be
at nineteen point two four and
E. R. B. would be at eighteen
point one five.
so madam chair the other
important part of this bill is
that it extends the educator
return to work I two years a we
are looking at possible
retirements at the end of this
year this return to work sunsets
at the end of twenty twenty one
and the superintendents have
asked us to extend that all
right remind you that we we
started that in two thousand and
one in an attempt to of sales
hard higher positions mostly in
rural schools just science ESL
and special at so we have about
fourteen hundred educators a
taking this up over the last
five years and their average
earnings are only thirty nine
thousand they have to lay out
twelve months before they can
participate and they must
contribute the ten point seven
percent and the employers have
to contribute although they do
not get any increase in their
retirement I've had many
teachers called me over the
years want to change that what I
tell him is well if you want to
go back to work stop your
retirement go back to work then
you'll increase your retirement.
So madam chair that is basically
the bill to extend the return to
work for two years and to try to
increase the employer alright
and I would be happy to stand
for questions thank you so much
for hearing this today.
All righty thank you Senator
Stewart for the overview of the
bill I wanted to ask Mike if we
have anybody in the audience
that wanted to make it Madam and
then we're going to go to
committee because I do wanna let
the committee and the sponsor
now we will be amending this
bill yes but let's go to Madam
first go ahead my.
Thank you madam chair we have
three at this time Mr Dennis
Ross please.
Thank you madam chair and
members of the committee Dennis
Roch speaking on behalf of the
New Mexico school
superintendents association this
year are associations platform
includes a call for increased
solvency of the retirement
system as a recruitment and
retention tool and just a good
stewardship measure the
committee may be aware that a
portion of the unfunded
liability from the pension
system actually involved with
every districts individual audit
annually so the more we can do
for this the better our audits
look as well and then I Senator
Stuart mentioned she was very
gracious to include a two year
extension of return to work
which is an important tool for
rural communities especially and
given the pandemic one tool that
we may need it with more
increasing frequency for the
next two years so we stand in
front support of this bill thank
you for your support.
Thank you Sir we go to Russell
Goff please.
Good afternoon madam chair
members of the committee my name
is Russell golf on the executive
director of the New Mexico
association of education towers
on behalf association we stand
and support.
Senate bill forty two want to
thank the sponsor for bringing
this forward and think of House
Appropriations finance committee
for your consideration thank you
very much.
Thank you Sir could we go to
Roger from A. R. P. please.
Madam chair and members of the
committee my name is Roger
career and I'm here is the
volunteer state president with a
a RP New Mexico.
A. R. T. New Mexico is a strong
supporter Senate bill forty two
and has made a high priority for
twenty twenty one.
We feel that retired educators
should have the security of the
strong pension during their
elder years in this bill would
help provide that security for
New Mexico educators for many
years it will also help to
retain New Mexico's teachers in
our schools.
Would like to thank the sponsors
Senator Stewart for bringing
this much needed bill forward
thank you.
Thank you Sir and our final
speaker in support of the bill
sherry Dodson from a R. P.
please.
Good morning madam chair and
members of the committee my name
is sherry dots and and I retired
after thirty one years as a
school nurse and joined the city
different retired educators
association as well as an M. A.
R. when I was an employee of the
public schools my co workers
that I contributed to the C. R.
B. program with the expectation
that we would receive our
pensions when we retired and we
hope to preserve the program for
our future educational retirees
we appreciate the efforts of the
E. R. B. investment team to keep
the the fund solvent and to
continue these pensions for us
and we think a Senator Stewart
for bringing this bill forward
thank you very much.
All right might as I conclude
our witnesses or folks that want
to say a few words yes ma'am
that's all okay very good
we just wanted to direct the
committee that I've asked that a
amendment be prepared we can
talk about that and that
involves.
How you're spending that is
something that we traditionally
don't do
is obligation of spending in out
years so Representative small
I'm gonna have you talk about
the amendment that can we put it
up on the screen.
Thank you madam chair I'll wait
until as Mr mall again puts it
up on the screen and I thank you
thank you very much.
Excellent I thank you madam
chair thank you committee madam
chair committee first this will
the
amendment the two oh two numbers
point to two zero eight three
six point one madam chair and
committee Mr mall again as you
scroll down as you noted madam
chair essentially what this
ammendment does is it
Includes the full one percent
public contributions to the R.
B. retirement fund for FY twenty
two in FY twenty three madam
chair committee it does not
extend the one percent
contributions pass those two
years pending and and this is
the other part madam chair and
committee Mr mall again if
you'll scroll down to page two
of the amendment
we include those to one percent
contributions FY twenty two in
FY twenty three and here in
section four at the bottom of
this ammendment there will be
the E. R. B. educational
retirement board shall report to
the department of finance
administration other affected
agencies and the legislative
finance committee specifically
to this
issue of solvency to further
flesh out madam chair committee
what the plan needs to be after
FY twenty three.
Thank you madam chair committee
I think that is a brief summary
of the amendment.
We take the amendment down
please.
Okay I'm I'm moving the
amendment for discussion and
Representative smallest
seconding that out so we can
talk about the amendment now so
committee you have questions on
this ammendment Representative
Anderson.
Thank you madam chairman Madam
chairman of my question on the
amendment had to do was section
for.
And in a section for I read
that.
Basically there would be a
report and the report would talk
to the idea of achieving pension
solvency.
Without from her employer
contribution.
And madam chairman.
I I fail to understand.
The.
I understand the wish but I'm
not sure in the shares of the
desire and and so on I'm a bit
confused about whether or not I
think the amendment service much
purpose because section for
simply basically says employees
are going to have to come up
with more contribution if
solvency is going to be achieved
unless the stock market doubles
in a very short period of time
that's a hypothetical madam
chairman but is really an effort
to say I'm concerned about
whether or not increasing the of
the employer contribution quite
frankly I I think it's the
largest single recurring expense
increase that we've seen this
year that's going to reoccur a
hundred thirty five million is
for I think I saw somewhere and
I just thought you know that's a
tremendous additional commitment
on the part of the state without
any further consideration of
additional contribution anywhere
else question.
David are you on.
Yes madam chair I am on let's
let's talk about that because
certainly.
The intention with this
amendment is to provide the one
percent in a two year for the
two year cycle but before any
more or any level of
contribution goes out we need to
have more than just because B.
E. R. A. gets.
Are we have to have some real
numbers some real information so
we can can decide what kind of
allocation should be made so if
you what David.
Well it madam chair I don't
think this precludes.
In
four and twenty five continuing
to look at higher employer
contributions we all know that's
out there is an option but I
think this amendment passed the
education chairman for to look
at other options as well the
could range from revisiting
budget having a different form
of of our budget for employees
of different income levels are.
Maybe looking at other revenue
sources it just ask for
something besides the general
fund as the only option for the
third and fourth year that that
was the intent of this.
Representative Anderson used up
the floor thank you madam
chairman I'm gonna wrap up five
point I appreciate the
additional comment I think that
of my concerns are going to be
more directed to the bill rather
than the amendment and I'm
satisfied with the amendment
thank you madam chair.
Okay how about any other
questions on the amendment.
Members go ahead Representative
excuse me.
Well in order for twenty years
as Representative Stuart but
we're gonna caller Senator
Stewart I apologize going at.
Thank you muted many.
You are muted Mimi.
So there you go can you hear me
now yes.
Thank could I get sent the
amendment I don't really have a
chance to read the last
paragraph you know my only
request is that you all also
have it sent to L. E. S. C. not
just LFC I think the language is
good enough to do that but if
you could send me the the
amendment.
Just to my right.
Please send that to we will
Senator right now madam chair.
Okay very good.
All right any other comments on
the amendment.
Okay
is there any opposition to the
amendment.
I don't see any opposition to
the amendment so
Let's go ahead and drop the
amendment.
Let's go back on the bill.
We'll start with Representative
Crowder.
Thank you madam chair and thank
you senator for bring the bill
forward all right I have a
question of that.
Is based on on what I saw from
an email back in June of last
year.
In my question has to do with.
It I don't see in the bill that
the employee is required to
contribute to this this is one
hundred percent employer
contribution is that correct
Madam chair Senator.
So madam chair the reason that
we have not increased
Forty contributions is that
they've been so high for so
long.
There is ten point seven percent
and they've been that way for
eight years it's among the
highest employee contribution to
a retirement fund in the
country.
In addition we don't get of cost
of living adjustment until for
new employees for last at ten
ten seven eight years until
sixty seven unlike para and I
you know I I I do feel it's
important for us to compare this
to pair up because two years ago
we certainly took care of para
out years by giving them a half
a percent for four years when
we're done with them they'll be
at nineteen point two four
percent they don't pay as much
for individual members they get
their call much earlier and so
it's it's just been it's been
upsetting to the educational
community that we seem to take
so much better care of their
parent employees that are
education employee so they don't
get the cold shoulder sixty five
or sixty seven the call it is
tied to the solvency of the fund
so right now it hovers around
one point two percent it's been
as high as one point six but
it's tied to that solvency of
the fund in addition we have
lowered the multiplier for
beginning teachers now they have
a phase in before they can get a
multiplier it's lower than para
it always has been so it's kind
of hard to get blood out of it
turned up and we have squeezed
the budget so much a lower
budget amendment para over these
years so in addition you know we
continue to do these increases
for para and we always say E. R.
B. will be next and then when it
C. R. B.'s turn it's like oh
well we don't have the money so
I just I have a hard time
finding anything that we can do
to education benefits I haven't
even mentioned everything that
we've done to those benefits so
there.
They're a they're already paying
among the highest in the country
they don't get a call until
they're fully retired they're
called it is not much because
it's tied to the solvency of the
fund and yet there is a.
Four to five percent gap
between what the employer pays
for para and ear beat.
Fourteen point one five verses
in two years nineteen point two
four that I don't even make up
that difference in this bill
certainly not with the amendment
which I I accept I had I've
talked to the chairman about
this before so
There's there's just not much
else to get.
Thank you senator thank you
madam chair of the the letter
that I'm I'm looking at was
stated in June's.
Thirtieth twenty twenty it was
from Jan.
And the on this letter it talks
about the employee contribution.
If their salary is less than
twenty four thousand seven point
nine percent if their salaries
over twenty four thousand their
contribution is ten point nine
percent.
So it if there are any number
above.
Your average would be about nine
point five percent contribution
when I look at the chart right
below that we're talks about
zero the employee contribution
as twelve point two percent
repair on the whole for a
municipal it's thirteen point
five three percent.
In this will place seventeen
point two eight percent
municipal fire seventeen point
five seven percent Judy.
In the judicial and that and the
magistrate it's ten point five
percent.
So just look at these charts the
percentages of the employee
contribution seems to be much
higher in in the some of these
areas than what it is of the
seven point nine for under
twenty four ten point nine over
twenty four so I was just
wondering.
On the charge that Jan provided
it shows that there are employee
contribution is much much higher
than what the E. R. B.
contribution is so madam chair I
I just wanted to mention that
and and I was curious why I
appreciate the senator's
explanation.
But I still you know I'm just
like so looking at the numbers
on these charts it seems that
the employee contribution is
much higher in the other areas
than it is in the E. R. B.
percentage wise so thank you
madam chair already thank you
Representative Crowder and now
that that's reason we need to
look at this will have some some
review on this
I don't I don't like compare I I
honestly don't like comparing
like that only because there's a
lot of other factors that are
putting all of this so it was
go to Representative Anderson.
Thank you madam chairman up to
the sponsor Senator
My.
Sure one is with the return to
work
Senator I have long failed to
understand the wisdom of the one
year lay out requirements yes
this bill will continue that
requirement question.
Madam chair and representative
of for two years yes and the one
your layout is really what is
required from the IRS they do
not want us to be guessing
retirement money to people who
are still working essentially at
the same job it's been a real
issue for para that has hardly
any lay out time when we had
that full return to work so it's
it's really it doesn't have to
be a full year but that's what
it's always been with the return
to work and so we're not
changing any of those provisions
we're just extending it for two
years.
Thank you senator up.
I'm discouraged here that we're
not shortening it only because I
live on a part I live along the
east side of the state and on
the inside of the state retiring
New Mexico teachers have a
choice to drive a few miles and
enjoy a new job as a certified
teacher in Texas while we go to
the Philippines to find teachers
to fill unfilled positions
within our districts
this makes me of a terminally
perplexed Senator on the wisdom
of going halfway across the
world to fill jobs when we live
in a state that has one of the
highest unemployment rates in
the country we have forty seven
soon to be forty nine per capita
income in the country and yet we
cannot educate New Mexicans to
take these jobs in New Mexico I
don't believe that it is about
our.
Retirement benefit I think there
are other issues at work in the
classroom that are not addressed
in this bill senator but I I'm
very concerned about.
Trying to piecemeal.
Of a pension funding solvency
of.
On a piecemeal basis I think it
has to be a comprehensive basis
at which everybody who is being
asked to sacrifice not just the
employer of consider of all
aspects of the cheating solvency
finally.
Senator my concern is that
currently the pension fund is in
from that Lee.
Billion solvent is where I've
read somewhere.
I read the Senator that in FY
twenty we went.
Deficit seven point nine billion
to nine billion dollars I'm very
concerned that we're misleading
not only the teachers in our
state that solvency is at hand
but I think we're misleading
taxpayers in the state to
believe that the promises we
made and the supplies have paid.
Grant at the stage rate and more
but that's all part of total
compensation and we've made
promises and we're on the hook
to medium and I'm not sure that
a partial.
Six is going to resolve the
issue.
Senator your comments please.
Madam chair and representative I
believe that retirement should
be for retirement not to make
money.
That's why I don't like the
return to work at all.
You know if you want to work
more than pay into the system
and work more and retire when
you can retire.
So I I don't really have much
sympathy about people who want
to.
Retire and go back to work
immediately and get a retirement
income and full pay I'm sorry
about that I just don't think
that is the proper use of our
retirement systems so you know
if they can retire hearing going
to go to Texas well that's one
way to make more money I do
think that our retirement
systems are a budget for both
educators and for state workers
I think we design them that way
from the beginning with the poor
state with the poor economy we
just have a lot of low income
workers we've we've struggled
for years to increase salaries I
don't believe the salaries are
at what I do I did ask the E. R.
B. to start surveying teachers
when they retired as to why they
were retiring.
the main issue the last few
years was the teacher evaluation
system which was thought of
those very unfair and very
punitive especially the teachers
teaching our most vulnerable
students only secondly was the
pay so they've been under
incredible strain this year
they've worked harder than they
ever have
with.
With pretty poor outcomes
because of what.
What we've all had to do the way
we've had to teach so I'm not
surprised they want to retire I
do think that we need to keep
this fund solvent because I
think it is a commitment that we
have made to educators let me
tell you.
The average pension is about
twenty three thousand dollars
for educators and it's
approaching thirty thousand for
para I apologize for continuing
to bring it up but it still
continues to be a sore point I'm
highlights the amendment that
the madam chair has put on there
I do think it's important that
we continue to look at it and we
will so that's that's the best I
can give you Representative
Anderson.
Thank you very much for that
Senator I appreciate that
response
and will listen to the remaining
debate but nonetheless remained
troubled with what I consider to
be one a partial fix into one
that elements best date the
passage of this bill simply up
brings in solvency problem
infinity two forty two years of
and I suppose if if I were a
pension recipient I might be
looking at the forty two years
is sufficient but quite honestly
I don't think either one are
thank you so thank you
Representative Anderson was
gonna Representative Syriana.
You madam chair and thank you
senator for bringing this bill
as a teacher the comparison is
very real we know what care gets
we know what you but we get in
here be so that comparison is
very real to your teachers
and and we do look at it as a
benefit and an incentive not
everybody gets retirement will
we get something but we have to
look at as teachers we don't get
paid much not nearly we put in
thousands of thousands of extra
hours every year especially math
teachers and science to
specially is certain teachers to
a whole lot I mean it I teach
during the day and then I great
my plan at night so so this is
the least you could do I think
is compare at make it comparable
pretty comparable to care
because teachers aren't staying
and I believe I'm leaving I'm
leaving this year but I know a
lot of teachers are gonna be
leaving so we have to have some
incentives to state or sentence
sentence to bring teachers in
and I think this is one thank
you senator.
Representative Crowder.
Thank you madam chair just are
clarified that the.
FY twenty two.
Funding that's required to
thirty four million is already
in the budget coming back to the
Senate is that correct madam
chair.
It is.
Yes okay sorry but FY the FY
twenty three is is a not covered
in this budget that's something
we'll have to deal with next
year and it if an emergency
arose we could deal with that
point because we'll be back in
session is at first I see David
Abbey sickness that yes so I
just want to clarify that the
the funding for FY twenty two is
in the budget thank you madam
chair.
Thank you Representative Crowder
and what we would do is do the
adjusting entry when we get back
in January for the for the
remaining portion all right all
right is there any other
questions from the committee for
Senator Stewart.
Go ahead Senator you had your
finger up go ahead.
You madam chair and if you could
put at the L. A. S. C. in to
your amendment at the end so
that they would Representative a
report to us also if you could
do that I would appreciate that.
All right is is there any
objection to that I think it's a
good idea let's go ahead include
the L. E. S. C. as one of the
the groups that would be part of
this process of reporting I
think that'll be fine we'll just
write that in there and and get
it in okay.
Is there any other questions
from the committee I don't see
any hands Representative small.
Madam chair I would move to a do
pass on house bill forty two as
twice Senate Bill sorry Senate
bill forty two as twice I
apologize.
And we have a motion to have a
second.
The second round Representative
Dixon.
Is there any opposition to that
motion it is a do passed motion
on Senate bill forty two as
amended.
Well just know.
Okay
All right let's go ahead and do
a roll call on this because I'm
saying hands waving and some of
the little yellow hands are up
so can we get the staff to do a
roll call on this place.
Do passed motion.
Representative Allison yes.
Representative Anderson no.
Representative Armstrong.
Yes.
Representative Brown yes and I
would like to explain my vote.
Representative Castellano.
Yes.
Representative Chatfield.
Yes.
Representative Crowder yes.
Representative Dixon.
Yes.
Representative Ezzell.
Yes.
Representative Garcia yes.
Representative headed up.
Yes.
Representative Hochman Vigil
yes.
Representative Lane.
Yes.
Representative Lara.
Yes.
Representative Sarinana yes.
Representative Sweetser yes yes
Representative Trujillo.
Yes.
Vice chair small.
Yes.
Madam chair yes.
That is it eighteen in the
affirmative and one in the
negative.
Okay we do have a due pass
motion and eighteen in the
affirmative one in the negative
so Senator you do have a due
pass on this and we do have a
couple people that want to make
a comment let's start with
Representative brown.
Thank you madam chair Senator
Stewart.
So I I think in the legislature
now for ten years and when I I
see a bill like this I feel like
we have a hotly contested
volleyball game with E. R. B. on
one side of the net and pair on
the other.
And the legislature's being act
just to service the referee and
it has some huge fiscal
implications for the entire
state so I don't believe I I did
vote for the bill but I I don't
believe we've really solved
anything by doing this.
I I really think we need to take
a very in depth comprehensive
look at where we are with the
retirement funds and would
really come up with a plan that
That's why is and so I I just
think we need to do a lot more
study on this and and come up
with a better plan thank you
madam chair.
Representative Trujillo your
hand was up go ahead yes I just
madam chair I just want a copy
of the amendments since we did
them at the last minute I didn't
get any copies.
Okay very good.
Many other.
Doesn't look like it so thank
you Senator Stewart thank you
madam chair very much in the
committee appreciate hearing.
All righty I was given a couple
of text messages so let's get.
Chase then garner and build back
in on Senate bill one thirty
three as we haven't done the
committee report so we can
recall it and bring it back into
committee
so go ahead Bilger Madam chair
of the regional
amendment that you had requested
actually struck the
appropriation.
And I said I'm sorry and I
apologize to you on the
committee I did not read it
fully so this the original
amendment works just fine.
And
I think all you would have to do
madam chair is not adopt the
oral agreement that we did
distracted appropriation.
All right chase are you on.
Yes ma'am do we need making
appropriation in the title.
Madam chair it has a fund that
is appropriated more that's the
reason that you're making
appropriation meets the state.
Bill is correct madam chair I
just for the record I would wish
of Council Service I'm here for
the sole purpose of providing
technical assistance on the
matter before the committee they
do not appear in support of or
opposition to the matter the
amendment that was first adopted
two two zero eight one two point
one that amendment did in fact
write the appropriation
and so there was no need for the
second amendment that was done
on the fly.
Right and so chase we don't need
it in the title either.
Actually we do need it in the
title because there is an
internal appropriation within
the bill other than sections
seven and so we just leave it in
the title and is and that's how
the amendment reads right now so
in my opinion the amendment
reads correctly from a technical
standpoint.
Okay.
What we.
Okay so what we need to do then
is so we need to recall the
bill.
And what we're going to do after
we recall the bill is strip the
second amendment that was done
and just let the first amendment
state.
Everybody understand that so
let's go to Representative small
to bring the bill back into
committee since since it's with
us anyway.
Madam chair I would move that we
reconsider
Senate bill one thirty three.
All right we have a second on
that.
Madam chair okay we have a
motion and second to reconsider.
Senate bill one thirty three as
amended and make it our next
order of business so we'll bring
it back up.
Everybody understands what the
issue is here so we need the
motion then that strikes the
second verbal amendment that we
put on the bill.
Thank you madam chair I would
move that we strike the second
verbal amendment.
Placed on Senate bill one thirty
three.
Okay do we have a second madam
chair okay Representative Garcia
to second.
Is there any opposition to
striking that second amendment.
Saying none it's been approved
so we only have when this bill
rolls out today is the very
first amendment and I've been
told by both our staff and
Legislative Council meets the
need.
So with that being said is there
any opposition for do pass as
we.
Amended.
We better do an official do pass
again go ahead Representative
small thank you madam chair I
would move a do pass on Senate
bill one thirty three as
amended.
We have a second Representative
Sweetser there any opposition to
that same line we've got to do
past and thank you for catching
that I appreciate it so we have
to pass on Senate bill one
thirty three as amended with our
first amendment.
So we today I just wanted to let
you know it looked at the list
of bills of still.
Our in our committee and asked
bill to go ahead and try to get
those all scheduled for tomorrow
I'd like to clean off our
calendar.
You never know when there might
be a row bill that comes our
way.
Or something that gets re
referred back up HSC.
In this last week it's pretty
fluid I mean it's not where we
have just.
a stagnant or a robotic schedule
it's it's very fluid in and what
goes where and why I understand
that the speaker is just
Sending to Senate bills to one
committee.
I don't know if that's going to
hold or not but I my
understanding is that's what he
said he's been doing now I want
you all to know that I am going
to be asking for Senate bills to
come to us that have the money
and that I'm surprised that they
got out of Senate finance but
they did.
And that is the wrong way to do
this
And I don't want particularly
new people to think Gee the way
I get something funded is I'm
gonna put it in a I'm gonna
create an appropriation bill and
I'm gonna get it through and
because the finance committee
didn't catch it Ford slipped
through by not going to a
finance committee I'm going to
be in good shape well it doesn't
work that way we've all been
going through this process is an
entire session that it needs to
be in the budget needs to be in
junior or it's a different
funding source we just don't let
things fly out got a list from
LFC David provided me a list
this morning as to some of those
bills that may.
That may be coming through you
want to rattle those off David
because we're going to ask for
those we're gonna ask the
speaker to send those to us.
Because if we don't get on we're
just gonna make that we're just
gonna but amendments on the
floor amendment which will tie
up the floor but I really want
this process done correctly.
So what David you want to rattle
off some of those Senate bills
that we probably need to take a
peek at.
You're you're muted David.
All of us my staff produces
daily report on the fiscal bills
that are passed one or both
houses and I have sent bills to
come to one example is one
eleven which you dealt with
earlier this afternoon we have a
couple bills with minor amounts
a hundred thousand Senate bill
one ninety three Senate bill one
ninety six and
Senate bill three sixty seven
and
The opportunity scholarship bill
which passed well heading your
way to the Senate floor.
So so those are the ones I have
madam chair you have one house
bill that.
Appropriation went to the other
side okay so what we'll do.
Those are probably be taken up
on Wednesday I mean we know what
our schedule be on and that's
getting darn close to the end of
the session which is okay with
me because those appropriations
need to be stripped out of those
bills I mean we just don't send
money across and hope that it
gets funded so you know through
these pieces of legislation so I
just want to give you a heads up
on what will be looking out on
Wednesday and then tomorrow
we'll just we'll just clean up
the calendar that we currently
have.
So with that well we finished
our work for the day I
appreciate it and look forward
to seeing you all thank you.
Thank you madam chair by
everybody.
