Here.
Representative Anderson.
Representative Anderson.
Representative Armstrong.
Representative Armstrong.
Representative Brown.
Representative Brown.
Representative Castellano and
president.
Representative Chatfield.
Representative Crowder here.
Representative Dixon.
Here.
Representative Garcia.
Representative Garcia.
Representative headed off.
Representative headed off.
Representative Hochman Vigil
here.
Representative Lane.
There.
Representative a lot up here.
Representative Sarinana here.
Representative Sweetser.
Representative Swetser.
I'm sorry I'm here I don't know
why it won't on mute sometimes
thank thank you Representative
Trujillo.
Representative Trujillo.
I share small.
I'm here.
Madam chair.
I'm here.
It looks like we have a quorum.
Okay all right very good
as I said we're going to take
the corrections department this
afternoon agency code seven
seventy we'll start with the two
analysts and then we'll go to
the cabinet secretary so analyst
if you would please.
Thank you madam chair would you
like me to share my screen to
show the different sheets to the
committee or at today all have
their own copies it I think it's
good if you share the screen and
everybody's looking at the same
thing at the same time thank you
okay.
Can you see my screen.
Yes we can.
Great thank you madam chair and
members of the committee and
good afternoon I'm Ellen right
in LFC fiscal analyst and I'm
joined this afternoon by
secretary at least it's a fairly
Serra of the corrections
department and DHS Jimenez
executive budget analyst I'd
like to note for your reference
additional information on the
legislative recommendation can
be found on pages sixty one
sixty eight of LFC is volume one
it is two ninety eight three
three oh five of volume two and
he just fifty six to sixty one
of the following three.
All of those are also outlined
on the.
First page of the difference she
packet.
I'll I'll be briefly reviewing
some of the most significant
differences between the overall
legislative and executive
recommendations and then Diego
and I will be reviewing the
differences on the program level
before the secretary makes or
comments.
So the different sheets that
discuss the overall differences
between recommendations I'm he
just wanted to the packet.
Presentation I'm primarily going
to be referring to the high
level general fund summary
that's on page nine of the
packets
Will.
Save a different version that's
a little better quality on my
screen.
Overall legislative
recommendation for the
departments FY twenty two budget
is three point six million
dollars lower than the executive
all those differences are in the
general fund.
When the agency submitted its FY
twenty two budget request it
asked for four point two percent
reduction in general fund
revenue compared with FY twenty
one and that was a total
decrease of thirteen point eight
million dollars.
The executive recommendation for
general fund revenue is flat
with FY twenty one the
legislative recommendation is
one point one percent lower than
FY twenty one but it's ten point
two million dollars higher than
the request.
The largest program in the area
of the most significant
differences is in in me Madam
the Emmy Management control
program and that is on outlet
on lines one three twenty eight
of the high level which is again
on page nine about twenty grand
copies I'm not handled in
taxation within the prison
system so that it's really just
the largest much larger than any
of the other programs.
Recommendations anticipate
significant reductions in prison
population so so they also
anticipate this will reduce
result in reduced costs
legislative recommendation
estimates the department will
realize at least nine point
seven million dollars in savings
and the executive recommendation
anticipate savings.
Five point two million dollars
and you'll see that that's
outlined online.
I can get this right one eleven
of the high level.
I just like to know for the
committees reference that prison
populations have significantly
decreased over the past couple
of years I'm because of how the
corrections department has
distributed its population it's
actually already been able to
realize significant savings in
FY twenty one I just last month
it was able to detect transfer
eight million dollars originally
budgeted for private prison
contracts to insect cover
increases in the medical
contract costs.
Now the agency's contract for
inmate medical care has actually
been significantly more
expensive than was initially
projected this is primarily
because it's based on Medicaid
managed care organization per
member per month rates and those
of significantly increases the
agency went out to R. F. P. for
this contract.
Nations both addresses issue but
do so in different ways.
Recommendation adds two point
seven million dollars to cover
these costs well the legislative
recommendation suggests the HSD
renegotiated contract to save at
least three million dollars and
you'll see that is
noted on lines.
Well.
And thirteen.
Of the high level.
One of the primary concerns with
this contract is it requires the
department to pay a per inmate
cost based on minimum number of
inmates but actual prison
population has fallen
significantly below those
anymore so they're paying for
inmates who aren't there.
Contracts to reflect either
actual populations are to use
minimums they're at least close
to the actual populations could
result in significant savings
are.
Both recommendations anticipate
some savings and the rat reality
be savings to address other
priority areas throughout the
department very few things that
both recommendations support but
in different ways so online.
Sixteen.
You'll see that the executive
recommendation includes over
five hundred thousand dollars
per person increases and I'm AT
legislative recommendation
anticipate the agency will
recognize significant vacancy
savings program and you'll see
that also online sixteen.
But it redirects the savings to
help support six percent salary
increases for correctional
officers you'll see that here
online seventeen.
I just like to note again for
the committee S. reference the
department has significant
funded vacancy rates and you'll
see these outlined on the
personal services employee
benefits calculation worksheet
that's on page fifteen of your
packet and column and I want to
say just now because we're only
talking about it briefly but LFC
calculated that I mac had eighty
three had three point eight
million dollars in funded
vacancies for FY twenty one and
the recommendation only read
only allocates two million
dollars so it still has about a
one point eight million dollar
question for filling vacant
positions.
Overall the legislative
recommendation for person and I
mac is two point five million
dollars higher than FY twenty
one and two point two million
dollars higher than the
executive recommendation.
Online twenty two of the high
level.
Thank you.
This.
I'm you'll see it.
Recommendations include more
funding for facility maintenance
and repair the legislative
recommendation has one point
five minutes I'm sorry the
executive recommendation
includes one point five million
dollars for this purpose
a legislative recommendation is
three million dollars.
The legislative recommendation
also includes about two point
six million dollars in total to
expand evidence based
programming inside and outside
prison you'll see this is
reflected on lines.
Twenty.
And twenty one of.
The high level for programming
within prisons and then in rate
in lines.
Forty nine and fifty.
Immunity offender management
program for programming for
inmates on supervision.
The executive recommendation
includes about six hundred
thousand dollars to expand
evidence based programming in
can in the community and you'll
see that also online we nine.
Now again I'll note that prison
populations are at significantly
declining and have been for some
time so it does make sense to
begin reallocating savings from
incarceration to supervision.
There are also a few areas that
are only addressed by one of the
recommendations that a highlight
because they are significant.
Recommendation allocates one
point nine million dollars to
eat out for per diem rate
increases for private prisons
and you'll see that's in line.
Eighteen.
and it also adds one point three
million dollars to expand the
agency's recidivism reduction
division you'll see that in line
nineteen.
The executive recommendation on
the other hand allocates one
point four million dollars for
supplies and miscellaneous costs
that aren't covered in the
legislative recommendation and
you will see that online twenty
three.
My level.
I also like to note for the
committee that the analysts have
come to consensus on all
performance measure
recommendations in targets and
these are outlined on pages
twelve through fourteen of your
packet.
I'm not ever to be a go to add
any comments you might have on
the overall recommendation and
to begin reviewing program
support differences and those
are on page three of your
packet.
Let's see now.
Thank you.
Madam chair of the mentioned I'm
Diego Jimenez that DFA analysis
for the corrections department
the main thing that I think it's
important to note on the the
overview of the recommendations
that the LFC recommendation
reduces the operating budget
below its current level by
nearly three point six million
dollars and beyond that I
believe the department is going
to address many of those points
in their presentation so in the
interest of time and and get a
move on to the program level
differences beginning with the
program support.
Madam chair both recommendations
include reduced general fund
revenue compared with the FY
twenty one operating budget but
the executive recommendation is
one hundred and fifty five point
eighty thousand higher than the
legislative recommendations.
Those recommendations include
reductions in person to decrease
funding for making positions and
the legislative recommendation
is fourteen point two thousand
higher than the executive
recommendation.
The executive recommendation
ships one hundred eight thousand
from the contractual services
category to the other categories
due to an accounting change
what's the legislative
recommendation does not do.
The executive recommendation
adds a one hundred and seventy
thousand dollars in general fund
revenue to replace reduced
revenue from other transfers and
the other categories which the
legislative recommendation does
not data.
And with that I'll hand it back
to Mr even to review the
information management control
program.
Thank you Diego madam chair and
members of the committee you
different seats for the in the
management and control
programmer I'm at can be found
on pages four through five of
your packets as I stated earlier
the differences and I'm and make
up the major differences between
the two recommendations so
massive this is already been
discussed and I'll just briefly
review the difference she.
The executive recommends four
point seven million dollars more
in general fund revenues in the
legislative recommendation this
is a zero point two percent
increase over FY twenty one
legislative recommendation is
one point five percent decrease
compared with FY twenty one I
also know that it's
significantly higher than the
agencies requested four point
six percent reduction.
Provided recommendations for
person is two point two million
dollars higher than the
executive because it provides
for those six percent salary
increases for correctional
officers as well as a staff to
expand the agency's recidivism
reduction division to expand
evidence based reentry
programming and to expand
evidence based substance abuse
treatment and programming all
goals may have staffing costs
associated.
In the contractual services
category legislative
recommendation is five point one
million dollars lower than the
executive and that's due to the
different approaches for
addressing agencies medical
contract that I discussed
earlier.
In the other category the
legislative recommendation is
one point eight million dollars
lower than the executive this is
largely because the legislative
recommendation I have for those
significantly greater savings
from prison population decreases
and it also doesn't reallocate
all the savings within the
category.
Finally on the.
Recommendation of include
recommended language allocated
amounts of almost four million
dollars for increased public
action officer Hey those of the
one of the six percent increases
and earlier one point nine
million dollars for increased
per diem compensation rate for
private prisons one point three
million dollars to expand the
recidivism reduction division
and seven hundred thousand
dollars to expand evidence based
programming for inmates and
executive recommendation doesn't
include any of this language.
I'll turn it back to Diego to
review the recommendations for
corrections industries which are
on page six.
Thank you madam chair the
corrections industry program
receives no general fund and
it's a one hundred percent of
the revenue and fund balance and
that being said there are no
differences in revenue sources
between the legislative and
executive recommendations at if
you look at the different sheet
right above the narrative area.
You can see that that both
recommendations reduced that FTE
count by eleven and that's due
to long term vacancies at and
what that reduced as as the
department had requested and and
in recognition of those eleven
long term vacant positions.
And the executive recommendation
applies a fourteen percent
vacancy rate.
And transferred about five
hundred thousand dollars to the
other category for its been made
work supplies.
Yes those are the differences
for this program thank you madam
chair now headed back to Oakland
to review the differences in the
community offender management
program.
Thank you.
Madam chair members of the
committee of the community of
vendor management program can be
found on pages seven.
Eight of your different seed
packets and Community of hunter
management hold handle
supervision of offenders in the
community so individuals on
probation and parole.
The legislative recommendation
for general fund revenue in this
program is one point three
million dollars higher than the
executive this is used to expand
evidence based programming for
offenders on supervision of
recommendations as previously
noted allocate funding for
expanding evidence based
programming executive recommends
about six hundred thousand
dollars in total while the
ledges in total increase other
legislative recommendation
includes one point nine million
dollars.
Legislative recommendation also
includes to his recommendation
recommended language program
executive doesn't recommend any
language the first piece of
language in the legislative
recommendation allocates million
dollars for staffing costs
associated with administering bi
annual risk needs assessments to
all attendees under supervision
and this is actually a
continuation of a funding
increase first put into the FY
twenty one budget the department
already conducts risk needs
assessments on offenders during
the supervision intake process
so the purpose of this
additional funding when we put
in last year this is to enable
them to conduct the same
assessments more frequently and
to ensure that offenders who are
in supervision for longer
periods of time have those
assessments updated.
In piece of recommended language
specifies the total amount of
funding for community
corrections programming and the
amount of funding for evidence
based programming throughout
community corrections
that includes my presentation
and I own out handed over to the
secretary for her comments.
Thank you and good afternoon
madam chair Mister vice chair
and members I am Alisha Tafoya
Lucero the cabinet secretary for
the New Mexico corrections
department and I have some of my
staff virtually present with me
today so when I call you out if
you would just please put your
hand up
so today virtually present with
me as deputy secretary Karen can
director of probation and parole
Melanie Martinez health services
administrator Wentz asa Ghani
behavioral health bureau chief
Dr Wendy price acting director
of the administrative services
division ed Smith and public
relations manager Eric Harrison
and I believe his camera is off
because he'll be showing slides
just a little bit later on.
It is an honor to present before
you today
and I would like to also just
say welcome to the new members
of this committee and to please
feel free to reach out to me
directly if you would like to
learn more about me and my work
with the agency our agency over
season operations at eleven
present facilities seven public
and for privately operated we
also supervise nearly sixteen
thousand people on parole and
probation in five regions of
that are made up of forty six
district offices we supervise
people that are on standard
supervision and then also others
in special programs including
things like drug court sex
offender management community
corrections and intensive
supervision.
I also like to just think are
DFA analyst Mr Diego Jimenez and
are LFC analysts miss Ellen
right in for the time and the
effort that they spent in
preparing their respective
recommendations and I am here
today seeking your support for
the economic I'm I'm sorry for
the executive recommendation.
So when we were developing the
FY twenty two request are the
economic outlook for our state
was different than what it is
now and I had to make some very
difficult decisions at that time
I submitted a request that
reduced expenditure by six point
eight million dollars in general
fund and proposed a one year
seven million dollar revenue
swap with fund balance in order
to preserve that amount in the
general fund for the state in
December upon learning that the
economic outlook was somewhat
better we learned that the
executive budget recommendation
would come in flat compared to
the FY twenty one levels sparing
those cuts and that fund balance
what.
My first priority.
Is always the safety of staff
facilities build offices and
other individuals in our care
the LFC recommendation cuts our
agency by three point six
million below are FY twenty one
levels and it redirects millions
of dollars away from necessary
functions and filters them at
filters that that funding
towards initiatives that I
believe will stifle the
creativity that is needed to
continue to innovate in areas
like reentry education and
vocational training as well as
behavioral health now among the
differences between the
executive and the LESC
recommendation and of great
concern for me is a redirection
of three point nine million
dollars away from currently
funded vacancies for raises to
CEOs only now conceptually I
really appreciate the idea
whenever it's possible for us to
give a pay increase to staff
members that is always a
wonderful thing to be able to do
but redirecting these funds
would stop us from recruiting
all critical positions including
correctional officer cadets
probation and parole officers
correctional officer specialist
that that's people like escorts
for programs maintenance workers
within the institution would
also stop us from a recruiting
and hiring behavioral health
therapists teachers and much
needed case workers every
position in an institution
contributes to the overall
safety of that facility and this
was especially apparent
throughout twenty twenty as we
managed our way through the
pandemic and it continues to be
every position every person
working in our facilities
contributes to safe operations
reallocation of these resources
to benefit one group and not the
others would create an imbalance
that would ultimately hurt the
success of our age.
Agency.
I believe it would also
compromise the safety of our
institutions.
Another LFC initiative would
redirect one million dollars
away from salaries and benefits
for probation and parole
officers to implement an
assessment that is essentially
redundant now I know that
mystery been mentioned this
earlier that there already is an
assessment in place and I want
to be clear that yes there is an
assessment in place and in that
process there are very specific
time periods where it's built
into the tool that we use when
and assessment needs to take
place so a person might have a
life changing event and in that
event might lead to them having
to be reassessed or re evaluated
and to places in this this
situation where they have to be
done in such a rigid manner on a
biannual basis really takes away
the flexibility that are
probation and parole officers
need to genuinely manage their
caseloads now also our agency
has made strides to ensure that
our probation and parole
officers have manageable
caseloads.
They now have K. lows in the
case loads in the range of about
seventy eight per officer in
standard supervision and special
programs we are able to ensure
that case loads do not ever
exceed thirty in FY nineteen
standard supervision caseloads
were at and above a hundred and
twenty hundred twenty cases per
officer so I'm very concerned
that the loss of funds in
probation and parole officer
salaries will.
And and budget will bring us
back to those levels that's very
very concerning.
Now.
The LFC.
Recommendation includes a
statement that it adds three
million dollars to our operating
budget for what is referenced in
in the documentation as ongoing
repairs and maintenance needs
but given that their
recommendation is three point
six million dollars lower than
the executive recommendation and
lower than our FY twenty one
level it's clear that this is
not a true addition and
directing these funds in this
region matter it's it's not
feasible we do recognize the
need for maintenance and repair
and we do spend about between
three and four million dollars
annually on facility needs this
re direction I believe is
misplaced.
I recognize that much of the LFC
is recommendation of redirecting
funds is based on the premise
that the department should
renegotiate the medical services
contract I want this committee
to know that this is on my radar
but right now it's just not the
right time we're in the midst of
a global pandemic still and our
current vendor has stepped up
during this time they have
administer tens of thousands of
tests to our staff members and
our inmate populations and they
have also worked to help
safeguard our facilities with
screenings and administering
vaccine I will commit to looking
at this contract when the time
is right and in the meantime I
believe this was also mentioned
by is right in due to our
percent vacant and the fiscal
mindfulness of our team we were
able to realize enough savings
to cover those costs that that
resulted from the medical
shortfall in FY twenty one.
The LFC recommendation includes
language that would
theoretically increase the
reentry division by one point
three million dollars and
theoretically add seven hundred
thousand dollars to increase
inmate programming these
recommendations however are
narrow and I expect that they
will have the opposite effect by
specifying so minutely how these
funds are to be utilized this
limiting language can only
negatively impact the creative
minds that are working to build
and strengthen our reentry
division and as noted given that
the recommendation of the LFC is
below FY twenty one operating
levels and the executive
recommendation these funds are
not truly additions are
increases.
In twenty nineteen when I when I
took on this role I found that
the reentry and recidivism
reduction bureau and those
issues were being treated like
after thoughts I elevated this
essential component from bureau
to division level and I brought
in a director of reentry she
really hit the ground running
and she began to move towards as
she began to move towards
community outreach and external
program expansion the pandemic
hit and so for the safety of our
populations we had to close our
facilities to non facility
staff.
It didn't stop us from pushing
forward and we found ways to
implement programming remotely
but as a result of everything
that we were up managing at the
early part and throughout twenty
twenty my focus really became
one of life safety needs for our
facilities and I unfortunately
did not make the deadline to
modify the structure of our
budget program codes this is
something that we are doing now
I'm submitting for the creation
of a reentry and recidivism
reduction budget code that will
enable us to formally shift
resources to this vital area and
solidified the division for
years to come regardless of who
is serving as secretary.
And practice we are already
doing this by combining some
work with members of our
probation and parole and adult
prisons division these folks are
working together to focus
efforts on pre release planning
and programming that starts
inside and continues after
release and we're also exploring
other ways that we might be able
to leverage federal grant
funding we've also been able to
figure out creative ways to
utilize technology in order to
facilitate things like reentry
committee meetings so that when
an inmate is preparing for
release they actually have the
opportunity to meet their
probation parole officers in the
community and talk about
community resources from the
institutional level and so we're
hoping that we can continue to
use technology to improve
services and then also to expand
services and improve services in
education vocational training
behavioral health and
certifications in all of these
areas with a particular emphasis
on things like peer mentorship
and getting people certified to
be peer mentors additional
merging of duties in the reentry
and corrections industry
divisions are focused on
ensuring that our business
ventures through industry are
accompanied by educational
components enabling people to
prepare for release and gain
employability skills and
credentials real credentials and
by working together to improve
the quality of life.
For the people who will not be
eligible for release.
With that I'm gonna turn the
floor over to director Smith he
will walk you through our slides
and then hill returned the floor
to me thank you.
But we can see the slide.
And your muted.
Okay my apologies of the sites
pop up yet.
Yes okay good afternoon madam
chair Mr vice chair members the
committee as a secretary
mentioned my name's ed Smith the
acting director of
administrative services we just
have like nine quick slides I'd
like to point out a few things
in addition to what the
secretaries mentioned on the
first slide following the
presentation of this is the
executive recommendation which
for total funding sources so now
I have a few of adjustments in
some transfers and other state
funds this is pretty much the FY
twenty one operating budget.
On the next slide you'll see the
differences between our FY
twenty one operating budget in
general fund the executive an
LFC recommendations and the
difference is that the analysts
has pointed out and the
secretary pretty much you know
cover those major differences in
in may management control and
then just a moment here I'll
discuss a couple issues with
program support.
So on the next slide.
You see the other main
differences as that is analyst
mentioned is a hundred and fifty
six thousand dollars lower for
the the LFC recommendation and
or this becomes a problem for us
is we had already when we
submitted the FY twenty two
request in August had taken some
pretty tough cuts in programs
support so about about four
hundred and fifty thousand
dollars give or say the
executive recommendation took
that four hundred and fifty
thousand dollars they left
Isidoro method but they moved
Act and make management controls
at least some budget flexibility
an inmate managed to control the
LFC recommendation not only took
those four hundred fifty
thousand dollars in cuts but
also cut programs support an
additional hundred and fifty six
thousand.
And where that's gonna cause
some issues for the agency in FY
twenty two is mostly are other
costs category.
The Santa Fe complex here on
south fourteen is not managed or
maintained by General Services
facilities management so we pay
for all costs and operating
expenses for this complex and
you know the last couple years
we've received support from
House Appropriations and
analysts so that we've increased
our four hundred category budget
a little bit but we're still
well before well below are
graduated from even like nine
years ago we were still not back
to the FY fourteen level so I
believe that this lower amounts
we're going to costume issues
maintaining our our campus here.
And then on the next slide
you'll see above what and Allen
had or I think I believe Diego
had mentioned you know we had
submitted in our budget request
moving some money between I can
get to the next slide please
there we go
A hundred eighty thousand
dollars is in the wrong category
this last fiscal year the
department of finance has moved
all the I. T. maintenance
contracts from contractual
services to others so the way
the LFC recommendation stands
right now contracts are
overstated in our other costs
will be short which will
basically just.
Read the issue of having to do a
bar on July first two movies
money's very quickly so we can
get our contracts in place.
So that'll be an issue for FY
twenty one.
moving on the next slide.
Both the analyst in the
secretary cover the inmate
Management control program but.
Now that we've made is that
almost a year of COVID right now
and seeing the effects of
revenue there may be some
general additional general fund
effects on a couple of our
programs in FY twenty two.
So when COVID hit last spring we
had to hold our inmate work
crews.
And we were working with other
agencies so the NMAA management
control program we ended up
short four hundred thousand
dollars in our transfers and
other revenues for FY twenty
which we were able to cover you
know just by reducing our
budget.
Looking at a full FY twenty one
expenditures and revenue coming
in at this point we're
estimating that you are
distributions to the
penitentiary income fund which
is you know distributions from
the permanent fund and as well
as the oil and gas royalties
will be almost six hundred
thousand dollar short and we've
had no inmate work crews this
year and that's an additional
about eight hundred thousand
dollars in revenue so in twenty
one were one point four million
dollars short which thank
goodness to some of these
excuse me expenditures
expenditures we've been able to
reduce we'll be able to cover
that revenue shortfall but that
might not be the is their case
in FY twenty two with a lot of
the re directs in the LFC budget
recommendation it's going to be
tighter we may not have an extra
million for to cover you know
that revenue shortfall so that
could be an issue in this
program.
the next slide.
Just point out a couple of the
things that the analyst at did
you know the LFC is four point
seven million in this program
below the executive.
The next slide for corrections
industry
both recommendations support the
agency request was just slightly
below the twenty one level
because GSD into our rates went
down.
Excuse me and then the next the
last two slides.
Cover the community offender
management program which the
secretary is spoken to several
those issues America this
programs also going to have
potentially severe revenue issue
in FY twenty two as well you
know when COVID had some of the
hardest folks in the state that
were hit economically were
probably you know a lot of our
clientele that lost jobs you
know the last you know the first
thing we got to pay your rent
and you know feature children
and what not you know we are
first in line so to speak for a
lot of people to make payments
so we were about four hundred
thirty thousand short and
revenue collections in this
program in FY twenty.
Full year projections for this
year we're looking about nine
hundred and thirty to nine
hundred fifty thousand short and
revenue collections and this
program and it's particularly
concerning in this program
because the fund balances are
beginning to do their dwindle as
over the last several years you
know there's fund balance budget
in the operating budget you know
in two thousand fifteen or
sixteen when we first started
the OMS system four point nine
million came out of this
programs fund balances to help
fund the offender management
system so these revenue issues
will potentially have general
fat General Fund impacts for FY
twenty two.
And with that that's pretty much
all the issues that I had to
bring up and I would turn it
back over to the secretary.
Thank you very much of.
Madam chair Mr vice chair and
members.
With that I will respectfully
request your support for the
executive recommendation which
provides the funds and the
flexibility that is needed to
maintain FY twenty two at the FY
twenty one level and my staff
and I will now stand for
questions.
Thank you very much for the
presentation I'm gonna go to
questions first I'll start with
Representative Chatfield.
Thank you madam chair thank you
Secretary for I start
questioning this I want to throw
out there where I where I'm
coming from I don't necessarily
think that the minor offenders
all these are better to be.
President because sometimes it
does more harm than good there
we were heartened.
Secondly I don't really think
that anybody is welcome to call
me should depend on how many
people we keep the.
That being said.
Many of our private prisons are
built.
With the expectations of a
certain amount of populate
prison population and with the
declining population I wonder
does not take the same amount of
person to keep that president
safe effective and running like
it should be and and if it does
are these private prisons.
The rate per inmate.
Thank you madam chair and
Representative Chatfield.
So I will start by just
addressing a a couple of the
things originally that you
mentioned about lower level
offenders we we absolutely agree
and we have lots of people that
are on supervision with us on
probation just appropriations so
they have not been sentenced to
terms of incarceration yes and
we do lots of work diversionary
work to try to keep them out of
prison in the first place so are
probation and parole officers
will see if they can figure out
like residential treatment for
people that have substance use
disorder and we really try
everything that we can do before
we move to seeking revocation
from the judiciary so with that
said now operating a prison with
the population being low it is a
a significant issue right now in
fact our number are percentage
bacon as of today is seventy
three percent of capacity so
we're all the way down seventy
three percent of capacity now in
some areas like in a state
institution that doesn't always
equal a savings and it also it
also doesn't really make any
sort of modification or changes
to the safety of the institution
when we can figure out a way to
downsize an area we do that and
we've done that and one example
is in the slowness we have a
three full well multiple
institutions on one on the
campus and we vacated one of the
buildings completely relocated
all of the inmates from that
building into another building
on the campus so that we were
able to shift our staff
resources to the other
facilities so this is a facility
that classically hovers around
to twenty seven percent vacancy
rate but at this point every
officer has opposed every area
is being covered and so we are
finding that we're able to
manage that at a lower cost
right now now in a private
institution things work a little
differently but.
Not they don't all work the same
because there's different
contracts for all the different
institutions so the one facility
that I'll look at is see our
CoreCivic facility and in
requests their contract is
structured where it is about per
inmate per day if we keep their
population very low then they
they definitely receive less
payment the population increases
they receive more payment it
doesn't necessarily make changes
for them as far as how they
staff the institution although
they may choose not to cover
certain posts that the
population is low we recognize
that and we work with them to
figure it out in a facility like
one of our geo group facilities
in Hobbs and in Santa Rosa those
facilities work a little bit
differently is that their
population
should be at the higher end or
at a higher percentage rate
we're not mandated to keep it at
that level once we exceed that
level however then we begin
paying per inmate per day but in
an institution like that when we
feel like they don't have enough
staff to manage it safely we
might shift population and then
that is something that they that
would affect them financially.
Thank you madam chair second
question was Albuquerque
constantly in the top ten most
violent cities in the nation of.
Judy option is number two.
I.
Don't know the the number
personally but I see reports
of their thirty seven card today
so someone from the Albuquerque
greater Albuquerque area.
Why are population population
one.
Which one that.
So this is sort of the question
that we've all been asking for
about the last year and a half
two years so we work a lot with
the sentencing commission those
those people of their brilliant
statisticians they come up with
all these formulas in numbers
and they're able to tell us how
we're what and help us predict
population for future.
This is what is strange though
the sentencing commission hasn't
been able to nail down a
singular reason why we're seeing
this drop in population the most
recent report that they put out
indicated that there were some
the last drops in prosecution
levels in different counties
they don't really know what the
source of that is we hope that
some of our re entry efforts and
the way that we're working with
our probationers and parolees
might be helping to decrease
that number but overall you know
the sentencing commission used
to put a report out on an annual
basis and they are now putting
out that report quarterly
because of the fact that we
cannot predict what will happen
with the population in prisons I
mean we definitely could see a
huge spike we could see a
reduction we do know that the
reduction in population is not
singularly because of the
pandemic though.
Thank you madam chair.
All right reserved all
Representative Chatfield.
For some reason it was.
I have one more question which
is more.
Efficient private.
Or.
State prison.
Madam chair Representative
Chatfield.
I think that they are different
I don't know that I would say
that one is more efficient than
the other
it from the state's perspective
we we have contract monitors at
our private institutions we feel
like that's a necessary thing to
make sure that we have eyes on
the ground in all of those
places and I think that they do
they both do different things
well
I one of the things that I'm
looking at right now with one of
our vendors is to figure out if
we can restructure the contract
in order to tie some kind of
like a completion of programming
or enrollment in or availability
of different types of
programming we're hoping that by
doing that we'll be able to
increase the efficiency and the.
The the value that the inmates
are receiving when they're
incarcerated but with that'll
say I've I've seen some private
institutions that really do an
excellent job with programming
excellent job with security and
then on the flip side of also
seeing private institutions that
really struggle with things like
staffing and are definitely not
meeting the same levels as a
state when it comes to providing
programming and pre release
Services.
Thank you madam chair thank you
very all.
Thank you let's go next to
Representative Hochman Vigil.
Thank you very much madam chair
and US secretary lose Cerro I
want to go back to the issue of
the medical services contract
Secretary is that the only
contract in which you have an
inmate quota that the department
has to meet.
Madam chair and Representative
Hochman Vigil.
I don't know that I would call
it a quota it's it's the number
that we put out when we are
first writing the contracting
going out to R. F. P. we give
the.
Editors an idea of how many
people are incarcerated are in
our system and so when we went
out to R. F. P. we had a higher
population we estimated a higher
population and we know that the
numbers that the that we're not
able to really predict future
incarceration rates and what
have you I think the primary
concern for us fiscally with the
medical services contract.
I to the Medicaid right and that
is definitely something that
will need to look at because it
also is an unpredictable right
figure.
Thank you very much madam chair
director Lou Cerro okay it but
does the state pay a specific
penalty for not reaching the
number that was put out in the
R. F. P..
Madam chair and representative
no we do not pay a penalty if we
don't have that number but we do
have to pay for the amount of
individuals that we did for that
was part of our original
contract that the vendor's bid
for so we are picking yes thank
you madam chair that the
secretary this are so you
essentially status paying for
medical services that are not
being rendered.
Madam chair and representative I
do believe in order to have
medical services available that
is something that we are
experiencing now because of this
extreme drop in population yes
okay thank you very much are
director are secretary was our
next question I have there are a
couple proposals on the table
this provided legislative
session to our basically in the
private prison contracts that
the state has on the books I
know that you had stated how
many contracts we have at the
moment are any of those
contracts slated to expire or be
renegotiated in the next fiscal
year.
Madam chair and Representative
Hochman Vigil.
I I'm not this year or not
within the year I do have some
contracts that will be coming to
determine approximately an
eighteen month period
and that's those those are some
of the ones that we're looking
at right now a restructure of
and with respect to some of the
legislation that's out there
right now I I just want I just
want to let you know and and be
clear on our perspective on that
we definitely conceptually agree
with a moratorium on private
prisons but in in reality in
practice what that looks like is
it has to be done in a way
that's safe responsible has to
be done over enough time and
there have to be financial
resources available in order to
make that happen without hurting
other initiatives in the state
that's really what it comes down
to for us and not just one of
the items that is a part of
particular concern there is
there's there's a pro
prohibition from even being able
to lease a building from a
private prison operator so even
if the state were to operate the
institution it was owned by the
company then we would
essentially lose the ability to
use those budget.
Thank you very much madam chair
director Secretary Mr on that
leads me to my last question
with regards to a potential
increased costs are having all
public facilities from here on
out that way those costs would
be and like employee benefits
correct R. P. E. R. A.
there are costs that would be
allocated to the state to
essentially keep the same number
of employees in the prison
system is that correct.
Madam chair and Representative
Hochman Vigil it's partially
correct but but I think where we
incurred the largest cost really
is in acquiring the building
itself and whatever maintenance
costs are associated with it
that's really where the big big
cost lies because in some
situations we might be able to
figure out a lease agreement
with the county or whatever the
structure of a given contract is
but in some cases that might not
be on the table and we might
have to figure out a way to try
to purchase of a large building
like that that's really where
the cost lies but but certainly
we experienced in clay in when
we modded or transfer converted
it from a private institution to
a public institution that the
officer salaries staff sellers
were approximately three dollars
higher per person and of course
I I think everybody knows that
the state of New Mexico has one
of the best benefits packages in
the country so that's definitely
something that's more costly
than what a private operator
would be obligated to pay.
Thank you very much madam chair
and US secretary Sir I
appreciate your answers.
Right one to we've got a few
more on the list I want to
remind everyone we do have a
hard stop at three it got
another meeting regarding human
service update our go to
Representative Herrera.
Thank you madam chair and I'll
just ask a few questions
I'm just to play I'm always
impressed by your presentations
and glad that you have the job
that you have although I think
it's probably one of the most
difficult in the state I guess I
don't really know how much do we
pay an entry level prison guard.
madam chair and representative
it added up thank you thank you
for that we start off at
eighteen dollars and I I'm I'm
not sure of the exact number I'm
hoping that one of my staff
members is going to text me the
answer the specific answer to
that question but it's in the
approximate range of eighteen
dollars they start out slightly
lower when they're when they're
in the academy as cadets and
then when they graduate the
academy and they moved into the
institution than the rate is
elevated
the correctional officer series
is elevated once they become
certified.
Okay and then they have a full
health and retirement package
with that.
You madam chair and
representative yes immediately
upon hiring they're given the
full benefits package thank you
madam chair and I guess that I
guess my follow up question is
with your funded vacancy rate.
How many hours how many average
hours a week or these prison
guards a doing with over time
because she would have to go
into overtime after forty hours
a week right.
So what's the average explain to
me what that compensation rate
is for having such a hello
funded they can see right and
what that means in terms of
overtime for your agency.
I'm madam chair and
representative okay so I'm I'm
looking at an average facility
and I'll also I just want to
start though by letting you know
that it's it's been different
because of what we've seen in
the in the population reduction
throughout the state so where
you may have needed to cover
certain post we're not having to
do that and then in addition to
that as we were working through
COVID we experienced outbreaks
in two particular institutions
one was in Los crucis one was in
Los Lunas and what that ended up
doing was that several officers
were out on COVID Lee because
they had to be away and
personally quarantine several of
them were positive and we had to
keep them away from the facility
and so what we saw was other
officers were having to pick up
the slack and there were lots of
people having to work overtime
tons and tons of overtime so we
were actually approached by the
officers you and they said what
can we do how can how can we
work together to help alleviate
this is a distress that's
happening at these institutions
now every other one of our state
facilities operates on a twelve
hour shift these two facilities
were operating on an eight hour
shift and it's it can get real
we do in complicated I'm gonna
try to keep it at a very high
level but what essentially it
means is that in a twelve hour
shift I use for people to cover
the same amount of post that I'd
have to have six people for in
an eight hour environment so we
modified their rosters we did a
new posted and then that in
itself in and of itself cut the
overtime in a way that was where
it needed overtime more
manageable for the officers so
rather than over time managing
the officer the officer began to
manage their choices of when
they were going to work overtime
for a way that worked with.
So those things have been very
significant during our during
the the the virus now with
respect to the vacancies and the
funded vacancies how many of
those vacancies are not in
correctional officer areas they
are don't get get me wrong we
definitely have vacancies in the
art world in the probation and
parole world but also there is
there are vacancies in areas
like maintenance right so like a
correctional officer specialist
plumber or electrician those
people are just vitally
important and nobody can just
step in and be a electricians so
those are some of the positions
that we really want to be able
to hire for focus on also things
like case workers so those are
positions that we don't fill for
overtime but they're critical to
the successful safe operations
of our facilities.
Okay thank you thank you madam
chair thank you is the Santa.
Thank you Representative at at
this is Nathan's mom taking over
briefly for madam chair thank
you very much madam secretary
we're going to continue with
questions going next
Representative X..
Thank you
vice chair small and secretary
Lou Cerro I'd like to pay you
back on the question posed by
Representative Herrera and
specifically ask about a
recruitment strategy for these
positions and what are your
department is doing to filled
some of the spot thank you very
much.
Madam chair Mister vice chair
and Representative Dixon
if if if I may I just want to
give the numbers I got the text
message finally so a
correctional officer in the
academy is at fifteen fifty five
an hour as it as a cadet and
then a correctional officer
graduated certified elevates
then to eighteen seventy five
per hour.
All right so now to get your
question our recruitment
strategy this is one of those
other areas that when I took on
this role it was it was it was
just it was like a few people
working extra extra hard to
recruit people and really not
very supportive just sort of out
on their own and island we
brought in this director of the
academy Mr George Stevenson any
he's wonderful he has a great
background in training and
recruitment in corrections and
so just I mean it's just
unbelievable and I don't have
the exact numbers but I want to
send them to you because they're
amazing he nearly doubled the
number of recruits that we had
from one year to the next based
on the way that he did things
out this you know pre COVID is
what we were starting to see
these huge increases so not only
did he go out in the community
he sent facilities out into the
community so all the facilities
were doing their own recruitment
efforts not just the the public
facilities but the private
facilities also and then he
increased the number of
available academies so officers
were able to participate in the
academy at the Santa Fe location
where we're our main academy
that but then he also had
satellite academies taking place
in areas where we had
particularly high vacancy rate
so we did some academies in
requests and our numbers really
significantly change like we cut
them in half as far as vacancy
rates are concerned and we did
the same thing and not likely in
Springer and some of those areas
where we really we're seeing a
lot of intensive vacancies and
then I think one of the other
items that he did that really
made a huge difference huge
difference so back before the
agency this agency we just were
like oh we're available we're
open on Tuesdays come on Tuesday
and screen from wherever you are
wherever you live hopefully you
can get to Santa Fe in four to
drive here and stay overnight
for this to do screening.
That in the most expensive state
city to stay in in our state and
so we have people are coming in
a trickle and so we took
ourselves on the road and we
said we need to be on site in
people's communities to do
screening that made a huge
difference and now as we work
through the pandemic we have
figured out ways to take our
classes to a digital platform
and when we're doing the
physical hands on training we
bring officers in in small pods
to do that hands on training.
But thank you madam secretary
and a vice chair that was my
question thank you.
Thank you Representative Dixon
we're gonna go next to
Representative cost them.
Thank you Mr chairman.
this is Cheryl I'm going back to
a question that Miss Hochman
Vigil last so I I think your
comment was made that with this
the legislation coming out you
the department would not be able
to lease the private prisons
correct.
I'm not here Mr vice chair
Representative Castellano yes I
was just talking about the
specific house bill House Bill
forty I believe is in the house
Judiciary today right now
probably
yes there is a provision in
there that says that we would
not be able to lease were images
work with engage in any kind of
a fiscal relationship with a
private vendor in any form.
Mr Chairman this is settled so
how does that affect what would
you do with those inmates at
that time that you can house in
those prisons that are E.
housing inmates for the state.
I'm.
Madam chair Mister vice chair
representative that's that's
that's my question yes I I mean
we we have a we would lose about
three thousand budget if that
happened about three thousand
beds and even our populations at
an incredibly all time low I
mean we're not that low where we
could just completely closed all
of the private prisons and be
done with it we would absolutely
have to convert the ones that we
could convert via lease
agreements with the county or
city or whoever's the
leaseholder with the private
entity or purchased the building
figure out a way to purchase the
building
one of our facilities is owned
by the vendor we would
completely have to just vacated
and so that the city has about
six seven hundred budget it's in
requests we just to close it and
I I mean I think that would also
have a really significant impact
on the community and not just
for a state institution but for
any institution whose private
vendor currently owns the
building those buildings would
have to be vacated an inmate's
displaced and possibly lead to
overcrowding.
Thank you Mr Mr chair one more
question so I I I think from
what you said also you you're at
seventy five percent capacity
you're not a hundred percent
you're at seventy five percent
so my concern is so I think you
said each probation officer had
a hundred and twenty cases per
officer correct.
So right now my concern is if
we're that low in vacancy rate
inmates being housed how is that
affecting a probation and parole
officers.
I'm here Mr vice chair madam
chair representative so that was
where we were at at FY nineteen
the hundred and twenty number
right now we're down to seventy
eight about seventy eight for an
average standard supervision
probation and parole officer and
our population capacity right
now is about seventy three
percent of what we're capable of
having but just because our
populations low doesn't mean
that we are seeing an increase
in people being sentenced to
probation so what what's what's
actually happening is that the
probation and parole case loads
right now are staying steady but
we were also able to do some
really significant recruitment
there which is why we believe
that we've been able to
stabilize those caseloads now
that they're hovering around the
seventy eight number instead of
the one twenty number we're
afraid that we could slide back
if we lose that funding for
those those people to be you
know compensated obviously
but like I think what's what's
happening in a lot of places
that there's of there's less
prosecutions happening.
Perhaps or less people being
placed on probation with the
state but we're not seeing like
a huge influx is sentenced to
terms of probation or or and
we're definitely not releasing
more people than what we used to
be releasing we're still
releasing at the same rate so
we're seeing that probation and
parole caseloads are remains
steady.
Okay thank you chairman Mr
Senator okay just a concern of
mine if in all the way I look at
if you release prisoners from
prison they have to go to
appropriations for all so that's
good that you hire more
employees in the case of.
thank you Mr Senator thank you
Mr chairman no more questions
thank you very much upset
customer on a next will go to
Representative Garcia thank you
Mr chairman of thanks for the
presentation Mr Cyril.
Question under
Funded vacancies in Muslim
three.
We got
Rystad of five point five ten
point five within that five
million.
A new fund event funded
vacancies.
With that I on more than five
thousand.
Mr chair if you want to pick
that question up.
You know look at a volume three
Mr Mr chairman of teacher Cheryl
in on your funded vacancy rates
fund raising and make it to cost
you have a total of five one
five one zero point five in and
dollars okay where is that money
going to the the that you're not
paying for employees.
This is Mr chairman
Representative Garcia.
Do you enjoy page numbers volume
three that's the LFC document I
don't have those hard copies in
front of me the PJD form I'm
sorry for the dungeon look at
the vacancy rate cost and you're
done department of corrections
is I don't I just I really I've
got to be five million five
hundred ten thousand five
hundred.
Not very where this is a total
of the total of all the agencies
instead of Mexico sixty nine
million and I'm mad that I
million on your on your behalf
I'm just wondering where that
money is what are you guys doing
with that money at any rate the.
Positions are not filled up Mr
Chairman representative Garcia
so.
If if that numbers that appears
to be five million and LFC
document that's probably
referring to you know what yes
raven researchers are funded
vacancies we get we on a regular
basis have thirty five to forty
five positions at any given time
advertise with the state
personnel office and that's in
addition to correctional
officers the cadets those we
just hire out right so that five
million dollars is to if we
could in a perfect world higher
all those correction officers
specialists for maintenance
behavioral health therapists
educators you know the
classification officers that
five million dollars would cover
all those job postings we have
out there.
Thank you Mr chair
Mr Smith but this this what I'm
reading here is funded making
she cost me another words what
I'm understanding I might be
wrong and sent to be corrected.
This money is been paid to for
these positions that are not
filled by understands right and
what I'm asking is where is this
money at the state rate of two
for fun is positioned and
they're still empty okay.
Mr chair and the.
On this so thank you please
thank you Secretary I I think
Representative Garcia perhaps I
know Ellen right been are LFC
analyst can also add that add to
this excellent line of
questioning miss right would you
mind.
Adding briefly and then
secretary will make sure and go
you and to Mr Smith for sure.
Thank you Mr chair and
representative Garcia I can
clarify the five point five
number in the vote in volume
three is five point five million
dollars that represents the as
as you stated the amount of the
appropriation for personal
services employee benefits that
is above the cost of the
currently filled positions at
the time at this table was put
together
I will leave it to the
department to discuss what
they're doing with their vacancy
savings at this time this year
but I can tell you that in
previous years they have had to
move that they if they move
those savings around to cover
other costs and sometimes have
reverted some as well.
Thank you very much miss raven
madam secretary is there
anything that you want to add to
that.
This yes yes Mr vice chair thank
you Representative Garcia so
yeah I I just want to clarify
that yes mystery bins correct in
that it has been reverted us
sometimes not all of it but
portions of it in prior years or
it's covered other areas but it
also pays for overtime for
correctional officer overtime
probation and parole over time
any other off of positions like
I noted earlier not all
positions are funded or
it like they're not built for
overtime all always but when we
do need to use over time that is
where that money comes from and
then of course being that it's
available readily available as
an appropriation it gives us the
ability to continue with
recruitment efforts and bringing
people on board as we're able
to.
Thank you Mr chairman and madam
secretary it seems to me to have
by million dollar drive I know
you said earlier madam secretary
Mr Chairman now you're having a
hard time recruiting officers or
gardeners or plumbers or.
Staff workers for these
positions you know it would be
good for the legislative body
control what is money's going to
you know other done me well we
can use it for this and that and
all manner stand if you're
understaffed you do pay over
time you know polite and I live
in grand of madam secretary Mr
chairman and I hear nightmare
what's going on with the you
will have and work double shifts
and so forth until just a
journal my next concern about
this money words go into it's
awful hard Mr chair and madam
secretary just to give somebody
a blank check and see year do
whatever you want with the end
of the day additional other
other there's.
Thank Representative no more
Armstrong said earlier you know
the all want to bridge the due
to a big dollar items and we
don't know where the money's
going to other you guys are
using it for whatever you did as
fit or is it better once we
raised but anyway that's one
concern another concern.
madam secretary Mr chairman if
the private prisons do pose what
is the liability going to be on
the state not the liability not
the purchase of the building the
liability factor thank you
somebody we just had a suicide
deal and grants and one of the
private prisons what's that
going to do our budget when that
starts happening in the state
prisons how much liability is
going to be incurred with that.
Mr Mr vice chair and
representative.
Arsia
you know it's it's it's sort of
hard to to to put a number on on
what that will look like I mean
if it did if they were to close
very quickly in a very quick
period of time then we would be
in a place where we were trying
to figure out how and where to
safely house people so that that
in and of itself would be a
complicated situation and if we
had to be a radically relocate
all of the people that are
currently house in private
institutions then we would
certainly create safety issues
by having overcrowding concerns
which is not something that
we're facing right now so I mean
overall I think that there
there's not only concerns for
the safety of the population in
general but also for what would
happen to the communities
particularly like communities
like your community where you
have not only state entities
that are right.
Also.
This one I just sent you a new
one.
It was.
The the all the kids for me.
Representative small.
Okay thank you madam chair I
know madam secretary was just
finished a quick answer and then
I'll have a couple of questions
questions thank you madam chair.
Thank you madam chair I'm Mr
vice chair I just wanted to to
finish that up by saying that
communities like lake
Representative Garcia like your
community and other areas that
are that have these large
institutions and whether they be
state county federal or what
have you if if they were to
close very quickly then
certainly there would be an
impact in the community.
Thank you Mr chairman madam
secretary you mentioned earlier
also brought the cat in the if
you have more academies you
could
recruit more for these presents
how many Academy do you have in
the state of Mexico for a.
Representative regards it was in
regards to.
So we have we've had academies
we have an academy madam chair
Mr vice chair representative we
have an at a meeting had to be
at the Santa Fe location but we
have areas in communities where
we can use as Academy sites to
hold classes on site and now
that we're doing some of the
academy's virtually we're able
to offer that same course work
in a wider variety of locations
without having to displace
people from their communities so
last year we increased those
academies by three times what
they had been the prior year and
particularly in in your area
where the vacancy rate dropped
eggs to very significantly and
is down now to just a fifth of
fifteen point four just above
fifteen percent vacant which is
a really significant change
classically the Western facility
had hovered at around a thirty
percent vacancy rate but because
we were able to increase those
academies we were also able to
bring that vacancy rate down
significantly.
Thank you madam secretary Mr
chairman that's all of us to
have an.
And for the president to.
Just remind everybody we have a
hard stop at three so we've got
three more let's go to
Representative small and
representative that person.
Thank you very much madam chair
I'll be very brief madam chair
first I just want to make a few
statements.
I think it's three out madam
chair madam secretary thank you
and and you have an incredibly
challenging job
Madam chair madam secretary
three out of your for fund
balances have grown
that's from.
November nineteen to November
twenty and there is there is
significant fund balance in
those four different funds some
very large second Madam chair
madam secretary.
There is thank you is what
roughly for almost five point
one million dollars of transfers
in FY twenty there were some
rivers and as you mentioned
Madam chair madam secretary
there seems to be significant
fluctuation at a very high level
and again understanding and in
knowledge and that the challenge
that you have
Third madam chair madam
secretary not to go into now
over the ensure leading up to
the session I know that there
were significant concerns with
the can corrections industry
division I also know Madam chair
madam secretary that's were the
highest funded vacancy rate is
in our it's over and R. as its
over.
Vacancies that seems to be a
particularly challenging area
So madam chair madam secretary
in the interest of time a
knowledge during the the the
very substantial challenge that
you have I think my comment
would be that the LFC analysis
and efforts to raise pay which
seems to tied directly both to
recruitment and retention to re
prioritize to evidence based
recidivism and other
recidivism reduction and other
evidence based approaches that
is very appealing and so
That but I know it's a longer
conversation but I.
I struggle with the fact that
there are these different areas
whether it's the fund balance
whether the the medical
contract piece which many
members have discussed that seem
to really point towards the
aggressive LFC approach to work
collaboratively in a very
important part of state
government.
That's it thank you very much
madam chair.
All right let's go to
Representative Anderson.
Thank you madam chairman.
Madam chairman I'll be short my
question was
Secretary secretary did I
understand that the.
Isn't population is an all time
low at seventy three percent.
Madam chair representative
Anderson yes that is correct.
Thank you for that I I guess on
I should be please.
Yes I suppose you are it does
however
make me.
Go to okay does that mean that
there is it.
That seventy three percent is
the entire system are some of
our prisons lower and some of
them higher.
Madam chair representative
Anderson certainly that's that's
definitely the case where some
facilities might be a lower
percentages than other
facilities
we discussed just in and out in
prior committees but I am a very
amount of that has to do with
the classification system I've
talked a bit about how we're in
the process of working with the
university of New Mexico on a on
revamping the system entirely
but
but I just want you to know that
we also are in the process of
making some policy changes that
we believe will have a
significant impact on the way
that we're able to manage our
budget to hopefully create more
equity of distribution of the
vacancies throughout the system
and we expect to be going live
with those policy changes in
about the next three to four
weeks.
Very good
I.
thank you for that of.
It.
Where do that and I believe this
is is we may have commented in
the last committee hearing on
this subject that
classifications and certainly
been a perennial of problem in
the prisons.
And
I look forward to your work in
the classifications just because
I share your opinion that we can
make some headway.
In reviewing.
Reviewing that going forward
madam chairman that concludes my
question thank you.
Okay thank you I don't see any
other hands up except for
Allen's offense supposed to be.
Thank you madam chair I just
wanted to clarify something with
regard to the funded vacancy
rate that was discussed earlier
that Representative Garcia asked
about I just wanted to clarify
that the FY twenty one field
position cost that is in that
table does reflect actual
overtime from the previous year
so that funded vacancy cost
generally it should have already
accounted for the cost but the
cost of over time so that
shouldn't necessarily need to be
paid for with.
Okay thank you very much I don't
see any other hand set up a
couple things I wanted to say is
I want to thank the cabinet
secretary for meeting with me.
During the interim.
We have had lots of lots of
discussions about the
classification system which
drives budget.
I don't know how much I am sure
there's quite a bit written in
one of our volumes about that
that
She did reach out to me a couple
of times and we've had a chance
so I really understand.
What they're dealing with and
where they're trying to go I
know that she's has started that
process.
independent even using the UNM
group to come back with a full
blown plan but that actually
drives a lot of what the costs
are probation is how these
people are classified in pretty
Ambiguous where it looked to me
when I when I saw the actual
intake forms of those kind of
things so it's it's it's it's
interesting and I hope that
that's going well and that we
have more to report during LESC
in the summer as to exactly
where we are.
I'm gonna go Representative
small and that I've got a
suggestion after that
Representative small for the
motion thank you madam chair of
the LFC recommended budget for
the corrections department.
Second Representative Castellano
for the second you mentioned is
there any opposition to that
motion I don't see in opposition
to the motion but what I want to
do for catch up clean up I'm
going to ask a couple of our
representatives to look at that
general fund transfer on the
inmate management and control
piece.
So a big difference there
between the LFC and exec so I'm
going to ask Miss Representative
Castellano and representative
Armstrong work but the analysts
and then I get a little bit
closer on that number.
So with that being said I want
to thank you all for good
hearing thank the corrections
department for the work they do
and thank all the panelists for
your work so I believe that
we're finished with this hearing
we've got one at three o'clock
but it's a different zoom link I
believe different invitation so
we'll see everybody at three
o'clock thank you.
Thank you madam chair.
