Representative Herrera,
Representative Little.
Representative Little.
Representative Lujan.
Represented Luhan,
Representative Pettigrew.
Representative Pettigrew.
Representative Sanchez.
Representative Saana.
Representative Silva.
Representative of Representative
Vincent.
Vice Chair Dixon.
Chairs small.
OK, great. We have a quorum, uh,
thank you, Representative
Caballero, please go ahead and
get it started and please be
brief.
Thank you, Mr. Chair and members
of the committee, I'm here to
present um House Bill 182, I'll
start with 182 1st and then we
have I bill 183. House Bill 182
relates to judicial retirement.
Providing for appropriations and
income derived from investments
to be credited to the judicial
retirement fund. What it does is
it provides incentives for
attracting and retaining of
judges by reducing the vesting
period, increasing the service
credit rate and increasing the
retirement to 100% of final
average salary, and with me I
have Greg Trujillo who's the
director of PERA.
Thank you, and we stand for
questions. Great. Thank you very
much. Uh, is there anybody who
wishes to comment on House Bill
182.
OK, I don't see anybody. Is
there anyone online?
OK.
Yeah,
Uh, OK, uh, uh, Mr. Trujillo,
anything to add before we go to
the committee for questions?
Uh, Mr. Chairman, members, uh,
we're concerned about this fund
and this increases the
contributions coming in and the
prayer board stands in full
support.
Great, OK. Uh, any questions
from the committee?
Uh
OK, I, I just want to make a
note and this will go for 182 as
well. Um.
We've been assured by the
judicial branch by AOC that
they'll not be requesting
additional funding for these,
uh, which is why we're bringing
it forward today, but I want to
announce that for the committee,
just so that we're all on the
same page. Uh, we'll go now for
the motion for the rea.
There's a motion to pass, 2nd
from uh Vice Chair Dixon, uh, is
there any opposition to that
motion, seeing none?
do pass on House Bill 182, 183.
Thank you, uh, Mr. Chair and
members of the committee, I'll
now proceed to 183, and this
bill is relating to magistrate
retirement, also providing for
appropriations and income
derived from investments to be
credited to the magistrate
retirement fund, and with that
we stand for questions. Great.
OK, thank you, uh, has anyone
woken up online?
Not that we're asking folks to,
OK, uh, oh.
No.
OK, uh, Natt Dean, go ahead,
please. um House Bill 183.
Excuse me, I thought that you
meant, is anybody awake
at night
yes, I am, I am, I am still
awake, but I haven't quite
gotten to the bill yet, so you
just roll and I'm catching up.
Thank you,
hey, you know, those of us who
stick around like this, you
really know we care. That's
right. We appreciate that. OK.
Uh, we're gonna go now.
To the committee.
I don't see any questions from
the committee, ranking member
makes a motion for a due pass.
Thank you from Representative
Vincent, any opposition to that?
Seeing none.
We've, uh, we have a due pass.
OK, uh thank you members now.
Um, we're going to ask for a
tabling motion, uh, in
consultation with the uh sponsor
for House Bill 387.
34 347, uh, we've got a motion
from Representative Sanchez
second from ranking member
Chatfield, any opposition to
that?
OK
Now we're gonna go to Senate
Bill 101 as amended.
Oh, all right, uh, we've got our
ranking member, um, go ahead
whenever you're ready, and
members, uh, Marty reminds us
that uh if you turn all the way
in the back of the book here, we
have our Senate bills.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Mr. Chair,
members of the committee I bring
before you tonight, Senate Bill
101. Uh this bill raises the cap
on livestock fees. It does not
raise livestock fees. It raises
the cap on the fees, and with
that I'll allow my expert
witness to.
Golden Lieber.
Good evening. Um, I'm Belinda
Garland. I'm the executive
director for the New Mexico
Livestock Board, uh, Mr. Chair,
members of the committee, thank
you for sticking this out with
us today. I appreciate the time
this evening. So, um, we are
asking that the caps that we can
charge for our fees be increased
to the amounts proposed in the
bill, uh, in order for the fees
to actually be um raised in our
board has to do that through the
rulemaking process. So there's a
30 day public comment period.
There's the public hearing, so
all of the producers from around
the state would have time to
comment on the, on any fees that
are increased. Um, these are in
very small increments for um
cattle and horses, these fees
can only be increased 10 cents
annually for sheep and goats,
they can only be increased 4
cents annually. So they are in
very small increments, and we
also um we canvass the state
this past summer. We spoke to
lots and lots of producers. We
went to meet.
meetings, um, for about, I would
say 90, 95% of the state we got
full support on this bill. On
the other 5%, um, there were
some concerns that were brought
to us. We addressed those
concerns with the seasonal
grazing that's kind of added in
at the bottom of the bill.
What that does is if I own
livestock in one district, and I
cross over into another
district, then I pay 50% for
that inspection rather than the
full amount. Um, it cannot allow
for ownership change. It has to
be the same owner both
directions, so, um, we believe
that helps all producers across
the state whenever they're just
having to cross district lines.
So, just as a reminder, this
agency was created by the
producers back in.
1897, as the cattle sanitary
Board, uh, they keep sheep
sanitary board was created 2
years after that, they merged
together in 1967 as a New Mexico
Livestock Board, so this agency
has been around before New
Mexico was the state and the
producers created this agency in
order to protect it from loss of
theft and disease. So with that,
we stand with the questions and
um our deputy director is here
as well. He might want to make a
few comments.
If the just deputy director Sean
Davis, I don't have any
comments. Thank you very much,
uh, director. Thank you, Deputy.
Thank you again for taking,
staying with us. Uh, OK, we're
gonna go now to uh public
comment, anybody wishes to make
comments.
Please come.
Oh, and we've got one right,
yeah, we're trying to.
Very briefly, uh, thank you, uh,
Mr. Chair, committee members for
hanging in there tonight. Tom
Patterson.
Uh, President-elect New Mexico
cattle Growers Association and a
cattle rancher from Catron
County. I pay these livestock
fees.
This board is charged with
protecting our cattle from theft
and from protecting them from
disease. They do their job. It
is a model agency across the
United States. We are proud to
stand in support. Cattle growers
don't want to pay more money for
anything, but we support this
fee increase because we know
that if we're gonna get the
quality of service that we've
been accustomed to for over 100
years. We need to pay our share.
We stand and support, and we
urge you to do the best. Thank
you. Great. Thank you very much,
uh, Mr. Patterson. OK. Uh, any
comment online?
See, uh, go to the committee.
Any questions?
Uh, well, I don't, yeah, great,
uh, I don't see any questions.
Um, and we'll go for the motion.
OK, there's a motion to do pass.
Uh, by Representative Duncan,
seconded by Representative
Vincent. Is there any opposition
to that motioning no.
Great. We've got a, you have to
pass. Thank you very much to the
ranking member.
Representative Gonzalez, please
come on up and I know there's a
number, uh,
Of folks on this committee who
are part of your legislation as
well.
OK.
OK. Excellent. If you can uh
tell us the bill and then uh if
you can read us the amendment,
uh, and then we'll go from
there. Um, thank you, Mr. Chair.
Thank you. Uh, my bill is House
Bill 4433, um, and I do have an
amendment, um, number 231703.1.
Great, uh, can we have a motion
a second for discussion on the
amendment.
OK. Uh, we'll, uh, take that
motion from Representative
Garrett saying by Representative
Duncan, um, can you explain the
amendment
strikes language, um, throughout
the bill, but essentially it
removes the appropriation. Um,
it also removes, um, the
deadline of the study, um,
higher education department has
agreed to do the study without
the amendment, um, you know,
with the understanding of, you
know, taking out those strict
requirements. They have agreed
to work with the departments.
in this study to get it
completed. Great, thank you very
much for that explanation. Uh,
any questions on the amendment?
then, can we have a motion to
adopt the amendment.
It's been uh moved by
Representative Brown, saying by
Representative uh Chatfield by
the ranking member, any
opposition to that motion,
seeing none.
OK, uh, now let's go to the
bill. Anybody here who would
like to comment on House Bill
433 is amended. Please come on.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman and
members of the committee. I'm
Scott Gorginski, deputy
secretary of the New Mexico
Department of Workforce
Solutions and just one statement
that the department is in
support of this bill. We think
it could improve the
effectiveness of career and
technical education, and I been
here uh can be available for
questions if you all have any.
Thank you. Great. Thank you very
much, Deputy Secretary.
Uh, is there anybody online who
would like to comment on House
Bill 433 is amended?
Seeing none, any questions from
the committee.
OK.
Awesome. OK, OK, we've got a
motion from Representative
Sanchez, uh, second from ranking
member Chatfield, uh, is there
any opposition to that motion,
Singan.
We have a due pass unanimous.
Also, I want very much thank
group Brown and so many others
for their hard work on CTE.
Great to see the partnership on
this and exciting to see that
coming forward. OK, members, uh,
that concludes us for tonight.
Thank you all for taking extra
time. We're gonna try to take an
evening off this week and this
way we got our work done, so
thank you, we're adjourned.
