Anderson.
Representative Armstrong.
President.
Representative Pandey.
Representative vanity.
Right now wrong list Sandra
hello yes yes yes I'm sorry
expanding.
Okay I'm sorry.
Let me start again.
Working.
Representative Allison.
Here.
Representative Anderson.
Representative Armstrong.
President.
Representative Franco here.
Representative Castellano.
President.
Representative Chatfield.
Crowder.
Here.
Representative Dixon.
Where.
Representative Garcia.
Headed up here.
Representative Hochman Vigil
here.
Representative Lane.
I am here.
Representative Lotta.
Representative a lot up.
Representative I do not your.
Representative Sweetser.
Here.
Representative Trujillo.
I share small.
Here.
Madam chair.
Good afternoon everyone I'm
going to call the house
appropriations and finance
committee to order and you have
the information in front of you
as to the agenda of this
afternoon and we should have all
the information to each one of
the committee members and I'd
like to start of course with the
analysts and then we'll go to
the presenter of each one of the
various agency because what I
have before may first as the
Supreme Court so we need we need
the analysts and then we'll jump
into the our presenters for the
Supreme Court.
All right.
Madam chair members of the
committee my name is Amanda Dick
Peddie fiscal analyst for the
legislative finance committee
I'm joined by Brian Chavez the
analyst for the executive for
these really small agencies
we're just gonna alternate
presenting them so I'll go ahead
and begin with the Supreme
Court.
Madam chair would you like me to
share my screen with a different
sheet or hold off.
We can go ahead and share the
screen with that and then you'll
take that down it comes time for
the of presenters if they've got
something they want to show so
go ahead really great.
All right.
Screen.
Okay.
So this report is pretty
straightforward the LFC and
Executive recommendations for
revenue are identical keeping
the Supreme Court flat with the
FY twenty one operating budget.
For the basic the LFC
recommendations person funding
is slightly below FY twenty one
levels LFC analysis shows the
agency has a significant funded
vacancy rate of eight point nine
percent.
The executive recommendation
applies a lower vacancy rate
decreases person funding to the
court I about two hundred
thousand dollars.
The executive recommendation
increases the other costs
category of by a hundred and
eighty nine point five thousand
dollars for improvements to the
Supreme Court law library.
Finally for performance LFC and
exec analysts agree on all
performance measures and
targets.
And I can go ahead and turn it
over to you I believe we have
more clerk of the court for the
Supreme Court and chief justice
Michael Carroll and I will stop
sharing my screen all right.
Mr Mayer are you going to give
the presentation.
Good afternoon madam chair
members of the committee I will
I will participate The
presentation I I know the Chief
Justice Vigil was planning to be
here and to vote I I don't see
him on the screen but I will
wait for just a second to see if
you checks and if not I'm ready
to begin madam madam chair this
is Michael B. O. I am president
the this for some reason the
short my name is already
happened Sardis here it twice
right yes but I am here I just
want to give a brief
introduction that say it's a
pleasure and an honor to appear
before this committee today and
Today and I'd like to thank you
for the opportunity to present
the budget of the New Mexico
Supreme Court to this up to this
members of this committee for
fiscal year twenty twenty two
with me is our party peppered
the administrative director of
the office the minutes of the
administrative office of the
courts and enjoy more on the
chief clerk of the New Mexico
Supreme Court says the executive
and the LESC recommendations are
are identical I would doubt that
discuss those propose that we
not discuss those items and much
you wish to and instead
concentrate on the increases but
the Supreme Court is requesting
over and above those recommended
amounts and for that purpose
with your permission I would
turn it over to our Mr Moyer.
All right Mister boy are these
going to be and specials and
supplementals
in that presentation also you go
ahead and do it now but I just
want to make sure we know we're
we're in the budgets this will
be heard.
Thank you madam chair members of
the committee now we do we do
not have in the Supreme Court
does not have any specials or
supplementals for this request
it would just be seeking a
restoration of base budget base
budget funding that was cut
during the last special session.
We are requesting approximately
two hundred fourteen thousand
dollars.
Crease to our base budget.
we are requesting and not just
because it was appropriated and
then cut in the special session
but because it is of a critical
need for us for the operation of
the Supreme Court law library if
I may I'd like to just briefly
explain why that is and also
address
something that Amanda touched on
with regard to our vacancy rate
as you all know Supreme Court
law library became part of the
supreme court's business unit if
you well a few years back and we
consolidated into one unit for
appropriations the Supreme Court
law library is only one of two
public public libraries in the
state the other is of course the
UNM law school library in
Albuquerque that's geared
primarily to their academic
conditions constituency which is
of course appropriate so the
Supreme Court law library is
really the only institution of
New Mexico with a primary
mission of serving not just the
judiciary but all of state
government we regularly receive
very many research request
process request for assistance
from throughout state government
we also provide assistance to
the New Mexico bark throughout
New Mexico and the significantly
the general public the Supreme
Court all ivory is the only law
public library in the state to
provide lending privileges to
the public as well as online
research tools which is a
particularly critical service
because of the ever expanding
number of self represented
litigants and and really this
report law libraries their
primary resource for research
materials.
The funds that were requesting
really is focused on serving
poor law library operations and
I would I'd like to focus
exactly on what we wish to spend
that money on it is to restore
the print legal research
resources in the Supreme Court
law library we provide both
robust online.
Legal research tools and of
really an excellent print
collection.
The online of course is very
important especially currently
when so much is being done
remotely but one thing that I
always want to emphasize and
remind everyone is that online
is not a replacement for print
there are many many things that
the Supreme Court law library
provides in the way of legal
research tools that are not
available through the online
resources that we provide.
And president is important not
just at the moment when someone
asks for a particular
Piece of material but also
historically long term the
collection that we maintain for
research over the years over the
last couple of years we've
engaged in an extensive re
examination of what the law
library does what it provides
for a period of time we
suspended renewing our print
subscriptions many of our print
subscription so we could analyze
what was needed and what was not
the result of that has resulted
in us coming back to some extent
already the the funds that we
would devoted to maintaining our
print collection so the money
that we're asking is really for
those things that we see as
critical moving forward to
provide a really robust and
helpful print collection for all
of New Mexico.
If we were not to receive
funding the funding request for
this this year it's it's a need
that does not go away and grows
with each year because at some
point we would of course come
back next year if we were not
the if you were not granted
these funds and ask again for
you to consider the
appropriation request so we
could.
Resale more print publications
but at that point we would be
and a whole because we would
need to purchase print materials
to bring the collection current
and then maintaining an ongoing
annual subscription that's in a
not show with these funds are
intended to do.
as Amanda noted we have had
significant vacancy savings in
the last couple years and in
fact in this last year we use
much of that they can see
savings to buy back to bring
current our pre collection
because as I told you we we
suspended print purchases for a
while but we re evaluated what
we were doing and why library
once we became convinced that we
needed to maintain our pre
collection and focused on the
most valuable pieces of that
collection to go forward we
needed to bring it current so we
use the vacancy savings to do
that I would like to continue to
be able to keep our print
collection current the reason
that we had so much vacancy
savings as you I'm sure all
aware we had a historic
transition on the Supreme Court
and then of course we have the
the pandemic on top of that with
the transition we've had an
eighty percent turnover in the
justices on the court and that
not only means that the justice
transition created vacancy
savings but even a longer term
vacancy of the staff that
supports the justices so while
we we could we had a lot of
vacancy savings the last two
years I do not foresee that we
have no intention of that
happening going forward I think
if you look historically we've
always reverted very little so
we don't see it as a possibility
to maintain this print
collection through vacancy
savings in the future we are
currently recruiting and filling
all of the vacancies that we
right now have we have three in
the library in particular that
have been especially difficult
to fill during the pandemic
because the special education
and qualifications of folk the
state law library director in
our library reference attorneys
need generally need to be
recruited out of state because
as I said this is the only aside
from UNM while.
However this is the only law
live Public Library the state so
we've tended to to of.
Higher from out of state for
those positions unless we're
able to find a local Canada and
given the pandemic and travel
and all of that that is part of
the reason why we've had an
unusually large vacancy so we we
are hopeful that all of this
will normalize we are through
our transition as far as our our
courts staffing is concerned and
we are hopeful that we will
return to normal in person
appropriations
In the new fiscal year and for
that reason we are requesting
this restoration of the funding
some of the funding that was cut
in the last special session to
enable us to do that and so that
that is really complete my
presentation on the course stand
ready to answer any questions
that the committee may have
thank you.
Already I I do have a question
When they LFC analyst asked if
there's an eight comments from
the DFA analyst are there any I
didn't see a and come up for any
comments since it's exactly the
same amount.
I don't madam chair no comments
from me okay that's what I
thought I appreciate that I also
wanted to ask does everybody
have the right person services
and employee benefits County
what I have attached to my head
high level is to eighteen but
we're looking for two sixteen
they're very have to sixteen.
This.
Here is I know it was emailed to
us I just wanted to make sure we
have the right help sheet here.
And I wanted to make clear
before I go to questions of the
committee this
All up.
Budget for twenty one.
Representative five percent cut
that was across the board for
every agency loss special
session.
Thanks.
Yes I'm sorry madam chair
members the committee that's
correct okay that's what we need
to know all righty so let's go
to committee members we've got
Representative Hochman Vigil
that Representative Crowder so
go ahead Representative.
You very much madam chair thank
you for your presentation Mr
Moran nice to see you again if
not electronically just have a
couple quick questions for you
has the Supreme Court library
been open since the pandemic
began.
Yes the the Supreme madam chair
members of the committee
Representative Hochman Vigil yes
library has remained open
throughout the pandemic for a
period of time we did not.
Provide access to the online
public computer station until we
get the get the necessary
protective equipment and there
we have remained open throughout
that now is back open to one one
visitor at a time and we have
continued to provide resources
remotely as well.
Great thank you very much and
madam chair Mister Moore at went
to in terms of the print
resources they can't that are
not necessarily available
electronically can you give me a
few examples of some of those
resources that you have
identified as being particularly
important.
Sure
so it would be a number of
loosely Services treatises for
example and and what we need to
do is we need to maintain them
across a broad broad variety of
law we never know.
Who is going to be asking for
what types of resources so for
example a couple years ago we
would not have expected the
amount of of requests for
a treatises loosely Services
form box comparative analysis
of publications and public
health law for example or for
example some items would be
accessible online for some users
who have an enhanced online but
would not necessarily be for
others for example are live the
fave criminal treatises on
criminal law search and seizure
law those are accessible through
some subscriptions on online but
we also need to have several
copies of hardline part back in
the library for request but by
the public.
Thank you very much I madam
chair Mister Mayer that it's a
good segue to my last question
which is how often are these
print resources visited by
members of her public verses say
are you know Supreme Court
clerks and people inside the
building.
Daily we have regular traffic
into the building to look at and
to check out some things are not
we don't something's we don't
check out to anyone a depends
what it is but we do have daily
visits from the public but and
public meaning truly the general
public we do have attorneys
outside attorneys who will come
and regularly as well but it's a
daily occurrence it's been last
during the pandemic that even
during the pandemic and this
because we're the only resource
for the.
Thank you very much madam chair
that concludes my questions.
Ready Representative Crowder.
Thank you madam chair and thank
you for your presentation.
As I look in our volume three I
noticed you reverted two hundred
and forty three thousand
dollars.
Back to the general fund and I'm
wondering was that monies that
you reverted not eligible to do
a bar in in use it for your
needs at the library.
Correct Madam chair
representative that that's
correct part of it was tiny and
not able to use some of that
funding before the end of the
fiscal year part of it was
earmarked for capital
appropriation that we concluded
our project reverted the money
and so it was limited for that
and as I said we we did have a
large vacancy we tried otherwise
you know use that money
responsibly but not spend it
just to spend it and so that was
our reversion for FY twenty.
Appreciate that and I noticed
that you did not have any
transfers out of your PSEB
account.
For other purposes the only
noticed I saw was the transfer
or the reversion itself so I was
just curious I thought it must
not have been eligible or
something's thank you madam
chair thank you for your
presentation more.
All right do we have any other
questions for many the other
committee members.
S. C. here I.
Don't see any other hands up I
do want to excuse me
representative small.
Thank you madam chair thank you
very much Chief Justice thank
you Mr Moya.
That I just wanted to ask
briefly madam chair Mr Moyer
Mister Chief Justice.
First if there is.
And expectation that post
comment
there will be an increase in
utilization of the digitized
resources that is madam chair
Mister Maria do you anticipate
making available online some of
the resources that you detailed
to in terms of the treatises and
others are well those remain
available madam chair Mr Moya on
the a if folks are able to come
physically to Santa Fe to see
them.
Madam chair representative we to
the fullest extent possible and
not from the funding or choice
standpoint but haven't made any
and plan to continue to make of
all the resources that can be
made available digitally to
continue to do that we in fact
expanded in one particular way
electronic resources from some
of our legal research vendors
electronically there's no plan
to cut back on that in any
regard once the pandemic is over
but I think I'm pretty savings
and we've pretty much maxed out
the extent to which there are
things available that we can
actually provide electronically
many of the some of what I'm
talking about is is.
Having print available in
addition to making it available
digitally and some of it is only
available in print.
Okay thank you very much madam
chair thank you Mr Moya I guess
my final question madam chair Mr
Moyer
The.
I think the you do realize that
honing in on the focus is that
two hundred and fourteen
thousand dollar cut during the
special session As You homed in
on and that's not a question
that was just restating what it
and said thank you thank you
madam chair thank you Mister
white thank Mister Chief Justice
all right I want to thank the
committee for their questions of
the presentation today and I
just want to make sure that
the shortfall was being asked to
be restored as a result of the
automatic five percent cap that
the agencies took last year and
we have in many of the other
budgets at restore that
primarily because we have the
recurring revenue come back
down.
Now because this is a unified
budget it's it's developed a
little bit different years so
I'm going to move to our vice
chair for a motion.
Thank you very much madam chair
madam chair I would move the LFC
recommendation with the
restoration of the two hundred
that five percent two hundred
fourteen thousand dollar June
twenty twenty special session
cut.
All right with for the motion is
there any we need a second to
that motion the second the chair
okay we have a second for
Representative Castellano is
there any opposition to that
motion.
We have one is that
Representative Crowder isn't in
opposition or questions or Madam
chair of a question go ahead go
ahead.
Madam chair as I look at the
Page I want.
Your your muted.
Randy.
Your available eyes wander on to
the wrong page.
Okay but yes I did I probably
thank you no problem we have a
motion and a second is there any
opposition to that motion.
Check let me scan the screen
here.
Any opposition so you have a
motion with the committee
approval thank you very much I
don't have a gavel or anything
so this is what the gavel would
look like.
Thanks everybody let's move on
to the next and let's move on to
the next HSD.
And we're gonna start with the
DFA analyst and that is for the
New Mexico court of appeals.
Good afternoon madam chair
members of the committee on HSD
to fifteen court of appeals.
On both the LFC and executive
recommendation keep general fund
revenue flat with FY twenty one.
The LFC budgets a thousand
dollars in other revenue from
court fees consistent with FY
twenty one that the executive
does not include on both
recommendations increase the
potential increase the personal
services employee benefits
category over FY twenty one
levels to improve staff attorney
recruitment and retention and I
both analyst came to consensus
on performance measures and
targets
imagine with Amanda would you
like to add anything.
Members.
All right so let's have The
presentation from the court of
appeals.
Good afternoon madam chair
members of the house
appropriations and finance
committee it is an honor to
appear before you I'm very sorry
it's not in person and I as I
see some new faces who may not
be familiar with me I'm here
with mark Reynolds he's our
quarterback I'm the chief judge
of New Mexico court of appeals
and this is the second time I
have appeared before this
committee the first time was
last year.
It proved the very request we're
making today of course we wind
up losing in the in suing cuts
the court of appeals our base
budget request incorporates a
two hundred and one thousand
dollar increase request that is
absolutely critical to our
function and let me explain the
court appeals resolved nearly a
thousand cases each year which
is by far most of the appellate
cases here in New Mexico and
like the Supreme Court.
All.
Four of judges.
and we're down another judge
right now is Justice truly
Vargas was just sworn into the
New Mexico Supreme Court we've
lost her.
Back in twenty nine.
after all this program we had a
historic through pooling
resources that included in.
Our staff through our staff
attorney group is incredible at
sixteen Act phone of our court
and they are measurably
underpaid in relation to staff
attorneys in other government
positions within the judiciary
and consequently we've lost over
the last since twenty fourteen
we've lost twelve of their staff
attorneys so we asked last year
and were awarded.
A hundred and twenty four
thousand eight hundred dollars
not not for races so much is
simply to attempt to equalize
the pay of the staff attorneys
here in our quickly done such an
incredible job for us I am will
be called upon to do so again as
we again are in the process of
advertising and will soon have a
new a new I can't a judge
appointed to our court our staff
attorneys have have stuck with
us over the last couple of years
despite these findings from the
national center for state courts
which undertook a comprehensive
review of our courting concluded
that adequate compensation for
staff attorneys is a systemic
problem and to limit further
departures and continue
attracting qualified applicants
we must address the comparative
low salaries so I request you
no different than it was last
year and that we were awarded I
only go into this detail because
I see the new faces on the
committee and I know that some
of your is familiar with our
court given our middle position
within the judiciary but the
bulk of cases that we do in the
fall of cases the public I
expect just resolved each year
is only achievable by virtue of
our incredible states are
incredible staff attorneys so we
ask again for that which was
given last year and that is
funding simply to bring our
staff attorneys even with other
people with other judicial
position so that we don't lose
them hi Mister Frank.
But also in twenty eighteen
approved the use of senior law
clerks walk is is many of you
may know drafted bone the
Indians before judges get and as
you staff attorneys in each
judge of the court has to those
if you when we when we can get.
A law clerk for the little bit
of experience there's a notable
difference in what they can do
in terms of attracting cases for
us so we would like funding and
again last year we were awarded
funding in the amount of sixty
thousand dollars to to.
Our senior law clerks and then
the last thing we thought that
it was given last year with
sixteen thousand dollars to
replace desktops it'd been on
our past for for far longer and
we're we're expected in in we
need to as you so many people
working from home port in
through the.
Sorry.
For that.
This is not quite the.
For me
thank you very much judge
Tennessee this is about I heard
I thought our deduction.
Sorry judge can you hear me.
Hi.
You were cutting up with second.
Okay thank thank you thank you
very much
judge Hennessey I think we're
having a little bit of
That kind of cutting in and out
was happening a little bit
perhaps is is you conclude
and and I will try if you want
to try I don't know if it your
Internet judge or or or where it
is but if it persists maybe.
we can cut off the video and try
to just go audio when we going
to questions but sorry for the
interruption.
Certainly I didn't I wasn't
aware that my internet looks as
solid as it always does and I
soon from here.
Quite often I and I don't know
if there's anything that I need
to repeat that I that I that I
said before other than that the.
It defines that we've asked for
we've we've talked for a very
long time time and we're very
pleased to be awarded those last
year and a learning our staff
that we have been successful
with the high point in my tenure
as the chief judge so far so it
was a it so we're asking for it
again because it's so important
to the long term function of our
court so with that I I I'll take
questions and and happy to
repeat anything that didn't come
through clearly thank you
Representative for awarding me
that at absolutely thank you so
much judge now we're gonna go to
questions
from committee members
In everybody an extra second or
two and to get out okay our
first question is going to come
from Representative at a.
Thank you.
Mr vice chair thank you judge
and the state I'm just curious
how much does a a staff attorney
what is the current salary and
and where would you like to take
them to.
So there's a sliding scale not
all of our staff attorneys make
the same amount of money there
some of them that have been here
longer than needed to do better
but I would ask for our court
clerk mark to step in because
maybe he's a little more
familiar with an average forty.
Yes Representative and Mr chair
this is mark Reynolds and the
clerk of the court in the court
of appeals and chief judge
Hennessey is correct that is a
sliding scale depending upon
experience a number of years as
an attorney on average I would
say you'd be in the low
seventies thousands for a staff
attorney at the court of appeals
the where we'd like to take them
varies depending upon their
experience so there's not one
number that would go to all of
the staff attorneys our
supervising attorneys in our
chief attorney last year
developed a system to do a fair
equitable distribution any funds
we got depending upon experience
so on average I think you see
staffs staff attorneys maybe
increasing very roughly
about five thousand dollars but
it's very wrote some will be
higher than that in some of the
lower depending upon where they
are and experience scale.
I think you are thank you Mr
rounds I appreciate that not
thank you Mr chair I guess I get
to know what is what is the
comparable wage for attorneys in
the private sector of with the
same
years of experience.
Madam chair members of the
committee the private sector.
Your would be altogether
different we would expect to
tourney's to make substantially
more money in the private sector
in in we're not seeking to
equalize with money that can be
a private leave is because of
course there's many reasons why
people choose to serve that that
the state and the courts what
what has been such a source of
trouble for us is that our staff
attorneys don't measure up to
other publicly positions staff
attorneys and that's why we lost
them in and we've lost them I I
I personally know of
circumstances where we've lost
them which raises in the ten
thousand dollar range and it's
hard I think for for a staff
attorney that loves their job
here but that that has to look
you know down the line if it's
in there can your as as a state
employee in the budget to making
more money so we've lost people
we did not want to lose and and
we we we were very fortunate
very fortunate we haven't lost
anyone in the last couple of
years and I think part of that
is art that the receipt are
consistent effort to try and
equalize them with with
similarly situated judicial
staff attorneys but
you know we were we we we're
we're back again this year
emphasizing the importance to
that to this body because it's
just so critical to our
function.
I hope I answered your question.
Mr chair yes she did I I just
want to say I'm on your side and
I know that I know the same is
true for judges I know there's
severely underpaid and is
something.
He needs to reconsider thank you
very much thank you very much
Representative and.
Thank you very much judge next
we're gonna go to
Representative Dixon.
Thank you Mr chair and our.
Judge Janice C. thank you very
much for your presentation I was
wondering and I apologize if you
covered this and I missed it but
the you the court of appeals did
make an impressive decrease in
the number of cases that had
been awaiting review and I was
just wondering if you anticipate
continued progress in that
regard thank you very much madam
chair members of the committee
and Representative Dixon we are
working very hard to continue
the the system that we have
established to Iraq Kate that
backlog it was that it was a
terrible place for us to be in
but it was also not entirely
unpredictable we lost judges
with decades of experience
are sometimes months apart from
one another and and then we we a
number of appointees then came
to the court in as they were
getting up and running they did
not prevail in elections so we
had not just the number of
judges to turn over that there
are seats on the court but we
had numbers of turnover with in
those seats so combine that with
the staff of Turkey's we lost
and we simply work in a position
to succeed are we've got our
wheels under us now I mean we we
certainly bemoan the loss of
judge Vargas although we're
certainly happy for the supreme
court's Gaynor for it is another
vacancy though that we have to
fill and we have to staff.
In in we have their their
learning curves in this job in
your your high learning curves
in that that the job that the
staff attorneys do which is why
we're so dedicated to trying to
keep them we do anticipate to
continue our success
representative to answer your
question directly I pay
attention to it everyday in my
role as the chief judge and it's
critical to us I have a list of
cases that have been in the
court the longest and we
prioritize those cases in the
system that we developed to get
to where we are now incorporates
those staff attorneys more the
more than you might expect.
Thank you.
Thank you.
All right I don't see any more
of the committee hands up for
questions so I'm going to turn
to the vice chair for a motion.
Thank you madam chair I would
move the LFC recommendation.
Okay we have a motion to have a
second thank you madam chair
okay we have a motion for
Representative small second from
Representative Sweetser is there
any opposition to this motion.
Saying the motion has been
approved thank you very much
go to the next presentation
which is.
Public defenders Department
Commission and that's agency
code to AT and we'll start with
the analyst will start with the
LFC analysts first and then DFA
analysts so go ahead analysts.
All right madam chair members.
Public defender commission the
LFC and Executive
recommendations are again very
close that the LFC and Executive
recommendations for general fund
federal and transferring are
identical the LFC recommendation
budget fifteen thousand more in
the revenue that the executive
and that's just consistent with
the FY twenty one levels.
In the budget the executive
recommendation includesd seven
hundred and forty three thousand
more in personal services
employee benefits category in
the LFC and that money is
intended for new in house
attorneys and associated staff.
The LFC recommendation budgets
two hundred and thirty four
thousand more than the executive
in the contractual services
category and that is to improve
contracted tree rate in rural
areas of the state.
The LFC recommendation also
includes an increase in the
other costs category and that's
to manage increasing these costs
for public defender offices
statewide unlike district
attorney offices counties have
no obligation to house a public
defender office.
For performance analyst reach
consensus on all measures and
target.
Mr Thomas do you have anything
to add.
Thank.
All right and then go to the
Representative for the
commission.
Yes good afternoon madam chair
and members of the committee
it's my honor to be before you
today my name's Tom Strickler
the third I am the chairman of
the New Mexico public defender
commission and actually power if
you could put on the screen I
want to serve their everybody a
make up of the a public defender
commission it is a statewide
commission it has been in place
for approximately nine years now
and I've been on the commission
for the past seven years and
I've been the chairman now this
is my fourth year as the chair
as you can see are we have a
very experienced and.
A very dedicated Commission
including former speaker of the
house Ramon Sanchez former
Senate pro tem Michael Sanchez a
retired Chief Justice Richard
Boston judge Michael Vigil will
be speaking with you in a few
minutes to chairs our our budget
committee
I I will tell you the work of
the public defender's office
especially during this pandemic
has been tremendous but the
number of hours that are being
put in and the stresses are
almost on manageable we have
lost internet to a suicide in
Albuquerque who was a big part
of the office here they survive
going through that of losing
their colleague
but it's been trying times and
as a trial attorney defense
attorney in private practice I
can tell you the amount of time
that is being spent on cases is
actually increased because of
the pandemic everybody would
think it might go down because
you're not having to go to court
you're doing everything from
your office but it actually has
gone up
but I'm very proud of the work
of our our department our
vacancy rate right now is a
little over six percent
and the entire staff in upper
management level team is
pitching in to help where we're
needed our chief Ben Bauer who
will be speaking in a few
minutes to you he he has even
taken on a case small case
slowed down and Lea County where
we've been a little bit stressed
are to try to help out as handle
some of possession of our
narcotics felony cases where I
see one of the biggest
challenges for us is whether
contract council around the
state of New Mexico
approximately half of the state
or more than that geographically
does not have a brick and mortar
law office of the public
defender and we are all rely
upon contract canceling those
have you been on this committee
for the past few years you've
heard me.
In this to you it and if we
could put on Sydney the a
picture of the map of of the
state of New Mexico with public
defenders offices you'll see
that the areas the counties in
orange do not have a dedicated
law office of the public
defender they counties in blue
do and as a result we're paying
contractors to represent
indigent clients in all of those
counties additionally in the
counties that are in blue many
times we have conflicts and a
con contract cancel will come in
in that regard the rates were
paying our contractors have not
increased very much since
realistically the nineteen
seventies and if we could put
that sheet out you'll see how.
How dramatic it is
we have a level rate of pay for
a contractor that does not
incentivize them to do a whole
lot of investigation and work on
a case imagine if if the loved
one of yours had a DWI and they
were sitting in jail and they
were awaiting a jury trial where
they could go to jail for an
entire year and you knew that
their attorney was being paid
three hundred dollars not per
hour but for the entire
representation of that case
I I I I feel sorry for that
family I feel sorry for that
defendant because that's all
that attorney's going to make on
that case and you can see on the
the sheet the juvenile cases
also include felony level cases
and then I forty for a fourth
degree felony six forty five for
third degree felony seven to a
hundred dollars for second
degree felony that carries up to
nine years in the New Mexico
department of corrections and
seven hundred fifty dollars for
a first degree felony eighteen
years to life in New Mexico
department of corrections and
imagine if you well that you're
facing life imprisonment on a
murder.
And you realize that your
attorney is being paid fifty
four hundred dollars and that
that has to go not just to
hearings not just to read search
not just to investigation but to
jury trial as well that's what
they're being paid and the
docking statement afterwards to
submit to the appellate courts
if that's necessary
it's it's it's based on a volume
business and I've said for a
long time I I think that this is
a real danger for the state of
New Mexico these long amounts
that are being paid it certainly
doesn't assist as well with a
lot of the reforms that are
going on because if you're
trying to help your clients get
out of the revolving door of.
A criminal activity
if you're not being paid up much
to represent them you don't have
the time to establish the
relationship to make that make
that difference I'm so proud of
this the HSD for how they manage
and shepherded the money that
they've been appropriated at
this time I would like to turn
the floor over to dear friend of
mine who was a District Court
judge for decades up in Santa Fe
County and he serves on the
public defender commission
retired judge Michael V. hill
thank you.
If you want to make a few
comments go ahead please German
Lundstrom and members of the
committee thank you for allowing
me to address you on our budget
I chaired the budget committee
for hello PED.
And I wanted to our.
Emphasize that we have had a
very good working relationship
with the legislature in the last
number of years
And I think since we became an
independent commission we've
been able to discuss with you
the true needs of the department
and we're very impressed with
how are.
Law office of the public
defender was able to deal with
this incredible pandemic that
hit and the adjustments that
people and the courts had to
make to accommodate this
pandemic
one of the things that.
The department unlike the other
two partners in the criminal
justice system our
responsibility was to make sure
that these changes did not in
any way violate the
constitutional rights of our
clients and although it's not a
perfect system I think our our
lawyers have adjusted well to it
and I think that we're we're
being able to to represent our
people
Adequately now unfortunately and
this is sort of a heads up these
these cases that have been
postponed in these cases that
are on hold have been continued
they are not going away and the
cases that have not been filed
are not going away so god
willing when this pandemic is
Is is over with that we will.
See a huge increase in cases
coming before the court which is
why one of the things that were
asking for was the restoration.
Of the cut because these these
cases are really going to tax
our ability.
To serve our clients.
I also wanted to talk briefly
and give you
Ask you to please.
Consider the criminal reform
bills that are coming up before
you these are bills that are
really going to affect us
financially.
If.
These the cases are I I think
one of the cases calls for
reducing possession cases two
misdemeanors which would greatly
free our attorneys up to be able
to dedicate more time to the
more serious cases the murder
cases the the serious felony
cases.
And lastly.
At I want to
Remind the legislature that over
the.
The past few years we had an
agreement or not an agreement
but an understanding that our
department was not being
adequately funded now there was
a commitment to get it to try
and every effort to give us a
four percent increase for like
four years in a row to try to
reach the level of course we
know that didn't happen our
there were there were some if
the money's not there that can
happen but
I think that with we need to
emphasize the importance of
Of adequately funding our
department because we we don't
have a choice we have to provide
effective assistance of counsel
and I think our budget request
reflects the need for us to do
that so
That's that's all I have.
And madam chair we would ask now
that the floor be taken by chief
bent of our the chief public
defender of the state of New
Mexico.
All right will ask for a few
comments go ahead.
Thank you madam chair members of
the committee my name's Bennett
power in that the chief public
defender
Just for.
Echoing what are commissioners
have said the Legislature has
worked with us over the last few
years in your committee to
increase funding over the last
few years up until the pandemic
I think that if you look at the
reports are that we submit to
the LFC and our performance
measures I think you'll see that
you have made a good investment
in this department that we take
the resources that you give to
us to provide representation to
New Mexicans in criminal courts
and that we put it to the the
best use possible we're very
committed to being are you
physicians and effective and in
doing that we've addressed a
number of problems over the last
few years one of which was a
lack of lawyers in New Mexico
especially in rural areas we've
been creative in addressing that
problem by creating what we call
a geographic differentials and
paying more taking that from our
our our budgeted amounts and
paying extra to lawyers who
agreed to serve and in rural
areas and that has helped
although it has not solved the
problem of bringing employees to
those areas
the the other thing that we've
done is really ramp up.
How are recruitment retention
programs and that includes our
hiring limited practitioners
this is what students from other
states when they graduate that
we bring in we had I believe
this last year over twenty five
limited practitioners that we
brought to our thirteen offices
around the state of New Mexico
we of course higher from the UNM
law school as much as we
possibly can but the demands for
services meaning that we have to
go out of state and we've I
think developed a reputation
around the country or being a
place where lawyers want to come
and want to practice
and so we've been able to bring
in new lawyers to to kind of
refresh and do our best to.
To provide counsel and
especially in these outlying
areas.
Over the last several years
we've also done everything we
can to address our vacancy rate
and if you look at the handouts
you'll see that.
About five years ago we were at
almost twenty two percent
Baconsky right
we have been able to every year
bring that rate down and that is
from really committed
recruitment and retention and
and application of our funding
as best we can within the last
couple months we've gotten down
to a vacancy rate of six point
one percent.
And that has helped us kind of
gird ourselves frankly for what
we know is coming in this next
for fiscal year and that's what
I'll just talk about are you my
last couple minutes here is that
the code pandemic really struck
the court system hard as you
know it's for all of us in New
Mexico and the entire court
system what it did to us was
really hard as public defenders
use.
It really made it difficult for
us to be in contact with our
clients and to move the cases
forward and so while we've
adapted using the technology
using creativity we've adapted
to having to appear in court of
course by phone or by video
having to contact our clients in
jails.
By video by phone.
There has been a build up
increases and I think that in
this next in the next few months
and especially in the next
fiscal year the amount of money
which we.
Which we're going to need to
address that as the courts open
up back starting today February
one for jury trials
we will need additional money to
pay for the contract attorneys
appear monies to rate the expert
witnesses especially for complex
cases which are coming through
the system for instance the rape
kit backlog cases in Albuquerque
and a lot of the murder cases
and unfortunately seeing that
the murder rates have gone up in
Albuquerque and in some other
parts of the state
those are unfortunately our
dependence and our
responsibility to provide
effective representation so we
are asking you.
To help us get back to and in
fact better resource than we
were this last fiscal year to to
look at the needs we presented
them
to consider the increases that
we have requested for both our
staff in house and forced upon
contract attorneys and with that
madam chair and members of the
committee I am here along with
deputy city Sanchez W. for our
Randy Chavez increasing the keys
are chief financial officer and
our commissioners to stand for
any questions.
Right thank you very much when
you have questions we're gonna
start with Representative
Sweetser Representative Hochman
Vigil and Representative brown
so if you would Representative
Sweetser thank you very much
madam chair and thank you all
presenters and thank you for the
important work that you are
doing it was really refreshing
to see your vacancy rate jobs as
that have because that's
something we've been worried
about when you've appeared in in
recent years Mr clear that the
map that showed the part of the
state that doesn't have a public
defender office was very eye
opening for me I don't remember
actually seeing it quite that
starkly before but my whole area
obviously doesn't have a a
public defender office.
So that to me back to the
differences in the budget and it
it looks to me and I'm not not
even sure who the question for
really madam chair but it looks
like the executive
recommendation is wanting to
hire more full time and the LESC
recommendation is wanting to put
more contracted tourney pay in
for rural areas and my
interpreting that correctly.
Ellis.
LFC analyst Madam chair
representative Sweetser yes
that's exactly correct over all
of the recommendations the
amount is very similar but the
LFC recommendation prioritizes
that contractual category.
Okay so and madam chair analysts
thank you for that so to me
looking at that map that shows
so much of the state that is
underserved doesn't have an
actual office that would benefit
from this improve contracted
journey pay in rural area
allocation at the LFC is is
working for that correct.
I believe that is correct that
that's the differences and I the
only thing I can say is that
you're absolutely correct those
dollar amounts that we're paying
it is
it's scary and defined people
that'll take the contracts
because of the volume work it's
frightening but at the same
token I will tell you that we
are really worried especially in
the metropolitan areas and and
and especially in Albuquerque
the number of jury trials were
going to be doing and for
fortunately we have got those
vacancy rates up but it is going
to be a challenge.
For the entire department as
well as the contractors.
Thank you for that and and madam
chair I guess my my final thing
I'm trying to get right in my
head is you mentioned or or one
of the the panelists mentioned
something that Geographic
differential paying more in
those under served areas so this
allocation and the LESC proposal
would go for that right to to to
not only get contract attorneys
in the rural areas but also to
bump up to that Geographic
differential is that is that and
my interpreting that one
correctly if I may answer that
madam chair represents we Sir
actually Geographic differential
is for for our staff attorneys
in offices Blake Hobbs for
Tallis Clovis and and some some
of the other offices.
We do pay sometimes additional
monies for contractors to take
take contracts in areas that
that are hard to serve I can
also tell you that.
When we recently did a request
for proposal and started a new
contract period for contract
attorneys and we had fewer
contractors apply this time
bandits during the last contract
cycle and especially if you were
in rural areas I think this is
one of the big problems we're
going to face over the next
couple years is are really
having just being able to find
contractors who are willing to
either live in those places and
serve the communities or to
travel to Mexico.
Okay well at madam chair and and
all of you thank you because
you're doing a good job in
filling those and covering and I
know it is challenging and I I I
see it in my own court system
back home so thank you for that
and and and I I know that you
need it both areas it'll be up
to this committee I get to
decide which direction we're
gonna go but I I do appreciate
and want to compliment you for
what you've done in recent years
because it's quite noticeable so
thank you thank you madam chair.
We're ready Representative
Hochman Vigil.
Thank you very much madam chair
and thank you Mr is our Vigil
clear and our for your
informative presentation I just
I take a moment to recognize the
colleague that you lost in the
Albuquerque office use an
incredible human being and I'm
sure that was a tremendous lost
you so my my condolences for
that I I also wanted to again
underscore the issue but having
the staffing I don't know if
remember the remember me but I
helped out at the Albuquerque
office for a little while and I
remember at that time that there
was a concern with cases I think
particularly in the twelfth
judicial district are that we're
being dismissed on six amendment
and six amendment grounds
because of the the trouble
staffing that we were having at
the time of the public
defender's office so can you
tell me is that still happening.
If it if if I may madam chair
and president Papen deal the
twelfth is particularly
troublesome place right now we
have lost a couple attorneys for
instance are Alamogordo office
the number of family cases per
attorney in this is heading into
the results in jury trials is
anywhere from a hundred and
twenty to one of our lawyers has
two hundred so eight eight it's
amazing that we can make strides
in terms of hiring reducing
caseloads and then then there's
a setback in this is happened in
different offices several months
ago was Hobbs which is why
people around the state at a
moment of a local courts Senator
was Rupel step in and take some
cases and because of the ability
to appear in some court hearings
by video.
To actually taken from other
places that's just not possible
for instance in Alamogordo right
now so Representative thanks for
the question and it really
points to something that we
continue to have problems the
kind of crop up in different
places both with our contract
representation but it especially
the number of cases that we have
in comparison to the number of
lawyers.
Thank you very much madam chair
Mister Bauer my apologies to my
colleagues on the committee who
may not be years six amendments
is the right to a speedy trial
so in some instances eficaces
drawn out because the resources
issues the defendant can move to
have the case dismissed because
it you simply did not get a
speedy trial on time so that was
kind of the problem I remember
the public defender was dealing
with at the time that I was at
the Albuquerque office and the
last question I have madam chair
Mister Fowler is I mean I'm
gonna commend you for the work
you have done with the vacancies
are you pushing more to fill the
vacancies for your staff
attorneys are you focusing more
on taking at the contract
attorney positions the rural
areas or I I guess the answer
could be your working on both.
as I said before a committee
that's like asking me to choose
between my children sometimes
you know when you have such dire
need for in both areas both for
contractors and
you know paying them what is
necessary for them to actually
take the time to do their jobs
and not be donating their time
which frankly so many of them do
is important and the staff
attorneys Representative is as
you know from being a public
defender there is for almost
everyone of them there's more
work than to do then they can
really feel good sometimes going
home at the end of the day
knowing what else they need to
do for their clients that leads
to burnout turnover and
ineffective representation and
so we'd really like to be able
to operate that funding up as
well.
Thank you very much madam chair
thank you Mr after answers I
appreciate you and everything
our office does.
Ready let's go to Representative
Brown.
Thank you madam chair and thank
you for this really good
presentation I have the
privilege of I think was a
couple months ago to join Mr
clear the public defender
Commission on the video call I
think it was basically giving me
a briefing on on what the
situation is for this agency and
I was really surprised at the
the low compensation rate terms
of per case
pay for things I I did not
realize it was as low as it is
my experience madam chair is
that we seem to we may beginning
attorney statewide the
population of attorneys but and
a lot of areas the number of
attorneys is shrinking and it
makes it even harder to to get
representation
madam chair
I'm I'm really inclined to
encourage our committee to to
fund the public defender
commission to the fullest extent
that we can.
I I think they really do need it
and again there some
constitutional issues in do here
in terms of speedy trial and
and.
Presentation madam chair do a
question and this might be for
Mr Bauer we you as you showed us
with the map there are places
that do have a public defender
office but do you know sometimes
have a situation where the
caseloads are so heavy that you
also are go out for a
contractual services in those
areas is there sort of a hybrid
depending on the need.
Yes if I may in and term clear
presenting I know you've seen a
lot of this
Madam chair representative.
Thank you for that question yes
in any place with an office for
instance in Lee County and yet
Hobbs or we even though we have
an office first of all we need
to have contractors for could
complications many cases where
there might be two co defendants
are we Representative one of the
witnesses we have to ethically
said that one of those cases to
a another lawyer outside our
office and pay them in addition
there are times when we simply
have so many cases in a
particular office that we do
what we call overflow and that's
taking a certain number of cases
because we reach critical mass
because as Representative
Representative Hochman you'll
talk about we may be looking at
real speedy trial issues for
some of our clients and so we we
overflow cases are.
Two contractors to kind of
alleviate the immediate strain
our office and Mr clear you've
probably seen some of this
the madam chair just to follow
up with that we actually had a
lawsuit that went to the New
Mexico Supreme Court and
subsequent to that we had held
public hearings back in two
thousand nineteen was your two
thousand eighteen or two
thousand nineteen and developed
a case refusal protocol that is
in our rules now we we are doing
our best not to have to
use that to decline
representation on cases and I as
I said
everybody is scrambling to do
the best they can
one thing that from a historical
standpoint two thousand fifteen
we get a budget request for
ninety four million dollars at
that time our budget was forty
three million because we are
assessment was that that is what
we needed to adequately and
constitutionally represent our
clients and to make a difference
for our clients which I think
ultimately makes a difference
for all of our communities our
our level is still forty million
below that and again we may have
dramatic improvement and we felt
like we've been a good partner
with thought what the
legislature with the finances of
the state of New Mexico but I
will tell you I I'm worried
about the jury trial starting
and I'm worried about potential
overflows and problems happening
in possibly having to use the
case refusal especially and and
a couple of the districts
outside of Albuquerque
that are both kind of a critical
situations right now.
Thank you madam chair and thank
you Representative Brown.
Madam chair I also just point
out for this benefit of the
committee that the district
attorney offices are paid for by
the counties but that's not the
case with the public defender
offices and so when we see that
the least costs for the
buildings are increasing we
really need to make sure that we
make sure that adequate funding
is made available for that
that's something that's very
hard to control for.
And finally madam chair I just
have a question about the amount
of money that was perverted
in fiscal year twenty by the
publication public defender
mission this is our in our
whatever abound all units in the
previous year fiscal year twenty
nineteen reversion was only
thirty four thousand dollars but
for fiscal year twenty it went
way up to about one point three
million and I'm sure there's a
reason for that I'm just curious
to get some information on that.
And that would be for whoever
wants to answer it sure madam
chair and that we're
Representative Brown.
perhaps needs keys who is our
chief financial officer yeah it
could address that.
Thank you Representative brown
and madam chair our large
reversion that was
completed during the last year
was due in large part to comment
in the impact upon offices
around the state
between the courts being closed
cases unable to be processed the
contract attorneys and expert
witnesses that we're not
necessarily
whose services were required
during the COVID impacted our
budget greatly so unfortunately
we are we need to make that
reversion.
Madam chair and
and everyone else I I think we
are we've heard about the
backlog that's been building and
I think that backlog is about to
bloom and so I wouldn't hold
this hype reversion amount
against this agency I I think
you're gonna need every penny
they can get so madam chair
thank you so much appreciate the
time.
Thank you representative
Representative Crowder.
Madam chair my question's been
asked and answered thank you
okay all right do we have
anybody else on the list but I
would like to ask Miss agency a
question.
If not I've got a couple
questions I want to ask for
incoming attorneys.
What is the salary level for a
new attorney working for this
for this agency.
Representative the sciences to
does a lot of our recruiting
and our the with a limited
practitioners up what do you
have that number in yes madam
chair members of the committee
our brands Attorney start just
shy of sixty thousand dollars a
year.
So.
As a state employee there is
sixty thousand dollars a year
plus benefits.
Correct.
Madam chair members the
committee and of course that you
mentioned are Geographic
differential so I'm particularly
areas their salaries also
increased an additional
approximately thirty six hundred
dollars a year up to twenty
additional.
Seventy three hundred dollars a
year and that is for those rural
communities in which they serve.
So we would say that possibly a
salary can be sixty seven
thousand three hundred for
coming in okay.
And I'm just curious.
If if you if you have done the
the math on.
What it what that does salary
would be equivalent to three
hundred dollar contract case in
other words if an attorney is
only gonna receive three hundred
box to handle a particular case
did you have you done any kind
of comparison
what that would look like.
And madam chair members the
committee no we have never done
a comparison like that we do
track case assignments of course
for in house attorneys in our
contract attorneys but we have
never done an analysis like that
generally the case loads are
very diverse in that our
contractors take misdemeanors
juvenile and felony or that
specializes in felony so it's a
lot.
I understand what you're asking
for I just wanna make sure that
it's clear that a lot of times
that the cases are very diverse.
Well they're very diverse for
state employee attorneys also
for so I'm just I'm curious
about that and also
Areas about whether or not those
contractors come from the local
communities.
Madam chair perhaps I can.
Address that and just for
reference I was a public
defender contractor in private
practice before I came back to
the department so I I had some
cases primarily in Santa Fe but
not only in Santa Fe I I can
tell you that we strive to
assign contracts to lawyers who
are in the local community
because of course it's it's
easier for them it's better for
clients and it's better for the
courts to have someone local but
there are a number of
communities where there are few
to no attorneys and in those in
in those places of course we
have to assign outside and that
you know the loss of attorneys
by retirements by leaving is is
a real problem.
The country not just in New
Mexico but it is particularly
here in New Mexico the loss of
attorneys in private practice
and especially those willing to
take our contracts I hope that
answers your question Madam
what's interesting to me is when
we set up that hybrid office in
Gallup which was based on the
Aztec model the people that were
most opposed to it you might
remember this band or the local
attorneys that were under
contract.
And what ended up happening then
those local attorneys decided to
be state employees and just
moved over to the public
defender office.
I thought that was kind of
interesting and now course we
have a lot of trouble recruiting
attorneys to Gallup.
People that have law degrees
don't necessarily want to live
in Gallup and certainly
you know want to get experience
in other places.
So it's kind of a mixed bag on
this I know that the local
attorneys at least in the
communities I'm familiar with
do have the public defender
contracts it's just part of
their practice part of their
business model sometimes their
riskiest because some cases they
Might Be are involved with both
the defendant and you know the
plan and so then you've got to
find somebody else to step in
and in and cover that that that
area.
But I am curious about that
because sometimes it sounds like
it's a good idea that we're
going to set up a state office
and that it's going to be in
some ways more effective and and
and all it necessarily is not
and I I have seen that in my own
backyard.
We assisted to do a high hybrid
model where we have both you
still have the contract
attorneys out of the state
employees there but I would like
to get some kind of a report
from that office to show me how
it's changed since we went to
the office versus the contract
attorneys I mean are we and and
we don't have to look at twenty
twenty because I know it was an
odd year with COVID but I sure
would like to see what that
trend looks like.
Member this got our hand up on a
call on her but I I'm not
finished yet so Representative
Herrera you have your hand up.
I thought I saw your the yellow
hand I apologize it's it is.
No it was at by
Samson okay I I just want to
make sure everybody gets a
chance to ask a few questions
here the other question I had
that it is the comment you made
it when you first started The
presentation about the criminal
reform package and how that is
going to help public defenders
what kind of specific things
about reform package are going
to help the public defender's
office.
Madam chair members of the
committee
As judge the heel I mentioned.
It's kind of hard to predict
these things but I I think
particularly
the that there are a couple
bills first of all
the bill to develop nice
possession of drugs
would.
We change
the way drug possession cases
are charged prosecuted and
defended in many districts the
family caseloads are thirty
percent
Position that drug possession as
the highest felony charge of
thirty percent that doesn't mean
that we would lose thirty
percent of cases right away but
I think that would make a
fundamental change in yeah in
our case structure and allow us
to take the resources on those
felony cases and move them to
defend other cases I think it
would result in an overall
reduction in in the number of
cases overall misdemeanor and
felony and support is part of a
larger package to kind of find
ways to address these behavioral
and substance abuse issues that
avoid criminal prosecution I
think that would help DA's
offices the course and us are
there's also
legislation to address fines and
fees which are automatically put
on a lot of defendants and we
have to represent those people
when they don't pay the fines
and fees even if we didn't
represent them initially and so
we're back down some of our
lower level cases and also
there's a bill to addressing the
suspension of driver's licenses
for failure to pay fines or
third appear where people are
automatically they had their
licenses suspended when these
things don't happen many of them
don't know how to work can't
automatically you get their
license is reinstated address
this and so they were charged
with driving a suspended license
and that is a criminal charge we
represent.
Hundreds if not thousands of
those cases every year and
although compared to a felony
case it's not that much time
when you add them up.
Madam chair that that's a lot of
time and therefore resources
which we invest in those cases
so those are just a few of the
our reform reform bills that I
think would address our budget
and also the budgets of other
players and forces.
Okay.
what they can see right for the
state state attorneys actually
work for the commission.
Public defender commission lots
the vacancy rate for the
Attorney.
Two senses do you know what I
know over already about six
point one as of last week I
don't know what our attorney
vacancy rate is.
I madam chair and members of the
committee I am checking right
now as of today are vacancy rate
is or yes six point six percent
we have twenty nine vacant
positions.
Unfortunately I do not I can
count and get an answer within
the next maybe ten minutes I
have a list of I just need to
count which ones are twenty I
don't have it broken down
attorney and staff but I can
provide an answer shortly okay
yeah I'd like to know what the
vacancy rate is four tourney's
and I'd like to know how long
they've been vacant.
That reason I'm asking is that
sometimes these positions just
are almost impossible to fail
without having contract you know
contract back up I am.
About that I'd also like to ask
the lawyer salaries for these
incoming attorneys that's or is
at a in your unified budget.
Madam chair we are not
understood person and so we we
set those rates
Her fifty G. sizes one once
Madam Madam how we do it
obviously we look at other
agencies around the state are to
you to try and be competitive
and that other agencies are in
sometimes in neighboring states
the public defender's office.
Business sense is there anything
else that.
Yes madam chair members of the
committee we our human resources
department does follow this same
if not the a similar not the
same process CPO in reviewing
salary recommendations when
somebody's bar on to the
Department they prepare part of
it look at the next the
candidate's experience they're
relevant experience and of
course the calculated salary but
looking at internal alignment as
well and then make a
recommendation okay right yep
that would be good to know I'd
like to I'd like to know what
that range looks like yes I'm
going to have you keep looking
for him what the vacancy rate is
actually for the Attorney piece
and I'm gonna ask is there any
other questions and if not I'm
gonna turn to the vice chair for
a motion and then I've got and a
second request after the motion
so Representative small thank
you madam chair I'd like to move
the LFC but recommendation.
Okay we have a motion for the
LFC and we have a second.
We have a second Representative
Brown on that is there any
opposition to that motion.
I don't see any opposition to
the motion but what I'm going to
do is I'm going to ask prior to
catch up clean up I'm gonna ask
Representative brown and
Representative
hello two could get together and
let us know if we need to have
of additional consideration for
the person service line item
here that's a pretty good
difference well will be looking
for that recommendation coming
from yet catch up cleanup time
given the chance to really dig
into this and find out.
what the vacancy rate is where
the vacancies are how long
they've been vacant
and it's also real interesting
to see.
If these areas have the same
contractors for year after year
after year.
Sting also that so far with this
and and learning more about this
department when we were setting
up our I've read model there in
Gallup.
So we have our direction we have
our motion we had no opposition
and Cindy did you find how many
what the vacancy rate is for the
attorneys.
Madam chair members of the
commission what I have here is I
am seeing.
Nineteen.
Actually I just got an update
from our H. R. director it looks
like we have twenty one vacant
Attorney positions as of today
and he's calculating the rate
right now so I can provide as
well okay well let's hang on
while he's calculating that so.
Of the twenty nine total twenty
one of the more attorneys.
Yes that's what it looks like.
Although I.
Yes.
That's what I'm saying we do we
madam chair we do track of the
status of all our vacant
positions in which we get a
report weekly which tells us how
many positions are vacant which
ones have been posted which ones
are in recruitment
To the point that you're making
earlier that we the concern that
there are vacant positions which
are challenging to fill I think
that you've touched on it
briefly but are managing
attorney position and Hobbs's
one of those in which we've been
attempting very hard to recruit
creative ways from us for over
two years and haven't been able
to fill that position in
particular.
I'm gonna get a text message
Representative Crowder did you
have a question.
Okay.
Was given just a second here so
they can tell me what those
rates are.
Madam chair.
Yes I have a quick question.
Yes I just want to know how we
trying to attract attorneys in
the rural areas we doing some
kind of incentive to to trying
to track into rural areas or you
know trying to get him out there
because I know in San Miguel I
think of you guys have for.
It's just a question to see how
we can attract these attorneys
because I know the case in
Senegal's kind high.
Thank you madam chair.
Then it do you have a response
on that sure
can work to par response out let
me talk very briefly about staff
attorneys and then perhaps W.
Chavez could talk about that
a place like San Miguel County
where we don't have an office
and it's all contractors so I
talk about the real differential
where we pay up to seventy two
hundred dollars extra to lawyers
to come in.
The most of the lawyers that go
to these places are not from UNM
and unfortunately not from New
Mexico so we are bringing in
attorneys from out of state so I
I don't think we're really of
you know hitting our with the
ranks of private attorneys in
New Mexico to fill most of these
positions we are we are
advertising and recruiting of
two places sometimes neighboring
states but to people who want to
do trials who want to come live
in a smaller town so we really
focus on that kind of thing over
the last few years and so it's a
combination of going out
recruiting and finding them and
then painting the sector where
by the way if they were to me
just Santa Fe or Albuquerque
they would lose that rural
differential that is only for
their service in these
communities and deputy chief top
is a you have any comments
about.
Recruiting contractors.
Yes Madam chair representative
Custer I don't matter what you
in the fact that when we have
contractors in in such an area
such as the fourth judicial
district.
Once we lose those contractors
getting they're getting harder
to replace what happens is when
we have the individuals who are
from the area they are willing
to take the cases that and
remain in the area because
that's the community.
Problem is that once those
attorneys either retired or
judge positions or or work for
the state or those types of
things then they get harder to
place nine those situations this
year this last year we submitted
the proposal the request for
proposals we thought we're going
to get a a bigger increase in
people responding to the R. F.
P. from these rural areas but as
it turns out most of these
contractors want to remain in
the so and the more suburban
areas like Albuquerque and Santa
Fe New Mexico says so those
areas are easy but it's getting
more more difficult.
as we lose contractors in those
areas such as the flush
additional district.
Thank you thank you we'll do W.
N. century thank you madam chair
thank you very much Senator have
a number for us I do madam chair
and members of the committee we
actually have I was one off we
have twenty vacant Attorney
positions are H. R. director for
me were right at ten point nine
five percent on attorney bacon
sees.
Okay already well we thank you
for the information prior to
catch up clean up will be
visiting aware of Papen Vigil
and brown and see what they come
forth with inner terms of that
person line item and I
appreciate your time today
everybody let's go ahead and
move on to the next chair of the
next agency and that's the New
Mexico compilation commission
also is going to start with the
analysts.
Madam chair members of the
community agency to eight
compilation commission.
So the LFC recommendation
decreases general fund revenue
to the compilation commission by
five percent funding the agency
request the offset are to the
office of the reduction the LFC
recommendation increases the use
of fund balance and age in the
agency.
Are the executive recommendation
keeps general fund revenue flat
with FY twenty one and increased
on balance revenue by the same
amount as galaxy recommendation.
do you have for the base the LFC
recommendation funds for the
personales Services employee
benefits category.
By twenty one thousand more than
the executive to maintain FY
twenty one funding levels for
contractual services the
executive recommendation
includes forty six point nine
thousand more than the LFC
recommendation.
And both analyst came to and
consensus on all performance
measures and targets.
I'm not if you have anything
that.
Members.
All right.
Let's go ahead the.
The HSD yes good afternoon madam
chair and members of the
committee my name is Brenda
Costello the executive director
of the New Mexico compilation
commission at the compilation
commission originally did submit
its request using the fiscal
year twenty two budget
guidelines to reduce our budget
by five percent that you see in
the original request we concur
with the recommendation to
restore that meant that many for
general fund to fund our
personal services to the
commissions I and T..
Is based on two factors at very
simply gets the year over year
decline in civil action filing
fee revenue and the increase in
production publishing costs and
our lease that we expect to take
hold in fiscal year twenty to
early in twenty two.
So with that madam chair and
thank you for your consideration
of our budget request and the
recommendation to restore the to
the fiscal year twenty one thank
you.
I already isn't of Politecnico
in your board.
Yes madam chair and she is here
as well share share what's your
smiling face here she she on the
zoom solve their issues okay
Pala says why don't you get to
say something going.
You're on mute.
Madam chair it's delightful to
be able to have a little part in
the legislative process with you
all.
It is such a wonderful job that
I don't ever feel like I have to
say anything to sit here and be
proud and smile.
We all of you.
Thank you Paula for those and
new members who may not know
Paula is our long time
Legislative Council director I
know what I was elected should
already been here twenty five
years so I I don't know well how
many years total was it that you
served as our Legislative
Council director well I was at
the council for twenty eight
years and I was in my twenty
third year when I retired
all righty well and she also
makes great fudge which I
haven't had any this year I'll
point that out.
Anyway if I might be able to get
it to you.
Yeah you can throw it over the
fence but anyway we yeah we're
not a it's been an awkward very
difficult time for us as
everyone knows with this COVID
business we haven't had anybody
in the capitol so everything's
been zoom and let's go to the
committee to see if there's any
questions from the committee
about this agency.
Look at the full panel here I
don't see any I don't see any
hands up.
I wanted to mention the of
course we generally take the LFC
and and and the it's because in
this LFC recommendation rather
than using general fund they're
looking at at fund balances to
make up that difference.
Fund balance amount is a.
Almost a hundred thousand
dollars what else Brenda went to
fund balance used for is it and
how do you acquire that fund
balance.
Share the fund balance I'm
referring and frontier and we
over the years it was to stay
scale of the compilation
commission drugs when the
operating structure the statute
of for us to sell our products.
And so the the are close to
hundred thousand dollars is used
to us that when we have the
decline in the civil action
filing fee so we use that to
them Fund production costs
published you costs or as in
this instance would be without
the restoration would be using
fund balance to also fund the
new full time person that we
hired.
In last August.
Okay okay Representative so
excuse me Representative
Crowder.
Thank you madam chair and thank
you for your presentation risk
issue I I think I just heard you
say it's a non reverting fund.
But yet it shows reverted a
hundred and forty one thousand
dollars
from your budget.
Get help me connect those two
dots from seeing reversion and
hearing it's not reverted to non
reverting fund.
Yes madam chair representative
so the reversion was for first
of all in general fund for
personal services in fiscal year
twenty we were not fully staffed
we only had four FTE and so as a
result that was part of the
reversion was funded general
fund that we did not use due to
the bank and see.
And we also have a special
appropriation of that we did not
use all at that special
appropriation fiscal year twenty
and that was referred part that
was regarded as well.
I've got a little bit of a
disconnect going on up here but
out I will I it was chair a
little bit later on and your
staff I I think what I'm saying
is reversion from your from your
overall budget but we're talking
about a fund balance of the
special fund yes that maybe the
difference so.
Thank you madam chair thank you
ma'am.
Right I don't see any other
hands up Representative small
the madam chair I would move the
LFC budget recommendations.
But we have a motion and a we
have a second for the LFC all
seconded.
Okay we have a motion and a
second is there any opposition
to that motion I don't see any
so I want to thank the
presenters and of thank you for
a good discussion this afternoon
thank you.
Move on to the next one which
is.
Administrative.
Office of the courts.
HSD code to eighteen.
And we'll start with the analyst
and then we'll go to the a
presenter.
All right madam chair members
Agency CO two eighteen I'm gonna
go ahead and review the summary
for HSD and then Brian will go
into one of the programs and
will alternate here.
So overall for all funding
sources the LFC recommendation
is nine hundred ninety six point
eight thousand higher than the
executive recommendation.
The LFC recommends one point six
million or less in general fund
revenue than the executive and
about two point five million
more in fund balances being then
the executive is a plant in
general fund revenue reduction
and support increase services to
district and metro courts.
The LFC reduces general fund
revenue to AOC but increases the
general fund to all district
electric cords which released
the judiciary as a whole nearly
flat with the adjusted FY twenty
one operating budget.
The executive recommendation
decreases general fund revenue
to AOC by ten thousand dollars.
In the base the LFC
recommendation keeps FTE lacked
with FY twenty one levels well
the executive reduces FTE by ten
provisions to address a high
funded vacancy rate of
authorized but rarely filled
positions.
The executive recommendation
also prioritizes adjusting
funded vacancy rates and
maintaining general revenue to
the agency.
Right and you want to go ahead
and move on to administrative
services.
Administrative support I yes
madam chair members the
committee this is Pico five five
nine administrative support.
So the majority of the LFC
general fund reduction is taken
from the.
Administrative support program
replaced by increased budgeted
fund balance from the language
access and wore Enforcement
funds.
Our AOC also requested an
additional one point nine
million deposited from fund
balances which you Alice you
recommendation supports the
executive recommendation is not
budget additional fund on says
but recommends additional budget
adjustment request authority or
AOC to use on balances or
appropriations.
the LFC recommendation is about
two million higher than the
executive recommendation the
more majority of which is in the
contractual service category for
initiatives aimed at making
courthouse more accessible
statewide such as translation
services virtual court
navigation tool.
The executive recommendation
applies a lower vacancy rate in
the LFC recommendations
resulting in a small reduction
and the personal services
employee benefits category
compared with the FY twenty one
operating budget.
Both the LFC naked Executive
recommendations for the agency
requests to reduce have to do in
the program.
the executive recommendation
Maez additional budget
adjustment forty.
And Orlando's came to contested
consensus on all performance
measures and targets.
I will go ahead and move on to
the next program that's programs
by sixty statewide Judiciary
automation.
So for revenue the LFC general
fund revenue recommendation
which is flat with the FY twenty
one operating budget is four
hundred and twenty thousand
dollars higher than the
executive recommendation in the
basic the executive
recommendation applies a lower
agency right the programs
resulting in a reduction of
personnel funding the LFC
recommendation keeps funding in
all categories lacked and that
is for an anticipated increased
reliance on court technology in
FY twenty two due to increased
working performance again
analysts have come to consensus
on all measures and target.
Okay program because extend
magistrate court.
The LFC recommendation is
overall eighty one point four
thousand lower than the
executive recommendation of the
LFC recommendation reduces.
I'm sorry I don't have that line
then to.
And that's it reduces general
fund revenue okay.
The executive recommendation
keep general fund revenue flat
with FY twenty one and increases
budgeted fund balance by hundred
thousand over the FY twenty one
operating budget.
For the base the LC
recommendation funds the agency
requests for personal services
employee benefits thank you to
contractual services and other
cost categories coast FY twenty
one funding levels the executive
recommendation leverages
significant funded vacancies in
the program reducing the
personal services employee
benefits category by one point
six million compared with the FY
twenty one operating budget on
the executive recommendation
increases the other costs
category by just over one
million for reimbursement two
point four F. T..
And both Alice came to consensus
on performance measures.
Madam chair this is our last
program before we'll turn it
over to already is is programs
six twenty special court
services.
The LFC general fund revenue
recommendation is flat with the
FY twenty one operating budget
well the executive
recommendation it reduces
general fund revenue to the
special court services program
by seven hundred and seventy
eight thousand dollars.
The executive recommendation
includes six hundred and eight
thousand dollars and I balance
revenue from the jury and
witness funds.
In the base the LFC
recommendation keeps personal
funding to the program black
with FY twenty one operating
budget well the executive
recommendation increases funding
for person to funded agencies.
The executive recommendation
includes additional funding in
the other costs category again
for reimbursement to court for
AT T. E..
Once again performance analysts
reach consensus on all
performance measures and
targets.
Stop sharing the screen madam
chair if you want to turn it
over to director are dependent
on it I do want to turn it over
to already have them and
Let's say go ahead already we're
ready.
Did your muted.
That better.
Do you have any preference chair
by the order in which I
addressing for budgets HSD I
would like you to address the
one that matters the most and
that would be the one that said
almost million dollars so if you
would let's talk about that
hello please and then we'll go
to questions from the committee
that's sure our records services
are aware that there is a
request was R. one point four
million dollars the bulk of
which two hundred fifty thousand
dollars we'll go to pre trial
services.
and that funding was included in
house bill two last year we
would like to get back to the
state and the reason is because
are we think this program has
tremendous advocacy and we've
been you give us a funding about
nine hundred thousand we've been
spending back wrapping up
programs in two districts the
thirteenth which is Sandoval
County and the eleventh which is
San Juan County and we just
partition data on outcomes of
their will I do have I've never
share my screen before but I'd
like to try for care manager and
I'll just tell you what I would
have to I know we go ahead and
share let's see if if we make
that happen.
Work.
There were.
Can you see above that the
drought Justice additional.
We can see already okay that's
easy the market is so
You're probably familiar with
that pre trial services and our
activity there Bernalillo county
and that's going up a long time
and I can talk about that what
we do with the money
appropriated already was going
to as I said the thirteenth and
eleventh district San Juan
County in the eleventh and we
all of our we will get to the
other county leveraging and
Sandoval county will get to the
other two in the thirteenth
district which is our C. will
and legislature's.
We want to tell you is that with
your money we've got analysis of
what happened in the first few
months when we started in
February and April in those two
areas and what we found in San
Juan County is that they're
releasing eighty three percent
of the defendants who come
before courts that's a good
right not right would like to
get higher what it is early in
the program.
Yeah it is eighty five percent
which is as good as the maximum
rate is about ninety three and
the public safety rating those
who do not get arrested during
the trial period is eighty one
percent like to raise up a
little bit I have been doing
some analysis about the
Charges for which people got
arrested director dropped in to
assist with the analysis by
number we are County up six
thousand cases over year and a
half they won't while crimes or
other serious problems but we
don't have that data yet the
general Canada releasing ninety
percent of the defenders.
T. not.
And that seven percent of thank
you rate is eighty seven percent
of people do not get arrested
for any other charge which
offered while the release.
Something significant that's
this are mentioned in this chart
that I want to highlight is the
background investigations unit
it's under the heading expand
pretrial justice issue this is
something unique in the country
that you are funded so what I'll
do we have an office where we
have to trust service officers
may overnight well throughout
the day but we also work
overnight
Rep after trial reports for
judges and defendants are judges
are going to see the next day
who are getting arrested
throughout the day and
throughout the night.
Now in Bernalillo county in in
the District Court.
The district court runs has to
try and make it is for the
judges make it reports in the
morning but most of the places
in the state we really couldn't
justify having a full time
background investigations
control we centralized and
they're providing the background
investigation services for San
Juan Santa and if we get enough
funding we'll go to the other
counties in this district and
also to Los crucis million
county which is our third
judicial district enter the
sixty additional district which
is grant Hidalgo Luna counties
in the southeastern corner of
the state in FY twenty two.
What they do they are given
reports from anti I see from
Odyssey which is our system that
shows any connection to get
police that on a rest there are
reports for the judge and they
run the defendant with other
commission through the public
safety assessments will give a
recommendation based on the PSA
score whether that person should
be released on recognizance
given cortical come back for a
progressive levels of us
division the doctor back and all
of that helps us achieve the
data that reflects very well on
these programs you know they're
just in their infancy yeah so
that on the second page about.
I mean that reporting to you
before we are now also with the
funding that you providers for
pre trial having the PSA
validated and that's an
important step in the the
maturing our ability to run pre
trial services so.
I'd love to talk about how great
things are going around the
state of Qatar Services and I
answer questions about that
there really is the one general
fund.
Program which I would really ask
the committee to consider
providing some or all of the
requests funds which are not
recommended by the executive
board by LFC
We will allow this program to go
further faster in other parts of
the state last thing I want to
mention is that there was a a
large committee formed by the
Supreme Court headed by retired
justice Chavez had all three
branches of government involved
they looked at a lot of stuff
Nicolai that the recommendations
but which accorded topic to make
a little bit easier for
prosecutors to have the
opportunity to move for someone
to be decades so dangerous
persons arrested there's more
time now built into the system
hello this is charted became
that person so that the public
safety is enhanced.
The court again became someone
less that the it makes a motion
so.
Then the judges conditions
releases that person and
With that I'll be happy to
answer questions about the
request in the airport Services
program that's the big one the
next one would really like to
committee give serious
consideration to.
Okay we do have some questions
already did you want to make a
comment on anything else before
I go to questions what other
programs I I want to say when
you look at the recommendations
and you look at a house where
one seventeen which Corporation
recommendations from LFC as I
understand it that's what looks
like the.
Instructions for and I'm a
difference you can see LFC comes
out a lot of worse with him the
LFC recommendations them to DFA
at least in terms of general
fund because we're reducing
after the that was our as a
result of work with LFC by us
for us if we if we could program
some of the funds out to
significant part.
The savings in general fund be
provided for the District Court
so you'll see S. is losing about
one point six million in general
fund and the courts are gaining
about one point nine the
district the metropolitan court
and that's.
What was appropriate and is
appropriate for fiscal year
twenty to when we submitted
these budgets the state was
predicting we're going to be a
billion dollars short like we
were better off than that now
but still it's uncertain budget
times it so we're very happy to
make that trade off I think I
would urge the committee to find
that the yep the LFC
recommendation makes more sense
for us in part because the rest
of their recommendations make
more sense for the District
Court and I don't think you can
have one without the other
course you want to give me our
general fund Mego the LFC
recommendations reports that a
great but I don't want to give
me an extra two million dollars
so in enacted section were
basically flat over budget into
fund balance in the automation
were basically flat although
we're we're budgeting so fund
balance in that's.
Okay because we are making
progress on
in other areas of particularly
with the district of the
metropolitan courts getting
recommended for some increases
so that is the one our general
fund appropriation I'd like to
talk briefly about section five
passwords are to the specials
because the courts don't
generally have any of these but
as he does we don't have a
deficiency you don't have a
supplemental but we have a
number of specials you'll see
different recommendations the
only ones that show up in our
house bill two from LFC are
funded judicial salary increase
very generously accepted section
eight are you this
recommendation increase judges
hours by two percent certainly
appreciate that would supported
on magistrates security.
You gave you gave us a hundred
thousand dollars in fiscal year
twenty one four to put people in
New Mexico is to provide
security where tourists are
great and the coverages well
COVID came along and really
disrupted our ability to get
working on that we are spending
money now we reimbursed courts
providing physical personal
security in magistrate court via
recommended giving us that
there's a special the eight
hundred thousand dollars again
another eight hundred thousand
dollars for fiscal year twenty
to the original request was much
higher than the hundred thousand
at LFC did not recommend so you
don't see that in our HB one
seventeen except this language
to expand our ability to spend
some of that eight hundred
thousand in FY twenty two which
is good because we got a late
start the the the need is really
in between somewhere well we
probably won't spend all eight
hundred this year fiscal year we
but we will be more than eight
hundred next fiscal year if you
could consider funding some of
that request even though it's
the it's an LFC recommendation
and not the DFA recommendations
are not LFC recommendation
similarly we requested a special
of a million to for judgeships
that was the case we did not a
recommendation to fund the
judges in the court that's our
number one priority and you have
hello she has done that that's
in house bill one seventeen so
there's no need to fund of
projections to a special.
Request for video network
operations center in both LFC
DFA recommended that it shows up
on the LESC side in the section
five if they recommended as part
of the C. two I. T. funding
either way is fine we just
thought we will at least one of
them would be important to fund
and lastly you have your request
for five thousand dollars a
special for data exchange is a
very important data sharing
project that crosses all kinds
of agencies local and state and
we thought when we made the
request our costume FY twenty
two would be five hundred thank
you to really be about two fifty
LFC recommended one hundred
thousand dollars in section five
in that DFA recommended the
whole five hundred we would
appreciate if the committee
would consider the LFC
recommendation but increasing
it by a hundred fifty with two
fifty we get this project going
and be happy talk about why that
it changes a great program that
you should consider from those
are for three categories of us
special request that I miss the
you to consider the dressing
last week.
Request you don't see anywhere
is that the US Supreme Court
recently approved AOC to ask
that in house bill two three
hundred thousand dollars a fund
balance the Warner questions
fund be allocated for a
procreative rather for us to
purchase a facility in Los
crucis with the reading of the
study there for a long time
training the statewide a
centralized operations are all
kinds of great stuff that I
could talk about but
we would like to.
Have you graduated from great
three thousand a fund does not
general fund it's just language
allows us from other state funds
funds on hand enlighten building
which will save money in the
long run and our current rate I
think it takes six years to get
even worse which started six
years ago we will we will we
appreciate your consideration of
putting that language in the
budget so those are the four
digit budgets Administration
automation what services is or
appropriations is our match
report sorry we talked for
operations and
that into any questions chair
okay RT can you start sharing
your document so I can get
everybody on on one Mr green
hair.
Would also like to get a copy of
this document so you can send
that to staff and we'll get it
distributed I did something on
Sunday.
So hopefully you have a full
stop share Representative but
let's see.
Look at and I should marry them
almost all of my staff or or
watching a hearing so that
property is our chief financial
officer is actually online
shopping when I mess up on the
numbers and now we also be able
to help because I don't think
they're on the zoom well the
other is what we'll do our best.
Okay we have some more questions
that we're going to start with
the Representative Crowder than
Representative Dixon.
Thank you madam chair already
thank you for your presentation.
Going to start off the PSEB
calculation worksheet.
in looking at the top portion of
that magistrate courts it shows
a fifty point three percent
funded vacancy rate.
Help me understand why we're not
able to fulfill the magistrate
positions I know you touched a
little bit on a match to
security.
With that that's one of the
starkest numbers that I've
looked at all calc she's
recently can you help me
understand that place
Representative Crowder I'm gonna
turn this is that you do not
explain that it's not as bad as
it sees.
What is subjected to address
Representative promised
question.
Yes.
Our.
Chair and committee.
We have agreements with numerous
districts courts.
To reimburse them for
weren't and weren't forced the
clerks you recall on previous
years we've asked to move them
to the district courts there
wasn't enough funding to do that
so they stayed in the AOC but
they're working on behalf of the
district courts the district
courts are paying them which to
understand
so help you understand the share
system.
You have to be paid out of the
District Court for them to
approve your time and do your
evaluation.
So we have to physically move
the people in Here to the court
the court doesn't have the
funding the funding is in the
AOC so what we do is after every
pay period we reimburse District
Court for worn Enforcement
clerks.
Drug court clerks are drug court
person and also for security
personnel to do that we have to
have the money in the two
hundred category two hundred
which is salary and benefits and
they have money in salary and
benefits you have to have FTE so
it over states are vacancy those
people are being paid out of
these different funds there some
in other our other funds also
but they're not physically in
our FTE during the District
Court
I know it sounds confusing would
love to clean it all up and we
hope sometime we will be able to
but until then we have to retain
these FTEs to justify the
funding that's in the two
hundred category that we're
actually going to transfer to
the District Court because they
have the employee but they don't
have the funding and I would say
madam chair chair Representative
Crowder this problem was
resolved in house bill two last
year if you put money into the
District Court and you took it
out of us
but.
House bill one should all that
money out so we're still paying
out of workforce and funds those
people and that is because we
don't have those people that
have been in the district courts
we would love to fix of our we
didn't think the fiscal
challenges were facing were
allowed act and I think that's
still true so we'll carry them
for fiscal year twenty two as
well.
And and thank you for that
that's a difficult explanation
for me to understand it is
complex and complicated I wonder
how does that explanation tie
into
the number that I'm also sitting
in the in our books that you
transferred two hundred eighty
eight thousand dollars after
personal services employee
benefits this year.
Along with regarding six hundred
ninety seven thousand the
reversion gonna have a lot to do
COVID understand that everybody
says that but I'm I'm curious
more so about the money
transferred out of PSEB and how
does that relate to.
The explanation that I just
heard.
The crowd on the reversion
whether six hundred thousand of
act were special appropriations
that we we could spend in the in
the midst of COVID when we got
hit in March so we reverted and
we didn't try to spend a month
something else or whatever you
just give the money back to the
general fund because we weren't
able to spend it for me
published are effective enough
money left over reverted back so
that would make that the matter
reverted in various categories
for various reasons amounts
about eighty thousand dollars
which is normal that are more of
our normal reversion after the
transfer out of the two hundred.
The nurses that will address.
So when
when the winds get budgeted and
house bill two we discovered
that there was next there was
more budget putting category two
hundred for salaries
and not enough put down in the
four hundred cover the leases so
we did a transfer so that we
could right size those lines but
we did still pay all those worn
Enforcement clerks out of the
warning Forsta Fund category two
hundred it just was right sizing
the lines are the categories
that were used in the fund
budget.
And I would add madam chair and
Representative Crowder we tried
what we saw house bill two and
house bill one to change that
but we were unsuccessful when
references every first of the
leases he's talking about the
leases are forty five metric for
corporate so he's in thirty two
counties which is not quite a
nine million dollar bill that we
AOC still face.
Okay thank you
I'm I'm struggling to comprehend
all that.
Continue to work I I I do have
another question is in it has to
do with magistrates when I saw
this your authorized thirty
seven person seventeen
vacancies.
It is there any matter effort
with the courts to have a
requirement that magistrate
judges have to have a lot of
great is there any activity in
that area this year.
Our manager and Representative
Crowder no effective chief
executive order while we did
have a bill last year there
would addressed Hey for message
to differentiate them from other
judges we had some discussion
about qualifications for
magistrates not to include a law
degree that constitution says
that that whatever
qualifications you've given them
in the statute that we have
currently is what it is and and
it's a high school degree or its
equivalent and the residents in
the district thank you Mr
qualifications are required to
certify the magistrate judge's
none of those vacancies I think
currently are naturally judges's
he says you need to go to the
governorship points in their run
but I'm not aware of the
discussion about bill this
session republication as we
could we could see one that
really is a provided the
termination of will work with
whatever requirements you yes.
RT I'm gonna have to come sit
down with you and and get a
better grip on the money's
transfer through your agency
well last question has to do
with the November are you
received a two hundred thousand
Representative industries that
came in from the special session
and in our feet bill this year
you received another two hundred
thousand for four hundred
thousand.
And as the US Supreme Court
justices were talking about
needing money for a lot of
library I thought more why do we
put the money over there is not
a.
Six or library instead of just
sending it to the AOC but where
is that money being booked what
did you requests for is it being
used.
Did you requests for some
particular area can you speak to
that four hundred thousand
dollars please
our manager and we don't think
that I.
Is transferable.
Here's what I suggest.
This.
I don't know.
I'm sorry I I think David
doesn't have is on mute right
now but he will look at their
okay you're talking about your
question Mr chair and
representative for our are we
did not request the funds but
they did show up because of an
actor I think in H. B. one
times you have a general
appropriations act which we do
have nuclear act making
appropriation our branch of
government all three groups of
them it is helpful and the
language now was brought a
little bit to allow us to create
litigation expenses ready to
comment
I would request for money to go
different places but that's how
it.
I didn't really have much of a
director request the money I
have a very brief time to
discuss of that there were there
was going to be an appropriation
we have used the money for all
kinds of COVID related expenses
and we're continuing to do so
you're going to record a C. plus
a partial see signs were given
out mass we're we're doing all
kinds of things to make sure
that their courtrooms court has
state we've got a lot to keep
people from coming to the
courthouse we're doing a lot of
video and telephone all that
what's the most welcome and of
the what we purchased a lot of
the equipment and supplies four
of three to four rooms and all
of that with the these funds
that's it's
We spent a lot of money before
we got the money.
And so if it may be difficult
and we may revert a fair amount
of the additional two hundred
thousand was given in each we're
glad to have it and I ask the
court what do you need that
would allow you to make your
program students safer to
accommodate for COVID nineteen
related expenses and
We would.
Of the happy to accommodate
those requests were working on
but we are restricted to a
degree I the appropriation
language is that did you want to
add anything about the.
I'm.
You cover.
Suzanne I know that Brian is
also had his handout
Representative Crowder was
talking those that go ahead
there will go a group go to
Brian Chavis go ahead.
Thank you dear women committee
no I just wanted to say that we
are working closely with all of
the Courts we do have someone
who is overseeing that entire
process and making sure that the
court stay safe so I I I think
already covered at all thank
you.
Did you want to make a comment I
noticed you put your hand up and
Representative Crowder was
speaking
yes madam chair and this goes
back to the two hundred money
being transferred other two
hundred so the courts so when I
did their budget recommendation
I noticed they had a super over
funded vacancy rate so we had to
have the conversation on why.
Why this was happening so a two
hundred cost is for the agency
and the agency only that's what
should be appropriated in that
cost so what I did in my
recommendation is I had to move
it to the four hundred one
hundred category the other costs
that way they could transfer
that out to the courts and it'll
give on a corrected they can see
right.
So hopefully that clears up your
your question on the out of the
two hundred transfer that you
shouldn't be you shouldn't be
transferring out of the two
hundreds.
Because that's an AOC costs not
the courts cost.
Twenty one the operating.
Number for fund balance was two
hundred thirteen dollars and
fifty cents.
So my question to you is what is
actually available in fund
balance that we're budgeting.
I'm not sure I don't have the
LESC of different she properly
but I can tell you that we have
a number of funds were and
that's where the front office
building budgeted out of that
have a lot more than thirty
thousand we have a close a
million and a half or more in at
least three different forms and
that some of the funds that
we're actually I have no idea
why it would show two hundred
thirteen dollars and I'm hoping
mannerisms that can help up to
thirteen fund balance.
That.
Madam chair RT if this is
helpful the chairman's referring
to what fund balance was used
for in FY twenty one operating
budget we know that the
recommendation for five Allen's
is much higher for FY twenty two
but but gives two hundred
thirteen thousand a year what
was that used for FY twenty one.
Do you have it because I have an
idea but I'm not certain.
Then and then says that I'd like
to know what the total of all
the fund balance numbers are you
feeling feeling good.
Well that's great.
So madam chair committee let me
look up to fund balances as of
the end of the fiscal year okay
why I may have my volume right
here.
Double check.
The.
Somebody is Senate finance I
would I would tell Christine.
So
both actually sorry madam chair
I know we're.
Either one of those I apologize
any any money on.
What we get here Senator.
Okay
Thank.
I am sorry.
Okay what I have here
for the benefit of the committee
if you look at volume three.
You look at page one hundred
ninety.
And you've got the
administrative office of the
call of the Courts.
This is just the capital outlay.
Then you go to the next page on
general expenditures up at the
very top.
And it looks like the first I.
That are listed there are all
tied to this agency.
In one case for November twenty
twenty is four point one million
the other is two million the
next is two point one million
two point six million.
And then magistrates courts as a
little over two million.
AOC statewide units Jurien
witnessed Fund is three million.
So.
because we're getting some
feedback excuse.
So when I asked the question you
know what are we really looking
at in terms of fund balances for
these different
These different here you can
see.
That is pretty hefty hefty for
the for this agency.
But I'm not sure what fund
balance is being recommended to
cover what we wouldn't be
funding in general fund.
I'm not sure which one that you
know Amanda yes madam chair the
fund balances in both the
executive and LESC
recommendations yes to be the
language access fund the last
year or what one two three four
going down the page with a
balance of two point six million
okay the Jareth witness fund
which is it just a little over
three million.
Okay that's helpful so the
committee knows actually where
the money would be coming from.
The other question that I have
is that
You know number of legislators
just a couple of years ago.
Where almost tarred and
feathered over this pre trial.
Was a call pre trial detention
program is that what that is
there are many of us for.
Referral services for pre trial
initiative.
and it sounds like just
generally what we did fund went
really well
that correct already.
That's a hundred percent correct
and I can talk about this for a
long time but yes the short
answer is yes okay yeah because
I know that that was such a big
deal.
I was quite a quite a big deal
between the judges and everybody
else that was involved the.
D. A. isn't and and others
particularly out of the
Bernalillo county area there's
quite a of of on that so you're
saying now those of services
we're not only burly but San
Juan County and and where else
was system of all county and
we're going you're going on it
and the three in the two
counties and six District which
is granted and the daughter of
and you were still here
someone happiness I should say
from the district attorney in
the second district we have a
disagreement about how this is
working LFC is analyze the
program.
of the satisfied with that
analysis by the U. your name is
to the Social Research the story
what it's supposed to do the
first really hard for
projections for example to be
part of this big committee's
recommendations and get it deep
dive into the data on
presumptions in the pre trial
context of founder ineffective
so those were not about to
present which is not happy with
and I know Representative re has
bill on I we try to follow the
data this is all about using
data to do to make better
informed decisions on the banks
and and I'm I think it's doing
very well.
I think they're on our schedule
for tomorrow so we'll let him
talk about it if he thinks he
needs to during the time that
his is area gets to speak so
that's all the questions that I
had is there anybody else I
would like to.
Ask a question from the
committee.
In a hands here I do not I'm
gonna go to representatives
small please mute everybody
except for small.
All.
I think madam chair I would move
the LFC legend recommendation
for the administrative office of
the courts.
All right do we have a second
for that recommendation we have
Representative Sweetser raising
her hand I'm I'm taking that as
a second.
Is there any opposition to this
recommendation at this point.
I don't see any opposition at
this point I want to thank the
presenters today for your
presentations I'm gonna take a
deeper dive into this pre trial
issue when we get the DA's in
front of us tomorrow I'm very
interested to hear what they say
because gosh if this is working
that is working and we need to
keep that keep the ball go on
here.
So with that I think that's all
we had in this bill comes
running in here telling me we
have something else for the
schedule but I I think that's
all we have for today committee.
With that being said same time
same place tomorrow at one
thirty then again I'd like to
thank courts and the justices as
well as already and all the rest
of the staff for today's
presentation thank you
everybody.
Thank you madam chair.
Thank you madam chair.
