I.
What.
We.
For all.
One of the.
I.
The war.
Your okay.
Yeah.
What.
But.
There will be a
well.
More.
The off of.
All.
Our.
Thank you the.
For.
Of our most.
All up for.
Of.
All.
Well.
All.
The.
What all.
All of these.
Wall.
What.
For people.
All.
One.
All.
But.
I.
For
the.
All.
You will be mine.
Well.
I.
What are.
Almost four.
The boys about.
Yes I.
For.
All.
Well it was on.
All.
They're all.
All.
More.
I'd like to call the house
appropriations and finance
committee to order like to
welcome you
Like to welcomed the committee
and certainly welcome those that
are.
Thank you to listen to what what
we're going to be discussing
today but before we start I'd
like to help the committee
introduce themselves and will
start to mind media it right
please thank you madam chair
finding the spells universes
Representative is.
Your last bill in the.
Southeast New Mexico.
Roosevelt Lee Travis county
thank you.
Chair Jack Chatfield house
district sixty seven bond or the
school.
But they're starting
to get out of here.
So did you keep all the same
counties.
I was warmly there some more.
All right.
Madam chair good morning I'm
Catherine brown hi
Representative the eastern half
of the county it's just fifty
five.
Good morning madam chair my name
is Gail Armstrong state
representative district forty
nine which is caption Secor
influencia.
Good morning madam chair
Representative ready Crowder I
represent district sixty four
which is in northern two thirds
of curry county.
Thank you mentioned good morning
madam chair good morning
everyone I'm Candie Sweetser
from southwest New Mexico
Representative Luna Hidalgo and
grant counties.
Thank.
That good morning thank you
madam chair I am is Nathan small
I'm proud to represent house
district thirty six which is on
the on the on account thank you
thank you Representative Allison
thank you madam chair good
morning to the committee I am
Anthony Allison and I heard
Representative the district for.
That's in the far west and
northwest corner of New Mexico
hi Representative nine Navajo
chapters now I got three more
added so and then three other
smaller communities looking for
the session thank you.
Good morning everyone.
State representative Christine
Trujillo out of house district
twenty five in Albuquerque and I
used to boast that I have all
the all the big
Supercenters you know all the we
will rock you Coronado I'd lost
when Ralph so so I've got a very
narrow
district now but it's concise
it's not so gerrymandered on my
eastern site and I lost I lost a
lot of space thank you.
Thank you madam chair good
morning my name is ray Lara I
represent house district thirty
four in southern Dona Ana
County.
Morning madam chair committee
committee at my name is
representative Susan Herrera I
represented the northern part of
the state of Illinois most of
Rio Arriba a little bit of Santa
Fe little details good to be
here.
A good morning madam chair
ladies and gentlemen happy faces
in this committee good to see
you again my name is very sales
representative house district
sixty nine with covers part of
one of the available McKinley
for rural funds one investor
companies thank you madam chair
thank you very much
Representative Dixon.
here to fix it hires for twenty
and seven thousand.
Thank you Sir.
Twenty one right.
And my district.
sixty.
District.
Thank you madam chair good
morning Ryan lane a
representative house district
three which is the eastern half
of San Juan County including the
tennis dollars aspect thank you
Representative good morning
everybody on state
representative Candie still
district fifty eight which is
that this of these reports state
the representative Russell.
Outline here is to.
Thank you very much
Representative Biko.
I tried talking to for a little
late this morning I and
Representative day Hochman Vigil
Representative district fifteen
northeast heights north valley
in one piece in the Midwest I
Albuquerque's thank you
representative of bill and like
to have you introduce yourself
and the HSC staff and then we'll
have is the introduce the LFC
staff so if you would bill.
madam chair yes I'm bill by this
the chief of staff the proposed
the committee been here thirty
two years or more I think it's
thirty three now.
we have some new members of the
staff the research we need to
get to know a little bit are
returning members are marked or
Regus marked as back over here.
Our friend Paula Jones.
And Center your state.
Well we have a new secretary
Jennifer Rodriguez to stay right
over here.
Our panelists Michael Mulligan
over here Richard Jones right
here and I don't for Ellery is
it is our new.
Analysts right here thank.
Terms of the the subcommittees.
Fran is a subcommittee a
secretary.
More to the subcommittee be.
Senator subcommittee C..
And Jennifer subcommittee do.
The analyst will in and out of
the subcommittees depending on
where they agencies they are
assigned to
madam chair that that is that is
the staff.
That we would well have serving
you already choose shores Marty
I'm sorry for murder cases he
just part of the furniture I
never.
We're still trying to get
another thing is we will have to
be committed well.
Will it excuse me when we have
to do.
Subcommittees.
Excuse me if we're in different
rooms and then you need another
attendance but that mail mail
change and I'll just leave this
point Madam okay how many years
are we had Marty.
Marty's how many years you have.
And Jim how many years subject
we had.
Right Richard for twenty okay my
my traffic is in her third year
with us.
Our.
Okay and Centers vendor file.
Fran.
mark this is our second year
with us.
of Bill we couldn't do it
without the staff there's no
question.
Just to the left that needs to
be done to make this budget work
so we want to thank you and I'd
like to ask is the to introduce
the LFC staff they're here
today.
Absolutely good morning madam
chair as you mention my name is
Izzy I go by is the my name is
is my on the chief economist for
the legislative finance
committee and with us today we
have deputy director John
Courtney are there economist
Jennifer foggy on and our intern
ginger who's gonna be helping
order the session right.
And.
well thank you and I want you to
speak briefly about these
volumes so the committee
understands how to use these
absolutely madam chair I know
you all get extremely familiar
with them volume one has a lot
of policy and performance
content so lot of narrative good
narrative and they're describing
sort of
the the recent policy changes
over the last year that you all
have been discussing and also
report cards for agencies are
involved in one volume two has
agency budgets and the narrative
that describes the agency
budgets and then volume three is
a sort of appendices a lot of
data and charts that are that
could be useful to you all
including you know revenue
charts or or chart specific to
agencies so hopefully they'll be
of use to you all right that's
wonderful and.
Please become an incredible
three a resource for the numbers
as we're going through each one
of these hearings and of
questions come up we we know
where we can look for the
answers so I'd like to ask those
members that are familiar with
these are using of that get real
familiar with it because it's
going to answer a lot of
questions that you may have as
we're going through the hearing
process this year all righty.
Appreciate that I appreciate the
presentations so we're going to
go ahead and start with our ten
o'clock of.
I think I'm gonna go ahead
introduce myself the program I'm
heading Lundstrom.
Thanks me laugh anyway I'm happy
Lundstrom and I represent house
district nine that is currently
half of the Gallup the check
account accounting in a small
portion of San Juan but after
our most recent special session
it is all in McKinley county
now.
So if I'm fortunate enough to
win again that child that part
of the name plate will be
changed will no longer be part
of San Juan County you know we
had a big population loss in
northwest New Mexico so it
really changed a lot about what
our districts look like up
there.
I've served on the
Appropriations Committee since
two thousand one here I was
elected I was put on this
committee as a freshman became
the chairman and twenty
seventeen prior to that I was
the vice chairman for about
eight years so been here a long
time I guess very I'd be a relic
I compared to some of the other
members but if you you know me
and you know how I run the
committee and you know that I do
have an open door propped up
process so those that want to
talk to me about something in
particular feel free to do that
you'll have my cell number you
know how to get a hold of me
we will as as as you all know we
start when we say we're gonna
start we're going to follow the
process that we've outlined for
ourselves particularly the
process of how things are
determined you know we want to
make sure that it's very
transparent in other words so in
the hearings we want to make
sure that good notes are taken
when you get into those
subcommittees and
We don't take public comment on
agency budgets we won't do that
we never have really we will
when we start hearing the bills
so the budget is our first
priority and probably should be
the only priority of the thirty
day session as far as I'm
concerned it's the number one
reason why we're here.
So I mean that's why we we maybe
we won't be hearing anything
until our budgets done so with
that let's go ahead and start
with our general fund estimates
and we should have the the
paperwork in front of us I got
this document everybody should
have.
And
We're ready.
Ready for.
Stephanie and debt.
Already.
Good morning madam chair members
of the committee we didn't have
audio to your until now so I
think that you're ready for
presentation is that correct yes
we're ready.
Okay I'm not able to share the
screen I don't know if you need
your.
We do have a hand out of.
I'm secretary we do have the
consensus general fund revenue
outlook handout.
She does she control that are
due on.
The committee rooms on your for
me I I can only hear myself and.
Okay we're going to work on our
technical.
Issues here so we'll just hang
loose for just a couple minutes.
Secretary Schardin can you hear
us now.
Thank you okay we're ready.
Madam chair and and staff
my ability to share my screen
disabled so I can just percent
and I think you have a handout
or if you'd like me to share the
screen with the webcast I would
still.
Okay we think you can but.
We're looking.
We're not set up for the okay
sure remember.
If you just referred to the page
number will go from there thank
you for thank you members I'm
stepping Schardin Clarke I think
madam secretary of the New
Mexico taxation and revenue
department me today.
From the department of finance
and administration we're very
pleased to be able to present to
you the December twenty twenty
one consensus general fund
revenue outlook some of you may
have heard this outlook
previously when it was presented
to the LFC at B. L. E. S. C. and
rest up in the last month.
Getting is so okay but will
we'll go through it and.
Your question.
No money slide to that I'll be
going through today you talking
about.
Except the consensus revenue
estimating group of a few slides
on the macroeconomic economy
both in the U. S. and globally
as well as the New Mexico I'll
give some highlights of activity
in our largest revenue sources
and then turn it over to
secretary Romero to talk about
the general fund overview.
I agree we provided for you here
reminder about who makes up the
consensus revenue estimating
group back Representative career
economists from for state
agencies as listed on site.
Going by for some updates on the
world economic activity and
certainty that was going on
especially at the time that this
estimate with many he can find
that the December estimate was
finalized right around
thanksgiving time frame and so
there was there was a lot of
uncertainty that has somewhat
settled down since that time at
the time of the estimate the
World Health Organization had
just identified makan variances
of very into concern and with
that right after the estimate
was finalize the price of oil
dropped significantly and my.
The drop.
Since that time I'm happy to
report the price of oil has and
and market levels have basically
rebounded so the severe drops
that were experienced right
after thanksgiving have
moderate.
I I we'll talk a little bit
about what goes into the
baseline forecasts on which this
is based on forecast for moody's
analytics as well as I. H. S.
Markit moody's analytics
estimates November twenty twenty
one baseline that the worst of
the delta variant was behind us
however the not yet consider the
on the committee and but as I
mentioned that had it
temporarily a temporary negative
impact on global economies but
it's it's settle down quite a
bit now
the moody's forecasts also
assume that the federal debt
ceiling would be raised in
December twenty one and that did
happen to avoid a federal
shutdown
the forecast assumes that
consumer price indexes in
inflation would be transitory we
don't have enough new data at
this time since the estimate was
made to
change that estimate but every
month that goes by you can see
that continue to.
Two very moderate and higher
inflation than than historically
normal we think close attention
to and markets are what the fed
is going to act fairly quickly
in the spring to try to combat
inflation your reserve by
constraints of the time line for
free.
The transit authority and and
begin to ease in the spring
we're still waiting to see on
that with the variants very
active I would think that that
might push back the the
resolution to labor constraints
but we'll be watching that
closely and then to the IHS
Markit baseline forecast
similarly the expected inflation
pressures to ease they they did
not include passage of the
federal build back better
legislation so in both forecasts
passage of that infrastructure
and and social spending go
upside risks to the forecast and
about the delta variants being
behind us but didn't yet know
about the on the con variant.
But
the US economic outlook and
referred to.
I know that the request for U.
S. B. P. came down slightly from
the July forecast the November
forecast that basically had to
do it from bringing it down to
about a two percent annualized
rate of growth
it affects the fed to begin
tapering office wanted Tatum
easing and and getting ready to
combat inflation moody's order
for us to the forecast the delta
variant fighting issues caused
by the COVID labor could supply
constraints and so that led to a
slight.
Downward revisions the forecast
for GDP.
Next slide seven looking at US
economic outlook for employment
you can see that after.
The US lost about twenty two
million jobs at the onset of the
pandemic it has regained
eighteen point two million of
those jobs and so the the US
economy still has four point two
million jobs that had not prior
to the pandemic employment gains
recently have been in many
sectors but notably leisure and
hospitality manufacture.
And we're housing and
professional services on the
market as I mentioned previously
does remain tight workers are
staying home primarily due to
health concerns and child care
issues.
Next on slate eight moving to
the New Mexico economic outlook
I mentioned previously that the
baseline forecast for US GDP
growth revised downwards someone
and New Mexico followed suit you
can see on the right hand
downward revision between the
green and grey bars and are a
downward revision was a little
bit more pronounced it had
something to do with a technical
revisions to the data.
Slide nine we look at
unemployment in both the U. S.
in blue and New Mexico and read
you can see that both trended
downward significantly since
their pets hi is there still
fire and expected to continue to
trend downward over the next
couple years on the US and the
New Mexico right right both came
down a bit further within it's
been released since the
forecast.
You're unemployed in New Mexico
decreased from about twenty nine
thousand individuals.
Decreased by twenty nine
thousand individuals to fifty
two thousand office building
Representative twenty twenty one
significant decrease.
So the public.
Employment by sector year over
year and start to focus.
you know that one year ago.
We're in a very.
Hello place of employment still
taking out of the pandemic and
so we've provided for you that
year over year chart that you're
used to seeing but we also know
that if you were to compare
these this growth to October
twenty nineteen which is a more
normal time we are down four
point eight thousand jobs for
about forty one thousand three
hundred jobs from those pre
pandemic levels but New Mexico
has currently recovered about
sixty six percent of the job
losses that occurred at the
onset of the pandemic.
More keep going slide eleven
just chosen another way that
women.
So you can see that from
February twenty twenty to April
twenty twenty those first few
months.
Pandemic New Mexico lost one
hundred four thousand jobs the
November twenty twenty one
baseline forecast for New Mexico
employment calls for us to
regain those pre pandemic levels
by the end of twenty twenty six
so it is expected to be quite a
long blossom jobs
and there was no significant
change to employment between the
July forecast in this December
for.
Twelve of this reference for New
provided you curry at job losses
and gains since the pandemic
yeah I think that there are
several industries that are
still down significantly and
some that have stated that we've
done that my component levels.
And I teen and fourteen moving
to some data we want to present
to you about the personal income
tax on fourteen provided us
basically demonstrate that we're
experiencing a lot of strength
and withholding
just a growth holding the amount
that employers three minute for
their employees each paycheck
each pay period with resulting
Representative set a record
historic high level in the first
quarter of FY twenty two and
that stronger than expected
withholding accounts for most of
the near term street and that
the pit forecast for December so
so basically we've seen that
those job losses that were
variants of the onset of the
pandemic the jobs that were that
in fact most quickly for higher
wage jobs which of course
generate the most withholding
and the continued job losses
tend to be lower wage jobs.
It is very important to the
folks who told them don't
contribute as much to
withholding mathematically.
The team will provide for you
some data here on employment
rates changed by wage
monitor that those higher wage
jobs were more likely to rebound
quickly and that's exactly what
we're showing here
I actually wages are
considerably higher over fifteen
percent higher than pre pandemic
for is for the lowest quartile
of wages they're still down five
point eight percent.
Sixteen of little bit of data
about economic volatility and
the impact of the pandemic.
Alright.
Women and women of color I've
I've reviewed this with you
before so go through the through
the quickly the basically the
point here is that all of the
labor force participation has
fallen across the board it's fun
for for women and and most of
all for women of color in fact
as of the time this data was
created labor force
participation for Hispanic women
was doubtful seven point one
percent which is a considerable
not just for earnings to date
but also social security
earnings for the future and
ability to set aside savings to
be resilient to economic
downturns.
Another way to look at that data
we can see employment changes
based on educational attainment
and just like you sort of expect
from whatever it is that on the
higher level of educational
attainment worker had going into
the pandemic more like.
Your job perfectly well those
with high school education or
less still have a very
significant losses in
employment.
I'm just looking at personal
income tax the outlook for that
revenue for the quarter.
I'm madam secretary what what
line are you.
Thank you madam chair I'm now on
slide eighteen okay because it's
all right.
Okay go ahead.
We're not hearing the oil and
natural gas please that was in
the pandemic.
I'm not there yet although I'll
be covering my oil and natural
gas ladies coming out.
Okay I guess somebody just mixed
it up in the stapling process
but go ahead go ahead okay
I'm AT and I'll try to remember
to always.
Thank.
One point eight the work we're
looking at how personal income
tax is expected to grow through
the forecast period and it's a
little counter intuitive because
of changes that have been
enacted that are affecting that
revenue source so well personal
income tax grew by an incredibly
strong twelve points and twelve
twelve point three percent and
FY twenty one
there are some factors that are
causing that growth rate fine
into for years we're expecting
FY twenty two to actually
decreased by one percent but
that's not a reflection of
underlying cause of that revenue
source it's reflection that
we've expanded the working
families tax credit and the low
income comprehensive tax rebate
no wonder right down one and.
Yes in the economy there's not
and then and rebound to
unexpected eight percent growth
in FY twenty three.
The legislative changes are
factored in and also we have
benefit that revenue stream from
the new five point nine percent
tax bracket that was just coming
into play.
Okay next slide nineteen and
twenty on twenty now start
taking the gross receipts tax
there's a number of factors in
the gross receipts tax stating
that we want to make you aware
of that the consensus revenue
committee.
Working.
He did a redesign of its
business tax filing from July
twenty.
The July twenty one and so in
the long run that's going to
make it a lot more granular data
available to them that will be
helpful but in the moment sort
of digesting changes to the
reporting and making sure that
everything is on so that is
something that they're working
through.
Twenty one
just wanted to is a cliche
another way the strength of the
underlying economy in terms of
match taxable gross receipts of
what that means is that the
gross receipts tax based where
eighty a return was filed that
was next to a payment and so is
the official gross receipts tax.
And the most recent one months
or some of the strongest for
months that we had in the
history of the gross receipts
tax the strength there is broad
based but it is coming
especially for mining and.
Hi Adam secretary your slides
don't time with our page
numbers.
So we're we're gonna have to and
people are getting more and more
confused if you can if you met
if you'd go to the heading on
the top of the page maybe that
would help everybody
Yeah
C..
You know they might the.
I think that.
And I think I can open something
that will help here sorry about
that Madam I think the slides
might have been reporter for L.
C..
And I have a power point of that
one.
Okay
the cruise Act around where it
was and hopefully we'll get this
worked out.
I was on page twenty one.
Sorry.
The state heading.
We need the heading on it so
people can track along with.
Getting to a different file
here.
Yeah the heading on page twenty
one says low wage and less
educated workers.
Okay so I'm gonna come back I
see what you're speaking about
the oil and gas lines so if you
L. jump back with me to slide
fourteen we'll talk about the
oil and gas lights next.
Re record from one another.
So we're starting with page
fourteen words as well prices
worldwide in New Mexico okay.
Thank you so much okay so
Personal income tax and we go to
oil and then natural gas prices
and volumes so as you all know
oil right.
Inherently volatile and depend
on a lot of factors that are
outside of
New Mexico's control of the
federal government control
but we over the comment pandemic
of course first we saw a sharp
contraction in oil prices and
and then someone called UNM's
after the fact because local
demand shifted downward oil
inventories grew and there was
sort of a collectible oil on the
market which further depress
prices but now we're seeing
supply and demand forces
program.
And find that a blurry but
everyone we can surprise New
Mexico producers are seeing so
you can see the change that was
made from August to December is
forecast and then the table here
at the bottom and those came up
very significantly which is a
lot of the strength of the if
the revised forecast.
Fifteen the our expectation for
New Mexico over.
Right of action RigCount
rig count stood at eighty three
right in November twenty twenty
one I was significantly
rebounded and the other thing to
make
Just a reminder about is that
that right technology is always
improving I mean if you are
right can produce more oil out
in the field because of that the
technological advances so return
on technology changes so fast
that it's really not apples to
apples can.
Previous RigCount
at the bottom right hand side
you can see the update two
volumes that that was revised
from the August to December
forecasts and again at a pretty
significant increase of the
expectation for volumes.
On the next slide sixteen we
turn and not for gas prices in
Texas.
We have covered the networking
side along with but not
completely dependent on oil you
can see a large spike in natural
gas prices for New Mexico that
occurred in the spring of twenty
twenty one that of course is
tied to that terrible storm that
hit Texas so
so abruptly back in February.
The
late eighteen and I've already
sort of covered some of this
with the but out of order.
This is a real quickly This
slide shows the strength in
withholding that we're
experiencing.
From nineteen eighty nine
are going through that in just
an employment I believe age that
I talked about previously this
is out of order with you.
I'm fighting for.
but I usually reviewed on how
the pandemic job losses impact
women of color in labor force
participation has
Twenty one
the employment statistics I
talked about though not by
educational attainment no
basically showing that the lower
level of educational attainment
the more work that workers to
have
experience deeper job office.
Slide twenty two personal income
tax
Increases it would not propose
legislative changes the growth
rate in FY twenty two we're
expecting to contract by one
percent but again that's not due
to underlying weakness in that
bedroom our result of facing and
legislative changes.
Next to slide twenty four I
mentioned a moment ago we have
these if you're putting data
Senator that are going to be
helpful for the meat and the
long run we have to change it
used to.
Right I I think we caught up to
each other now
I wanted to highlight here in
three the last four months of
with full of masters receipts
tax data and have been some of
the strongest in state history
about that strengthens your tea
has been very broad based but
does have a lot to do with
strength in mining and gas
extraction as well as retail
trade.
Twenty six here we're looking at
the next tax to see the growth
rate yeah we can see that
matched your hands recovered
pretty significantly but limit
has not kept pace and so we've
got more on spending and
activities going on in the
economy that we have jobs to be
created and I'm always talking
about that K. shaped recovery
broken record on that here's
another way of looking at it.
Between the blue and orange
lines on the on the left
basically underlines the
economic recovery has not been
shared equally across all
sectors of the economy.
What are we share with you the
outlook for the gross receipts
tax over the next forecast
period you have small help
revisions in the December
forecast versus the previous
forecast in August in FY twenty
one G. R. T. declined by three
percent from FY twenty in part
that had to do with the
restaurant deduction that was in
place for FY twenty one
that over fifty million tax
relief to
Rep Abbas mentors we also had
into hospital to deductions
there were increased by the
COVID pandemic physically
hospitalization was up so the
hospital deduction is a.
Nothing more at home so the
production was up
you know words restaurant eating
is taxable.
To G. R. T. is expect expected
to decline by two percent but
again that's not a
representation of underlying
weakness in the revenue we're
basically now if we fully phased
in internet sales and
destination based sourcing so
the state is no longer going to
benefit from the one point two
two five percent of the mystical
sale on internet sales G. R. T.
that's not going to make
municipalities and we also
subtracted from FY twenty two a
one time fifty million dollars
settlement that had to do with
that municipal distributions
lawsuit so those are kind of non
economic factors that are
pushing growth downward by two
percent and FY twenty two but in
FY twenty three twenty four G.
R. T. growth is expected to
regain its it's basically strong
from trajectory of growth twenty
three four percent and FY twenty
four.
I'm fine with a little bit about
severance taxes and rents and
royalties another large area the
general fund.
Reliance on the twenty nine you
can see a comparison of how
severance tax revenues as well
as royalty revenues compared
cost fiscal years the good news
is that that reserve transfer
that was put into law several
years ago it's now I'm
transferring windfall revenues
into reserves is working just as
anticipate so what we're finding
is that general fund revenue is
much less volatile and that when
there are fluctuations in oil
and natural gas revenues the
fluctuations are for our our
first and foremost by this
reserve.
And not
immediately felt the general
fund.
So
you're with at three hundred
forty two point seven million in
emergency school tax over the
five year average that was.
The trust fund in FY twenty one
and twenty two severance tax
general fund revenue.
Early twenty seven percent up to
six hundred and four million.
Slide slide it over to secretary
Romero thank you.
Media secretary Romero.
You madam chair members of the
house appropriations and finance
committee slide thirty one is
the general fund overview FY
twenty one numbers are actually
audited numbers and so
Representative research ended at
two point five billion for
thirty five percent of the
current publications FY twenty
two is estimated to increase by
one percent which is consistent
with what we what the this
estimate shows and then reserves
are estimated at three point
three or forty four percent for
FY twenty three it's estimated
to increase by eleven percent
which results in two hundred
million more than what was
projected in August the new
money is forecasted to be one
point six billion dollars.
Like to this is the consensus
revenue summary.
FY twenty one revenue did not
provide as much as expected
actually grew by two point one
percent.
The general fund revenue
exhibits a slower growth of less
than one percent and and
secretary Schardin Clarke
touched on this have to do with
things like internet sales and
local sharing the designation
sourcing
stated that the state changes to
working families tax credit in
the the litter and all that
amounts receive your childhood
friends but then without why
twenty three eighty would more
likely be a growth rate of about
three to four percent.
Three madam chair is the general
fund reserves December twenty
twenty one instances one
forecast improved over this four
million dollars and for FY
twenty and FY twenty two for I.
twenty three about two hundred
seven million in FY twenty four
hundred sixty seven million the
daughter Representative siapa
assessment and you can see the
December slightly better oil
prices and volumes.
Yes less than one percent only
eleven million of the fifty four
million it's actually oil and
gas.
One twenty three and twenty four
will be time the oil and gas
industry.
One four is the general fund
reserve slide in FY twenty.
Ended up pretty much at the same
place.
Four percent office.
Twenty one reserves are opted
again and and at that point five
million of recurring
appropriations.
This shows that by twenty two
general fund reserves are
estimated at forty four percent
or three point three billion but
that's before any legislative
action through the twenty twenty
to legislative session.
Slide is it just a recap of the
FY twenty one twenty reserves.
We were only in thirty five
percent.
Put me at a three point three
billion or forty four percent
the new money of one point six
billion which is almost twenty
percent of recurring
appropriation for.
So why is it is it is actually
really.
looks what we found was
projecting that facility would
be met in office not sure that
we met.
I just as soon as quicker
recovery in consumer spending
and productivity at the
experience a little bit about
higher prices as demand
increases we've seen that happen
okay it's not delayed or late
oil production increases which
is hello.
economic impacts from that a
little structure this jobs act
and.
With the passage of that act
better.
Legislation say that.
The.
You is certifications and
reducing the variance right now
from we go to come in and
straining on health systems and
all of this you also take into
consideration and increase the
production.
I just some other you can see in
this slide one twenty twenty one
was eighty five percent however
placing concerns due to tax.
Critics and labor constraints
and labor market let us could
cause problems twenty twenty
two.
However it is expected to be
temporary and what causes labor
markets
is that right priest job title
have reached record highs and.
One of.
The stress test.
Hello again the risks and how we
can on the prices of financial
downturn movie conduct press yes
most or all states.
Even their own in the stress
test projections it is stress
reductions ranging from high
three hundred and twelve million
to a low negative eight hundred
fifty nine million.
Ten percent probability national
economic.
the stronger resulting in higher
wages and salaries increased
employment just been hired
summer spending and confidence.
This is the oil prices range
from seventy three dollars a
barrel in FY twenty issue to a
low of sixty six dollars sixty
six point five dollars a barrel
in FY twenty four.
This also has higher prices
increases in New Mexico
severance and economic revenue
baseline as well as increases in
G. R. T. permitting the counties
and gain nonstandard.
A moderate in are you a
tentative probability New Mexico
experiences a decline in GDP
consumers an increase in
unemployment oil prices slightly
lower at sixty two dollars a
barrel in FY twenty two and
forty eight dollars and fifty
cents a barrel in FY twenty four
we.
Some of oil production declines
and and drug activity.
And the local scenario which is
a five percent probability
assumes I'll prices fall to
fifty dollars and seventy six
cents a barrel in FY twenty two
thirty one I.
Dollars a barrel in FY twenty
three it is we continue to be
able to can you continue to be
on the verge of thirty one
dollars a barrel in FY twenty
one.
Well production and drilling
activity explanation decline New
Mexico experiences decline in
GDP consumers are gonna find an
increase in unemployment.
We also expect that New Mexico
will experience a decline from
losses in
County in the counties and out
of state G. R. T..
Slide.
Ten year trend.
More revenue to be creative.
What is
the greatest naturally natural
resource dependent economies
which apartments go with it's
important to think about it good
years and state more whether the
batters many of us remember.
Two thousand and nine and twenty
twenty associated with those
counters are dependence on
natural resources and
legislations we experience
highlights need for local health
researchers and budget.
Revenue and may not be
sustainable in the long term and
here's a low.
Stress test resources and
economy.
We don't want to draw your
attention to slide forty five.
The person uses table tennis tax
forms and obligations lost this
is.
Source you for profit level.
Nearly six hundred sixty four
million the severance tax bonds
for statewide public health
projects.
Includes two hundred forty two
million for public school
capital outlay.
For for instructional materials
which this will be the last year
that it that this is earmarked
for this purpose.
Senator water projects and.
Each for.
I projects.
There's another six.
In this.
Thank you.
Patiently eighteen years is here
posted to your bonds for
conservation.
Madam chair that includes my.
All righty thank you of
secretary let's go ahead and go
on to Izzy's presentation please
thank you madam chair and
members I'll be speaking to the
LFC brief it looks like this has
the heading at the top it says
money matters.
and also just there on the first
page if I could draw your
attention to the table at the
top the second line there shows
the adjustments in December
compared with where we were in
August you can see in FY twenty
three the budget here we came up
about two hundred million
dollars and if you look at the
graph at the bottom right hand
corner of that page you can see
the make up of that increase so
in that FY twenty three column
that purple and that sort of
Beijing bar those are rents and
royalties and severance taxes
those are related to oil
production and prices you can
see that most of the make up
there is being driven by those
two components are about two
thirds of that increase is
really driven by direct oil and
gas related revenue so you can
see that it's driving the
increase in this estimate but in
addition to the general fund
those related revenues that oil
and gas related revenue also
makes large transfers to the
reserves or the early childhood
Trust Fund in the case of access
to the five year average and
I'll talk about that a little
bit more in the second if you
turn to page two there's a table
at the top left hand corner of
the page you could see FY twenty
one we ended reserves at thirty
five percent and before any
spending before anything happens
in the upcoming session reserves
for FY twenty two are estimated
at forty three point nine
percent but I know you all will
get an update this afternoon on
on the spending plans and and
obviously that will change.
On page three the charter the
graph at the top right hand
corner shows the estimated
interest rates of that we had
expected back in December if you
all have read the news this
morning you might know that the
federal reserve is actually
adding an interest rate hike
this coming year so this graph
will actually looks deeper and
that sort of rate hikes will
we'll quick and then where we
expected in December so that's a
change from where we were about
a month ago and and that does
present a risk to the forecast
it'll get into towards the end
of my presentation if you'll
turn to page four all dryer
tension to the chart at the top
left hand corner this shows the
top three oil producing states
in the country that Green Line
is Texas that purple line is
North Dakota in the Orange Line
is New Mexico prior to the
pandemic New Mexico is the third
largest oil producing state in
the country but once the
pandemic hit we had some pretty
severe price shocks at the
beginning which caused
production to fall in it and it
fell in all three states but New
Mexico's any unique position to
be the only state to recover to
pre pandemic levels when it
comes to oil production so Texas
is still down about eight and a
half percent from where they
were pre pandemic North Dakota
is down almost a quarter permit
almost a fifth twenty one
percent and they have yet to
recover but New Mexico's
actually at twenty seven point
seven percent higher than we
were pre pandemic so our our
production is continuing to
climb significantly.
If you'll turn to page five I'll
talk a little bit about match
taxable gross receipts tax so
gross receipts as one of our
best indicators of economic
activity in the state and
Representative consumption
activity in the state and you
can see what happened in FY
twenty one during the pandemic
in that graph those orange bars
show year over year percent
growth you can see we are
experiencing some significantly
or at least stable growth in our
match taxable gross receipts
leading up to the pandemic and
then we had that sort of
negative valley there we we
during the pandemic we go
negative but by the end of FY
twenty one we saw some pretty
significant growth year over
year and maybe better
illustrated is that blue line
which shows match taxable gross
receipts in levels if you were
to sort of trucking along stable
they're going into pandemic and
we had that deep valley and by
the end of FY twenty one are
match taxable gross receipts has
exceeded its pre pandemic levels
already which is a great sign
for sort of the economic
activity associated with
consumption but we know our
employment has yet to catch up.
And that growth there that's
that's you know resurgent
consumption is continuing into
FY twenty two if you turn to
page three the table in the
middle of the page shows match
taxable gross receipts in FY
twenty two quarter one over FY
twenty one quarter one and you
can see there that the major
driver or the largest driver of
growth is retail trade but the
second largest driver he's the
mining industry and retail trade
is an interesting one at the
beginning of the pandemic this
was one of the hardest hit
industry as lockdown went into
place a lot of people could go
out and and shop and of course a
lot of that consumption shifted
online but another contributor
is large stimulus payments
strong unemployment benefits
that actually resulted in record
US savings up across the country
people had the largest savings
on record and so now as we come
out of this pandemic people are
really motivated to spend all
that money that they've saved up
and that's really despite these
inflationary headwinds we care
about inflation all the time we
expect that to slower
consumption but because of that
savings we're seeing that
consumption accelerate.
If you'll turn to page seven I'd
like to highlight one of the
benefits or or a few of the
benefits of the recent reforms
that take the excess of the five
year average and distribute it
to either the tax stabilization
reserve or the early childhood
Trust Fund so if you all
remember this is a few years old
now oil and gas revenues that
exceed the five year average
that peak is lopped off and it's
distributed to the tax
stabilization reserve ever
reserves are already at twenty
five percent that distribution
instead get sent to the early
childhood Trust Fund so at that
graph on the top right hand
corner you can see the blue bars
are the amount the general fund
receipts from oil and gas
emergency school tax and the
orange bars show the excess of
the five year average being
distributed and if I could point
out from FY twenty two to FY
twenty three the some of those
two bars actually decreases and
despite that because of this
excess five year average the
general fund amount is actually
increasing and you can see those
blue bars actually increase
sustainably and in a stable way
through the forecast rising
because of that five year
average so just highlighting the
the benefit that the stability
that that access provides to
budgeting but you will take this
very seriously it you can see
the same in the middle of the
page the distribution of federal
mineral leasing payments again
you can see in FY twenty three
to FY twenty four there would
otherwise be a decrease but
because of that mechanism the
general fund is insulated and
actually continues to grow and
at the bottom of the page the
some of the two you can see
almost one point five billion
dollars is estimated to be
distributed to the early
childhood Trust Fund in FY
twenty two alone and and again
at the end of my presentation
all of discussed that forecast
for that fund.
If you'll turn to slide to page
eight I'll briefly talk about
corporate income tax the graph
at the top left hand corner of
the page shows a total corporate
income tax collections the red
shows film tax credits estimated
to be distributed you can see in
FY twenty one those credit
actually shrunk as the pandemic
forced productions to to shut
down they were able to claim as
many credits but we expect that
the industry will recover and
you can see the impact to the
general fund as that bluevar
shrinks.
If you'll turn to.
Page nine.
I'd like to quickly reiterate
something the secretary Schardin
Clarke mentioned and that's the
impact to personal income tax
collections that the pandemic
has had unlike any other
recession the pandemic has.
Has not resulted in declining
personal income tax collections
and typically in a recession we
see people across the income
spectrum lose their jobs and we
haven't really seen that play
out as as similarly during the
pandemic as secretary Schardin
Clarke mentioned we have
something called the the K.
shaped recovery so these made in
high wage workers their
employment has fully recovered
and grown pastor pre pandemic
levels and their wages are also
growing pastor pre pandemic
levels despite that those low
income workers are still
struggling to recover but those
low a you know low wage workers
don't have as high or as
significant of a personal income
tax liability as the mid and
high wage workers so we're
seeing our personal income taxes
grow and expand the growth
significantly despite sort of
this recession and despite these
employment losses I also like to
draw your attention to the table
in the middle of that page which
shows the recent changes to
personal income taxes you can
see from FY twenty one FY twenty
two those costs jumped from
thirty six to ninety three
million the secretary Schardin
Clarke mentioned we have a
declining personal income tax
collection in FY twenty two a
large part of that is because of
the increasing cost of those
changes.
If you will turn the page ten.
But I'll talk a little bit about
recession risks or just risks to
the forecast in general of
course COVID is at the top of
our money the secretaries
mentioned on the con at the
beginning of December was a
significant risk it oil prices
fell pretty significantly but
have since recovered so you know
the path of the virus the
resulting reaction if if the
economy has to shut down again
that would present a significant
risks to the state's revenues
but in addition to comment oil
and gas always remains a
significant risk to the forecast
large changes in price and
production would have
significant impacts to the
general fund and of course
inflation we've we're watching
inflation very closely but
stubborn inflation and the
resulting reaction by the fed
could cause interest rates to
climb more quickly which could
slow the economic recovery.
If you turn the page eleven of.
The consensus revenue estimating
group does a stress test every
single time to demonstrate what
could happen if different
economic scenarios came to
fruition that blue line there
shows our current baseline
estimate for the general fund
and that bar above it shows what
would happen if the economy
recovered more robustly than we
expected so you can see there in
FY twenty four three hundred
million dollars higher than
we're currently estimating and
those bars below it show what
would happen if the of New
Mexico economy experienced a
recession a moderate recession
or if low oil prices and
production came to pass and the
table they're below which
summarizes or shows you the
impact of each scenario under
your tended to that light blue
line at the top of the table you
can see the largest impact to
that baseline is the low oil
price and production scenario
where the state could lose one
point five billion dollars in
general fund from the current
baseline estimate in FY twenty
four.
This is another.
Good time to highlight the
benefits of those access to the
five year average distributions
that second light blue line
there shows the impact that
those distributions bear as as a
total of loss in revenue so.
The excess of the five year
average if you recall call those
bars those born bars shrink
first before the blue bars Frank
and so you can see in this
scenario the distributions
actually there about sixty eight
percent of the losses in FY
twenty two fifty two percent of
the losses in FY twenty three
and over a quarter of the losses
in FY twenty four so that helps
to insulate the general fund in
the case of a downturn from
those losses.
And finally I'll point out here
that despite that insulating
effect despite the benefits of
those five year average
distributions the general fund
could still lose two point six
billion dollars of in the
forecast period here FY twenty
two to FY twenty four which is
about the thirty percent reserve
target.
Turning to page twelve here you
can see the trend analysis which
secretary Romero did a great job
covering all just point out that
those five year average is the
do a great job of keeping the
revenues on trend for FY twenty
two but that five year average
is a pretty short memory so as
those distributions to the
general fund increase you can
see we are actually over the ten
year trend by five hundred and
seventy million dollars in FY
twenty three nine hundred
seventy four million dollars in
FY twenty four and that could
just show of you know reasons
for caution that those elevated
revenues may be unsustainable in
the long run.
If I could have you turn to page
eighteen.
All.
Talk about one last benefit of
those distributions of the five
year average.
The chart at the bottom of that
page shows two red lines the
dotted red line shows the
dependence on the oil and gas
industry the general fund
dependence on the oil and gas
industry if those excess of the
five year average institutions
were never made that solidly red
line shows where we are today
because of those distributions
you can see that the general
fund is about seven percent less
reliant on the oil and gas
industry because of that and of
course that helps for the
stability of the general fund.
And lastly if you could turn to
page nineteen.
This is the early childhood
trust one forecast
this was created a couple years
ago and I remember when it was
created you know there's
discussion that hopefully you
can reach a billion dollars to
in Taos sort of the programmatic
uses but we expected to exceed a
billion dollars this year alone
and and it's possible that with
the the resurging the surging
oil and gas revenues that those
distributions for programmatic
use could doubled between FY
twenty three and FY twenty four.
And with that madam chair happy
to stand for thank you to see
Appreciate it we're going to go
to questions of.
Any the presentations that we
have one thing I am going to ask
the committee to do is to we're
gonna make a change to the feet
bill when we get it we need to
get this place technologically.
Prepared for presentations.
You know I and and it's not
about the staff for anything
they've done the best they can
to try to set this up but we're
gonna make it we're going to ask
a representative of small to
bring I a amendment forward on
that feed bill I want this place
lit up like a sports book this
ridiculous that we're we're
mention are next to see somebody
here you know and and I mean it
so we've there let them know
we're going to be changing that
feed bill so next year we come
in here not only can the
committee but the public can see
what the heck's going on here.
So with that being said let's go
Representative Chatfield the
amendment prepped for.
Start over thank you madam chair
my first question is for
secretary Schardin Clarke on
page eleven where it says that
we will achieve pre pandemic
employment by the end of two
thousand twenty six and I'm just
remembering some estimates for
some talk last year of a pre
pandemic levels by two thousand
twenty four I maybe confusing
employment rate with economic
recovery right or maybe that is
it's been move forward a little
bit
can you shed some light on that
for me.
Secretary.
Madam chair and representative
outfield I your question just
fine thank you
I I believe you're right what
we're sitting here I'm going to
look at a previous for the
presented to you about this time
last year but I believe you're
right that that estimate of when
we will reach that the pandemic
employment level has been
shifted back from what and one
of the also director chief
economist speaking about that
but I think what might have
happened and make more money
with.
Okay.
Thank you madam secretary Feb
secretary Maestas second
question is on page thirty six I
understand what herd immunity is
so what in the world is for
resiliency.
Thank god I had madam secretary.
Madam chair representative
chapel I think it's a state I
think it's just we do not going
to have more people vaccinated
and having more people I have
asked that the talk about.
Thank you madam chair thank you
madam secretary.
That's it thank you Sir let's go
to Representative Anderson.
Thank you madam chairman Madam
chairman of.
I had.
An observation I suppose about
what I perceived to be so.
Conflict that the secretary
presented to me it's a conflict
between the bullets and the
statistics.
So when we Wade through the
statistics secretary.
My understanding that we're
going to base.
The next budget on sixty four
dollars and fifty cent crude oil
and three dollars and eighty
cents.
Natural gas prices.
Madam chair and representative
Anderson I'm just navigating to
those I mean.
Yes I think it's fourteen fifty.
Hello yes I think that's correct
for.
Revenue estimate is based on
sixty four dollars and fifty
cents a barrel of oil over three
hundred.
The grant.
For the three dollars and eighty
cents for.
Thank you very much madam
secretary on page eight for.
The last bullet of.
Tells us that good news is that
volatility in the oil revenues
will be absorbed mainly by
reduced transfers.
To reserves analysts impact will
be bored on the channel five.
If.
In the course of volatility from
sixty four dollars and fifty
cents.
Reduce transfers only implies
prices go down is that correct.
Madam chair representative and
representative your question I
think one of the.
We were really provide you the
fact is revenue estimate was
eating presented right in the
way of the crime would like for
example the first time this was
presented in early December we
were presenting at a time when
the price of oil just dropped
sixteen percent as a result of
the crime and the market were
down significantly as well and
we're about the economic
uncertainty.
The new reverts to the work
request for really needed any
work at so that's why it's more
about.
But going forward if you like
thank you madam secretary so the
word reduce transfers to
reserves.
Is is an up or down price
concept up or down above below
sixty four fifty.
Based on what I based based on
what I heard you say.
I believe it's only a one way
street and it only deals with
the downside.
Madam speaker and Representative
Anderson you're correct the the
risks to the forecast upside and
downside for oil in either of
those reserves transfers
insulated volatility in the
general fund okay madam
secretary I'm gonna make one
final point about your bullet
rider and your bill what writer
concludes that that's good news
it's good news when oil prices
go down because we have reduced.
Right of first to reserves and I
am struggling to understand
where.
The bullet rider comes up with
the notion that that's good news
I'm gonna leave it at that if I
could and just want to a couple
of other concerns.
Of that I have
in the presentation this
morning.
One is where the consensus group
has come up with.
it's.
One is where the consensus
group.
Comes up with all which volumes
going forward
in and so in my mind I'm not I'm
gonna do this off the top of my
head but.
From the year before.
From last year to the year where
we missed by fifty percent which
was my think that's my
calculations.
Then we look at twenty two to
twenty three more saying all the
volumes are going to be down.
And the price let's see what I
have on the price sixty four
fifty yes it's down as well
is the is it my sort of.
Painting a fairly accurate.
Question off the top of my head
with those statistics.
Madam chair and representative
Anderson on page fifteen of the
secretary I you can see the
volume estimate and it's not as
a committee from down oil.
Expected anything different.
And then in our free point.
Thank you
For that I think
I have gotten a bit of an
information overload here and I
don't think the of.
Particularly on the revenue side
that strive for oil and gas
it seems to me this is a little
inconsistent and
I'm wondering about both natural
gas I believe and oil.
Reflecting reduced.
Volumes.
Going forward now here's where
I've got it.
Okay you're correct on oil we're
going from four ninety six
Four hundred ninety six million
barrels to five hundred and
fourteen I think the question
might have been that on natural
gas which is sort of.
Where did the consensus grew up.
Okay never mind there's slight
increase in natural gas volumes
as well thank you madam chairman
I I.
Madam chair that's all my
questions right is co
Representative Crowder.
Thank you madam chair and thank
all of you for your
presentations it it's it's
difficult to absorb so much so
quick and so forgive our
questions if they're a little
bit off key you're off track
on the slide from personal
income tax historical in outlook
FY twenty one through FY twenty
point on my slide twenty two.
As I look at that it shows the
year over year growth is
declining from twenty three to
twenty four.
But yet R. P. I. T. is going to
go up.
But as you went through that
slide and then a further slide
on page twenty seven of our
gross receipts tax outlook.
FY twenty three is is it six
percent increase in is going to
drop down to four percent.
But our our
Gross receipts total is going to
go up into two slides together
got me to wondering.
How did the Craig estimating
group look at.
The day that's coming where they
stop sending federal monies to
the state of New Mexico we've
got a twenty four billion
dollars into the state that is
beginning to work its way
through our economy and in is it
commented that that five people
put that in savings but now
they're starting to spend it so
it's working as where P. I. T.
energy your tier gonna go up
when they spend.
And our oil and gas was off the
charts the past year so we're
we're doing really really good
but one of them is real volatile
which is all and gas in the
other in the day that the Feds
kind of stop sending the the
trillion dollar packages out
through our country there's
gonna be a cliff for a fall off
we're in your presentations do I
see that clear for fall offer
how did the trick estimating
group treat that.
Madam chair.
And I'll I'll take that question
madam chair the LFC presentation
if you'll turn to.
Page six we have a graph on
personal income and that's on
the left side of the page there
you can see we do it expected a
pretty steep drop off I think
we're expecting four point six
percent decrease in personal
income in FY twenty three over
FY twenty two because at the end
of those federal stimulus
programs so we it is it is baked
into the these forecast
estimates and and you do see
that in the slowing as you
mentioned as you pointed out the
slowing of the growth.
Okay I must madam chair I think
I missed which chart were you
looking at we're looking at the
New Mexico personal income and
billions yes Sir.
Okay and so the dotted line
versus the Green Line is that
what you're.
But no I'm sorry about that
madam chair representative
cutter you can see that it it
drops off pretty significantly
there from twenty twenty one to
twenty twenty two is it pocket
spot spikes a couple times and
that's with each state federal
stimulus it spikes those are
because of those transfer
payments that you mentioned and
it drops down pretty
significantly as those fall off.
I thank you for that I I missed
that I didn't see that I guess I
was looking at the chart
differently is there anyway you
madam chair and and analysts and
secretaries that we can get a a
side by side chart.
To look at
FY twenty two perhaps because
the double double behind this
soon
or twenty one twenty one very
good a good chart to look at how
much money actually came into
the state for in P. I. T. a G.
R. T. for more and gas and how
much came in from the twenty
four billion dollars of COVID
money that worked its way
through our economy is there a
way to do that.
Madam chair representative it it
it would be extremely difficult
because that money really.
Aids every aspect of the economy
so to to be able to disaggregate
that's very difficult I do we do
have some numbers I know direct
payments those those twelve
hundred dollars stimulus tracks
the additional unemployment
benefits that maybe about eight
billion dollars over the last
year and so we can do some some
you know guess work there we
know that about a third was
spent on consumption so that you
know maybe representative about
two billion dollars a match
taxable gross receipts over the
last year so we can do sort of
exercise like that but to
completely disaggregated I I
don't think we'd be able to do
so.
It so I'm not sure I question in
in FY twenty two.
Since.
The population is beginning to
spend the money they put into
savings and it was more of a
coming into the county
You anticipate our our P. I. T.
in G. R. TV greater from oil and
gas for for the federal stimulus
money.
can is that possible.
I am of the opinion that that
the twenty four billion coming
our economy made a huge impact
and when it stops we're going to
see a huge drop.
Kind of what your chart is
showing over here I I don't know
where I'm seeing a rebound in
that because a lot of gas is so
volatile and and I just I'm
looking for answers in that
arena but will work more offline
madam chair thank you all righty
thank you Representative
Herrera.
Your mark on.
Posted on okay sorry I didn't
turn it off excuse me thank you
madam chair I guess this
question is for Stephanie
Schardin Clarke.
Yes if the curious about the
How how this pandemic has
disproportionally affected the
women of color
in our state I know that about I
think it about fourteen percent
of our households are headed by
single parents are in and I
guess I look at that and now I'm
also considering that you know
the federal child tax credit.
I think was called the advance
federal child tax credit they
came in that was about three
hundred dollars a month per
child started in about July I
think ended I think in December
I think I think with kids being
out of school and at home.
No I I can't imagine having
three kids as a single parent
head of household.
Trying to balance school
Rental payments everything else
and and these are people who
don't make very much money but I
think that I think that tax
credit really see families but
you're saying that you think
those jobs are going to come
back by the end of twenty twenty
three I think because they don't
have that anymore I know there's
a move in Congress to get you
know extend that that that child
tax credit doesn't come back
sooner.
if it comes back I think people
will stay home just because it
has been.
So hard for these families I
would just like to get your
comments on that are your
thoughts on that I know you also
have two children every year of
the year at much higher level
I'm not worried about you but I
am worried about about these
women that are just really
struggling in our state.
Thank you madam chair and
representative Erica that
question this is a life you're
most closely referencing would
be on page twenty one look at
that and we're not looking at.
And then as we're leaving our
participation and so when you
fall out of the labor force that
means you're not no you're not
even looking for work currently
and for us and this is US
economic data
we have.
Mexico as well on the U. S. we
do that.
The difference is that you need
for women two point seven
percent versus just one point
eight percent for men and I I
just.
I agree with what you're saying
that it's a really difficult
decision a parent in general to
make but women especially for
all the progress that we've made
over the decades in you know the
families are structured in
women's ability to to be in the
workplace
this is it is it is going out of
state are women are making that
choice the difficult choice to
stay home more often and then
our and especially women his
labor participation is down
seven point one percent versus
banning.
Senate
it's just really start and again
at you know leading to inability
to save for future resiliency
but also that compounded terms
of social security benefits over
one's lifetime and at the end of
the comes with with working out
so I think in our offices in the
area want to support our policy
makers will remember that safety
net seven
nine however tax credit that you
mentioned has been very well
targeted for just as a problem.
Thank you madam chair thank you
Stephanie.
The representative Garcia.
Thank you madam chair.
Well when the presentation you
mentioned that the low income
people are struggling more.
In the state of New Mexico my
and my question is these
lowincome how many veterans are
struggling.
I'm wondering I don't have that
data with the over the top of
the line.
If the retirees and their
retirement benefits my first
more stable income source when
they're working age veterans ID
we would probably find also
impacted this They Might Be
lower incomes and they might be
at a lower educational
attainment level so to the
extent that the veterans that
seems to be what's pushing the
job losses do not.
Thank you madam chair the the
reason I'm asking because you
know we have about a hundred
sixty thousand veterans in New
Mexico.
And you know wondering how
they're doing.
To even make ends meet next
question I have is.
What counties in the state of
New Mexico are struggling the
most.
Madam chair representative
I'm not sure if I struggling you
mean of receiving less revenues
I believe all counties of except
for Roosevelt County are
experiencing year over year
gross receipts growth and I
believe that's because of the
ending of wind projects in our
in that part of the state so I
believe all counties are
experiencing growth.
The reason I'm asking the madam
chair is as you all know all of
our part of the country we lost
the power plant would also
refinery we've taken a beating
on unemployment the the next
question madam chair is
What are we doing on people that
are struggling to help them the
levy a.
The burden of the late the
penalties and interest on
gross receipts taxes.
Madam.
Representative.
Contract
And it was estimation special
session legislation that
created.
Through the winter and in
interest on all.
You
Moreover they don't.
anything to enter manage on
active.
Eighty.
Returning.
The focus of the thank you madam
chair Representative Ezzell your
next.
Chair thank.
Okay.
This question is for secretary
Clark on page I hope the stud
faced at rate that slide number
twenty seven.
All.
As of.
Romero.
That
is what I.
Well as.
That that.
Madam chair and representative
visibility having to talk more
about what that was there was a
lawsuit filed by the state for.
Hello County.
November twenty eighteen and the
tax action rather than a partner
that litigation and it ended up
having over thirty eight even
about forty minutes to pull an
account on linkedin
prior to twenty eighteen that
that's references and Revenue
incorrectly distributed server
local and state
Revenue and the hello my name is
netted out in have members
receipts tax revenue and that's
why.
One
twenty two revenue.
Thank you very much.
Thank you very much
Representative Ezzell next is
Representative Hochman Vigil.
You very much Mr chair and
thanks for these really
informative and educational
presentations little our state
so please forgive me.
my first question I think goes
to is in the LFC report on page
two and also on page seven we're
talking about the distributions
to the early childhood education
funding three hundred forty two
point seven I believe next year
and then another sixty four
point three million year after
totaling a total of with a total
of one point two seven billion
then you have this great
appendix number five were you go
into further granularity on how
we're going to be receiving
these funds into the early
childhood education
funding and how we're going to
this distribute some of them for
program funding my question Mr
Chairman is the is with all of
this money going to E. C. E. and
with the volatility that
respected down Rhode Island gas
prices do we have a plan for if
the money in that fund exceeds
the need for programming and
that funded is there a way to
perhaps bring money back from it
should we need it if you know
further need arises.
You Mr chair representative
that that's a good question I
believe we did a presentation to
the LFC in December which
attempted to sort of show a
couple different high uptake
scenarios for early childhood
programs and low
scenarios and and the current
forecast shows that they could
absorb the additional
distributions that we're
expecting but of course if these
things continue to to grow more
quickly than we expect it could
exceed so do you have a couple
options you could obviously use
some of those revenues two
instead of general fund if if
they exceed the total need of
the department of you can also
expand the uses of the fund you
could you know expand to the the
allowable uses also for children
but and in other departments as
well rather than just the early
childhood and education care
department those are a couple
of.
The options yeah she's looking
at specials okay thank you Mr
and is the so it sounds like
there is a the ability for the
general fund to claw back some
of those monies and or expanded
the program usage beyond early
childhood that wasn't thousand
law.
That's right Mr Chairman
representative you you couldn't
climb back when you could you
know change out general fund for
this funding source but you
could you could also in the case
of all the reserves being
depleted tap into the fund that
is in the law.
Thank thank you
Mr chair my second question if
you go to page two of the LFC
report
the state labor participation
participation continues to be
halted due to health concerns
and also child care needs I
remember that we had talked
about LFC during and from we
received a report on the status
of child care availability in
the state of New Mexico and so I
was wondering if we can get an
update on that as we go into
this budgetary session and you
know if we can get additional
information if it's available on
that.
Great and then my third question
Mr chair just wanted to catch
one thing here and the LFC than
it New Mexico B. B. E. R. report
estimates New Mexico job jobs
will return to pre pandemic
levels at the school year twenty
four however I if I'm reading
this right to DFA analysis as
this isn't expecting that to
occur until fiscal year twenty
six so I'd like to know which is
it and if you guys can reach can
have can reach consensus on that
because I think that's a really
important number for all of date
for us all to know sure Madam
chair representative we use two
different national forecast
national forecasters the DFA
economists use moody's and
moody's expects recovery in
twenty twenty six we use I. H.
S. which partners with bureau
the bureau of business and
economic research at UNM and
they are the ones estimating
fiscal year twenty four so we we
consider both in our estimates
but you know reaching a
consensus.
Wouldn't make sense for those
two national forecasters okay
and you guys have an opinion on
that Mr chairman and madam
chair.
Act the reason we consider both
madam chair and representative
is sort of the benefit of the
diversity of opinion it all
tends to be likely somewhere in
between the two.
Thank you very much.
Really thank you Representative
Lara.
Thank you madam chair of this
question is for Mr Taurus with
the fund LFC report so it's
going through it and I plan on
page nine the impact aid
liability.
what concern over I was reading
the the the section of what
concerned me was that last
paragraph.
Point is that there's an
outstanding
that there's and that there's an
outstanding balance here the
current fund balance is
insufficient to cover the cost
likely recording additional an
additional appropriation in the
twenty twenty two social provide
very five point one million so I
went over to the.
To be a transfer from one and I
find that the state support fund
and our revenues I see the
notation on there and it says
here that ought to show that the
transfer was and maybe from the
K. three plus program to the
support to the support fund do
we know why that hasn't happened
in terms of.
Madam chair representative I
believe the department had made
it at that point it was supposed
to be in FY twenty one but we're
expecting that to show up in FY
twenty two now we have confirmed
with the public education
department that it occurred so
it will show up in FY twenty two
you could see that that revenues
line if you're looking at that
attachment and I believe there
is the appropriation in house
bill two to make sure that that
fund is solvent okay okay so so
then madam chair Mr Taurus so do
we know what the delay was from
PED doing that is our what was
the reason for that.
Madam chair representative I
don't I'm happy to follow up
with you on that yeah if you
would please as I'm curious to
see because you know this is
something that was supposed to
be done this.
This year and and for what it
looks like renters were
estimating it for for twenty two
and it should be taken care of
now.
Thank you Mr secretary thank you
madam chair hiding
Representative small thank you
very much madam chair thank you
to both secretaries and things
Mr thought as then madam chair
and Mr todas and secretary want
to chime in.
You noted that New Mexico is the
only oil producing state amongst
the top three to return and
actually eclipse pre pandemic
levels.
of production so.
It is a is it fair then to note
that even as worldwide demand
was weak New Mexico production
began to search.
Madam Mr chair.
That that is a tough question I
don't know if it's fair to say
that production surged while
demand was weak because when
those prices fell because of
weak demand New Mexico's
production also fell but I think
it would be fair to say that New
Mexico production.
Is it is likely to grow first.
Okay that thank you thank you Mr
thought as I it
I think it up this will be
something I'm excited to really
dialogue during this session
because it your note that at the
at the depths with with the
demand destruction we felt that
just like every other state and
country for that matter but we
even even as demand was lower
than pre pandemic levels New
Mexico's production has surged
over twenty percent.
And with demand risk from home
across on and other things we
see production.
It continued elevated production
and the foundation for actually.
Again increase production on the
horizon is that fair to say with
the number of rigs the
technology that's advancing the
the fact that.
Oil from the Delaware portion of
that is located significantly in
New Mexico is likely some of the
lowest emissions oil anywhere in
the world we see continued
production growth over the next
couple of years the the the The
presentation reflects that but I
I think it then last the
question madam chair Mister told
us to conclude that.
I would not be surprised to see
production in our current
worldwide environment even with
some of the risks from increased
interest rates and other things.
For demand we see that
continuing to rise at a
worldwide level and production
seems to rise response some of
the past this anywhere in the
world in New Mexico is that fair
to say.
Madam chair I would agree okay
so we shouldn't that I would not
be surprised madam chair Mister
Fotis secretaries to actually
see continued oil production
volume growth over the next few
months even though we of course
cannot that that is not nowhere
near a permanent state of
affairs but it is a short term
state of affairs that seems
quite likely given where we are
and the resulting fiscal
strength
The that that that are we would
likely find ourselves working
from.
Thank you madam to.
Largescale Representative Dixon
go ahead.
Thank you madam chair to follow
up from the.
Representative lost.
Workers.
It's hard to top these four zero
four.
The property.
I.
That New Mexico over the numbers
better than Texas the specially.
Absolutely Madam chair
representative Dixon the Permian
basin in New Mexico has.
Ostensibly we've we've you know
read a lot on this and and has
the best economics in the world
so the lowest sort of break even
price on a per barrel is in New
Mexico and and that's why you're
seeing it surge in New Mexico
and on other states.
I think madam chair.
Okay do we have any other
questions from the committee.
If not I'm gonna ask David to
come up to the table if there
are some questions that I have I
want to start on page thirteen
of the LFC three.
This is gonna be the most
important document you all can
know about.
That's our general fund
financial so.
Yeah it was shocking to me but
there's a number of people that
don't know how to read this
document so we're going to go
through it today I'm gonna
understand how to read it.
That's on page thirteen.
This.
I'd suggest finding the same
document which is more up to
date is okay what what.
I'm here.
Just.
Through the funding of broke
the.
This book open yeah.
To see the production manager
that the page one eighty three
and and volume one.
The like this version because it
has a record.
Hey everybody this page one
eighty three volume one table
for the general fund financial
summary.
If there's one thing we walk out
of today and that's learning and
knowing how to read this so
let's let's go through this
David and.
I would like to have a
particular focus by the
committee obviously on the FY
twenty twenty three call on
that's what we're working on so
wait.
So why don't we why don't we go
ahead and fire up here David
let's go through this.
People can understand what we're
doing here.
One mistake in our this budget
document we didn't include the
one with the spending
recommendation we will bring
that this afternoon.
The appropriation account is the
checking account in effect for
the general fund.
It's receives almost all
revenues and it's the account
from which general fund
appropriations are typically
made unless they're specified to
come from reserves and one other
thing about the definition of
the general fund the general
fund gets all revenue X. and and
it isn't earmarked to another
phone so so
Let's see we've and then of
course we distinguish between
recurring revenue and non
recurring revenue.
And the non recurring revenue at
times has been extraordinary
sometimes nonrecurring you've
revenue even counts as recurring
like
there was a year that bonus
income from federal lands was
over a billion dollars was
quarters for recurring yet
typically that's like fifty
million and then we up to we get
update the forecast which we
show times that we get the
August forecast in the December
forecast and you'll get an
update about January thirty
first before you take final
action on house bill two so
total revenue for shown at
eight.
Of the million six hundred and
forty nine million and I can
tell you both the LFC and exec
recommended revenue of
reductions and LESC will take
that as a bill a week from today
but both the governor and the
the LFC for example have a
quarter percent gross receipts
tax reduction at least for LFC
it's a staff recommendation till
next week so in LA at the LFC
recommendation that number comes
down four hundred million set
aside for revenue the move to
appropriations that's house bill
two section for FY twenty three
recurring appropriations and
then nonrecurring appropriations
are typically in the back of the
bill think about section five
special appropriations section
six
Special supplemental
appropriations and section five
includes I. T..
And then in section eight we
have compensation which is
typically not included in in
your agency action all the
hearing she'll have this week
don't include come up they're
typically separate it with the
exception of schools we Roland
and mainly for convenience and
then finally the LFC
recommendation has sections nine
and ten which are spending of
our money.
As well as extraordinary
spending from general fund
reserves before we go into the
session reserves are looking to
be over forty percent LFC
recommended spending about a
billion dollars of general fund
reserves to bring it down to a
target of thirty percent so
that's the last row in you don't
see it here because would
include our spending but will
bring it in this afternoon are
we LFC recommendation has
reserves of thirty point nine
percent about two point six
billion.
With the Executive
recommendations at thirty six
percent although that doesn't
include
Really a recommendation from the
executive for our part.
Or for drawing down all the
nonrecurring general fund
surplus okay then we go to the
the general fund reserves which
are on the second page which is
one eighty four.
Of your budget document.
And the operating reserve.
This like the savings account
for our check checking account.
And the surplus.
Of the appropriation account is
typically are transferred to the
operating reserve at the end of
the fiscal year with some
exceptions or alternatively if
there's more spending than
revenue which will be the case
with all the nonrecurring
revenue to spend than the
operating reserve is drawn down
to cover spending the savings
account covers a shortfall in
our checking account or it
receives the surplus of this the
checking account because the
checking account the
appropriation account is what we
call a zero balance account.
Now in addition to the operating
reserve the savings account and
with the LFC recommendation we
show that reaching almost three
hundred million at the end of
next year we have the
appropriation contingency fund.
And that mostly is used to cover
disaster spending the disasters
of the one kind of spending that
can happen from the general fund
without appropriation there is a
continuing appropriation for the
governor to have authority to
declare that there's an
emergency or disaster and
authorize it seven hundred fifty
thousand a pop spending from the
appropriation contingency fund
to address the disaster and also
it's that's and then we have the
state support reserve.
Which is to cover a shortfall in
appropriations from the state
equalization guarantee this is
less important than it used to
be because we have more
predictability in school funding
because it's based on prior year
enrollment growth in the current
year so the uncertainties less
than it used to be but
nevertheless we use the state
support reserve in case we don't
have enough money to cover
school appropriations then we
have the tobacco settlement
permanent fund which gets.
Half of the tobacco revenue call
at thirty million a year
typically.
sometimes more sometimes less
half of it is available for the
appropriation the other amount
goes to the tobacco settlement
permanent fund balances around
three hundred million growing by
about half of that thirty
million a year just as an aside
at some point you might wonder
why we even should count the
tobacco settlement permanent
fund as part of general fund
reserves.
especially with reserves as high
as they are it it might not hurt
to think about pulling it out of
the general fund I know for a
fact when you're when we're
totally broke somebody had the
great idea when we count the
tobacco settlement permanent
fund as part of general fund
reserves to dress up the balance
sheet that's not very important
the.
And then finally of the tax
stabilization reserve and when
the operating reserve of is more
than eight percent.
Balance is going to the tax
stabilization reserve but much
more importantly windfall oil
and gas revenues go into the tax
stabilization reserve
and we're in a situation now
where when I went full I mean to
say revenues greater than the
five year average we're gonna be
in that situation for several
years so those balances are
soaring with that is to help me
hello of the the relation to the
early childhood trust one if
reserves are already at twenty
five percent there they go to
the to the.
So we're in that situation with
reserves greater twenty five
percent and there it is the
third to last row transfer I
don't early childhood trust fund
on the order of a half a billion
dollars a year and we don't
count the early childhood trust
fund as part of general fund
reserves and it's heading
physically so that on page one
thirteen.
Volume three.
Thirteen.
Early childhood first for those
heading to have
Yeah one thirteen balances
approaching three billion
dollars at the end of next
fiscal year and again that's not
part of general fund reserves of
thirty to forty percent or
around three billion so if you
count that we really have six
billion.
To respond LFC will bring in a
bill to proposed changes in the
methodology to tap the early
childhood Trust Fund it's it's
somewhat modest but the formula
basically says it's worth
looking at one thirteen.
The formula says five percent of
the prior five year average well
with the brand new fund the
prior five year average isn't
very much because it three four
five years ago the phone didn't
even exist so the fund is only
generating thirty million
dollars next fiscal year LFC
will bring in a bill to expand
that thirty million to forty
million thank you can see
quickly by twenty four that
number grows from thirty or
forty under the LFC bill to
sixty eight to one hundred and
seventy five by FY twenty six
so.
That's a lot of money coming to
the to be available for early
childhood uses the LFC bill will
also expand the uses and then
finally if the state gotten a
gem is a mention Mister Torrez
mentioned there are there
provisions to tap the early
childhood trust fund to support
maintain general fund spending
in the state where the tobacco
settlement permanent funds being
used.
maybe just of the final comment
we used to.
Thirty years ago is to think
five percent reserves for the
general fund was the right
number but oil and gas
volatility from that concept out
the window and became ten and
twenty and and.
It just allow us six years twice
the legislature's had to cut
spending after the been passed I
think in twenty seventeen was
significant one of the
perspective first bill of the
session to roll back spending
and then in June of twenty
twenty in the pandemic here you
had to sharply cut spending from
growth of three or four percent
to minus six percent for many
agencies and roll back pay so
again this that this I think Mr
Torrez and others mentioned the
general fund is getting one
third of revenue directly from
oil and gas and just a month to
month there's tremendous
volatility of as mentioned
natural gas prices went were
five fifty in December and
they're both they were both for
last week will come back a
little bit so that volatility
and increasing dependence for
the general fund is the reason
to have much higher general fund
reserves than was thought to be
needed in the past so you don't
have to take those drastic
actions to unwind spending that
you have already committed to
a lancer questions but that's L.
as motivational questions and I
got some comments also will
start with a research Chattfield
on this.
Go ahead.
Thank you madam chair.
Madam my question is how do we
on this money go into the land
grant permanent fund in the
Associated Fund within it okay
so let's look at page one of one
for you.
One.
I think this will.
This is a hundred thousand foot
view of state finances.
And.
Over the years on average about
half of oil production came from
state lands.
Lea County it into a less lesser
percent.
And royalties on state lands.
There are investments land grant
permanent fund royalties at
twelve and a half percent.
The into the land grant
permanent fund.
And then the investment income
for the land grant permanent
fund to the general fund which
is the air on the top left
corner yes interest twelve point
seven percent.
So royalties can be spent their
corpus there for perpetuity but
investment income from the land
grant permanent fund can be
spent chief common school share
of the land grant permanent fund
is eighty percent of personal
that total or.
The answer questions.
Yes Sir thank you thank you
madam chair.
Sweetser thank you madam.
David I.
I think that we should look at
the tobacco settlement funds
issue and stop taking that half
doesn't require legislation.
Thank.
Serve Armstrong thank you madam
chair I was curious to know I
can't really remember how the
the new
early childhood education fund
pass but if I remember correctly
there was language in there that
that had to be the last fund
that was swept is that correct
that's right chair okay thank
you madam chair.
Representative Eli.
thanks for taking the time to go
through this I.
So.
So.
One of the three.
As one
god for FY.
Right.
Billion.
I I just just four point three
four revenue number and track
that from the FY twenty two
estimated total program.
Operating budget.
Recurring appropriation.
And then the next page.
Thank.
For the fact.
I think that we've that if the
balance in the operating reserve
exceeds eight percent in our in
our operating.
Expenses.
In excess of that falls into the
tax stabilization reserve the
right that's right now in terms
of
is there any other inputs and
the staff there was a center of
the operator yes madam chair and
and not director Avid was
pointing that out that the
transfers into that or the
excess of the five year average
for oil and gas school tax
revenues and so they go in there
but because reserves are over
twenty five percent they come
right back out and go straight
to the early childhood trust
fund so if you're under twenty
five percent that would be an
additional distribution to that
of that would start.
Once you hit that twenty five
percent more for and again the
twenty five percent twenty five
percent of.
Recurring appropriation
Representative once you get that
point five percent and what
staff and say when we start
falling out to the early early
childhood Trust Fund.
And then.
If the.
Operators are registered for all
the office to the operator.
Drops below a certain level that
we follow money out of this tax
stabilization reserve to back up
that.
The there is one case madam
chair Representative Lane if.
If the operating reserve is
below one percent recurring
appropriations then there is a
transfer from the tax
stabilization reserve just to
get the operating reserve to one
percent that's the only time
that transfer occurs unless
there's an emergency declaration
and and a budget is passed to
transfer them out and.
In the back of the bill
typically every year there's a
provision for transferring
revenue from reserves if there's
a revenue shortfall of revenues
over estimates.
And there's a bill safe
mechanism that Mr Taurus
described if there's less than
one percent move some
automatically into the to take.
Two to one percent of the
operating reserve automatically
cover shortfall but if there's a
shortfall beyond that
That's why there's a provision
in the back authorizing the
transfer of up to six million
hunt typically a hundred million
or two hundred million and it's
one of the last things you do
you kind of look at what you're
spending level is what you're
revenue levels are what the
balances are and then thank what
kind of cushion a like one
percent is reasonable that's a
provision in the back and then
finally the failsafe mechanism
even if that's not enough the
transfer offers from reserves to
cover the spending.
Then you use that fail safe
mechanism.
After last.
I got.
The the in fact.
Or.
Will.
Access from well yes with school
tax.
The alcoholics or.
Fifty five percent in the fact
that building for.
Stabilization reserve and that
goes or coke Trust Fund and then
if we did below one percent more
than the other office of that.
The last four again is one of
authorized in the back of the
bill so look at look at the
you'll see in the version that
includes our recommendations LFC
recommended total spending of
nine point five billion revenues
are only nine point two.
Well even going budget plan
says.
We spend a lot of nonrecurring
we don't need forty three
percent was ours what if we
spend that we need to get money
we need to pull money out of
reserves.
So there's the row
Transfer transfer to from
operating reserve and there is a
shortfall on the first page of
two sixty three point seven.
It is the truth there it is two
sixty transfers from to
appropriations.
That's the shortfall that would
it requires authorization in the
back of the bill.
All righty Representative
Anderson thank you madam
chairman of madam chair and I
just had two quick questions one
of each file well I heard of the
issue choose of school Texan I
was curious what's the
difference between the emergency
school tax in the school tax the
same with that change its name
or is it still in statute as an
emergency school tax Madam chair
representative it's still
statutory emergency school thank
you that are director Avid I
have one final question and it
goes to the billion dollar
windfall that you referred to
was that largely from federal
oil and gas bonuses in the
leasing.
No thank you would you could you
I think it's from gas but the
bonus thing happened in FY
eighteen nineteen.
But the windfall in twenty two
revenues came in much stronger
than estimated resulting in
reserves getting over forty
percent thank you Sir it we
maybe get the difference that
there what the billion I was
talking about was about three or
four years ago.
That's FY nineteen.
That price driven or did it come
from New Mexico share of federal
oil and gas leasing it in
production it came from price
expectations because it was a
bonus income offered to acquire
leases so as expectations about
future prices the coast
companies to bid to the federal
government vast sums to obtain
the right to leases of which the
state got half.
In my last question is was that
before the federal leasing
moratorium on federal lands.
Yes thank you.
Representative small that thank
you very much madam chair thank
you very much director Abbey
It's a really incredible chance
to go deeply through the madam
chair Mr Abbey use said that
we're likely to see access
district continue distributions
to the early childhood Trust
fund because of of excess
revenues do you have a time
frame or we think madam chair Mr
Abbey Alaska's public request
and first in terms of a of a
time frame for that expectation
would you set a time frame for
us.
She began to perform.
One.
Thirteen thank you.
So.
The greatest problem is right
now that the fund is going so
passed the formula hasn't caught
up.
But in two years from now or so
like FY twenty five and twenty
six we have five year history of
the fund.
The distribution is going to
soar and if we continue the past
twenty six you know you get five
percent of three million is
going to.
Of the well a hundred hundred.
Fifty nine so it looks like that
FY twenty six if the three year
average this is distributions.
This is the we will look at the
road distribution to E. C.
program that's that's the fund
that's about five percent of the
prior year average so from FY
two by FY twenty six will have a
the trust fund is kind of
working the way it hopes to
dispute it would work like as a
permanent fund if you want to
keep it as a permanent.
But because it also is a
close a reserve fund that you
might tap if you had a sharp
downturn.
well it's just another demand
for the for the phone so the the
challenge in FY twenty three is
the fund is reaching well
actually misspoke to cause FY
twenty six months balances for a
half billion without any change
so five percent of four and a
half million is two hundred
twenty five million please still
not even then in that
distributing five percent but
the real crunch happens in FY
twenty three where the statute
limits the distribution only
thirty million in order to allow
the corpus to grow well that's
obsolete.
On the other hand there isn't a
huge need for recurring revenue
there's a modest need in the LFC
bill takes the thirty million to
forty million.
But then look at FY twenty for
the distribution grows to sixty
eight million so there's real
help on the way to generate
funding for those programs and
the LESC recommendation.
that the statute provides money
to only go to the early
childhood education and care
department but I I think it's
the the LFC record staff
recommendation will expand the
use to CYFD an arranger programs
like domestic violence and
sexual assault counseling and
other purposes and
You know I think that's
consistent with the intent to
address needs of families and
not just here to fund so
thinking more about zero to
eighteen oh zero to twenty one
is eligible beneficiaries and
combined with the for the but
before the formula cupcakes into
much greater level like in
twenty five and twenty six
looking at expanding the the
amount from the thirty million
cap.
Thank you madam chair thank you
Mr thank you Director Abbey and
you've noted but just to
reaffirm that that modest
expansion both of of of amount
of support and the beneficiaries
to go into CYFD that does take
that does require legislation
which is currently being
contemplated again in a very
modest sort of away is that
thank okay and then madam chair
director Abbey.
Even within that scenario we're
we're so much additional revenue
is going into the early
childhood Trust Fund.
If we continue to see New Mexico
oil production growth
particularly coupled with
exceptionally high prices which
was the environment we're in
now.
We actually see albeit more
slowly than if we didn't have
these trust funds we see
continued expansion of New
Mexicos general state budget to
oil and gas.
Yes yes yes so madam chair
director Avid I think.
And what that time line is given
that it's it is this it does
seem very much the short term
outlook.
How short term that is whether
that's a few months what for if
that for an extended period of
time.
Not for discussion now that I
know you know worldwide oil
demand P. is certainly an
important.
consideration in that area since
New Mexico seems to be so well
positioned to supply the world
The bottom line is we're gonna
have we're likely to have.
short term very elevated even
general fund revenues even after
the trust fund which are not
permanent they won't be
recurring you know mid twenty
thirties so we can't act as if
they are but we do have this
window of time where year over
year revenues are likely to be
elevated even with the trust
funds.
I think in the this decade of
the twenties.
Seventy five the risks are
probably on the upside for oil
and gas and then it's the
thirties yeah when.
Transition away from oil and gas
really batters state revenues.
Madam chair director Avid I I
totally agree and I think it
helps give us a very.
Give us a good frame to work out
through the as you say the rest
of the twenty twenties knowing
the changes absolutely on the
horizon thank you madam chair
okay have a question for
secretary Romero and this is on
the general fund financial
summary on your page forty four
I'd like to know why state
support reserves different than
what we have for LFC secretary
Romero.
our executive budget
recommendations.
This is what what appendix three
on page forty for your general
fund financial summary.
The state support reserve.
If this is done by a consensus
revenue they're all supposed to
be working together I want to
know why it's different than the
one we have here for state
support fund for the LFC.
Chair I am definitely going to
have to look into that because
we do because that we do work
with the agencies and we have
the consensus revenue and so
I'll just I'll get back to you
on that find out why there's a
difference.
The.
Okay
You have a comment on that David
mmhm.
There's a little difference the
executive as a recommendation to
cover twenty million for that
shortfall from last year and we
have thirty million I think the
higher figures probably needed
but other than that I think the
bounces should be somewhat.
It might my point on that is is
this is for the state
equalization funding formula
inside the education budget I
can't imagine that it would be
lower than what we put in for
LFC
I think I just listen to that
would be one that education
group in front of you all so we
now we think the need is thirty
one perhaps locally okay is
there anything else we need to
ask of these presenters.
I want to thank you all for the
presentations today Paul
secretaries of and LFC is you
done a good job here
I think we may go back through
this general fund financial
summary again I think it doesn't
hurt to hear a couple of times
over but is good at it down a
little bit better so I want to
thank you all for the
presentation I want to move into
something else before we break
for lunch.
In front of you is the schedule.
Our hearing scheduled for this.
Yeah maybe we better.
Okay I need to visit with the
committee privately.
Everybody.
I'm here.
We excuse themselves.
Alburnus all right.
Yeah I need.
One of the.
