That
Representative Herrera.
Representative little
representative Lujan.
Representative Pettigrew.
Representative Sanchez.
Representative Sariana.
Representative Silva.
here.
Representative Vincent.
Vice chair Dixon.
chair of small.
We have a quorum. Great, thank
you very much. We'll ask from
Hendon, uh.
To
Come on.
And we're on House Bill 58.
Good afternoon, Mr. Chair,
members of the committee. It's
my honor to tell you about House
Bill 58. House Bill 58 would
make an appropriation to the
public education department to
support mental health training
and wellness spaces in
kindergarten through the 12th
grade. The bill would also
direct the use of, of some of
the funds.
For a culture centered suicide
prevention training for school
personnel, students and the
community.
And Mr.
Chair members of the committee.
I just want to say thank you for
putting the money in the budget
for these mental health rooms to
continue. We have 14 so far in
schools across the state, and
now you're going to make it
possible for more schools to ask
for them during the last uh
legislative session, we had 41
requests, but we couldn't fill
them all because we lacked the
funding, so, uh, Mr. Chair and
members of the committee, I
stand for any questions that you
may have.
Excellent. Thank you very much
from Sanfo and thank you for
your advocacy, as you noted,
this is in the budget. Uh, are
there anybody who wish to
Republic?
Come on up.
Sorry.
Appreciate it. Uh, Chairman,
committee members, my name is
Edward Webster. I am the uh
government relations director
with NDA New Mexico. Uh, we
stand in strong support of HB
58, and we thank the
representatives and the sponsors
for bringing it forward. Uh, NEA
NM members primary concern every
day is the health and well-being
and instruction of our students,
um, in the age of social media,
students can be bullied at all
hours of the day, um, data tells
us the poor mental health
outcomes lead to poor academic.
outcomes and impede
instructions. And we also know
that suicide and suicidal
behavior is increasing in New
Mexico.
And then the rest of the United
States.
Attempted suicides in grades 9
through 12 in New Mexico was
9.7% in 2009.
It was 10.5% in 2019 and that's
based on LESC's, uh, analysis.
New Mexico needs more money
invested in mental health school
programs, not less to achieve
improved academic outcomes.
Please vote yes on HB 50.
8. Thank you. Great. Thank you
very much. OK, um, is there
anybody online?
Great. Uh, we're gonna go to
Gabrielle.
Good afternoon, Mr. Chair,
members of the committee. My
name is Gabrielle Dietrich. I am
the executive director of Nami
New Mexico.
in strong support of this bill,
we believe that normalizing
discussions around mental
health.
Illness is the way to fight
stigma both among young people
and then going forward into the
future. Thank you very much.
Great. Thank you very much.
And, uh, who's that, who's the
admin?
Oh great. OK. Uh, Nat Dean.
Good afternoon, uh, Mr. Chair,
members of the committee and
sponsor in the interest of time
because the days are running
long. I stand in support of this
bill. It creates a wider
opportunity to address mental
health concerns early on rather
than later on and later on can
have more significant
detrimental impacts. Thank you
very much.
Very much.
OK, that concludes the public
comment. Uh again,
representative, you've noted
that this is in the budget and
it builds on past work which uh
I want to thank you and others
for their leadership on. We'll
go to committee questions to
represent Pettigroup.
I thought I waited long enough
to be last.
Thank you, Chairman. Uh, thank
you, Representative for your
bill. I have one question.
If your clinic
School-based clinic is not
school
state funded.
Does this still work?
So, um, uh, Mr. Chair, members
of the of the committee. I'm not
sure I'd call it a clinic, so
they are wellness rooms that
would be staffed with people who
have a background in.
In psychology, sociology, um,
mental health.
So, um,
In terms of their background in
schooling, and it also has
equipment and.
And um
And and individual items that
will help it students when
they're going through stressful
items. So you're asking me if it
would be uh if it would exist if
we didn't have state funding, so
I would probably say, I don't
know the answer to that.
Thank you, Chairman. Thank you.
Thank you, Representative
Pettigrew. Next we have
Representative Vincent.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Thank you,
Representative Fernan.
If a child or a student, it does
not have Medicaid. Are they
still able to receive the
services. Mr. Chair, members of
the committee, yes.
Oh I have. Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Perfect. OK, thank you very much
Vincent. OK, I don't see any
other questions we're gonna ask
for a motion to table simply
because the funding is already
in the budget, um.
Oh, sorry. Uh,
OK, great.
Thank you. Uh, it's been moved
by Representative Little.
So by Representative Garrett in
the opposition to that motion,
saying none.
Thank you and thank you very
much again, Representative
Ferndon. Uh, next we'll invite
Rosinerrera.
Up for House Bill 239.
Mr. Chair, members of the
committee, your timing is
impeccable. I think it's
Just right that we should have
this bill before us on Espanola
day at the Capitol.
And with that, uh, seeing
there's already money in the
budget for this, uh, for the
feasibility study, I
respectfully request that we
table this legislation.
OK, uh, uh, we'll open for a
motion to table. This is, uh, so
House Bill 239, uh,
It is in the budget for
feasibility studies. Any
questions that folks have?
Being um
uh OK, it's been moved uh by
member Chatfield.
Seconded by
Um
But uh, there's a second by
representative.
Uh, Luhan, before we go to that.
Wait, let me go back.
Um
We've already started the motion
process. We're gonna go, we'll
vote on that and then I'll
announce where the phone is at.
Is there any opposition to that
motion to table, seeing none.
That's been uh moved uh the
there are feasibility studies, I
believe, to cultural affairs,
uh, where the funding is to for
that's associated with this.
And happy to follow up with
getting the
Uh,
if members, it's a special
appropriation can director, can
you just send that out in an
email to folks. Great. Thank you
very much.
OK, uh, members, we're gonna go
on now ask Representative Luhan
to come down with a House Bill
113 as amended. Quick note,
members, um, for bills that have
amendments, uh, our staff has
put those amendments at the
front of the bill in our books.
This is gonna be a committee
substitute, uh, which the staff
Great to see both members there.
Thank you, Representative Wuhan.
Thank you, Representative
Sanchez. Uh, please start us
off.
Introduce your uh experts, and
then we'll go from there. Thank
you, Mr. Chair. I'll have them
introduce themselves my experts.
Good afternoon, chair, members
of the committee. My name is
Stacy Sutton Kirby. I'm the
chief government affairs officer
at Animal Protection New Mexico
and Animal protection voters.
Good afternoon to Small and
members of the committee. I am
Judy Wolf, Chief Human
Communities Officer for Animal
Protection New Mexico and Animal
Protection voters.
Great. OK, uh, members, we have
a committee substitute. Can you,
can we have a motion, uh, in a
second just to for discussion
purposes.
It's been moved by Vice Cha
Dixon saying by Representative
Garrett, can you read us the 231
number, please. Thank you, Mr.
Chair. It's 231-423.1. OK. And
can you explain the substitute?
Yes sir, Mr. Chair, committee,
we had a, a bill that created an
animal protection fund.
It's OK.
And um.
So
The subs with the substitute
does is it moves it from a fund,
uh, investment fund into a
straight appropriation, Mr. Mr.
Chair, um, after consultation
with DFA. DFA, um, uh, spoke
with us in and um had expressed
concern that the the the $7
million that we have in HB 2 was
not that there was some er with
a low amount and it creating an
investment fund with that, so
they advised that we create uh
uh instead, just.
a regular appropriations chair
and and with that we'd stand.
Great. OK, thank you for that.
Are there any questions on the
substitute?
Seeing none, is there, can I
have a motion to adopt the
committee. It's been moved by
Representative Little.
Seconded by Representative Silva
to this would be to adopt the
House appropriations and Finance
Committee substitute for House
Bill 113. Is there any
opposition to that motion being
no, we've adopted the committee
substitute.
Uh, next, we're gonna, um, uh,
go to public comment. Is there
anybody who wishes to make
comment on
House Bill 1 13th, please.
Uh, Mr. Chairman, members of the
committee, my name is Drew
Sutter, registered lobbyist.
Thank you.
OK, we have a few folks online.
Anybody, I don't see anybody
else in person uh online.
Let's, uh, start with Grant
Sizemore.
Go ahead, Grant, please.
Hi, uh, Chair, Vice Chair and
members of the committee. My
name is Grant Sizemore, and I am
the director of invasive species
programs that American Bird
Conservancy.
Our organization supports
effective management of pet
animals, uh, but management
strategies, however, must not
sacrifice the health and welfare
of people, other domestic
animals and wildlife. House Bill
113 as written would provide
public funding for programs that
intentionally keep stray and
feral animals roaming the
landscape, um, where sterilized
or not, they continue to
contribute to widespread harms,
including property damage,
nuisances, disease transmission
risks and threats to wildlife.
So we asked that should
this bill move forward, that it
be amended to prohibit public
funds to enable the release of
cats or dogs to run at large.
Instead exclusively support
programs that move.
Yeah, they removed these animals
from the environment. Thank you
very much. Thank you.
Next, we're gonna go to Cynthia
Carter.
Cynthia for one minute or less.
Can you unmute?
Oh, sorry about that. Um,
Uh, good afternoon, Mr. Chair,
members of the committee, um, I
want to ask that you consider
voting for HB 113. I strongly
support it. Um, I, it, it's come
to my attention that many
shelters and rural New Mexico
are either nonexistent or poorly
run, um, one example I came
across recently is one domestic
animal shelter in a poor part of
the state, which has a very
large population, homeless
animals that are taken in and
euthanized week weekly. I
learned that recently they
changed the
and now killing them after 14
days, regardless of adoptability
or space. Um, people in the
community are poor, when their
dogs go missing, they're rounded
up, taken to the shelter where
they're required to pay for spay
neuter and vaccines before they
could retrieve them, and then
because they cannot afford this.
Most people abandon them, and
then 14 days later they're
killed.
Um, another example I saw a post
on Facebook about two dogs tied
up in freezing to death in
Colfax County.
Um, well, um, I think that, um,
the, our state has a number,
record number of stray dogs that
are not spaying neutered. Um, we
euthanize over 20,000 annually
if we have the funds available,
we can actually um develop more
spay neuter mobile clinics,
education, financial assist.
OK.
OK, next we're gonna go to Stacy
Vass.
Stacy go ahead for one minute or
less. Hello, um, Mr. Chair and
members of the committee, my
name is Stacy Voss, and I am the
former director of the
Farmington Regional Animal
Shelter that serves the city of
Farmington and San Juan County.
I'm also the chair of the animal
sheltering committee that serves
underneath the New Mexico Board
of Veterinary Medicine. Um, I
stand in support of HB 113. I
have firsthand knowledge of
shelters and their states or
status across the state and
they're in dire need of funding
upgrading and resources so that
they can help their communities
and
help the people and animals of
their communities. Thank you.
Thank you.
Next, we're gonna go to Letty.
Van cabbage, Letty.
Yes, my name is Lady Van
Cabbage, and I'm senior
legislative attorney for Best
Friends Animal Society, and I
thank you, um, Mr. Chair and
members of the committee, we
urge you to support this
important bill. More than 60% of
households have pets, but um the
majority of people, um, have
problems getting veterinary
care. Indeed, in 2023, 87,000
dogs and cats entered shelters
in New Mexico, the highest
number of
animals entering shelters per
capita out of any state in the
country, and a 25% of those were
surrendered by their families.
The the most common reason why
they were surrendered is they
couldn't afford veterinary care.
So, um, this has ramifications,
fiscal ramifications for cities
and counties. It's expensive to
maintain animal care and
control, especially with that
many animals coming in. So
again, we urge you to support
this bill, and we do support
trap, neuter and return.
uh for feral cats as the only
thing that has been proven to
control the cat population.
Thank you for your
consideration. Thank you very
much. We're gonna conclude with
Mayor Ken Brennan.
Uh, Mayor Brennan.
Thank you, Mr. Chair and
committee members for hearing us
today. I'm the mayor of
Edgewood, New Mexico, and we
passed a resolution supporting
HB 113, and that was resolution
2025-006. Roy communities are
always struggling to help uh
with their animal control
systems to um and to further um
take care of these animals, and
that's where we run pretty close
to capacity all the time, but we
have a very good adoption rate.
The other programs that we do
have to help to promote the
adoptions are wolf stock that we
have.
year that also requires funding,
which would also fall under this
bill. So I urge you all to pass
and and move forward to a full
election of HB 113. Thank you.
Great. Thank you very much, Mr.
Mayor.
OK, that concludes the public
comment. Any committee
questions?
Oh,
we're gonna start with
Representative Duncan, then go
to Representative.
Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Thank you, Representative
Ms. I have a couple of questions
on um
Page 2
Lane 6, section 2, I guess.
Um, improving the enforcement of
animal cruelty laws, including
investigation and response to
reports of animal cruelty. Is
this not already in statute?
Chairman, um Representative
Duncan, thank you. I'm happy to
answer that question. No, there
is no actual requirement for the
training for animal control
officers, uh, they're
Um, is a great need across the
state to actually train and
retrain animal control officers.
There's a high attrition rate
about 33% of animal control
officers leave the profession
each year, and what we've
noticed, or excuse me, what we
found in our county by county
surveys is that um many
communities, municipal and
county shelters, um, lack
budgeting for training for the
officers to be able to um be up
to
date on the animal cruelty law
and to be able to uh
successfully conduct animal
animal cruelty investigations.
If your question is whether we
have animal cruelty laws and
statute, obviously that, but do
we currently have uh funding for
officers to be able to
successfully enforce those laws
in lots of places, that's not
the case.
Thank you, Mr. Chair and
Representative, I appreciate
that. Um, I mean, that's already
on the books. If I mistreat my
animal, somebody can turn me in
and I'm gonna be in trouble.
So I'm just trying to figure out
why we're doing this again.
Um, you know, as a, as a county,
um, as a city, we have these
statutes on the books already,
um, so thank you, we're just
duplicating laws that are
already there.
So, um, let's go to section 7
then.
Um, providing persons with
essential resources. Can you
explain what essential,
essential is?
What does that mean, Mr.
Chairman Representative Duncan,
um, yeah, I'd be happy to
explain that uh something
essential to keep a dog in their
home with their family, such as
um a dog house or perhaps a a
bag of dog food might be a one
time very low cost and a program
run out of his shelter that
identifies um opportunities to
keep those animals in their
homes by providing those
resources can really
taxpayer dollars because once
you do intake that animal, if
the animal is relinquished
because the homeowner can't,
excuse me, the animal owner
cannot provide those resources.
Now you're looking at $25 to $50
a night, uh, to keep the animal
in the shelter and the average
stay cost about $3000 an animal
before they get adopted out. Uh,
so that's the reason for
considering um those types of um
emergency uh
sources being made available to
people to keep their animals in
their home instead of
relinquishing them.
Thank you for that, um, Ms.
Cher, I, I, um, and I've always
wanted a plane.
Always wanted to be a pilot.
But I don't have a plane because
I can't afford it. This chair,
this is the problem I have with
this bill. If you can't afford a
dog or a cat.
Don't get one.
If you want me to help you as a
human being with food, we've
done that and we will continue
to do that.
But now we're taking another
step going beyond it and saying
not only we're going to do this,
we're going to help you with
your, with your pets as well. If
this bill only said we're going
to put money into counties and
cities to help with uh spay
neutering.
I'm all for that. I have a real
problem when I take that one
step further. I don't golf
either cause I can't afford
$2000 golf clubs.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Thank you
for that, so.
That input, um, however, we know
that when we have a population,
especially in a crisis
population of of elderly.
That they, they, they find
comfort, they found, they find
um.
Companionship, which leads to
better health outcomes,
behavioral health outcomes when
we do have pets in our homes.
We, uh, we are people, uh.
Humans that rely on that
companionship, and we know, uh,
through studies that when we
have that companionship, we do
have better outcomes if we can
help afford those better
outcomes, and I think that's
where we should, those are
dollars well spent, Mr. Chair,
thank you.
Thank you, Mr. Chair and thank
you, Representative. I
appreciate what you said. I
understand that. um I've had
animals my entire life. I just
haven't asked somebody else to
pay the bill. That's the problem
I have with this. So, thank you,
Mr. Chair. That's all I have.
Thank you very much,
Representative Duncan. Uh, next,
we're gonna go to represent.
Um, thank you, Mr. Chair, I just
want to understand you're taking
the appropriation out.
Of this spill. Are you gonna get
a a new bill with.
Thank you, Mr. uh Mr. Chair, uh,
Representative, so, uh, for our,
our process for appropriate
house appropriations and finance
Committee. We take that
appropriation out, um, what we
amended through the committee
substitute was this is no longer
a trust fund, this will be uh
just a regular appropriation.
And so it's the same process of
what you just did with your
bill, uh, Mr. Chip, thank you.
Great. Uh thank you very much,
uh, Representative Merera,
Representative, uh, down,
please.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Thank you,
Representative. I really wanted
to sign on to this bill, and I
was excited until I, I had the
same concern as Duncan. You gave
a very reasonable restricted
example of a one-time bag of pet
food, but there's no
restrictions in this bill from,
do we know the average cost of a
fence. Fencing is an example. Do
we know the average cost of
kennels and is there
veterinarian care, which who
determines which emergency
veterinarian care is approved
and which is not.
Um, and in this, um, what is
considered adequate shelter.
For how many pets, how often can
they request these services?
There seems to be no caps. Did
you consider any caps?
Uh, Mr. Chair, um,
Representative, thank you for
those, uh, uh, for that
question. A lot of that, a lot
of those, um, questions can be
answered through local
ordinances and through um
as for, especially, um, not so
much the caps, but the need is
so vast and great that we are
going to allow those local
governments to help us to make
those decisions. So as far as
where their needs are to pay for
those needs, um, they know, um,
in the local, uh, the our local
governments know where those
needs are and where those
fundings are are necessary.
Um, but a lot of the ordinances
already in place as far as like.
You know, number of animals and
things like that. Thank you, Mr.
Chair. Thank you, Mr. Chair and
thank you, Representative. But
how much does it cost to fence
in someone's backyard for the
question.
It can cost about $3000 to fence
in a yard.
As a one time. Thank you, Mr.
Chair and thank you
Representative. $3000 to fin in
the yard. And Mr.
Chapresentative, did I hear you
say about 20,000 pets are
euthanized.
A year in New Mexico.
Uh, I think you're too small,
uh, Representative Doe.
The, um, right now the
euthanasia rate of 6%, which is
about 20,000 animals a year that
are euthanized. Yes. Thank you,
Mr. Chair. Representative,
that's almost parallel to
another population that's
euthanized in our state. It gets
very little consideration. I've
never seen a a bill defense in a
backyard of a, a family with a
toddler or someone who chose
life. It's extremely
Hard to vote for bills like this
when there's not parody, you
know, for.
other considerations, um, I'd
love to see a cap on it, if, you
know, there was a reasonable
amount of what we would spend.
But I mean, if you fence in the
backyard and you're paying for a
kennel and then you're paying
for the food. It's not one time,
it doesn't say it's one time, it
doesn't limit the number of
pets.
It, it could get costly if the
bill doesn't pass, but the
money's in the budget, won't the
funds still go to animal
shelters throughout the state,
eligible animal shelters
throughout the state. Um, Mr.
Chair, I would defer to you
maybe in in helping to answer
that question. Uh, thank you,
representative, uh, in
consultation with the budget
chief, we, we don't think so.
The, the money, because it's
tied to a bill, if the bill goes
away, the money goes away.
So Mr. Chair and Representative,
we don't typically fund animal
shelters like the the the the
state owned and operated animal
shelters wouldn't receive these
funds without the broadened
scope of the definitions
uh representative for, for the
funds that are tied to House
Bill 113, that money which
currently stands at $7 million
would go away. Thank you, Mr.
Chair and thank you,
Representative, because I, I
think we desperately need these
funds. I, I really do. I think
it goes a little bit too far
with without any sort of
boundaries or
restrictions on how much money
could be spent.
For a single pet owner or
person, eligible person who owns
pets.
Mr. Chair, I, I'll let my expert
answer.
Um, I think Representative of
Doo, this will be a competitive
process and DFA will be tasked
with promulgating rules that are
very specific to ensure that
priority areas receive the
funding, but also to ensure that
any program or project is well
managed and is cost-effective in
there will be caps on any single
project that will be promulgated
into those rules. Thank you, Mr.
Chair, and thank you for that,
and I, I believe that you also
have the liberty to put.
That amendment in here as well.
Like you could cap it at 250 a
family per year, 250 a pet per
year. What's prohibiting you
from choosing to do that.
I'm sure uh a mister, uh,
representative, I think that
that is, that is something I
would explore with you after if
you wanted to, I think.
What has been explained is that
that that would be part of the
process through the rules and
through our, we want to give
more.
Uh, um,
More of these funds and
decisions of to our local
governments, and I think that's
something we always discuss as
well, and that's always an
appropriate thing to do, but I'm
happy to open that conversation.
Thank you. Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Thank you, Representative.
Uh, great. Thank you very much,
Representative Dell. We're gonna
go to Representative Brown.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman Sanchez.
Um, so I, I do have some
problems with this bill, and I,
I, I love my dog is no longer
with us. I, I'm definitely for
treating animals well.
Um, I do see an inconsistent.
Page one talks about
Um, grants or rewards being
given to municipalities,
counties, Indian nations,
tribes, or pueblos.
Or contract for services with an
eligible entity, but here's the
kicker, it says, provided that
A grant to repair or renovate
shall only be for publicly owned
facilities.
Um
But then we go down to um
subsection 7 on page 2, and it's
talking about providing persons,
i.e.
Private individuals with
basically food.
Uh, shelter, or I guess we call
it feed fencing, kennels and so
forth. So we have this
requirement that it be
A governmental entity, but then
all of a sudden you're saying,
and this is under that same um
Uh, section one that it, it can
go to a private individual, and
I, I love the opinion, Mr.
Chair, Representatives, that
I think we're going a little bit
too far on this, if we give it
to private individuals. We
basically subsidized subsidizing
not just pet ownership, but pet
infrastructure.
And um
I have used, uh, in the past,
Mr. Chairman, uh, Capital Olay
money to help my local um
shelter.
And um proud to do that because
it's a public.
Entity, so I, I think this is
just a step too far for me, and
um,
Oh
I, I guess, Mr. Chair, I just
need also some clarification. I
think I heard the original
request was for $10 million and
that was assuming a trust fund.
A larger amount because it was a
trust that would, but now it's a
straight appropriation, OK. So,
that's correct. OK. Well, thank
you. Uh, again, I, um, I would
like to see, as was stated by
another reps and caps.
And um a limit on the number of
pets if this were to go forward,
uh, to the house for, um,
otherwise I think we're looking
at
Possibly a violation of the
anti-donation clause with money
going to private individuals. So
thank you, Mr. Chair. That's all
I have. Thank you.
Thank you very much Brown. Uh,
we're gonna go to represent
Silva, represent Little, and
then ranking member Chatfield.
Thank you, chair, uh, and thank
you, representatives for
bringing this.
Um
I, I'm just wondering, um, how
many rural communities.
Do you think, um.
Lack
This sort of services to get
like animal control, um,
I know it's a very broad
question, but can you help me
understand the size? Thank you,
chair. Mr. Chair. Mr. Chairs
representative, I know just in
my district, there's probably
about 10 areas that have asked
for this that are supporting it.
You just heard someone from
Edgewood. I know there's been uh
areas down south, so I think
it's throughout the state. I
think it's probably every county
is gonna try to get access to
this.
Mr. Chair, uh, thank you, uh,
Representative So even uh.
I'll just give an example of
Taos County, they have, they
lost their their lost their
last.
Uh, animal facility county
facility they have, so they have
no, they have nothing, and I
think that that's the case we're
we're hearing throughout,
especially in our rural
communities. I know there's dire
need even here in Santa Fe, in
my own county that, um, but I
will, we have some statistics if
you want to.
Um, thank you, chair small.
Thank you representative. Uh,
what we can tell you is in 12
counties, there are no
government run animal shelters.
Of those, uh, 12 counties, 2
have no surfaces at all,
including no nonprofit
organizations providing
services. Um, 7 counties have.
Have no contract between
nonprofit organizations and
local government entities. Do
you have a number of counties
where nonprofits are taking on
the heavy load. Thank you,
chair. Um, and then just one
more.
I, I don't know if it's a
question, but I will say that in
uh House District 53 in my
district.
In Chaparral, um, if
So let me back up. 80% of the
animals that are in the
Alamogordo.
Uh, animal shelter, 80% of those
animals come from Chaparra
Chaparral is.
About an hour and 10 minutes
away.
And so if animal control picks
up your pet and chaparral,
you're driving.
2+ hours round trip.
To retrieve your animal.
Um
And I know many on this
committee and um my colleagues
have heard me tell the story
that I got bit on election day
by it by a loose dog and in
Chaparral and um.
Tracking down and making sure
that I didn't need a rabies
shot.
Um, but also knowing that like
kids at school have to deal with
coming on and off a bus.
And wondering if there's a pack
of loose dogs waiting for them
is terrifying.
Um, and so for that reason alone
is why I want to support this
bill and these funds to go into
the budget because there's so
many of our communities and
neighborhoods that need this, so
thank you so much for bringing
this forward. Thank you, Chair.
Thank you. Uh, next we have
Representative Little and then
ranking member Chatfield.
Thank you, Mister Chair.
Um, thank you for bringing this
bill forward. I, um,
I think it's important to my
senses to try to uh prevent
these
Um, by having um spay and
neutering uh opportunities is
key in my mind.
Um
One of the things
And I'm generally supportive,
Mr. Chair. The one of the big
things, however, that really
gives me a reason to support
this is because of the
experiences.
That Representative Silva has
just begun to touch on.
In the communities along the
most heavily trafficked areas,
I-25, I-40, and all of the state
roads that come through.
People.
It's really unfortunate that Mr.
Chair, that's, it's unfortunate
to see the numbers, the sheer
numbers of animals that are
left.
By the roadsides and we're not
talking Mister Chair, uh,
members, fellow colleagues,
we're not talking about stray
dogs, about, um.
Feral animals we're talking
about very, these are bread.
Breed animals, these um and uh
left out there long enough, they
do become a hazard to our
communities when growing up, we
had a number of children and
elders who have been attacked as
a result of pets forming. This
is a reality that we face in
these rural communities, and I'm
talking about human lives. I
can't even begin to imagine. I'm
aware of the, the cost to
Uh, individuals who are raising
or attempting to raise livestock
out in this rural areas with
these animals, um,
Trying to forage for food. So I
am greatly appreciative of this
effort and I think that uh many,
as I've heard already, Mr.
Chairman, there are many
communities are looking forward
to utilizing this these funds, I
think that uh having.
Allowing the access to
communities to uh reach these
funds are going to be key and if
people would quit dumping their
animals along the sides of the
roads and highways.
Um, that will alleviate some of
the problem, but there are so
many people driving through our
state that we can't begin to
control their activities, but we
can at least begin to control
Mr. Chairman in my, in my view,
some of the activities we can
address some things and it may
be uh more that's gonna follow,
but I think um.
Ensuring that these entities
have access to these funds is
key. Thank you so much. Great.
Thank you very much for
representing little, uh, next
ranking member Chatfield and
then represent Baca and then
represent. Thank you, Mr. Chair.
I read this bill and you talked
about Spain and neutering. I'm
in. You talked about the animal
shelter I'm in.
Uh
A lot of the other things to,
that we do to control them.
But whenever I got over here and
they talked about uh providing
persons with essential services.
I've got um
Probably 89 horses.
Uh
Maybe 4 or 5 dogs between my
wife and myself and my son and
my daughter-in-law, it's 5, if
you really wanna know. So each
one of us has a dog, we live in
different houses, but they're
all on the same ranch. Uh.
Cats, they kind of own their
self, right? They,
they live out there and keep the
barn clean. Uh, my wife has 15
chickens that she adores and it
takes a small truckload of
chicken feed regularly brought
in by me.
Uh, I'm wondering about this
program. No, I'm, I'm only
kidding. Uh, I, I, I don't think
that anybody should provide food
for my pets.
Uh, I think that I should
provide food for my pets. But I
do think we should have spayed
neuter, and I do think we should
have animal shelters. I think we
should have programs, uh,
Those of us, I really appreciate
what Representative Little had
to say, those of us that are in
the livestock business knows
that people just dump their pets
out, their dogs.
Um, I should just say dogs
because.
Um, and they packed up.
And if they don't have food,
they, they will kill your
cattle.
They'll run them off in the
cattle guards, they'll
Chew them up, eat them, kill
them, run them to death. And
those of us that are in the
ranching business of mostly all
experienced that, so.
Uh
I am, I am really in favor of
about 90% of this bill that you
lost me whenever you start uh
You know, I believe in personal
responsibility.
And I believe if I have a pet,
uh, that I need to take care of
that pet, and I've got some, and
I do take care of them. Thank
you, Mr. Chair, Mr. Chair, thank
you. Just briefly, if I could
respond to that, um, I just had
a constituent um a veteran.
Who called me, um, and he's on a
fixed income, uh, retired, um,
and had a dog.
That was his best friend that
was in dire need of help.
And he just, he didn't want
everything to be covered. He
just needed a little bit.
Um, while his dog because he had
a veterinarian, uh, charge that
he needed to cover.
And he needed just a little bit
of support.
Um, and I was able to find that
through a nonprofit.
And he just needed just a leg up
while he had to pay for his
other, the other costs related
to his animal because I was his
best friend and his only
companion.
And I would say that that's if
that's what we're looking at and
you want, and we want to talk
about some kind of amendment for
a a small supplemental amount or
something we're very open to
that, but I just want to let you
know that this happens
regularly. This happens with
with many of our folks on fixed
incomes, sometimes they have
other bills and they have to pay
for medications or their own
hospitalization, and they want
to keep their pets and they're
they're part of their families,
and this is a way that we can
help them do that. Thank you,
Mr. Chair.
So, Mr. Chair, you got me right
at the get go, you know, I, I, I
think that, I think that's an
honorable thing, but I also
think that, I don't think the
state should be responsible for
that. I think we as individuals,
Uh, if we have a neighbor,
sometimes we need to help that
neighbor.
We have go to various churches.
I, I think that there's a church
community out there that should
help that neighbor.
I just don't think that the
state
should provide everything for
everybody. And uh that the
things that we should provide as
individuals, I kind of separate
that out. Great. Thank you very
much, ranking member Chatfield.
Uh, we're gonna go next to
represent Baca, then represent
Vincent.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman and
thank you for um
For bringing this forward.
I will first off, Mr. Chairman,
and say to you folks that
emailed us and House Bill 113,
you guys totally flooded my
inbox, so the fact that the, the
way you were able to mobilize,
there's only one other bill that
I got more of those and that's
another bill with it. Well, we
won't talk about but um
Uh, Mr. Chairman and uh
representative uh Lujan.
One of the
With with this bill, and I think
some of the concern is, and I
think that
For me
I, I definitely see the need
for, as you say, 90% of this
bill, OK? And I'll tell you just
a personal story that, that's
why Representative Silva and I
are buddies cause I got bit by a
dog,
um
It was a transient, it was a
transient couple. And so when I
got bit by the dog and I'm being
attended to by the uh
by the first responders found
out that dog had never been to
the vet.
So here we go, right? So, Mr.
Chairman, and I, and I think
that's
I think that's what it is. I
mean, Mr. Chairman and
Representative, not that I say,
but I, I support.
And would say that the spayed
neuter if we're picking up
things, I would support the
vaccination, vaccinations and
registration fees that are
required in their community. I
would absolutely um support to
provide food to a shelter or
area that could be used.
If somebody so had that need.
But my, my question and Mr.
Chair, is really about
These funds where I think it
goes is the, is the, the
upgrading of the backyards, and
it goes to the actual, uh, you
know, how will those funds be
there because uh Mr. Chairman
and uh representative like for
myself.
My dog gets Costco dog food.
It's Kirtland, right? Small
breed. So is there, you know,
but I've also seen that farmer's
dog kind of stuff like that
that, you know, he's better than
I do sometimes, you know, the
license rep, this trail mixes my
lunch today.
So, um,
Mr. Mr. Chairman and a
Representative Lujan, uh,
I, I think, and I, I mean, I'm
saying is if we can put some
guard, I mean, I think this
thing will fly out of here. I
mean, I, I have no problem.
With, with, like I said, but,
but I think that we get there
how's the food gonna be out
there because I think with our
local processing, Mr. Chairman,
and, and some of the stuff
they're doing with our animals,
if we're able to support local
folks that are creating this,
this dog feed for cats and dog.
I think that's, that's really
what for me it kind of ties it
together so that's because of
the lack of specificivity
because of some of the other
things, I think that's where
I'm, I'm happy and I'm
struggling with, so if you have
a comment, Mr. Chairman or
representative to, to that.
I would be very open to to
hearing about it, Mr. Chair, uh,
Representative, again, we are
open to work with with I know.
5 of you, I think we're hearing
the same thing and and and uh
I'm always.
That's the way I like to work
and I've, we've been discussing
amongst ourselves briefly here,
uh, to sit down and and really
work on that, thank you. Great,
thank you, Repent Baca. Let me,
I'll just interject here, uh,
Representative Mohan, it sounds
like you're open to, that would
be rolling for the day, uh,
working on it,
uh, may, may, may I ask it for
another option? Can we work on
this for?
Or perhaps for the, would you
prefer that I I'll go to you to
you, Mr. Chair. Would you prefer
that or would you, uh, would it
be all right to have a 4
amendment? I think, yeah, thank
you. I think as we're getting
close to time we'll be in a we
could hear this again tomorrow.
I wanna make sure get any
questions. I'd love for us to
get it right here, be able to go
to the floor, uh, members as we
look at this and thank you, um.
This came out of uh government
uh unanimously. It sounds like
if there's some tweaks, which,
you know, obviously it's always
up to the sponsor to sort of be
to sort of finalize the tweaks,
but I think committees making
some good faith suggestions. Uh,
it would be great to try and get
this back on for tomorrow and
see if we can work out something
that satisfies things, Mr.
Chair, that's what our committee
is is good at doing and and so
under your guidance, I would, I
would.
I would say I would do that. OK,
we'll go ahead and roll there
and Vincent, were there any
things that weren't mentioned
that you'd like to flag, or no?
Mr. Chair, that, that was
perfect timing. That was perfect
timing. Thank you. Good. All
right, great, thank committee,
thank you for uh really
thoughtful questionsent Lohan,
thank you. Um, we'll look to,
uh, get this done and hopefully
be able to bring it back
tomorrow.
Uh, and we'll be, um,
I think amending our committee
substitute, although we'll make
sure that we're doing that.
Right, OK, we're going now to
house bill, so we rolled one
house bill, 113, the substitute.
Now we're on the House Bill 167.
Great, uh thank you,
Representative Garrett.
Um
We're on House Bill 167 and uh
members pulled this up and I
believe there should be an
amendment. So we're saying if
you could explain it then tell
us the amendment number so we'll
make sure we're tracking. Yes,
Mr. Chair, House Bill 167 is the
higher education payment for
certain tests, it provides that
the higher education department
shall pay the cost of high
school equivalent see credential
tests associated test
preparation.
us for New Mexico restaurants,
they, excuse me,
residents, not restaurants.
I had a sketchy lunch. Um, and
they have to be at least 16
years of age, not currently
enrolled in secondary school.
They have not graduated yet from
an accredited high school
program, and they need to have
passed an official practice
tests so that when higher
education pays for the test,
they know that uh they're
actually gonna probably pass.
And do you want to hear the
amendment? Ah yes, please. Can
you read us the 231 number. Yes,
it's 0231612.1. OK. Uh, that's
the number we have. Can we move
that amendment for discussion?
OK. It's been moved for
discussion and seconded, um, if
you, the amendment, it strikes
the appropriation, uh, from the
bill. Is that because
representative, it's already,
we've included this in the
budget.
Yes, it's already in the budget.
Great. OK. Uh, any questions on
the amendment?
Yeah, can I have a motion to
adopt the amendment?
Been moved by ranking member
Chatfield, seconded by
Representative Dixon, in the
opposition to adopting the
amendment.
You have an amended bill. Let's
now go to public comment. Is
there anybody here who wishes to
comment on House Bill 167. Come
on up.
Come on down is the better way,
and if we have a number of folks
we'll work to keep it brief, but
again, I always appreciate folks
being here, um, please go ahead.
When Jorge Rodriguez
a migranteganisao rural E Lee,
San Juan Maley Chavez
When Jorge Rodriguez
a migranteganisao rural E Lee,
San Juan Maley Chavezposa
principale ado
valencia continuing embargo
miame de ran gratuitosierra ma
centro de preva in commun mogo
mijo.
or Achewe,
gonna ask you. OK, uh, go ahead
and please translate for
interpretation. Good, uh, good
afternoon, uh, Mr. Chair,
members of the committee. My
name is Jorge Rodriguez. I am a
member of Somosuelo Unido, a
worker and immigrant justice
organization which organizes in
8 counties some of the some of
the 7 of them rural, including
Eddie Lee, San Juan McKinley,
and Chavez. I have lived
In Lee County for one year and
live uh live there with my wife
and daughter. I have really
enjoyed living here and we have
built a home. I work as a
fitness instructor, mainly
helping people who have been
incapacitated or with obesity,
obesity problems, I would like
to be able to obtain my high
school equivalency and continue
my education so that I am able
to grow in my field. However,
currently, the cost is too much
for me. If high school
equivalency equivalency testing
were free, and if there were
more testing centers like that
in my rural community, I would
be
to get my certification and then
skill up in English and other
skills. Thank you and please
vote yes on HB 167. Great. Thank
you very much.
Mr. Chairman, members of the
committee, Marlahos registered
lobbyist for uh Central New
Mexico Community College, CNM
stands in strong support for
House Bill 167, which provides
funding for free high school
equivalenty credential tests and
associated test preparation
costs for New Mexico residents.
CNM is committed to expanding
access to education through our
HSE courses which prepare
students for the GED in the
I set exams by removing
financial barriers, HB 167 will
empower more individuals to
achieve their educational and
career goals, strengthening our
workforce and community. Thank
you. Great, thank you.
Thank you, Mr. Chair and members
of the committee. My name is
Leah Ellis and I'm from Valencia
County, originally a high school
equivalency students. I'm asking
you to support, uh, House Bill
167 because an educated New
Mexico is a better New Mexico
without a high school
equivalency, doors are
To to higher education and many
career paths are effectively
closed, uh, preventing access to
better opportunities, the
opportunities scholarship that
you instated for myself in New
Mexico's New Mexico residents to
benefit from, become unreachable
from those without the high
school equivalency diploma.
Students have already made a
huge step by making the decision
to continue their education and
don't let this be a roadblock to
keep them from moving forward.
Uh, show them New Mexico is
investing in its people and its
future in the economic
stability. Great. Thank you very
much.
Hello, my name is Victoria
Garcia Montoya. I'ma
LLC student of Las Vegas to
Mexico. Um, my representative,
um, is, um,
Some representative Sanchez, um,
there's many reasons, um, that
the free testing benefit
students, uh, by removing the
barriers to assessments, helping
students focus on their studies,
keeping a positive focus on
mental health and the well-being
with students while giving them
an advantage that can help me uh
benefit of adult learning even
more rewarding.
Adult education provides
educational opportunities and
services to provide to adult
students with the knowledge and
skills necessary to participate
as citizens, workers, parents,
families, and community members.
Adult education serves as an
increasingly diverse student
population like adult
immigrants, adults with
disabilities, single parents,
and so many more. I feel that
all education provides
opportunities for personal
growth, goal fulfillment, and
socialization. I'm very grateful
to have been. OK, thank you.
Thank you very much. Thank you.
Uh, OK. Uh, thanks everybody for
being here. Uh, thanks for the
in-person comment. Is there
anybody online who wishes to
comment on House Bill 167 is OK,
I don't see anybody, uh, go to
the committee. Are there any
questions
down please. Thank you, Mr.
Chair and thank you,
Representative. I'm so excited,
um, you know, a few years back
when we moved, uh, adults after
21 from PED and we were working
on what this would look like as
an alternative.
It got a little rocky there a
little bit when you only could
do GED.
And that's, and when they
revised the GED and it was
pretty much college bound and so
I, you know, this is, this is
so, so important and it's great
progress to where we want to be
helping those folks who maybe
you're just a few credits short
and need a little bit of help
and I'm excited to see how much
the adult
Literacy, adult education
program is, is blooming in the
state, and I know it's a lot of
your hard work and so you're to
be commended and congratulated
on that. It's, it's great to see
the progress that's happening
with us.
Great. Thank you very much,
Representative Dale. Uh, we're
gonna go to Repentative Brown
and then Vice Cha Dixon.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman and
Representative. I, I support
this bill. I serve on and have
for many years now the board of
directors of our adult literacy
program in my community.
And um we celebrate every time
one of our students, uh, gets
the high school equivalency, uh,
taken care of.
Um, this is already um a
function of the higher ed
department. We, we do fund adult
literacy through that.
So I see the, the linkage there
and I think it's a really good
idea, representative and, and
Mr. Chair that one of the
requirements is that the person
had passed an official practice
test, because we know if the
person has not passed the
practice test, the chances are,
are low that it will happen on
the final.
Um, yes, so I think that's a
really good measure.
And um so I just think it's
really supports what we're
already doing in the state.
And you know, $145 to pay for a
test that is a lot of money,
especially if you're risking it,
so I think this will encourage
many
uh learners. So thank you, Mr.
Chair. Thank you very much Mr.
Chair, I forgot to introduce my
witness who won't have to say
anything, but it's Doctor Amber
Gallop, the tenacious director
of Adult Education Division and
HED.
Excellent. Thank you very much,
Doctor Gao and uh thank you very
much for Representative Brown.
Uh, we're gonna go now to Vice
Chair Dixon.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Uh, thank
you, Representative Garrett and
Doctor Amber. Um, I just wanted
to sort of echo what I think has
already been said, but how this
is a really great example of
expanding access and
opportunity, uh, for all New
Mexicans. So thank you very
much.
Great. Thank you very much, uh,
Vice Cha Dixon. I don't see any
other comment. We're gonna the
ranking member for the motion.
Thank you Mr. Cha. I move a do
pass on the House Bill 167 as
amended. OK.
It's been moved and seconded
simultaneously by Brown and
represent Little.
Is there any opposition to
adopting or to a due pass as
amended for House Bill 167.
Got that and thank you committee
for including this in the
budget. Thanks to everybody for
their advocacy. Um.
OK, we're gonna go, we'll ask
you to stay up there,
representative.
Uh
Representative Garrett.
OK, uh, we're on House Bill 196.
And
Um, Mr. Chair, oh, ready?
OK, um, I'm here to represent
House Bill 196, the Behavior
Health and childcare funding.
Uh, this comes out of the New
Mexico Finance Authority
oversight committee, it's
endorsed by the committee. It
makes a one-time appropriation
to re-established NMFA programs,
providing what they're known for
the low cost loans to eligible
behavior health, primary care,
and child care service providers
in medically underserved
communities and child.
He deserts throughout the state,
uh, specifically, it's one time
25 million to the Behavior
Health Capital Fund, 25 million
to the primary care capital
fund, 10 million to the
childcare revolving loan fund,
uh, these programs were amended
in 2023 by Senate Bill 423 to
expand the use to include
working capital in addition to
facility renovation, expansion
equipment, this change meant
that loans could be
used for those initial salaries
and other operating expenses
that are critical to expand
providers, and I'll just wrap up
by saying the programs have
financed 30 projects, served
more than 350,000 patients with
1.4 million visits, 80% of the
services were in rural and
frontier communities, um, and
with that I'll introduce my
expert witness, Marquita
Russell, the CEO of NMFA.
Great, thank you very much
representative, um, yeah, OK,
uh, we'll note that this is in
the budget right now. It
currently stands at $10 million
and that's before our Senate
colleagues who have capacity to
dedicate additional funds should
they so choose before they've
acted, but we've sent this over,
um, with, uh, with funding.
OK, um, we're gonna go, are
there any, uh, and ultimately we
will be asking for a tabling
motion since it's only straight
appropriations. Are there any,
is there anybody who wishes to
comment on House Bill 196.
Don't see anybody uh in person,
anybody online?
Don't see anybody there. We'll
go to the ranking member.
And we'll go to uh for
questions.
Mr. Chair, my question was
answered. I just wondered if it
was in the budget. That's fair
enough. Thank you, Ra member
Chatfield. Next, Representative
Dow, please.
Thank you, Mr. Chair and thank
you representative. I, I should
have read this bill cause I was
like, slam dunk, yes, but then
you said something about taking
out a loan to pay. I thought it
was for capacity building as in
like,
Building an infrastructure, but
then I heard you reference
payroll and startup costs.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman and
Representatives. So these are 3
separate programs and one of
them is the childcare revolving
fund, which it does have a $10
million appropriation in the in
the in-house Bill 2 as it went
over to the Senate, um, and
there, these are for loans, um,
so they're, there's no grant
dollars associated with them,
the, to date, the prim primarily
been used for modest expansions
and more recently to help
clinics, um, refinance their
projects or to
buy out their buildings so that
they have as part of a cost
containment strategy. Um, the
childcare program's only been
used, uh, you know, once in the
last 20 years, so that's, that's
a, that's a difficult uh
history, Mr. Chair,
Representative, yeah, I, I
actually used one of those way
back in the day, but it wasn't
for payroll, which, which one of
these three would be used for
staffing and payroll expenses,
um, Mr. Chairman, all three of
them were expanded to allow for
working capital expenses. So if,
for instance,
to expand your clinic or even,
you know, uh, build a new clinic
altogether, you would have the
capacity to use some of these
loan dollars to help pay for
salaries until you started
generating enough revenues to
start repaying the loan.
Mr. Charon Representative.
So how long, I know with with
you wouldn't open a childcare
center without it being
licensed, but we do have like on
site like you could open up a a
a government program could open
up one on site that only serve
the families that are at that
site. There are some exemptions
from licensing. I mean, I've
worked with you uh quite a bit,
um, on committees before and
We wouldn't want to exempt on
the childcare revolving one
fund, for example.
If, if Albuquerque, city of
Albuquerque wanted to build and
operate a center on their
premises only for the employees
at that site. They wouldn't
necessarily have to be licensed.
Only by not being licensed would
they ever operate without being
reimbursed.
And the reimbursement is every
30 days.
So the the capital operating for
payroll expenses shouldn't
exceed 30 days. I don't know
what that looks like in
behavioral health because it
looked to me when we were
building out the behavioral um
the very behavioral health
capital fund that the goal was
that people would eventually
qualify for Medicaid and
Medicare.
How long are you thinking people
could get capital operating. Mr.
Chairman, we would anticipate
that they would be modest in
scope, 3 to 6 months
potentially, um, again, during
construction, if there's
interruption of business, um, or
after construction while they're
ramping up operations. So we
don't anticipate that the
working capital portion would be
a major portion. This will still
typically be used for bricks and
mortar and Representative
Marquita.
Is there some of these can be as
low as 0% interest.
Well the interest rates, what,
what do you, what do you think
these interest rates might be,
Mr. Chairman, right now the
interest rate on these programs
is 2% for the primary care
capital fund and 2% for the
behavior health capital fund,
and right now, 3% for the
childcare program, we're in the
process of revamping that
program with our partners at
ECECD, so that interest may may
come down to 2% as well.
Thank you, Mr. Chair and thank
you, Representative. And where
was the, um, did you guys do
that through rulemaking or did
we change statute to say working
capital could be included. Mr.
Chairman, uh, the, the statute
was changed in 2023 to allow for
the working capital that was
part of Senate Bill 423 and then
the interest rates are set in
the rule.
Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Thank you very much,
Representative Do. Great
questions, uh, Representative
Duncan, did you have a question?
I do have one quick question.
How are we following up on
these, and can you tell me?
Um
What's the success rate of these
loans? What's the failure of
these loans?
Mr. Chairman, so we began the
primary care capital fund back
in the mid 90s, and we
eventually funded about 19
projects from that, um, there
have been several
reappropriations, if you will,
for solvency purposes, so that
program has been um $9 million
was appropriated 9.7 was moved
back for solvency, despite those
moves back to the general fund
we did fund uh 19 projects
totaling $11 million. All of
those projects were successful.
They all repaid.
or, or, or in the process of
repaying as expected. The
behavioral health capital fund
suffered a little bit more of a
rocky history in the mid-teens,
there were some issues with uh
the way in which behavior health
care reimbursements were
happening and some issues
related to oversight of
behavioral health. Um, so
ultimately one of those clinics
did shut down. We were able to
sell the facility. It covered
our costs and we took those
dollars and reloaned them to
another uh primary uh behavioral
health care.
uh, group, um, and so they're
operating another facility out
of the uh initial funds. So we
haven't suffered a loss in these
programs, um, but we have had um
behavioral health clinics not be
successful long term.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Thank you
for that. Um,
The part of this that I don't
like.
And I'm coming at it from a
self-employed individual. When
you're offering a 2 to 3% loan.
Every one of us would love to
have that.
That's an advantage that other
people don't get.
If you don't know about the
programs, you're not getting it,
you're paying 5 rate may be, and
so, again, I, I think we pick
winners and losers, and so when
you start doing this for for
storage facilities, would you
call me?
Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Thank you very much,
Representative Duncan. OK, uh, I
don't see any other questions,
um, as we noted, this is in the
budget, uh, at that $10 million
level, um,
So at this point, I had asked
for a motion to table.
OK. It's uh been moved by
Duncan, seconded by
representative Herrera. Is there
any opposition to that motion? I
don't see any, um,
That's been tabled. Thank you to
Miss Russell, uh, who's a
frequent persons uh visitor
here, which is great.
And um.
OK, members, we've got uh House
Bill 7 next and House Bill 209.
I'm checking briefly.
OK, and we're checking briefly,
uh.
And uh House Bill 7 and we'll
just give that a minute or two.
Um, quick note the vice chairs,
yeah.
Anybody want any cookies?
Uh, mister,
are we waiting for the, yeah,
we're gonna wait just for, I
think that uh perhaps the
speaker may be swinging over and
I know Cher Serato is coming as
well. We're gonna give it just
another minute. I know some Doo
uh appreciate having you, um,
They represented.
Thank you, uh, Madam Chair.
Great to see you.
OK, um, we're on.
House Bill 7.
Go ahead, please explain the
bill. I believe we'll have an
amendment we'll go through that.
Thank you, Mr. Chair and thank
you committee for hearing. I
apologize uh for my delay. Um,
I, uh,
Uh, we do have an amendment
added to the bill, but I'll
explain the bill first so we can
go through that. Um, so House
Bill 7 creates the Children's
Future Act, and it does two
things in particular. One, it
sets up the fund itself so that
investments can start being put
into the fund. And 2, it, uh,
would create a task force, but
the guardrails around, uh, you
know, who could withdraw this
from this fund, uh, and how we
mature. Um, what this future
fund does is it establishes a
fund for New Mexico's children,
and so after.
18 years, children born this
year would be able to have
access to um something like it,
a trust fund to be quite frank,
that can be used for education,
starting a new business, buying
a new home. A lot of these
different purposes. There is,
uh, I have with me right now my
expert, uh, Michelle Gilbert,
who is the executive director of
Partnership Partnership for
Community Action, um, they have
a pilot program going right now
with a small group of of of kids
that are eligible for this. Um,
we've seen this established in
other states. Connecticut was
one of the first states
to have a a baby bonds bill,
which this is akin to, um, that
essentially says that once these
kids are old enough, they would
could use this for these kinds
of down payments, um, you know,
very many families across New
Mexico, maybe middle class, but
they're still living paycheck to
paycheck. And so having an
investment for their future, um,
is a big piece of that. I'm
gonna hand it over to, uh, Miss
Gilbert to talk through that
that uh experience they've. Good
afternoon, Mr. Chair, members of
the committee. My name is
Michelle Gilbert. I'm the
executive director of
Partnership for Community
Action, a community-based
organization that has been
working alongside community for
nearly 35 years in the areas of
early childhood education,
economic equity, and wellness.
I'm happy to be here today to
talk to you more about the
Children's Future Act, um, and
what New Mexico is already doing
in terms of our New Mexico
children and families, um, as
representatives shared, uh, we
are uh a part of a group of
organizations that has launched
a pilot here in the state of New
Mexico that is serving 15
participants currently.
20% of those parents and
caregivers are of the ages of 18
to 24 and 93% of those children
enrolled are ages PN to 3. we're
really interested in driving
this policy forward as it
addresses long-standing wealth
inequalities, inequities, excuse
me, um, that have been existing
in our state and across the
nation. Thank you.
Thank you very much. OK, uh,
now, can you go, uh, can you
read us the 202 number for the
amendment? Uh yes, it's 231
number. I apologize 231493.2.
We've got that. Can we have a
motion in a second just to uh
for discussion purposes.
OK, it's been moved by
Representative Silva for
discussion purposes. Can you
briefly explain the amendment?
Yes, if you look through the
FIR, Mr. Chair and committee,
uh, you'll see that there were
some concerns from the SIC. Um,
they didn't want to necessarily
be part of the task force
decision making. So we reset up
the um the task force to reflect
those concerns they had, and we
also removed the appropriation
from the bill.
Great. OK. Uh, any questions on
the amendment?
Uh, OK, can we have a motion to
adopt the amendment?
I moved
OK, it's been moved uh by Vice
Chair Dixon saying by
representative Little, or any
opposition to adopting the
amendment?
See, we have an amended bill.
OK, uh, now we're gonna go for
public comment. Is there anybody
here who wishes to make public
comment.
Uh, once we get the mic up
there, yes, please. Good
afternoon, chair and committee
members. My name is Anne Lin
Hall, and I'm the CEO of
Prosperity Works. We have been
serving the Mexicans to build
and protect assets and help
eliminate poverty for over 20
years. I also stand here as a
parent, like all other parents
across the state who wants
amazing opportunities for my
child to grow, thrive, and excel
in our state now and in the
future. Prosperity Works has
invested in children through a
long-term savings account that
has similar qualities to a baby
bond for the past 15 years.
Because there isn't a lot of
research about baby bonds yet. I
wanted to share some research
that has been done on these
accounts specifically both the
short term and long-term
outcomes. They included 50%
lower maternal depression ahead
of their peers in math and
reading scores by 3rd grade, a
future focused mentality and
college-going identity, 6 times
higher rate enrollment in
college and 3.5 higher
graduation rates from college
and hope. I stand before you
today to ask for your support of
HB 7 so that every child in New
Mexico.
has not only a great start in
our state, but a strong future.
Thank you.
Buenos Aires, Mr. Chair and
members of this committee, my
name is Lisette Vargas, and I
would like to ask you to please
support HB 7. I have the
privilege to actually be one of
the families to participate in
that program that was offered by
Partnership for Community Action
uh in collaboration with
Prosperity Works and Rio Grande
Credit Union in my community 10
years ago and um I can see that
my son's education in the
support that I got from this
organization as well as their
finance literacy has helped me a
lot and also I can it it's
created a, a great benefit for
my son.
He is a 3.5 GPA and he is
already enrolled in UNM, so
he'll start this year in UNM and
I am not worried about getting
money for his education, and he
is focused on his education. And
so I please ask you to support
the child the Children's Future
Act, and let's create a very
future for New Mexico and
support our families to create a
generational wealth in our
state, please support HV 7.
Thank you very much.
Good afternoon, Mr. Chair,
members of the committee. My
name is Jacob Vihil. I am deputy
policy director of New Mexico
Voices for Children, uh, and,
uh, just want to urge support
for this bill in recent years,
this body has made incredible
progress, uh, and great strides
in improving the lives of New
Mexico children, uh, through
social programs, support and
benefits, including putting
together a a really wonderful
early childhood, uh, system,
right, so we urge our lawmakers
in this committee to champion
the.
other parts of anti of the
anti-poverty equation, which is
wealth building even with strong
social safety net programs, many
families still face barriers to
wealth building, uh, the gap in
New Mexico is especially wide
the top 1% of earners make 15
times more than the bottom 20%.
So this bill could be the first
step in bridging that gap,
ensuring that all children, uh,
regardless of their family's
financial situation have the
opportunity to build a
prosperous future.
and contribute to a stronger
economy, so we think the
sponsors, and the experts for
this important bill and urge
your support. Thank you. Great,
thank you very much. OK, I think
that concludes our in-person,
uh, anybody wishing to speak in
opposition in person, seeing
that we're gonna go online. Uh,
we have a number of folks
online. We're gonna try to get
through everybody, please be as
brief as possible. We're gonna
start to, we're gonna go uh to
start with Leslie Garcia Moreno.
Leslie.
Hello, Mr. Chairman and members
of the committee. If this bill
is passed, my children and my
future children I may have, will
have a greater chance of
achieving a stress-free,
debt-free education and life.
This program promotes financial
dependence and stability by
giving young people the freedom
to choose their own path, while
ensuring they are equipped with
the knowledge to make informed
financial decisions. Our state
has the resources to invest in
the next generation, and doing
so will create a ripple effect
by prosperity.
But
By providing baby bonds, we are
cultivating a future where more
residents are educated,
financially independent and able
to contribute to New Mex to New
Mexico's growth. This is
initiative is a direct
investment in our economy
ensuring that all families
regardless of background, have
the opportunity to build
generational wealth and thrive.
A financially stable, well
educated population will drive
economic growth and innovation
in a brighter future for New
Mexico. Please vote yes.
House Bill number 7. Thank you.
Great. Thank you.
Next, we're gonna go to Cindy.
Hello. Um, I am a parent that is
a part of the um PCA group. We
were able to learn about the
House bill number 7.
And now I've already had my
children and I don't think I
will be having more, but coming
from someone who
You know, made less than $10,000
last year supporting myself and
my children. It is hard and I
would like to ask that everybody
um really take into
consideration that having
children and having to worry
about whether or not I can help
them with college or help them
with uh buying a house or in the
future with anything, it's
stressful.
And that's not something that a
lot of children should be able
to live through, so I believe
that everybody should
I guess, go for the bill and try
and get all of these children
the necessary resources that
they need to be able to build
their life in the future and not
have to worry about um you know,
being stressed about money when
they should just be like 7 kids.
I'm sorry. Just please, please
conclude your thought.
Oh, no, that's it. Thank you.
OK, next we're gonna go to uh
Sinee Satrian. Can you hear me?
Uh, if you can speak up a little
bit, please.
Can you hear me now?
OK. Good afternoon, Mr. Chair
and members of the committee. My
name is Shae Satrian, and I am a
healthcare advocate for the New
Mexico Center on Law and
Poverty. Uh, we think the
sponsor in early childhood
advocates for this bill, and we
stand in support because we
believe that every child should
have the opportunity to pursue
fulfilling, productive,
prosperous, and self-directed
life.
HB 7 is a real opportunity to
close these income gaps and
foster generational wealth with
funds growing over time. The
fund would cover educational
expenses, provide home ownership
assistance, support
entrepreneurial endeavors and
allow for other long-term
investments. We also want to
remind people that New Mexico
currently ranked forty-fifth in
income, inequality and grapples
with high child poverty rates.
For all of these reasons, we
stand in strong support for this
legislation, and we urge
legislators to pass the life
changing legislation.
Thank you. Thank you very much.
Next, we're gonna go to Jennifer
Jennifer Rafael Goetz.
Good afternoon, Chair Small and
members of the committee. My
name is Jennifer Rafael Goetz,
and I'm the director of the New
Mexico Commission on the Status
of Women. I'm here to speak in
support of HB 71 of the
challenges that women in New
Mexico and around the country
face is unequal pay. Studies
show that it will take Hispanic
and native women 400 years to
reach pay equity with their
white male counterparts, unequal
pay means unequal retirement
savings and even unequal social
security in retirement. Why am I
talking about unequal pay when
we are discussing
baby bonds, it's because we see
that equal pay laws are not
helping women build generational
wealth, but perhaps an economic
investment like baby bonds can
help this process. If a small
investment is made for a baby
girl at birth, that investment
can grow into a down payment on
a house or tuition for college.
These investments in our
children can help keep them
living and working in New Mexico
and contributing to the economic
health of our state. For this
reason and others discussed
today, I ask you to stand with
us in support of HP 7. Thank
you. Great. Thank you.
Next, we're gonna go to Melissa
Mason.
Hi, um, Mr. Chair, members of
the of the committee. Thank you
so much. Um, my name is Doctor
Melissa Mason. I'm a
pediatrician in Albuquerque, and
I care for kids from across the
state. I'm asking you to please
support House Bill 7. it breaks
my heart that not all of my
patients have the same
opportunities for education and
other supports, and I believe
that this measure would enable
them to have opportunities that
um
You know, my, my family is with
more means are able to provide
their kids. Um, this is the
right thing to do for kids and
their families. Thank you.
Great. Thank you very much.
Next, we're gonna go to Reeve
Mora, Reeve.
Hi, Mr. Chair Committee, my name
is Reve Moa and I'm a mother to
3 beautiful children, 1510, and
5. I'm in support of Health 7.
My oldest is now a freshman and
it won't be long until he's
college ready.
He still faces the fact that we
have no generational wealth to
pass to him to pay for
schooling. Well, there is more
access to college now in the
state, he still faces the
obstacles of being from a family
that has no wealth, as we live
paycheck to paycheck. I have
done my best to research my own
resources, however, I feel my
children will still face
adversity, as I cannot provide
them with access to capital for
things like car, first home or
any financial assistance to
pursue the dreams they may have
for starting a business. Baby
bonds can address these
generational and systematic
injustices.
And I'm working hard to provide
opportunities for my children.
My income has yet to prove to be
enough to generate wealth. Baby
bonds can do that and just
provide children with assets to
set them up for future, they may
not have otherwise had access to
by placing them on a
on them, we show them that we
place them in the highest value,
um, well, yes, thank you. Thank
you very much. Next, we're gonna
go to Karina Bursa.
Good afternoon, Chair and
committee members. My name is
Karina Murciaga, and I work at
Abrendo Puertas. I also live in
the South Valley, and most
importantly, I am a mom to a 2
year old Allison.
I am here today to urge you to
please support House Bill 7.
When I learned about baby bonds,
I was excited because I
understand the impacts it can
have in our economy, in our
state, and in the lives of many
Mexican families. At the same
time, I also felt an
overwhelming amount of anxiety
because I realized that I was
not currently doing much to
create a fund that would support
and feel my daughter's future
goals and dreams. I do not want
her to work two jobs in college
and face the same exhaustion and
burnout that I faced. The
children's future.
fund would give parents the
ability to dream of a better
future for their children and
the kids, the ability to dream
for their own future and to
motivate them to keep going.
Thank you for your time and I
urge you to please support this
act. Thank you. Thank you very
much. OK, next we're gonna go to
Alexandra Alarcon.
Alexandra, can you unmute?
OK, there we go. Go ahead,
please.
Sorry about that. Good
afternoon, chair and members of
the committee. My name is
Alexandra Larcon, and I'm a
proud mother from Silver City,
New Mexico. I stand before you
today to voice my support for
baby bonds by providing families
with the resources to prioritize
education and secure a brighter
future, we are empowering our
children to reach for the stars.
This isn't just about handing
out funds. It's about unlocking
potential, fostering innovation
and building a stronger
more resilient New Mexico.
This program is about empowering
our children to dream big and
reach for the stars. It's about
giving them the tools they need
to overcome the obstacles, so
that often stand in their way.
As mothers, community leaders,
and as advocates for our
children, we have a
responsibility to pave the way
for their future. So let us
raise our voices, let us fight
for the future that our children
deserve. Thank you.
Excuse me, great, thank you very
much. We're gonna conclude the
online portion of public comment
was Juan Abeta.
One, go ahead, please. Good
afternoon, Mr. Chair and
committee members.
Uh, my name is Juan Beta. I
currently serve as chair of the
Board for Prosperity Works. I
just want to say that there's
ample evidence that these types
of investments in our youth
benefit our state as a whole to
be more productive, be more
inventive, be more secure. I
strongly encourage you to
support House Bill 7. Thank you.
Great. Thank you very much.
Thanks everybody for uh public
comment, everybody, uh, for
being concise. Uh, we're gonna
go back to
Uh, we'll go straight to the uh
committee. Well, first, let me
do this, uh, representative, let
me go to you. Anything you'd
like to add before we go to
committee questions. Thank you,
Mr. Chair. Thank you committee.
I'm just having my co-sponsor
Patricia Royal Caballero join
us, but we're, we stand for
questions whenever, uh, from the
kidney. OK. Uh, are there any
committee questions?
Uh, OK, perfect. Representative.
OK, great.
Oh goodness.
All right. Uh, a, um, we'll go
ahead and start with
Representative Brown, then go to
represent Wuhan.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Um, so
a couple of questions, uh,
representatives, um, so I, I
believe I heard recently that
New Mexico on average per year
has 1000 births.
And so my question is, um, so
this appropriation, I take it is
for $5 million is that correct?
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Thank you,
uh, Representative. So that uh
which we removed from the from
here, um, the goal is to set up
the task force to build out all
of the pieces to it, so it would
not be just an investment of $5
million as I said, you know, in
the original bill, um, we are
looking to have this grow over
time and then additionally, uh,
you know, create the fun, create
the task force, so we know the
parameters and then build out
the fund for.
Um, Mr. Chairman, I, um,
I seem to see a new way of doing
things in committee. It's create
a fund, but no money in the
budget for it, but the fund
exists and sometimes
It seems that's happening with
more frequency, and so I have a
concern about that.
Um, like I said, on the house
for a while ago, Mr. Chair, uh,
every rep could want to start a
trust fund, but put nothing in
it. But, um, Mr. Chairman, so,
um,
I heard someone say, uh, in
talking about this bill that
The amount of investment would
be $7000 per child. So, Mr.
Chairman, either rep, uh, can
you tell me where that thinking
came from. Thank you, Mr. Chair
and thank you, Representative.
I'm actually gonna hand it to my
expert because, um, the, the
pilot program they've
established starts each child
with about $6000 as the fund
grows over 18 years, um, it
grows to $20,000 when they turn
18, but I will hand it over
because I think there's some
more numbers related to that uh
from my expert.
Absolutely, chair, uh, and
representative Brown, thank you
so much for the question. Uh, we
did look at what's happening
nationwide with regard to the
way that we established our
pilot. We wanted to invest an
amount of money that would
produce significant return for
the child to invest in these
wealth building activities. For
example, Connecticut has
introduced, um, it is actually,
actually enacted a bill that
funds each child that's a part
of their Medicaid program at
$3200 initial investment,
Washington DC is doing something
similar with a $500.
investment and then subsequent
investments based on income for
every year thereafter. And so
it's based on, uh, national
research from partners at the
new school in other states who
have enacted. Thank you very
much, um, and I understand
there's no guarantee that would
be given that this will indeed
happen, is that correct? Thank
you, Madam Chair and thank you,
Mr. Chair and thank you,
Representative. Um, that is
correct. We wanted to make sure
that we're protecting the fund
overall and while we see really
strong returns from the
investments made by the SIC by
the treasurer.
Um, throughout the state, we all
know that there can be economic
downturn. So this non-guarantee
ensures that we're protecting
the fund and, um, setting up the
real realistic expectation that
should, you know, the fun get
hit very hard by, you know,
investments as we've seen, um,
that we can continue to build it
and maybe and maybe that there
isn't a we've we've seen a
number of trust fund bills in
the last several years for sure,
Mr. Chairman, and um we almost
always include a clause, and I'm
not gonna quote verbatim, but to
the effect that
If the state ends up with some
financial woes that these trust
funds, and this is true,
especially for example, for the
early childhood Trust Fund, the
state may
Take, uh, what's in that trust
fund and use it for other
purposes to basically stay um
solvent. So I'm, I looked
through the bill, Mr. Chair,
representatives, I didn't see
that clause in this bill. Did I
miss it somewhere? Thank you,
Mr. Chair. Thank you,
Representative. No, you, you do
not in this bill, in particular
because of the objective over
time is that it will continue to
add and that it will be paid out
to the kids or to young adults
when they're
So, Mr. Chairman, I
Um, I'm not the world's greatest
investor, but uh, I listened to
some talks on it, and I
understand, Mr. Chair, that
This isn't really wealth.
This is a hand up.
Or education or um someone who
wants to start a business and so
forth, you mentioned a few
categories where this um this
money could be used.
But I, I think it's a misnomer
to call it a wealth fund because
this money is not really truly
wealth. It's, it's just not at
that level yet. So, um, one of
my concerns is that a lot of
people, if this passes and they
hear about this, they're gonna
For one thing, expect almost
count on that money, they won't
probably look at the part that
says, uh, no guarantee or
anything like that, but I, I
don't believe it may help with,
for example, a down payment on a
car.
Or even a house if it's not a
very expensive house. So I, I
think it's
Just a little bit misleading,
but I understand, um, I did
wanna ask, there's a statement
in the bill, Mr. Chairman, that
this would be exempt from state
taxation.
The question I have is, should
there be a distribution.
Would the money be exempt from
federal income tax, Mr. Chair,
Mr. Chen, Representative, this
is actually also part of the
reason why the task force is
created here. The goal of this
bill is to build out this fund
through the legislative process
through transparency through
that. And so this is why you'll
see in the.
In the task force, uh,
individuals that are included
from our, from our financial
experts on it, but also our
community experts as well that
can influence that. So again, we
want to make sure that how this
fund is distributed, um, is done
so in a fair manner, but also
that um that the funds existence
doesn't undermine the benefits
that these families may may
receive and so this is why the
task force is a really important
aspect to this, um, to make sure
that we're doing it within these
parameters, if that helps.
Yeah, Mr. Cha I'll just kind of
conclude with um
An observation or an opinion
that I think this bill isn't
really ready to be a bill. I
think it really calls for
memorial to study the whole um
subject, the whole proposal. Uh,
I think.
There's just a whole lot here we
don't know yet. And a study
could help um
Give that some uh formation so
we have something a little more
to, to deal with. So I would
have preferred to see this as
memorial. Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Thank you very much. Uh, next,
we're gonna go to Luhan and then
represent Duncan.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Thank you,
um.
Representatives bringing this, I
would concur with Representative
Brown. I think we need to really
look at all the financials, um,
investments that we're making
for um
Especially after the session to
see what things go through, I,
um.
I know there's an
Another version of this bill in
the Senate as well. I think it's
a great idea. I really do. I
think this is, this is headed in
the the best direction that we
need to go. Um, but I just feel
like there's a, I'm reading the
FIR and there's just a lot of
concerns, um, and here in
appropriations we we need to
take these, these measures all
up.
Uh, together, um, Mr. Mr. Chair,
um.
Represents, is there money in
the budget for this?
Mr. Chair and Representative,
we're working with Senate
Finance right now on ensuring
you.
Um, Mr. Chair, thank you for
that answer. Um, I just.
And I say this in in the spirit
of, of me looking at certain,
uh, different ways of types of
investments in a certain way,
and I've been Mr. Chair, uh,
sectioning off by different
populations and working with
groups to figure out
Where the biggest need is,
especially after this session
we've done so much to benefit
our working families and our
families. We just passed out of
the house legislation for paid
family medical leave, which is a
huge endeavor and one of the
best things that we can be doing
right now. And there's a, there
was a
A new section to the act that
provides for $9000.
Um
Amount that's given to every
child that's born is that in any
way connected to what you're
doing with the degenerative, Mr.
Chair Representative, so this
is, this is a completely
different concept in that this
is money that is held and
invested in over the course of
18 years and beyond as, as it
continues to grow. And again,
depending on as things are
withdrawn, working with the
treasurer, ensuring that kids
can have young adults can have
access to this. The way that it
builds wealth in a later
generation is that it is able to
um.
ensure that they are able to
take those first steps, right?
The biggest thing that prevents
someone from buying a home or
investing in a new business is
not having the means to do so.
And so this bill acts in a very
different manner. I don't know
if you wanted to
add that.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Thank you
for that answer. I, I think
that's great.
I think that's a great concept.
I just want us to be, um, taking
into consideration everything
that we're doing, um, and be
prudent about it, and I and uh
Mr. Chair, representative, uh,
we had the state treasurer in
front of us at the beginning of
the session, and I believe this
is one of her, her big ideas,
but specifically on this bill,
she's not in favor of.
And so this.
This would go to the way you
have this um.
Set up in your legislation would
have two different funds related
to each other one going to the
SIC and what can you
Delineate that the portion of
this one maybe is a better way
of saying it, going to the SIC
and the other portion.
Going to the state treasurer's
office. Thank you, uh, Mr.
Chair. Thank you,
Representatives. So no, the, the
way this is set up and you can
see it in section 3 with the
creation of the fund. What this
does is it says that for the 1st
18 years, essentially, the SIC
does all the investing or the
the state investment officer
does the investing and after 18
years, 1/3 of it, um, is then
manage what it is then managed
by the uh state investment
officer and the other 2/3 is by
the state treasurer. Um, and I
will say that, you know, last
year.
we did do a memorial, or sorry,
I actually put in growth funding
to have the state treasurer
review this topic and, and come
back with some recommendations.
And while appreciated, I think
the other bill has adopted some
of those already. What this bill
does is it puts it through a
task force process that happens
through the legislative process.
I would argue that that's one of
the biggest differences between
those two bills, um, and some of
the concerns that were
expressed, we try to take care
of with the changes in the
amendment, because the amendment
makes sure that the SAC
these concerns in particular
were taken care of by removing
them from the task force. Um,
and I also wanted to turn it
over to my expert, who wanted to
also address some of the, the
thoughts on the other funds.
Uh chair and Representative
Luhan, thank you so much for
pointing out the tremendous
resources that we have offered
our communities uh across our
state. I want to just uplift
that while baby bonds would help
to narrow the racial wealth gap,
they would not address, no, not
all of the financial cha
challenges experienced by
households across the state. So
we should view baby bonds as a
part of a suite of policies to
meet the needs of children and
families in terms of wealth
building and immediate
assistance.
And so when you're thinking
about a landscape in a suite of
policies, thinking about
complementary policies like
affordable childcare, like early
childhood education like
guaranteed income, strengthened
um paid family medical leave.
These are all complimentary to
what Baby Bond seeks to achieve
in the state. Thank you, Mr.
Chair. Thank you for the answer.
Again, I, I don't disagree with
with what you're saying. I just
feel like there are some
technical issues. And Mr. Chair,
I would like to defer to the
state treasurer who is online,
if she could comment.
to to this bill.
Uh, great. Thank you,
Representative Wuhan. Let's keep
going through questions. uh, if
the treasurer is online.
Uh, great. Uh, Madam Treasurer,
do you, uh, want to add anything
on House Bill 7?
Yes, thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Thank you, Representative Wuhan.
Thank you, Representative
Serrado. Um, I think you bring
up a lot of concerns. There is
no funding to this right now, so
there is no way of being able to
support the baby bonds as is.
The structure of the development
within House Bill 7 is faulty in
in a number of ways, just to
name a few, it says every baby
born after January 1st of this
year, that would make it
retroactive, which would not be
permissible, so it'd have to be
July 1st, um, if this bill got
passed.
It says the prudent Investment
Act is under DFA which does not
invest, um, and it eliminates
any student that didn't graduate
from high school or left New
Mexico for a short time. So for
example, if your family is a
military family, you wouldn't
also be able to qualify for
this. So the very people we're
trying to help with baby bonds
are the very people that we
wouldn't be able to do, and the
task force that is presented
doesn't have any money or asset
allocation that would need to be
done in the interim because
there is no funding to it,
but I'm gonna.
So we had public comment.
You didn't, um, Representative
Lohan, thank you for, uh,
including the treasurer, uh,
please continue on with any
questions. Thank you, Mr. Chair.
I would just say the, the having
the expertise from the the as
the state treasurer to comment,
is essential to this because
this is going to take 2/3 of
this fund and
And have it taken to the state
treasurer's office, so I think
that this is important and
valuable information that we're
getting and just to the point
like.
Maybe we could have a more,
more, um.
Robust information if we did
turn this into a memorial, Mr.
Chair, thank you.
Thank you. Next, we'll go to
Ripside Duncan, then rips down.
Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Um, chair and representative, is
this even legal?
To take, um, taxpayer funds and
give them to people. Thank you,
Mr. Chair. Thank you,
Representatives. So, as we know,
there are many exceptions to the
anti-donation clause, and again
we see this as falling within
that realm. However, that is
again part of the, that is one
specific piece that we put in
for the task force is to ensure
that this is legal with all
statutes and laws that exist
within the state. So ensuring
that that that part is, so I
feel confident it is, and that's
part of the reason why I'm
ensuring the task force will
confirm that as well.
Thank you, Mr. Chair, I, I just
would have thought this might
have been one of those things
that's run by the Attorney
general first and find out what
falls within the realm or if it
falls, it makes it illegal. Um.
So, a couple of questions. So,
I'm looking at this and it says
any citizen of New Mexico, is
that right? That's born in New
Mexico, Mr. Chair and
Representative, uh, yes, I
believe so. OK.
Thank you Mr. Chair and
Representative, is that a US
citizen or just anybody that's
born in the state of New Mexico.
So, let me just pull up where it
has the language around chair
and representative, I would
assume that anyone born.
Thank you, Mr. Chair, uh,
Representative, but there are a
lot of people that are born in
New Mexico that aren't citizens
of the US.
And that was my point. Mr. Chair
Representative, you're, you're
born in the United States you're
a citizen.
OK, fair enough. Um, and I
appreciate that. I stand
corrected. Um.
I,
I'm gonna.
Go a little bit with what
representative Brown.
Um, had talked about.
This isn't going to be a wealth
builder.
This may buy you a used car in
18.
Years
Um, but, but I don't know that
this is a well, but I will tell
you what the wealth builder is,
and we do a really good job of
getting our kids a free
education.
where they can go to school and
and work hard, become what they
want to be for the rest of their
lives as far as I will tell you
that in college.
A clean toilets for a living.
Not necessarily a bad job, not
the greatest job I'll ever, I'll
tell you that's for darn.
But when we start making it.
As we continue to give.
Program program of program.
My concern is this.
I played ball with some guys on
the football team, and none of
them were like back or you might
have had a better team.
But I played ball with those
guys and everything we did was
hard. Everything, and I think
when we don't expect hard things
from our kids, we don't, we
don't get.
things done and accomplished
with them.
So I'm all for saying, look,
let's get him an education.
Let's get him to college. Let's
do what we can for him.
Um, I just don't know that I'm
ready to buy in my used car in
18 years.
That's my
Thank you.
Great. Uh thank you very much
Representative Duncan.
We're gonna go, uh, sorry,
down there, please. Thank you,
Mr. Chair. Thank you,
Representative. Did you say you
clean toilets in college? I did
too. That was my work
experience. I cleaned, um, 4
floors of showers and stalls in
the women's dorm at my college
for 3 semesters, um, and had a
waitressing job also in Tata,
um, but thank you, Mr. Chair.
Thank you, Representative. Um,
so in this bill as it's drafted,
you were very specific that a
student, if they drop out of
high school.
They're not eligible or if they
move away from New Mexico,
they're not eligible. Mr. Chair
Representative, can you tell me
a little bit more about how you
came to that conclusion. Thank
you, Mr. Chair. Thank you,
Representative, and 11 thing
briefly, um, one other thing we
lay out here is it's not for a
used car, it's very specific for
education entrepreneurship. I
just want to be clear for this.
But, but to your question about
um why we specifically said high
school, we effectively wanted
full buy-in from the students
that that were receiving the
benefit. Um, so for example
example, there's a lot of
mobility nowadays that we see
oftentimes that is tied to that.
Now, if somebody, as we have
with the task force and as we
know a GED is an equivalency of
high school. Um, this does not
preclude that from existing or
being a possibility. We just
want to make sure that the folks
that were investing these
dollars in, um, and, and I do
see this as an investment, um,
are able to see New Mexico as
their home that they come home
to. And I think that's the, the,
the fundamental reason why we
focused on high school. Thank
you, Mr. Chair. Thank you,
Representative.
So they can be born in New
Mexico, live elsewhere, and as
long as they move back and
graduate from.
New Mexico, they would be
eligible. uh, Mr. Chair and uh
Representative, the, it says uh
in here we have it clearly that
who graduates from high school
in New Mexico is pursuing in
pursuing, uh, who graduates from
a high school in Mexico, so yes,
that's correct. Thank you, Mr.
Chair. So my grandson who was
born in New Mexico but doesn't
live here, he could come and
stay with me, his senior year,
and he would be eligible, well.
Hypothetically, that scenario
could qualify. Hypothetical,
although I will argue, Mr. Chair
and Representative, the majority
of the individuals that are
going to be receiving these
benefits or ones that are born
and raised all their lives in
New Mexico. OK. Thank you, Mr.
Chair. And then, um, why Mr.
Chairs representative, why is
there not?
There's not like a financial
literacy component in this, Mr.
Mr. Chen and Representative,
we've actually discussed this as
well, and again we go back to
the task force aspect to this.
Um, we're entirely open to that
being a possibility, so I, I
don't want you to think that's
uh completely off the table, Mr.
Cha. OK, thank you, Mr. Chair.
Um, in the beginning language,
so I've heard, I heard this
pitched.
For all throughout the interim,
many articles, I went back and
looked and speeches given by the
majority repeatedly said every
child born in New Mexico. I
noticed on page 1 line 13, it
says every eligible child and
100% of the testimony of the
folks that are doing this and
working on this.
Specified underserved poverty,
Medicaid, income levels. So
Madam Chair Representative, is
this for every New Mexican born
in New Mexico, every child born
in New Mexico, or is it income
based? Thank you,
Representative. Thank you, Chair
for the question. So it is for
every person in New Mexico, and
again, the guard rails and how
to ensure that it's it's
received in a fair and equitable
manner, uh, makes a big
difference, um,
I apologize, uh, yeah, so, so
that that aspect is there as
well. The reason for that is
that as we know, a lot of folks.
New Mexico, and as I said in the
beginning, live paycheck to
paycheck, but are middle class.
So there's no um generational
wealth, there's no home that,
you know, after your parents may
pass that gets inherited, that,
that doesn't exist for a lot of
Mexicans. And so we wanted to
keep that broad, but again, the
task force will look to ensure
that it's being received in a
fair manner. Thank you, Mr.
Chair and thank you
representative. Um, so I mean,
I'm I we've got $11 billion
budget. There's like half a
billion dollars for housing last
year, half a billion dollars for
housing this year. Um, we're
building more capacity.
We cover tuition, not just for
undergrad but now possibly
graduate school, 2% business
loans, long term business loans,
that's an incredibly low
interest rate for business loans
and can be even used for
capital. Um, we've got the EDD
grants, we've got LEEA, we've
got Jip.
And
I think we don't have a shared
language on fair and equitable,
because that would mean all, and
We're, you're asking us to vote
on a fund that has no money.
To create a there's no
boundaries.
We don't know what we're
funding, who's eligible.
I mean, it's, it's, it's what,
what we're, what are we, I'm not
even sure what we're voting on.
We don't know what the
boundaries are going to be,
who's going to be eligible, how
much is gonna be put in the
fund? Who's going to be
appointed to create the
guardrails.
Or what the definition of an
eligible person is. So it's,
it's early for me to be able to
support this because, not
because of the intent. I, I
actually feel pretty good about
the intent until we start
picking and choosing which New
Mexico children deserve this
type of an investment. We have
an $11 billion fund or when
we're thinking about whether
children would be more bene
benefited today if their parents
could have some money to to be
in charge of their kids'
education today when they need
to be proficient by 3rd grade.
It's, it's, there's, there's
nothing in this.
Bill
Um, except create the fund and
we'll decide how it gets spent
later. It, it, it's too, it's
too broad and it's not ready
yet. So at this point, for
fiscal responsibility as
lawmakers. That's our job. I
don't know what the laws or
rules are gonna be, and that
appropriators, I don't know what
this is gonna cost. Today I'm
gonna pass. Thank you, Mr.
Chair. Great. Thank you very
much, Representative Dao. Next,
we're going to go to vice chair.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Um,
The $5 million appropriation.
Can you just remind me, Mr.
Chair, um, and representatives,
um,
Is that being invested for
future disbursement.
Distribution or what is the $5
million appropriation going
toward at this point. Uh, thank
you, Mr. Chair. Thank you, Madam
Vice Chair. So again, well,
that's been removed. We're
working with Senate Finance to
ensure that that's included.
However, the intent is to get
the fund started with the money
and a small portion of it to set
up the task force, the, the
general. Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Thank you, Representatives. So,
um, for instance, if $100,000
were used for task force,
um, administration and per diem.
and then 4.9.
were used for the corpus of the
fund, um, how
It
If there were no other
appropriations made into the
fund. What would happen?
With the funds. Thank you, uh,
Mr. Chair, uh, Vice Chair and
committee. So that would be the,
the corpus to begin with, and
again, it would, it were 18
years that interest would grow
and uh that would compound, as
we've seen all these funds as
well, and we would, you know,
and essentially disperse what we
had at that point. Yeah, I think
I do in an ideal world, we're
able to hit a fund amount that
is higher than that so that you
can ensure that what's being
taken out, whether at 18,
whether at retirement age or
whatever in between would make
sense. But again, with the
specifics that is for children
born in Mexico, graduated.
New Mexico. If we were investing
in their education,
entrepreneurship, housing, um,
and, and investments.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Thank you.
Um, that, that helps, um, with
the, I mean, staying on the, you
know, potential.
concept that it's 4.9 million uh
plus interest compounded
interest. Are we only talking
about the children born in one
year, or the children born over
the course of 18 years, and then
there's a payout.
Every year for the 20,000. Uh,
Mr. Chair and Mount Oyster,
it's, it's the, it's the latter
that you're describing. So
again, it would continue to
accrue while it was being
dispersed. This is why the fund
changes, uh, the investment
investing arm, uh, just to fall
in with that prudent Investor
Act.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Uh, thank
you.
Great. OK, um.
We've got, um, um, I've got a
few questions. Is anybody in for
a 2nd or 3rd time?
Great. Let's go back, uh, let
me, I'm gonna have a few
questions I'll go back to
representing Wuhan, um, first,
um, thank you, representatives,
um.
Chair, Sarato, um.
Can you explain sort of the
importance of the task force for
sort of our picture moving
forward from your perspective.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Thank you,
uh, committee for the question.
So it really does lay out the
optimal design of this program.
Again, we've seen in other
states, uh, how we can affect
communities. We also seen
evidence that when you have
something like a future fund
available, students do better in
school, they have better
outcomes, um, just with having
the, the potential to have
access to some sort of resources
like this. So with this
Uh, with the task force would
do, would provide advice,
recommendations through a report
about how we implement this
program specifically. Um, as
we've heard oftentimes with
other bills, how the
implementation happens is a big
piece of what we're doing. And
so requiring that from a task
force of experts, um, we believe
is essential in ensuring that
the uh the guard rules that are
around it are effective in, in,
uh, in providing for these these
children.
Uh, great. Thank you very much
for that. And um you talked
about this a little bit. Uh, I
was looking at a couple other
things. er Serato in terms of
the uses for the fund. Is it
sort of wide open, are those
more limited?
Thank you. Can you point me
towards that, Yes, absolutely.
Thank you for the question. If
you go to page 2, lines 10 and
11 lays out who would be
eligible for it.
So again, those who graduate
from a high from high school,
uh, and then they are pursuing
education, housing,
entrepreneurship, retirement and
investment opportunities. Um, I
want to point out the retirement
aspect as well, Mr. Chair, um,
and some of these estimates you
were looking at half a million
if it just saved for the
entirety of the the until
retirement age. So again, this
is truly a a useful tool for
individuals to be able to depend
on it for later, for very
specific intents. Uh, Mr. Chair,
uh, in the previous committee we
were
How would it be distributed,
right? I didn't buy a house when
I was 18, I bought a house when
I was in my 30s, Mr. Chair, and
again, you know, the amount that
would have been withdrawn at 18
versus later, um, you know,
could be like a Roth IRA when
you withdraw from a Roth IRA,
proving that you're utilizing it
for a specific purpose. Mr.
Chair, if I may add, I think
this is one of the most
beautiful aspects of my service
as chair of the Investment
pensions and Oversight Committee
because this is one of the best
ways and most importantly.
to invest in our, and this is
why the SIC is real important.
protects our, our deposits.
That's the role of the treasure,
protecting our deposits
overseeing how the deposits are,
but most importantly, how best
to invest.
One of the key questions in uh
the Ipoist over and over again
is, are these investments
secured for the future. And so
this is, this is one of those
perfect examples that we can now
give. Thank you. thank you very
much, uh, in Royal Caballero,
um, and, uh, presenters, uh, the
that actually leads into another
question. So the, the
treasurer's role, does that kick
in for the next year or does.
that kick in under this bill at
a later date. Thank you, Mr.
Chair. The, uh, treasurer's role
kicks in as a member of the task
force within as soon as the task
force is formed, uh, their role
is later on after the 18 years,
uh, in which they'll be involved
with investing, but like all of
the funds, it would be held
underneath the treasure.
Got it. OK. Um, thank you for
that. Um.
OK. Uh, I may, I, I know we've
got in sort of a 2nd round, I'm
gonna go to Representative
Garrett, uh, next.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Uh, thank
you for bringing this. I've put
a lot of cheerleading about it,
but this is the first time I've
actually seen the list of things
that really have to be
determined, which is a long
list.
My first question is it says the
task force must report.
Recommendations to the governor
and the legislature by the end
of 2025.
So am I correct, Mr. Cha, in
assuming enabling legislation
would come out of the task
force?
Uh, Mr. Chair Representative,
yes, that would be the intent.
That leads to my second
question, Mr. Chair, if the
enabling legislation really has
to come at that time. Why would
we establish the fund now.
Mr. Chair and Representative, we
would like to start the
investments that are happening
as soon as possible, so that,
again, the dollar invested today
is worth more tomorrow, as we
all know. That's the intent of
putting it out as for now. We
also want to ensure that we're
catching these kids that are,
that are being born in this year
to be able to benefit from this
fund as well. And so that's Mr.
Chair and and Representative, I
appreciate that. I kind of wish
that we would have started the
fun 34 years ago for my 34 year
old, um.
But I just, I'm very much on the
line right now.
Because we're making a fun for
people that are being born as we
speak, but we don't really know.
What the
What qualifies you like in
Connecticut, you had to be
Medicaid child.
Is that what we want, uh, do you
see what I mean? It's like I
like the idea. I think it has a
lot of merit.
But what I'm asking myself is
should we establish the actual
fun at this point.
That's my question that I'm
asking myself in listening to
you if you wanna comment, you
can or not. No, thank, thank
you, Mr. Chair, I, you know, I
defer to how you guys, uh,
handle comments and questions.
No, I, I, I understand the
concern that, you know, why
would we be doing at this point?
Um, you know, as one of the
sponsors of the bill, I think we
are putting in the, the, the
parameters. We know that it's a
child that is born here, that
is, that is, that is graduated
here and what they're going to
be allowed to invest in, we know
that it's every New Mexican we
want to make sure has access
to these funds in a fair and
equitable manner. And so that's
why we set those up. Now, again,
we know that sometimes we we
bring forth a, you know, not, I
do too, a a a big bill that has
all the details all sorted out,
right? But it doesn't mean that
everything is resolved already.
The objective here is this
future fund that really is about
funding, you know, for all of
our communities.
That it's done through the the
the legislative process, right,
that we have set up these
parameters, we set up the fund
to begin growing and that the
specific surrounding it will,
you know, our, our continuing to
be done through the legislature
under, you know, LFC and and
through that manner.
The sooner the fun begins to to
grow and the idea is to have a
fund that continues to compound
to grow so that.
We can meet out in the policy
aspects of the bill. Thank you.
And Mr. Chair, that's my final
question. 5 million isn't a lot.
Um, it wouldn't go that far,
even in 18 years. So do you
anticipate
Asking for more money and for
the fiscal year 27.
I apologize, I don't understand
the question about Mr. Cha,
sorry. Do you anticipate, Mr.
Chair.
Asking for additional
appropriations. Thank you, Mr.
Chair. Thank you, uh,
Representative. Yes, I would
anticipate that would be part of
it, and again, the full uh
spectrum of what that amount
would be, would we, we would
have from the task force. OK,
thank you, those are my
questions right now. Great.
Thank you very much. Um, uh, for
the first time I just I want to
tell everybody I'm gonna,
there's a few things including
sort of the retroactive, uh,
date and continuing to monitor
the Senate for the
appropriation.
I'm gonna ask if you're willing
to roll the bill, um, there's a
few questions, good questions
that the members have brought
up. I think we have a chance to
work on as we did earlier with a
different bill, um, before we do
that, I wanna go to represent
Pettigrew if there are any other
questions, I'm not. I'm sorry,
can you restate the last part,
sir? Yes. Yeah, I'm going to,
I'm looking to, I'm gonna ask
the uh representatives to roll
the bill I'm gonna, uh, however,
I want to see if members
Have any other questions or
comments that they wanna raise
prior to us rolling it just so
that we can make efficient use
of time.
Chairman, I was going to make a
motion at the table, so.
OK, great. Thank you. Uh, any
other uh things representative
Brown?
Mr. Chair, I just, you know,
reiterate, I think we really
need to see a memorial on this,
and I would hope whatever we see
next would be a memorial. Thank
you.
Thank you and Representative
Lahan anything additional
questions Mr. Chair, I just
think this committee has spoken
and and there's a lot of concern
on both. OK, reiterating
concerns are fine, any other
questions and then I'm gonna
have a couple of additional
questions.
I would just, I mean,
I, I would just like to say I
would, I would support what
Representative Brown said and
and seen a memorial on this for
further study and further
information. I don't think we're
ready for this. Thank you very
much for that, uh,
representatives, one of the
questions that I have is sort of
for, since we operate in 60 and
30 day cycles.
Uh, I'd like to have a better
view of the expected verse in
the upcoming window.
And what uh establishment of a
fund.
And the potential, here's the
question.
And that we're talking about
sort of additional money that
clearly would need to be
appropriated.
If a fund isn't created until a
future date.
Does that mean any child born in
the state of New Mexico.
Prior to that fund's
establishment, even if uh
legislature in 3 years says, I
want to plunk down $500 million.
If that fund isn't established.
When that child is born, what
does that mean for the inner,
sort of the intervening first.
That's one of the big questions
for me.
Is that clear as mud? Do you,
can I ask a quick question back,
Mr. Sorry, uh, so are you saying
that?
If you establish a fund in 25
that has $4.9 million and then
in 206, it then has 500 $4.9
million. Um, would a child born
in 25, have access to their.
That's right,
because I think this seems like
an incredibly sort of
Very strong pro-family policy. I
appreciate very good questions
that are being raised across a
wide range of areas. Um,
One of the values to me is sort
of being able to um support as
many New Mexico kiddos who are
gonna be born in families, and
so I'd just like to understand a
little bit more on that when you
all come back. I want to thank
the members for great questions.
Um, thank you for taking the
time both. Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Thank you. Great. OK, and now
we're uh ask if
Uh, if Representative Doo is
here, we can also
Ah, perfect.
We'll move on to House Bill 209.
Not accepting motions. Thank
you, Mr. Chair and thank you
members of the committee. Um, we
have really started creating a
lot of funds and um when I was
not here for the last couple of
years, you know, folks would
come to me and say, do you know
how I could fund this or how I
could find that and one of the
incidents was the Kiki Vedra
Fund. It was the icemaker at the
senior meal site that I heavily
supported when I was here
before. The ice maker went out.
And so I said, oh, I, you know,
there's a Kiki Saedra fund for
that. Well, the name
Kiki Save Fund. If you were not
here when that bill was passed,
you would have no idea what that
fund was for. And so I, you
know, went on the sunshine
Portal for various things that
came up from my community, um,
and I could find the names of
the funds, but you couldn't find
the purpose of the fund. And so,
uh, what this bill does is, in
addition to putting right now
the Sunshine Portal shows the
name of the fund and the balance
of the fund.
But no linkage to how to fly or
find the purpose of the fund or
what that might be. So if you,
this is all existing language
except on page 5 and the
underlying language is the new
language, and it asks that we
link to the New Mexico
Commission's website, the state
fund created by law to to to the
user directly to the statutory
provision that created the fund.
It
I personally think it should go
further because it doesn't have
the name of the contact, it
doesn't have an email for the
agency. It doesn't take you to
their website, but so many of
the funds, you just can't find
it and I didn't want it to be
complicated. I just wanted it to
be a little bit easier so you
could at least search.
What a fun was about to see if
it would, if you're interested.
Excellent. Thank you for that.
You also have an amendment. Can
you read us that number, please.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I do
have an amendment. 231523.1, and
this change, changes the
effective date to 2025 December,
December 31st, 2025. Great. OK.
Uh, can we have a motion in a
second for discussion? OK, it's
been moved by Representative
Duncan, seconded by
Representative Vincent, um,
you've explained the
Amendment, uh, in that, um, any
questions on the amendment?
Any kind of motion to adopt the
amendment.
Kate's been moved by uh
Representative Vincent seconded
silently by Representative
Vincent and out loud by
Representative Brown.
Uh, is there any opposition to
adopting that uh amendment
saying that you have an amended
bill. Is there anybody who
wishes to speak uh publicly on
House Bill 209.
Casey. Anybody in support or
opposition?
Is there anybody online who
wishes to speak in support or
opposition.
Hey, back to the bill. Any
questions from members?
I don't see any questions, uh,
uh.
Thank you for the bill. I will
now go for a motion for
Yeah
No, please withdraw that because
that is non-debatable, uh, that,
that is non-debatable as I have
learned many times. What I'd
asked for is a motion to approve
House Bill 2 or a due pass on
House Bill 209 as amended.
OK, it's been moved by uh
ranking member Chatfield signed
by Representative Brown and
Representative Duncan, is there
any opposition to that motion.
Seeing none.
Thank you, Mr. Chair, members of
the committee. OK, now everybody
to explain their vote. I'm just
kidding.
Uh, OK, thank you very much,
Representative Doo, and uh a
needed idea. OK, remember that's
gonna do it for today. Thank you
for working through some
challenging things. Appreciate
everybody's time. We're
adjourned for today. We'll be
back tomorrow.
