And can participate in our
budget hearing. So thank you,
Madam Chair for kicking us off
with that We're going to go
straight, Madam Secretary. Thank
you so much for being here. When
we get to you. We want to make
sure you can introduce members
of your also as a note, Uh, as
we do the conclusion of this
morning's hearing, we will set
aside 15 minutes for public
comment.
With that we're going to turn it
over as we do to our analysts,
and we'll start on the lfc side
and go from there.
All right, Mr Chairman, members
of the committee.
My name is Eric senior I'm the
LFC, analyst for the Healthcare
Authority.
Sitting next to me. Here is
Secretary Kerry Armijo for the
Healthcare authority.
And sitting next to her is the
executive analyst Mary Beth
Densmore.
Hmm. I wanted to just first
start off kind of orienting us
to to, um
Some legislation that passed
last year, which created the
health care authority. So
This department was previously
the Human Services Department.
Um, Now it's statute. It's
called the Healthcare Authority
Department.
And it took on three new
programs from, uh
Two from the Department of
Health, and those were the UM
Division of health improvement.
And then they also took on the
developmental Disabilities
Support Division.
And then from the
General Services Department they
took on the health benefits the
Employee Health benefits
program.
So they they've grown quite
substantially over the last few
years or over the last year.
And so this year for FY 25 is
the first year that we're
actually going to have a budget
for the newly established
healthcare authority.
Then I just wanted to orient you
to the LFC documents that you
have in your package there.
Yeah, Volume one, which is on
page 52.
And that's the policy right up
for healthcare.
Uh, and volume one in the
performance. You can see all the
performance report for, uh,
The entire year. Last year FY 23
on page 121 and then in volume
two, you'll see the lfc right up
and documentation on page 291
thing in volume two that I
wanted to actually point out to
you. That's a little bit
different because we're adding
three new programs here.
Because if you look in the, um
towards the end of the LSC
Uh,
Section for the Health Care
Authority Department.
You'll see these supplemental
tables in there.
That's because the regular table
ones for those newly transferred
programs.
Um don't include
Your op, but But these tables in
the back give you the up bud. So
that you have
A good apples to apples
comparison.
Uh, of, um the budget increases
from last year to this, And then
another thing I wanted to go
over is on your volume. Three.
Um, that's the spiral bound book
there. That's on page 70.
There's a few documents in here
that I think you'll find, um
Um, helpful in there, and that's
on page 71.
There's the tobacco settlement
fund sources and uses
Um
I'm on the following page page
72. You can see the opioid
settlement revenue that's kind
of high level for opioid
settlement revenue.
And then you'll also see aged
73.
This table That gives you a good
long history of the, um
The enrollment in Medicaid and
then also the revenue sources
for Medicaid. And so that's
Uh, I think you'll find those
tables to be somewhat helpful to
you during this. This
presentation, alright, moving on
to the actual difference sheets
and this is again. This is
agency 630.
Um and you should see a high
level. Uh, she in front of you.
General fund high level, and so
On this spreadsheet. We're only
talking about General fund and I
just kind of want to orient you
to kind of some of the bigger
Uh um.
Ah, issues within and
differences within the LFC and
the executive recommendation on
this
Um so lfc kind of took. It took,
um, the approach of kind of
prioritizing.
Rural health care.
Um, and a few other things in
there and the executive. They
kind of took more of an approach
of prioritizing aging.
And and those types of services
for as far as rate increases go,
and so you'll see if you look on
Um, lines four. So these this
table's has, uh
Numbers next to it, And so I'm
going to be referencing those
numbers so
Line forward there. The maternal
and child health and other
physical health services.
You'll see the LFC recommended
31.3 million and executive
recommended 21.4 million.
And then LSC also included an
additional 5 million for that
particular rate increase from
the early childhood education
and care fund.
Um
You know, moving down to line
nine.
Um
Both recommendations included
funding to kind of maintain the
rate parody.
Last year. We benchmarked a
bunch of rates, um for Medicaid.
Providers to Medicare.
Um, And so this is an
appropriation that's meant to
maintain those rates going
forward.
Um
You'll also see on their lfc
included online 11 an
appropriation for the smallest
20 hospitals.
Um and then you'll see you'll
see a lot of other differences.
I'm not going to go into a ton
of detail on this because we're
going to go into that in a
minute here, But I just kind of
wanted to point out some of
those differences for you.
Um, on this first page here.
So one other difference that I
wanna point out and this this
makes a big difference once we
get to the actual different
sheets themselves because you're
going to see a big difference in
the medical assistance division.
A large portion of that
difference is actually
explained.
Um, down here online 36 and
that's in the developmental
disability support program.
So you'll see the operating
budget last year for that
program was 100 and 94 million.
Um
But then online 37 what the
executive recommended was moving
130 or sorry, 100 and 71 million
From
The developmental disability
support program and just
budgeting that in the medical
assistance division, right, so
you'll see that up in that, um
Up above there in the medical
assistance division.
And so that's that's a pretty
large difference. And so it does
that 171 actually does kind of
wash out because that 171 was
recommended for both.
LFC recommended it.
Maintaining it in DDS D to
maintain that kind of
Fiscal oversight and
transparency Executive
recommended moving it. We like
to see a kind of broken out and
maintain within DDS D. So that's
that's one really big chunk
there that I wanted to just
point out before we go into the
deep seats. Alright, moving on.
I'm going to move into the
healthcare authority on Page
three.
Um, I'm just gonna go over the
main differences and I'm going
to start just going through the
bullet points actually, that
we're on Page four.
Um
So they're lfc recommended a
7.5 increase.
7.5% increase in the executive
recommended an 18.4% increase in
general fund revenue for the
health care authority.
Ah, including the prior year
Operating budgets from three
programs transfer from other
agencies.
Both recommendations included
General fund revenue increases
for Medicaid provider rate
adjustments.
With differences primarily
related to provider types and
amounts. General Fund
recommendation differed on
assumptions for Medicaid program
growth.
And the need to offset other
revenue sources.
The executive also supported a
58% increase in income support.
That the LFC did not support
Yeah.
L. C did not support accounting
for general fund revenue for the
developmental disability support
program.
And the Medicaid in the medical
assistance program and
maintained General fund revenue
and developmental disability
support program.
Both recommendations adjusted
federal revenue to match their
respective
Funding levels. LFC funded
administrative costs for state
health benefits with revenue
from the employee assessments.
Um, as it always has been done
by the executive funded these
costs through general fund
revenue.
Through Medicaid provider rate
adjustments. Both
recommendations prioritized
provider access and network
adequacy.
With LFC investing more in rule
access and the executive vest
investing more in elderly
services.
The executive assume continued
Medicaid enrollment growth.
Well, LFC assumed the reduction
in enrollment growth following
the end of the public health
emergency, which allowed a lot
of, um enrollees in Medicaid
Stay on Medicaid.
Um a lot of those have now
dropped off, and so we assumed a
lower
A lower growth rate there.
The executive recommended
increasing Supplemental
Nutrition assistance program
benefits caseloads and
increasing temporary assistance
for needy families.
Caseload by increasing income
eligibility from 85 to 95% of
the federal poverty level.
LFC did not support these
increases.
The executive supported
administrative expansions to
increase spending on the call
center contract at 31 F T. E
Administrative FTE and increased
spending 838.3 million for I t
infrastructure software
maintenance.
I T support and creating a data
analytics team.
Um and then we'll discuss
differences by program. Um
Analysts reached consensus on
performance targets. Um
And then expansions. Differences
will be discussed by program.
I'll just I'll just mention if
you go back to page three.
You'll see that expansions table
there at the bottom.
Uh um.
And you'll see the LFC didn't
recommend any of those. We
actually did recommend some of
those, but they are actually
included in the base. They're
not included in as expansions
because we see this as more as
program growth, not program
expansion, So it's it's
Its services. There are sort of
being pretty much being
provided, but, um
Are
Just growing in funding, right?
And so with that, madam chair,
I'll pass it over to our
executive analyst, Miss Densmore
for further comment on the
she'll move on to the first
program. Thank you, Mr Chairman.
Mr Ensberg. Okay. Thank you,
Eric. Um, good morning, Mr Chair
and members of the committee.
Um, I'm Mary Beth Dunsmore, the
executive analyst for Health
Care Authority. Um, I'm gonna
take you through medical
assistance or Medicaid. So
Bear with me. I'll try to do
this at a good pace so we can
really
I don't understand some of these
differences in a little bit more
detail. Um, before I do that, I
just wanted to, um you know,
just us a minor correction the
and we'll talk. We'll get into
this when we talk about income
support, But the executive
recommendation takes the federal
poverty limit for the tennis
piece to 90% not 95.
So just just to put that out
there, So you're working with
the numbers that we have, but
with that said, let's let's get
into it. Medical assistance.
So for this program
LFC recommended 5.7% increase.
the executive recommended 8
33.6% increase in General fund
revenue for medical assistance
So this equates to a difference
of about 359 $59 million.
To account for accounting for
277.4 million is what Eric was
mentioning a moment ago about
where the funding for the DD
program is whether it is in the
Medicaid.
Division or whether it is in the
D D Division. Um
As as it says there. It also
accounts for much of the
difference in other transfers.
Revenue When you look at here,
If you look at the transfers
line, you'll see it is
considerably higher.
On the LFC side. That's to
account for the money coming
over from the DD program.
Additionally, LSC projected a
decrease in the amount of
available funding from the
tobacco settlement fund. So this
resulted in a 12 million
reduction in allocations from
the fund to the department. LFC
recommended replacing this
revenue with General Fund.
The executive recommended
replacing 3.4 million of tobacco
revenue.
Let's see, also recommended
using about 10.8 million from
the early childhood education
and care fund, and this would be
to offer doula and lactation
counseling services, which are
part of the expansion that the
agency is requesting. Um and
also to cover part of the rate
adjustments for maternal and
child health.
Moving on to the base.
We can talk a little bit about
the Medicaid provider rate
adjustments, which are in both
recommendations, but at
different levels and funding
different sort of things.
Again, We will certainly get
into those differences, so
they're clear, um to you all
Through these Medicaid provider
rate adjustments, both
recommendations prioritized
provider access and network
adequacy.
Lfc invested a bit more in rural
access and workforce the
executive invested a bit more in
services for the elderly and for
rape maintenance.
For rate increases. LFC included
more for maternal and child
health and physical health
services.
Rural Precept Ear's
The 20 smallest hospitals and
federally qualified health
centers.
The executive included more for
nursing facilities, Phase three
providers. Those were the
providers that did not get to
100% for this year so they would
raise up to 100% in the
executive
Um, let's see rate maintenance,
behavioral health.
And pace to see a detailed
breakdown of the differences in
Medicaid. Please see the general
fund high level sheet that Eric
went over with you just a few
moments ago.
The executive assumed continued
Medicaid enrollment growth.
Well. LFC assumed a reduction in
enrollment following the end of
the public health emergency and
projected growth in labor force
participation.
So there's a bit of a difference
there and approaches as well.
For administrative costs, the
executive recommended replacing
federal revenue, reducing the
vacancy rate.
Expanding residencies and
increasing the call center
contract.
LFC did not support most of
these items, but did include
funding to reduce the vacancy
rate.
For language. Uh,
recommendations have language
supporting respective funding
levels for tobacco. Lfc had a
couple of pieces of language,
not me. Executive. Um, the
executive included like I'm
sorry. The LSC included language
specifying the amounts being
used for opioid settlement
revenue.
Which is another source that
has, uh
Is in this budget in in certain
places. Now it's the also
included language specifying
each rate, increased dollar
amount and revenue source.
For expansions. Um, as Eric
mentioned a moment ago.
Sometimes things are funded in
expansion. Sometimes they're
funded in the base. It's a bit
of a difference in philosophy.
But I would like to note that in
the end, it does washout because
everything does end up in the
base.
But that said the executive
funded many of the recommended
rate increases through an
expansion item LFC funded rate
increases in the base budget.
And with that, I'll turn it back
over to Eric for developmental
disability support.
All right, Mr. Chair for DDS, D,
um
So we already kind of talked
through a lot of the revenue
issues of, you know, executive
recommended a bunch of the
revenue be located mad. We kept
it in D D s D So I'm not going
to go over that.
But both recommendations
included increases for continued
developmental disabilities.
Medicaid waiver program growth
and provider rates and
additional funding to replace
ending federal pandemic.
Aid.
Funding for these items is in
the executive recommendation are
included in the medical
assistance program, while LFC is
included in DDS D. So you'll see
those differences there, too.
The executive recommendation for
these items totaled 106 million,
while LFC s recommendation
totaled about 58 million
Uh and then Lfc s recommendation
included language specifying
that 11.8 million of the General
fund appropriation to the
program.
Is to be used for provider rate
adjustments with that, I'll pass
it back over to Ms Densmore for
the Medicaid Behavioral House.
Medicaid, Behavioral. Help, Um
For okay. So for revenue for
Medicaid behavior, health lfc
recommended 1.2% and the
executive recommended 8.4% in
general fund increases to
Medicaid behavioral health
programs.
Lfc included 3.5 million in
opioid revenue to support the
ongoing costs of the opioid
epidemic and 1.8 million to
support the care. A program for
infants born exposed to
substances now managed by the
department.
In the base. Both LSC and the
executive included rate
adjustments for behavioral
health providers, with LSC
recommending 5.1 million and the
executive recommending 14.3
million.
Lfc included 500,000 for
bilingual therapy, Medicaid rate
differentials.
And in terms of language, the
executive included language to
transfer $100,000 to the
administrative hearings office.
LFC included language to
transfer 50,000, so that would
be an increase from the current
year that's in the executive and
then on the executives
administrative hearings office
cited LFC included language
specifying amounts for those
behavioral
And with that, I'll turn it back
to Eric for behavioral health
Services. All right, Mr
Chairman, uh, so for the
behavioral health services, LSC
recommended 1.9% increase in
general fund revenue, and the
executive recommended
13.3% increase in general fund
revenue.
Um Lfc included 3.3 million from
opioid revenue.
And the executive recommended
about 5 million
LFC recommended 9 million more
in federal revenues, and this
was 22 more closely aligned with
prior year. Uh actual revenues.
With eight funded vacancies in
FY 24 lfc did not recommend as
much of an increase in personnel
services.
Um lfc included 3.3 million
again from opioid revenue to
increase vouchers and housing
support for people with opioid
use disorder and for both
behavioral health services.
The executive included 5
Million, Um
You know, opioid revenue to
replace expiring federal grants
for the 988.
Um, crisis line LSC included
funding in this one as a special
appropriation.
Um they also had the executive
also included, um, support for
the certified community
behavioral health centers. Lfc
included that in the expendable
trust or the Government
Accountability Trust the gate
and to continue screening, brief
intervention, referrals and
services. We also included
funding for that in the gate,
too, so
That's that's where that is, Um
and then the executive included
language specifying that the 5
million opioid revenue is to be
used for behavioral health
services. And with that, Mr
Chair, I'll pass it over to
Ms Dance floor for income
support. Thank you again, Mr
Chair. As Eric said, This is the
income support division.
Uh, super. This division LSC
recommended a 2.3% in the
executive recommended a 58.2%
increase in General fund revenue
for this program. Lfc included
1.9 million in additional
federal temporary assistance for
needy families, otherwise known
as Tana.
Revenues for the Children, Youth
and Families Department.
In the base. The executive
recommended an increase in
contractual services to support
increased spending on the call
center contract.
LFC included more funding in the
other category for Karen's
support, including 1.9 Million
and This is to support
additional fostering
connections, services and the
keeping families together
program, which are both at the
Children, Youth and Families
Department.
For language. The LFC
recommendation included language
specifying that $500,000 from
the town of revenue.
Would be used to implement
programs at the Public Education
Department for teenage fathers.
Both recommendations adjusted
dollar amounts of support
recommended funding levels.
And in expansions, the executive
recommended a $20.7 million
expansion to increase
Supplemental Nutrition
assistance program benefits and
enrollment.
And I just like to point out
that this increase is intended
to take recipients from $25 a
month benefit to $125 a month
benefit.
Their executive also included an
11.4 million expansion to
increase the threshold for the
tip. Temporary assistance for
needy families eligibility again
that would go to 90% in the
executive recommendation.
Because the program struggles to
meet many of its performance
targets for timeliness. LFC did
not recommend these expansion
items.
And with that, Mr Chair, I'll
turn it back over to Mr Shannon.
All right, Mr Chairman, uh,
program support that, and that's
on page 14. Just so we're still
on the same page.
Ah LFC recommended a 5.3% and
the executive recommended a
total of 51% increase in general
fund revenue for
Program support.
The L. C and executive
recommendations for federal
revenue coincided with the
respective recommendations and
other revenue sources.
Base. L C, uh
Wrecked in the base. LFC
recommended sufficient funding
to fill about 20 FTE, and that's
on top of the nine funded
vacancies that are in the base.
Um, while the exact executive in
the base funded about nine
vacancies.
The executive recommended more
in the contractual services and
other categories for I t
infrastructure and maintenance.
Um, and operations of a newly
acquired it Systems executive
supported admitted straight of
expansions to add about 31
administrative FTE I T personnel
and support and new Data
Analytics and a new data
analytics team.
With that. I'll pass it back to
Ms Densmore, Mr. Chair.
Thank you again, Mr Chair. Um,
The next program is child
support enforcement, which I
think might be the program where
the executive and lfc
recommendations are the closest
um
In this program, the LFC
recommended a 1.9% in the
executive recommended a 7.3%
increase for this program in the
base. LFC recommended 690.6000
to eliminate fees charged to non
Tana families for full child
support services in the base.
The executive also recommended
this item but in an expansion
Additionally, the executive
included, um 6 99.2000 and that
would increase the call center
contract. Um
Expansions the executive
recommended 6690.6000 to
eliminate those child support
fees and again, LFC recommended
that in the base, um Mr Carroll
turned that back over to Mr
Alright, Mr Chair members of the
committee Now we're on page 18,
and this is for the health
improvement program.
This is the program. This is one
of the programs that moved over
from the Department of Health.
And so that's why you see that
zero there in the upward. Um lfc
recommended the 13% and the
executive recommended 20%
increase in general fund revenue
over the FY 24 operating budget.
When the program was located at
the Department of Health.
LFC made a small adjustment and
federal revenue to account for
reduced federal pandemic aid.
And the base LFC recommended
506,000 more in personnel costs,
spending to support greater
boarding home regulation and
oversight.
The executive recommended a
total of 1.2 million more in
contractual services and other
spending to support more
facility regulation and
oversight.
Um, and I'll pass it back to Ms
Ms Densmore.
Okay. Thank you again, Mr.
Chair. I believe this is the
last code for this agency.
And this is the state health
benefits Division. This is the
division that was brought over
from the General Services
Department. Um, so one of the
three that's new.
Uh, in the health care
authority.
Um, okay. In this, you'll see
the The biggest difference here
is that the executive added some
general funds while the LFC
recommendation did not, uh, the
executive recommended adding 2.6
million in general fund revenue.
Let's see, did not recommend
general fund revenue as the
program
Operations have not needed
general fund support in the
past.
Let's see Recommended 3.2
million more employee assessment
revenue than the executive
Both recommendations included
funding to support the
administrative functions of the
program, once housed under the
General Services Department.
But I will just add these
recommendations to help support
the administrative functions in
the executive that is supported
with some additional general
fund and the LFC side that is
supported with the assessments
already, um, that are collected
by the agency. Um, And with
that, uh, Mr Senior and then Mr
Chair. I just wanted to add one
thing to kind of
Wrap up this our presentation
here on the diff sheets. And if
you go to page flip back to page
two
On your high levels and you go
all the way down to the bottom.
You'll see. Um
You know, some of you some of
the members here on HFC or not.
members of LFC, and I think it's
worth kind of just mentioning
Some of the kind of
Larger picture. Um, idea behind
the LFC recommendation, which
Was, you know, looking out over
the horizon we're looking at,
you know
Um, General fund Growth kind of
tabling off, right? And so
Um and I know this is probably
already been mentioned, but I
think it's worth mentioning
again because this is such a big
chunk of the budget, right?
We're looking at
General fund tabling off in out
years and, um And so l s C s
recommendation kind of took more
of an approach of
Well, let's
Spend at about a 56 7%.
Growth rate every year instead
of
Spending everything that we have
every year.
Because otherwise in the out
years, we're going to end up
only being able to grow the
budget by, you know a few
percent every year.
So this kind of like, spreads
out our ability to grow over the
next you know, foreseeable
future and
Um, and so you'll see there that
there's a executives total
recommendation in general fund
revenue is 18.4 increase.
Lfc is is about a 7.5% increase,
and I just wanted to kind of
close off with that. And with
that, Mr Chair, I'll pass it
over to the secretary. Thank you
very much, Mr Senior. Thank you,
Miss Densmore. Really good. And
Madam Secretary. You can take
time to introduce your staff and
thank you for the opportunity.
Mr Chair. Let me just line this
up here.
So, Carlos stuff on the desk.
Um good morning to all of you,
Mr. Chair, Madam Vice chair.
members of the committee. I am
grateful for your time this
morning, and I'm grateful for
the early placement in the
schedule on these hearings, we
know that there are some big
differences is Miss Densmore and
Mr Senior just reviewed and so
eager for the opportunity to
kind of resolve those difference
and really make sure that we all
understand the budget clearly,
So thank you for the chance this
morning.
Um
I want to start out by
acknowledging and thanking the
amazing team of public servants
but joins me today we are
filling out. About half of the
rooms are not going to introduce
everybody. But there are some
key folks who I want to call
your attention to. There are
some new faces in our senior
leadership, but in particular I
want to recognize Alex Castillo
Smith deputy secretary, Kathy
Slater Huff, a new deputy
secretary for the agency, and
Kira Ochoa, another deputy
speaker.
Critelli, whose first day was on
Monday.
Um, we also have with us our CFO
Caroli Graham or budget director
Ricky Montoya. And then I'd like
to recognize Laura like Kellogg.
I think she's here. She's been
are acting Medicaid director for
the past year, and Alissa Walker
Moran, our CFO for Medicaid.
Those are the folks who are
really think tank for the
budget part of the work that we
do.
It has been. This is an
inaugural budget for agency and
if it weren't for this amazing
group of folks, all of them
collectively, I wouldn't be
doing this job. They really keep
me from hiding under my desk
every day. So thank you team and
also like to thank Mary Beth and
Eric. We have had a really good
partnership over the past year.
Working together to really
understand where we're going
with the budget. There are some
differences, but I think those
are largely explained, Um and we
can kind of go over those again
and all kind of review those at
a high level since you got the
details from Eric and Mary Beth,
but I do want to thank them for
working so closely with us on
this inaugural budget. Um and
lastly, I'd like to thank all of
you on this committee for your
public service and your service
to the people of New Mexico. The
state that we love so much.
Moving on to slide to I am gonna
go over the framework for our
budget because the framework for
that executive budget is the
health care authorities, new
mission vision and goals. Um,
and so I want to restate our
mission here. It is a new
mission. It's differs slightly
from the mission of the Human
Services Department. But as we
head into standing up this new
agency
Our mission will be to ensure
that new Mexicans attain their
highest level of health by
providing whole person cost
effective, accessible and high
quality healthcare and safety
Net services and as we become
the healthcare authority, we do
retain those safety net programs
like food and income assistance
and child support, which helps
low income families meet their
basic needs in order to support
their health and well being.
Our vision is that every new
Mexican will have access to
affordable health care coverage
through a coordinated and
seamless healthcare system. We
know that a coordinated
healthcare system does not exist
today and so are gold is to
build that and our that is our
future state, And that leads me
to goal one, which is to
leverage the purchasing power
and partnerships of our state to
create innovative policies and
models of comprehensive
healthcare coverage that improve
the health and well being of new
Mexicans and our healthcare
workforce.
Our second goal is to achieve
health equity by addressing
poverty, discrimination and lack
of resources Building a new
Mexico where everyone thrives
and has a chance to thrive.
Third, We strive to build the
best team in state government. I
think we're doing that by
supporting our employees,
continuous growth and wellness
and we want to be a leader in
supporting the wellness of our
employees and our workforce of
state government.
Um and forth we are our goal is
to implement innovative
technology and data driven
decision making to provide
unparalleled, convenient access
to services and information, all
of the executive budget
recommendations tied directly to
one of these four goals.
Moving on to slide three.
I think you all know the impact
of our agency. But I do want to
restate this healthcare
authority will serve 50% of your
constituents in the state,
always humbled by the impact of
our agency recognizing that our
services and programs directly
affect the lives of at least one
and two new Mexicans. Every time
I go to my kid's school
To the grocery store. I remember
that impact. It strikes me every
day because I see our customers
out there in public. I have a
chance to interact with them so
the healthcare authority will
continue to serve all 988,200
customers of our existing
programs. We have the highest
Medicaid population, Uh,
Medicaid rate by population in
the United States and also the
highest snap enrollment by
population.
Um, serving about almost 76% of
the al Jamea Mexicans for snap.
We will also be serving as we
become the healthcare authority
123,000 new Mexicans who are
enrolled in public school or
retiree health plans. 57,000
Mexicans enrolled in a state
employer, Local public body
health plan 77,319 New Mexicans
enrolled in the Medicaid
developmentally disabilities
waiver program and all new
Mexicans who received care and a
licensed healthcare facility or
from
Medicaid, home and community
community based waiver provider.
These are just the direct
customers of the healthcare
authority. This doesn't include
the healthcare providers, the
grocery stores that substantial
economic impact that's generated
by our programs in local
economies, including in rural
New Mexico, where in some places
you may only have a local health
clinic in a grocery store. Those
are directly served by our
programs. And so we believe that
investment in the H C A is a
really smart and powerful
investment in New Mexico's
economy.
Remember that for every $1 in
general fund we receive about 3
to $4 in federal money and that
goes back out into our state's
economy. Moving on to slide.
It's actually a slide for it
says on the packet. There was a
miss numbering there. So sorry
about that. But we are on the
slide that gives the high level
of the executive
recommendations. Um so do you
want to as miss dense more than
Mr Senior, mentioned the
healthcare authorities.
Executive budget recommendation
is $12.4 billion.
16.9% of that is from General
fund that equates to about 2.12
0.14 billion or an increase of
310 million from fiscal year 24
that does represent at 16.9%
Increase 88% of that growth is
attributable to recurring
Medicaid general fund so
That is influenced by enrollment
trend utilization of services
Sustaining the provider rate
increases the investments that
you all made and that we have, I
think been very grateful for
your support, and also those
other health investments that
you've made through the Medicaid
program and then changes in
federal funding. All of that
comes together to create that.
Um 88% growth on the Medicaid
side, which equates to about
244.5 million. Um and then 4.3%
of the growth in the budget is
for new hcea costs, including
the transfer of funds from the
developmental disability
supports Division, the division
of Health Improvement, Um, the
employee benefits and then
standing up
The foundation of the new
agency.
Um, I do want to call out we do
have a pretty low reversion Read
for fiscal year 23. It was
1.62%. All of that was due to
you federal funds enhanced
federal funds that we were
receiving during the Covid 19
pandemic and are reversion rate
on administrative services is
zero.
So the key differences between
legislative and the executive
budget recommendations equates
to 197.4 million, a pretty big
difference this year. Um and I
do want to call out about 44
fewer vacancy or fewer funded
staff for the agency, um, than
what the agency requested.
Living on to slide five. Do you
want to just highlight the three
key priorities in the executive
budget? Um, the first is
Medicaid coverage and workforce.
innovations that includes
Provider rate increases.
Additional provider rate
increases new services, and I
want to thank you for your
support and House Bill two.
We had, um, you can see on the
in the shape. Uh, map, I guess
on the right. You can see where
those rate increases went in New
Mexico. That's 400 plus million
that was implemented through
rate increases in November.
Those rates you could divide
that up by county so you can see
how much your district received.
And I do want to thank the
legislative for supporting some
of those new services, including
services for women and Children
that doulas lactation services.
We think those are really
important in a state where we
have a shortage of baby care to
really build that out. So thank
you to the legislative for
supporting those changes.
Um I also do want to just point
out that we really believe that
these investments are working.
You can see that the rate
increases that we initiated in
2019 for behavioral health and
the concentrated effort to
rebuild the behavioral health
system have more than doubled
the number of behavioral health
visits. There's a table at the
bottom of the slide there that
shows that more than 2 million
visits or encounters. We would
like to see that double again.
make sure that every new Mexican
is receiving the behavioral
health care that they need.
But those investments are
working and we will continue to
measure and monitor the impact
of those most recent rate
increases. Um, the second
priority for the agency is to
create a more effective safety
net that includes additional
food support, particularly for
the elderly and disabled here in
New Mexico, and then on the
third. We really believe that
the agency needs to be set up
with a strong foundation to
ensure its success. We that will
require that the H C a
Has adequate staffing so that we
can meet its mission and that,
but it does require some level
of investment in the talent of
the agency and the people who do
the critical work every day.
Okay?
Moving on to slide six.
I'm going to talk about Medicaid
First. Those are the
Large differences. Here we go.
Um, those are the biggest
differences and so I'm just
going to call those out the
biggest ones and the assumptions
that we're making in our budget
request versus what the
legislative assumptions are, or
at least I think, and Mr Sheen,
you can correct me if I'm
incorrect about anything. One of
the biggest points of the
variance between the executive
and the legislative is on the
enrollment trend assumptions
that's resulting in about a
$48.5 million difference.
Um, you all know that we are in
the middle, actually, toward the
for the end of the middle of the
Medicaid unwinding. It is an
unprecedented and unknown
historic event for all of the
United States. This is something
that first of all, we don't
really have a pandemic very
often. Thankfully, I don't want
that to happen again. But then
when you have that, and then
it's three years you've got, um
you know, the federal government
gave us 12 months to unwind
three years worth of work. It is
a lot of work.
Um, and the impact on the budget
and the enrollment trend.
Is somewhat unknown. We're
really kind of taking our best
guess to really figure out
what's going to happen in the
future and prime project that
out, and it's challenging to do
that. When you've had factors
like a pandemic and unwinding
that you've had to kind of
factor in. I do want to say that
the margin of error on the
agency's projection historically
has been plus or minus 2%. So
we've been very accurate with
our enrollment.
Um And so I really we stand
behind what Our projection trend
is, Um and we're projecting
higher growth than what the
legislative has built in. I do
want to say, um
There is some uncertainty here,
But there's also some risk but
underfunding. The Medicaid
program will lead us down the
road of cost containment, if not
adequately sustained with the
budget.
I think you've already We've
already talked about the
differences in the provider rate
increases, but I did want to
call out there were some
providers that did not get that
100% of Medicare threshold and
we really want to make sure that
we can at least support getting
all of our providers to that
minimum benchmark, and then
sustaining everyone where we
kind of put them.
Um And so that is a very
important and high priority for
us. Um, there was last year. You
may recall we had a request that
was tied to phase one and phase
two of a rate study. This phase
three was something we talked
about last year, so we are
coming back asking for the rest
of the funds to do that phase
three of the rate increases.
There are some big changes are
big differences also with
Medicaid waiver program growth,
I do want to acknowledge the
legislative for getting us part
of the way there, but I think
you know there's still a $46.9
million difference on the
Medicaid waiver. So you know, as
you all know if the Medicaid
that if the D D program is not
fully funded than providers,
either won't receive those read
increases that they need or that
we may need to kind of go back
to the wait list for the
program.
We do know that people on the DD
waiver don't typically lose
eligibility. The retention is,
you know, in the 90% 95% rate,
so it's It's a very stable
projection. In terms of, um it's
just you're really kind of
trying to predict who will need
services in the future. Um,
there's new benefits and
services that we have.
We have asked for in our budget,
um, that are supported by the
executive. Um, I did want to
just call out a couple of those
we had requested, adding vision
care services for adults, For
example, I view this as a
service that can help people get
to work. I mean, I actually
couldn't work if I didn't have
my glasses on right now, And I
think there are a lot of people
probably in that same boat who
cannot get vision services, and
so we would like to add those
Um, kind of bring our benefit
package up to parity with what's
provided on the commercial
market, so we don't cover
acupuncture services. Add those,
and then we have a proposal in
our budget to pay that we think
will attract providers to New
Mexico by increasing the pay
rate for the what we call the
midlevel providers. So a
certified nurse practitioner or
a physician assistant
Getting them to the same rate.
as a physician. Um, we think
that we can really start to
build out that workforce of
midlevel providers it's hard to
attract physicians. Um, there
aren't as many of them and so
we'd like to pay them on par
with what the physicians get
paid. That also is not a
supported by the legislative
budget.
Um And lastly I on the Medicaid
side. I just want to call out
that we have requested for new
FTE to oversee the turquoise
care managed care organizations.
We strongly agree with the LFC
and the and the legislative side
that the healthcare authority
needs better oversight of
managed care contracts. Um, and
we need that funding to support
those positions to do that work.
Um, we have a very low vacancy
rate right now. It's about
12.3% were actually currently
staffed below the funded vacancy
rate for the agencies, so
there's not much additional room
for FTE without either getting
additional legislative funding
or cutting the TV have, and I do
want to just mention that the
Medicaid division
Does an incredible amount of
work. It is very complex
division, lots of workload, lots
of agency bills just recently. I
was kind of counting this
morning. Last year we implement
or this past year we implemented
19 pieces of legislation. Most
of that was Medicaid related
legislation, no additional
appropriations or staff to do
that work.
So congratulations to the team
for that, Um
On slide seven. There are just
some additional differences to
highlight between the
recommendations and these really
fall into the categories of
foundational program support for
the health care authority and
program expansion items so you
can see on the sheet here. We've
got the office of Data Analytics
for the HHS agencies. We really
want to build out.
The analytics for our agencies
across the HHS enterprises. This
would also leverage support for
our partners at the Department
of Health, early Childhood
Department, the Aging Department
and the Children, Youth and
Families Department. We're
working together as a team on
data that enterprise we have a
new data services contract that
will start to have a data. What
we call a data lake that's going
to be implemented in April.
Or start to be rolling out in
April, but we really need people
to be able to do the analytics
work that the system is designed
to pull for us, Um
We also have additional support
built in that was not
recommended by the legislative,
um, for I t support and as a
reminder, we're getting 411 new
staff from the Department of
Health and General Services
Department. We need to be able
to support the ICTY licenses,
their equipment and their
software, So it's really
important that we actually have
the support to do that. Um,
otherwise we're gonna have to be
making cuts. I'm not sure where
we would do that. So there's a
lot of
I'm just basic support that we
need to be able to provide the
staff. Um and then in programs
support right now we're very low
to zero almost of our program
support budget. We do need staff
to do legal counsel. We need
human resources, staff,
financial and leadership
support. Um, without all of
that, um, and in that key
difference kind of runs the risk
of noncompliance or failure to
be accountable to all of you and
to the people of New Mexico with
our mission.
Um And lastly here, I think
there's just a difference in
terms of funding. This is an
expansion item. There's a snap
expansion that was mentioned
earlier. This is the one I do. I
do want to call this out because
New Mexico is the number number
one food insecure state among
seniors in the United States,
and we often hear from seniors
directly. You may have heard
this, um that that $25 is just
not enough. It's not really
worth, um, benefit and so
raising that from $25 250.
Dollars will really make a
difference in the lives of our
seniors and disabled
populations.
One other thing I want to
mention here is that when you
invest in food supports for
people who are disabled or
elderly, you reduce their risk
of institutional care when
people can't meet their basic
needs, they will end up in a
higher cost of care setting that
reduces their quality of life.
And so we really view this as
helping to meet their basic
needs to keep them healthy and
keep them getting the services
they need in their communities.
Moving on to slide eight.
Um, there's just some
differences there in the
developmental disabilities
support, staffing and contracts
about 2.5 million and then
again, some of those it and
human resources FTE, this one I
wanted to call out separately
because it's my understanding
that the Department of Health
reduced its budget by that 11 F
T E and those did not get moved
over in the legislative to the
agency, so
We're asking to get the full FTE
count that we need for the new
agency.
Slide nine. I know that this
budget is not focused on
specifically on non recurring,
but there are a couple of items
that I just felt like I needed
to mention because of those big
differences
there are you know, the
legislative did support some of
the snap expansions, including
the summer MBT program that will
launch but those were built in
the administrative side, and the
I T side was built in as non
recurring, So we really need
that support in order to execute
those programs.
Um, that the legislative is
supporting. There's also a
federal settlement that is
supported by legislative budget
over the past two years. That
was a negotiation that we made
with the federal government that
we would reinvest General fund
dollars into New Mexico to
improve the snap program.
Through that we have been able
to pay our frontline workers are
retention increase that has
helped substantially with
keeping those frontline workers
working at the case workers
working at the Human Services
Department
If that's not supported, we will
have to initiate a pay cut for
those teeth. That group of staff
and then you've got some public
health emergency and winding
contract staff costs. You're
probably hearing from your
constituents that the unwinding
has been painful. People are
waiting on the phone. They are
There's a backlog of
applications and renewals if we
had not supported through
additional staff augmentation we
were able to hire about 1000 new
workers through staff
augmentation contracts.
If we had not done that, I think
we would be in a true disaster
right now. So we did have to
support those additional costs
for the unwinding.
So, lastly, I'm just going to
restate those three priorities
for the agency and for the
executive, those Medicaid
coverage and workforce
innovations, creating a more
effective healthcare safety net
and setting up the healthcare
authority for success in
closing. I do want to highlight
that the health care authority
doesn't just administer public
assistance programs were
successfully connecting our
customers with work. We connect
we partner with the Department
of Workforce Solutions were
being recognized nationally for
the work we're doing in child
support, and I do want to thank
you.
For the past two years. We've
had legislation supporting the
child support program and
modernizing that
But nearly 40% of our parents,
those noncustodial parents that
we are connecting with
employment services have are now
employed, and that means that
their Children are getting more
money through child support. And
so you know, we really believe
that investments in our programs
are wise, uh, and a good use of
money for the state of New
Mexico and really help lift the
state out of poverty. So I do
want to thank you for your time,
and I'll be happy to stand for
questions, Mr Chair.
Thank you very much. Madam
Secretary will go straight to
questions. We're going to start
with representatives Romeo, then
go to representative dela Cruz
and we'll have a number of
members.
Thank you, Mr Chair, Madam
Secretary.
What a heavy lift. You have.
I, um I don't think I've seen a
discrepancy like this.
Ever.
Um
When my daughter was born 30
some years ago, and we knew she
had disabilities. I was told
that there was a waiting list of
15 years to get her on the DD
waiver and, um
We waited and crossed our
fingers and hoped we we would
not die.
Because I wanted to ensure that
she was taking care of. And I
think that that that is the fear
of every parent who has a child
with severe disabilities. Is
that, um
Uh, sadly.
That we will
Not be able to care for our
Children. It scares me to look
at the fact that there may be a
waiting list again.
I'm also a speech language
pathologist.
Who provided services on the DD
waiver for
20 years.
And I know what a difficult job
that is. And all the immense
cuts that have happened to the
DD waiver.
And, um
And how difficult it is to to
find providers, especially in
rural areas. So, um, so that is
a concern.
And that that is is a focus. I
will be looking at to ensure
that we never go back to the
days when our Children, um did
not have options that that we
had to wait 15 years to receive
services. And, uh and at that
time all we could hope for is to
receive services through
attrition, and that concept was
horrifying to me.
Knowing that my child would only
receive services when somebody
else's child died.
So, um
I I hope that we can look at
that and ensure that we continue
to provide services to Children
with disabilities.
Um, In addition to that
Um, concern
Um I also want to say that
access to health care is
preventative and, um, when we
are providing health care in New
Mexico, um
We know that hospitals,
especially our 20. Rural
hospitals will provide that
healthcare anyway. Whether there
is an ability to pay or not.
And so when we expand Medicaid,
we understand that now these
service providers will have
compensation for the services
that they provide. And those are
lifelines to our rural hospitals
and areas that do not have
health care coverage.
So with that being said, I also
want to say that or point out
The M. C. O s
And how they disperse money or
rate increases.
I know of a facility. Um,
personal care services.
That there was a rate increase
in July.
That has yet to be rolled out.
The providers were mandated to
increase. Um, uh, rates, but
they were not reimbursed for
these rates.
So when we do these rate
increases in the M C. O s are
not conscientious about rolling
out that
We are building that on the
backs of business owners who are
trying to keep their doors open
and provide healthcare without
compensation.
And so is there a plan to do a
study on the CEOs and how
efficient they are and how they
work well with our medical
providers.
Thank you.
Thank you, Mr Chair and
representative Romeo. Thank you.
For those really important
points. I am so a couple of
things we to my knowledge have
implemented the rate increases,
So if there is a specific issue,
I would just make sure you have
my card like to know who I can
reach out to just make sure I
have actually asked for the data
and reviewed it directly myself
to ensure that those rate
increases have been implemented
and that claims were
reprocessed.
Those were implemented in
November. Claims were
reprocessed automatically to
July. So if there's an issue, I
would like to look at it and I
will personally take a look at
that and make sure that it gets
addressed. Um, so there is a
contract language that requires
the M CEOs to pay no less than
the fee schedule for Medicaid.
So if that's not happening, I
need to know about it. I think
you did also described
Exactly why we need those
additional FTE from EMC
Oversight. These are huge
contracts right now. Each CEO
has one contract manager. But
these are fiscally very
complicated contracts. They
require a lot of oversight. A
lot of data. Um, and it's very
important to me that the MCSB
hold accountable and I
Completely agree. If there's an
issue those those dollars were
designed. They were requested by
the executive supported by the
legislative signed by the
governor in the bill to go out
to providers, and so I would
like to know about that, and I
will investigate. Um, you know,
by and large. I think those rate
increases have gone out. I've
heard providers have called me
and said they were. They were
happy. They received the money,
but I can't
There may be some issues that
I'm just not aware of, so I
will. I will look at that, and I
think an audit is a great idea,
You know, supporting some kind
of audit to make sure that that
that occurred correctly, We will
absolutely support that.
Thank you. Um, my next question
is Kara.
Um, you had indicated that Carol
would be through your
department. And how will you be
managing Kara?
So, um, Mr Chair,
Representative. How Romeo? I
think there was actually just a
request for some additional
staffing to support the car
program. I think that's still
going to be housed within the
Children, Youth and Families
Department. We are very Did you
want to add anything? You're
hinting over here? So, Mr Chair
representative, I don't know if
Eric wants to speak to this, but
I believe there is additional
funding in the LFC
recommendation to address this,
but I don't believe it was in
the agency.
Sees
Request. Um
At the September 1st. So if
there is this funding in there,
I believe it's an lfc and I'm
sure it would be more
appropriate for Eric to speak to
that so
Yeah. Mr Chairman and
Representative, if you look at
in volume three, I pointed out
earlier, the opioid, uh
Settlement revenue and you'll
see down on line 23.
You'll see 1.839 million there,
and that's uh from opioid
revenue for Karen at HST.
So for Mr Chair for
clarification. This funding will
go directly to see why f d to
find Kara.
Um So, Mr Chair, Representative.
How Romeo? I think there's a
difference of opinion between
the legislative and executive on
where the car a program would be
housed. I think that's what
you're seeing in the budget. So,
um, the executive
Continues to support the car
program at the Y F. D
Um, the legislative and you
probably saw the car report that
was drafted, has proposed moving
that to the Healthcare
authority, and I just think
there's no disagreement between
the executive and legislative on
where that should be housed. We
will continue to support the car
program. Um, we've made a lot of
really great changes, including
sort of boots on the ground care
coordination at hospitals before
babies are born so that we can
really try to get Mom's engaged
with care coordination.
Um, but the Locusts of the
program still under the
executive proposal stays at
Thank you, Mr Chair.
Thank you very much for inviting
me. Oh, representing dela Cruz,
and then we'll have represented
Garcia.
Thank you, Mr Chair. I'll start
with the statement. First for us
my question.
Uh, when I was into the state
representative
I just assumed that there was no
money being allocated in any
significant way by the state to
communities around behavioral
health. It turned out that
there's quite a bit of funding
that is made available in a
variety of ways.
Unfortunately, it's not always
viewed that way. And one of my
disappointments coming here is
that there are no real measures
for the effectiveness of those
dollars that are being
allocated, which are being
allocated a variety of pockets
throughout departments and
throughout operations within the
state, including schools,
etcetera.
And so and I'm sure I apologize.
Well, you'll probably hear me
say this repeatedly in in the
future.
Because until there is a
measurable way to see how those
dollars are being spent.
It's just a mystery to me.
And I think it's a mystery to
most Mexicans.
But with that being said, does
the LFC budget.
Include funding to increase
Medicaid reimbursement rates at
150. I see that correctly.
Uh, Mr Chairman, Representative,
so we included 5.1 million in
there to increase and that's
General fund and that would be
matched with federal revenue.
Um, so that would be like a
total of I don't know if 1617
million somewhere around there.
And rate increases for behavior,
Health providers Briefly, Mr
Senior Mr Densmore, Madam
Secretary. Let's be super clear
here.
Uh, can we summarize sort of the
rough levels that
The LFC is proposing and then
the levels that the executive is
proposing the representative
really clear question 150%.
Give us sort of the level. So,
Mr Chair, I'll do the executive
side and then turn to one of the
two on the side of me to talk
about the legislative so the
executive request includes a
rate increase for, um Child
maternal health, primary care
and behavioral health up to 150%
of Medicare, all other providers
up to 100% of Medicare, so
keeping that parrot keeping pace
with those Medicare changes and
then moving those phase three
providers that didn't
Knock it an increase last year
up to
Thank you.
Mr Sanders. I think it would
take it to get you know about
131 40% on the behavioral health
side.
Um, and then similarly for, um
like, okay, so we we broke if
we're talking about, um, you
know, the representatives
question was on
Behavioral health specifically
Um
And I don't know if you want me
to go into the other race, Let's
stick to the question for right
now. Yeah, so okay, That's
great. Thank you. Both very
much. Representatives Continue
Mr Chair, Maybe one word
scarification, which is just
that the executive budget
includes puts the rate increases
effective date on calendar year
basis and to align with our
contracts, So I just want to be
since we're trying to clear
things up here. I just those
would not start on July 1st.
they would be implemented on a
calendar year basis to align
with sort of the way.
That are contracts for managed
care work, so that would be they
would begin at the midpoint of
the year.
And please Mr Chair and
representative that
Alex. See, uh, kind of, um
Considered whether or not to do
it on the half year starting off
at December, But we see it as
actually kind of tying the
Legislature's hand for the
following years, because if you
only do the half year, then
you're kind of on the hook to
include
Uh, those rate increases for the
full year, Uh, in FY 26. And so
that's why we don't. Um, include
that for a half year. Got it.
Thank you very much present.
Thank you. Mr Chairman. Briefly.
Can you explain the rationale
for for the
The arrival at those rate
increases by percentage, you
know.
Looking at the total budget,
right? Um, we've got
Lfc s, uh,
Um
Budget guidelines were for about
a five to a 7% increase in
spending.
And we have to, um, prioritize.
Lfc looked at prioritizing
network adequacy. We looked at
maternal and child health rate
increases.
We did quite a bit on that.
Um And we we did, uh, do quite a
bit for behavioral health.
Um, but, you know, not, uh,
that's essentially how we came
up with that.
Thank you, Mr Chairman.
Thank you very much for daily
cruise next 5% Garcia and then
representative Armstrong making
member. Thank you, Mr Chairman.
Thank you, Secretary. Uh, I have
a number one question. I have
that we spoke briefly before
wasn't the DD waiver?
You know, the I know that your
computer system went down and it
was rejecting her providers on
the DD waiver and you mentioned
that had been taken care of. You
know, I got an email that there
was over 50 of them that were
affected by it, and there's no
roughly 20 of them still out
there, not getting taken care of
is. Can you talk briefly about
that?
Sure, Mr. Chair representative
Garcia. Thank you for reaching
out to me. I always appreciated
hearing about issues directly
from all of you free to call me.
Um there was an issue with the D
D. There was a update that was
made in one system that didn't
interface correctly with the
other system. Um, no one's
eligibility was actually set to
expire, but they appeared as
though they were about to
expire, which created some
concern. Our team works over the
holidays to make sure that we
resolved all of those
Differences, but there were some
people that we found in the
process who had not renewed
their coverage. Um or completed
what's called a level of care
assessment that's required.
And so we're still working
through those issues were
working directly with families
were, you know kind of trying to
handhold through that process.
Um, In addition, as I mentioned
to you on the phone
representative, um we have asked
the federal government We
submitted a request for a waiver
of the unwinding for the
developmental disabilities
population and the institutional
care population.
Because that retention rate is
about 95%, and most people don't
really lose eligibility and
their conditions don't change.
Um we really want to be as
protective as possible about
that population in particular as
we go through the unwinding, and
that would include the
reinstatement of anyone who lost
coverage for failure to renew.
Um so we've worked negotiating
that now with the federal
government. We're hoping to get
that that would give us more
time to complete those
renewal's, um, because we just
know that this unwinding has
been
Very operationally challenging.
So that is the saddest, but I'm
happy to work into any specific
Member case for you.
Thank you for having man. Uh,
secretaria, Mr Chairman. The
problem is that people are
calling in and they're telling
these people were going to pay.
You were going to take care of
you. But nothing's ever in
writing and what happened at the
end of the day.
These people have nothing to
fall back on.
For this service is we really
need to look at that. Thank you
for that. But in the next
question I have is a
How much is your agency grown in
the last five years?
Sorry I can.
How How much is it grown in the
last five years? Enrollment in
our programs Mr Chair
representative has grown by at
least 20%. But our agency hasn't
grown at all. Really. The agents
the size of the agency has
actually decreased a little bit.
Thank you, Mr Chairman, because
you know what? I'm looking at
the spreadsheet here and there's
a There's a $200 million
difference between LSC and the
executive. That is huge. Can you
explain why it was that the big
difference on two agencies?
Mr. Chair, representative
Garcia. I'm happy to defer to
either colleague here on my
right and left, But the big
differences are really in the
Medicaid assumptions that are
being made. So I think that's
it's kind of like I would
categorize it as three things.
Um, one is I mean, the big
dollars are really on the
Medicaid side. Um, and just
assumptions that are being made
about the enrollment trend and
what will happen, so I think
that's kind of one of the big
differences.
Um and you can kind of see that
That makes up a large chunk. Um,
some differences there and like
how much to fund for rate
increases. Um, and benefits
support. And then there are some
differences in terms of food
support for the agency and Tan
If that the executive added to
the request that were not
supported by the legislative,
and then finally, I think
there's just some difference of
opinion around the
administrative sort of program
support side of the agency and
how much staff we need.
Do you think
Okay. Thank you for that. One.
Last question, Mr Chairman.
River. Uh um, You mentioned
rural hospitals.
You know, we really need to see
what we're gonna do to healthy
people out because there's about
20 of them. They're really
struggling and then my father of
the country.
For me to order the hospital if
he closed that hospital now it's
100 Mile trip away, and there's
people out there they have to
travel even further.
To get care and we cannot afford
for these hospitals shut down,
so we really need to go through
these AIDS and she's to see how
we can help each other people
out there.
You know they're struggling, and
they will close down.
And you know, we're not in
Albuquerque that we have three
or four hospitals. You know, we
have one for three or 400 Miles,
so
You really need to look at that.
How do you plan on addressing
that of you can act a little
bit. Thank you for the question.
Mr. Chair, Representative
Garcia. So in last year's budget
request, there were some
substantial rate increases for
hospitals. Many of those did go
out to a rural hospitals. But we
do know that there are more
needs to be done, and I think
both the legislative and the
executive agree on that.
Um
There is going to be governor
Response. Governor Bill, um,
that comes up this session for a
provider rate tax that would
then generate some general fund
to raise reimbursement rates to
hospitals. All hospitals,
including our rural facilities,
Um there are some new federal
rules around allowing us to go
up higher than the Medicare
threshold for hospitals. That's
a new thing. We haven't been
able to do that historically,
but that would allow us to go up
to
The average commercial rate.
The potential net on that for
the hospitals in New Mexico is
about $1.1 billion. So using
that provider assessment as the
form of general fund to support
the hospitals, Um Mr Senior, and
I were talking about that. You
know, there's some additional
funding for the 20 smallest
hospitals in the legislative. I
was curious kind of what
happens.
If the bill passes just do those
go together or not, I think we
we will still need to discuss
that so, but there is support
for for hospitals kind of built
in both sides.
Thank you for that Mr chairman
with with, including just just a
comment.
Uh,
You know, I have two siblings
that are on the BD waiver. And,
you know, I'm not gonna turn
about them. But there's you
know, we had a 15 year waiting
period.
And then these problems come up.
We don't want that waiting
period to go back to 15 years,
so we need to address that
problem and really addressed
rural hospitals. Thank you, Mr
Chairman. Thank you very much
Represent Garcia. Next, we go to
ranking member Armstrong.
Thank you, Mr Chairman and thank
you for your presentation. Um as
representative Artemio said, you
have a heavy lift, and, uh
It's a It's very confusing and
it's old. There's a lot of
moving parts, so I appreciate
you trying to
Gather that all up. Um, one of
the questions I have. Mr
Chairman is on the provider rate
increase. Phase three. Is that
raising all providers to 100%?
And is there a list?
Somewhere that we can see of the
increases that are going and is
it not just providers is there
other
Um, is there a list?
Um, there is a list Mr. Chair,
Representative Armstrong. There
is a list and we we sort of did
Phase one, phase two and phase
three of a rate increase rates
study. We will send that over to
you, but it basically includes
everyone who wasn't increased
last year. So what? We will get
you the list so you can see
exactly who that was. Thank you,
Mr Chairman. And thank you,
Madam Secretary. I would like to
see the list.
And make sure that all have been
raised to 100%. And then, uh,
The healthcare authority. So the
state health benefits have been
moved over to the
Uh, New Healthcare Authority.
So what changes are going to be
made in the deficit that that
has been running?
For the last several years.
Mr Chair. Uh, Representative
Armstrong. Very fair question.
Um, we are doing a lot of
analysis right now. I don't know
that I have the clearest answer
yet, but I will. So right now
what the state is doing. We've
decided to kind of extend those
existing carrier contracts for
one year.
Um, to allow us time over the
next nine or so months to do the
analysis we need we have.
There's kind of three pieces. We
have an actuarial analysis going
on. That will tell us sort of is
the self insured model working.
Do we need to switch models to a
fully insured model? What are we
paying? How much are the
carriers? We just don't know.
There's a lot of a lack of data
right now.
Um, there's I'm boarding a
expert who has a lot of
knowledge around self insured
plans to make sure that they
really help us. Write the new
RFP that will go out and
negotiate favorable terms to the
state. There are states that are
doing a lot of really
interesting work around
reference pricing, for example,
and requiring that I think
that's where we're headed.
And so we would probably achieve
some stability and savings
there. Um, And so those are the
main pieces and then we are
going to do a claims Integrity
audit of the current performance
of the current carriers just to
make sure we really understand
what's going on, Um when, as
that's been transitioning, and
over the past few months
whenever trying to learn, I just
learned that there's not
Really a lot of data, and so we
really need to do the analysis
very important to me that we
make smart choices. So I don't
wanna tell you what the answer
is yet. I'd like to be able to
make sure that we get those
analyses completed. Have some
recommendations that we can then
discuss with all of you about
where we go forward because I
think, um do you think their
savings to be had, um
I think we have to be innovative
and I think we have to do
something different. It's not
working. So you know, I think
over the next six months or so
you'll expect to hear more from
us about recommendations about
where we think we should be
headed. Thank you, Mr Chairman.
I appreciate that.
Oh,
Go ahead, Eric, Mr Chairman and
representative, I also just
wanted to add on that that both
lfc and the executive included,
um deficiency appropriation and
a supplemental appropriation.
And projections kind of indicate
that that would bring us up to,
you know, take take care of the
deficiency.
Bring us back to zero so that
when it does get transferred
over to the healthcare
authority, that fund is no
longer in the negative and then
the rate adjustments that are
included.
Uh, that were included in all
the budget requests when they
came through.
I believe that was, um
9.2% and then also in the LFC
recommendations for the
compensation package. We
included another 5%.
Increase. And so we we think
that that will kind of stabilize
the fund and get rid of that
deficit spending.
Thank you so much, Mr. Chairman.
Thank you so much, Eric. For
that information. Um, I'm glad
to hear that. You you're
acknowledging that it's broken
and that it needs to be fixed.
Um, you know, we've been
You're getting a the state is
getting a little taste about of
what businesses go through.
All the time. So let's all keep
that in mind.
Where we're trying to provide
some type of insurance for
employees and how hard it is and
and detrimental sometimes to the
business and the employee.
Um so I'm glad that you're
you're gonna tackle that beast.
The other question I want to
talk about is, um, the snap
benefits I really personally
like, um
Raising that for the older
Americans are older adults.
But I'm concerned about the
fraud that has taken place in
the past, and I wondered if that
has been fixed and then also
just to add onto that the
performance measures are stating
that
You're not. The entity is not
the best at getting that out the
door.
Um and then the fraud on top of
that. So how are you proposing
fixing that if this happens to
be raised to 150
Oh, my gosh. Sorry up, Won't
touch that again. Sorry, Mr
Chair, Representative Armstrong.
So two questions that you're
asking there. The first one I'll
tackle is on the fraud. Um so we
actually and that kind of pulls
me back to that appropriation
around the settlement that we
made with the federal
government.
To reinvest dollars. It's a It's
part of the budget. It wasn't it
wasn't supported by the
legislative that actually is
supporting a new fraud detection
system so that funding is going
into that We're building it
right now, and that is
specifically for the snap
programs. We're kind of focused
on that making sure that we
address that proactively.
And so we are in the process of
kind of rolling that out, and
that should be completed in the
coming year so that that is
partially supported by those
funds, So I did want to call
that out.
The performance. I think it's
correct to say that the agency
is having performance issues
right now because of the
unwinding and it is unwinding of
Medicaid and snap. There were
some for three years We
basically did not have to renew.
Both populations pushed things
forward. And when you do that
you do lose some operational
efficiency, I think and so what?
we're identifying is on top of
the unwinding and just the sheer
volume of cases is a need to
really hone in on our
operations. What we do through
the income support division is
the bread and butter of our
agency, and, um, it's probably
my very top priority. So we
actually had over the holidays.
We spent some time we brought in
the leadership. We brought. Some
experts, including some former
Leaders from the income support
division who have kind of moved
on to other roles, but might
have that perspective.
Brought them in with the leaders
and managers really kind of
focus on a new operations plan
for I s d will be managing that
in daily stand ups, really
making sure that we are paying
very, very close attention to
the operations of the agency
going forward. I do not
anticipate we are that we are in
a permanent operational issue,
but we do need to pay attention
to that because the numbers are
telling us that we really need
to pay attention. So we're
fixing it.
Thank you, Mr Chairman. And
thank you so much for that,
Because, you know, I
The bad guys are everywhere,
Unfortunately, And so I just
want to make sure that if we
are, um you know, trying to help
as much as possible that that
we're not, uh
Spending money that is just
fraudulent, the other just the
last statement that I would like
to make and and with that being
said, and my support for that,
Um uh, it was an lfc that issued
the report that New Mexico spent
10 billion
Per year in state and federal
dollars on anti poverty
programs. Yet the poverty rate
has not fallen.
So we need to keep that in mind.
Maybe we're doing something
wrong.
Maybe we could make changes, But
I appreciate all your answers.
And, um
And good luck with that
Healthcare Authority Act. Mr.
Chair, Representative Armstrong.
I'd love to address the last
point that you made. Um I would
just like to say that when these
programs were designed by the
federal government, most of them
are
Ages old. They were designed as
a landing spot, not as a
trampoline, and so we really
need to look at how to make them
more like a trampoline, more
like trying to help people lift
their lives up and we talked a
little bit about the cliff
effect and how people have to
make decisions.
To not improve their lives
because of the financial impact
of losing benefits. So I think
what you can anticipate to see
from from the executives some
more consideration around that
cliff effect in the FY 26 budget
really thinking about how we can
smooth those edges out for
families so that they aren't
disincentivize from improving
their lives and truly lifted out
of poverty.
Thank you, Mr Chairman. Thank
you, Madam. Secretary. I've been
in here for eight years and have
been screaming and shouting
about the cliff effect and it
has not been fixed. So if you
can get that fixed, be happy to
support that. Thank you.
Thank you very much. Ranking
member. Uh, we're going to go
next to representative
Mr Chair, and thank you, Madam.
Secretary and analyst So I would
like to focus for a moment on
behavioral health care, and you
brought that up. It seems to be
an important topic that is of
interest to everyone here. My
question to you as a part of
what you do with your behavioral
health care in the healthcare
authority.
How do you work with Nick
Bolkus, who was with the health
and human services and the
executive director of behavioral
health Care?
Um, Mr Chair, Representative
Herndon is in the audience
saying is one of my staff
members. He's on my leadership
team. He reports to Alex
Castillo Smith. Okay, I'm sorry,
but seeing him still listed as
health and Human services
Department and not in the
healthcare authority, So thank
you for that clarification with
respect to that clarification it
I want to make sure that
behavioral health care as you
are describing it. Also report
also includes addiction.
Shin Services.
And, uh, and substance abuse
services. Is that correct?
Mr. Chair representative
Herndon yes, including not just
through behavior health but also
through Medicaid.
And so, madam secretary, as we
look at those items that are
being looked at, sometimes there
are single parents who have a
child who is over 10 years of
age, and they may need to go
into a behavioral health care
facility. My understanding is
that if the child is over 10
years old, the child cannot
accompany that that parent
Is there something that you're
doing to address that question?
Mr. Chair, Representative
Herndon. I am not aware of this
issue, so I will have to get
back to you and look into that.
Unless, um, you know, with your
permission, Mr Terror, I can
turn to my team to see if anyone
can answer that question. Mr
Chair and Madam Secretary. We
can get back to that. I just
want to make sure that it's
brought to your attention.
And Mr Chair and Madam Secretary
with respect to the coordination
of behavioral health care with
and looking at the fact that you
are secretary of a state agency.
How are you also coordinating
with counties and cities so that
once individuals have their
healthcare behavioral healthcare
dress at the state level if
there's a handout to the
counties and to the city's,
please explain how that
coordination is working, Mr.
Chair, representative Herndon
right now on the behavioral
House side, most of that is
occurring through the paper off.
Laboratory.
There are local collaborative
who worked with the secretaries.
all of this cabinet secretaries
for health and human services
and more are actually part of
the collaborative and we we work
through those local bodies. I
would say we have room for
improvement on this. I would not
say that were as effective as we
should be. I'm really excited to
move on boarded. Mr who is
really familiar with sort of
local, um
Governments and has come from
the city. I think that's going
to be a real benefit to us As we
start to think about how to
build out those local
partnerships. Sometimes I think,
and I'm just going to be very
transparent with you. I think
trans state government isn't
As good at that, and so we
really need to build out that
there's a lot of ways in which I
see room for improvement on
those local partners,
potentially
And Mr Chair and Madam
Secretary. Thank you for
recognizing the need for that to
happen. I do want to bring to
your attention that they're
members of the tenants of the
House of Representatives of the
executive team of a state agency
as well as those that are in the
county and in the city who are
having that conversation and we
want to make sure that you're
aware of it and that you
participate in our joining in
those conversations because they
are hugely important to make
sure that that coordination does
occur.
And Mr Chair and Madam
secretary, one of the things
that is important as these
conversations continue, is that
every single member of the M C.
O s. Whoever that single person
is. Is that the table? Uh,
there's a great deal of
conversation by making them
accountable. My question to you
is how do we get them
accountable and come to the
table and talk with this? Mr
Chair and Madam Secretary. There
is not a situation with
themselves can resolve this
themselves this matter.
There has to be brought together
with the counties and cities and
the states and individuals who
are experiencing behavioral
healthcare difficulties.
Mr. Chair, Representative,
Herndon. Um, first, there's a
lot of levers that you could use
to get the M C s to be more
accountable. Please do feel free
to talk to me if you were trying
to engage them, and they're not
participating. I do. I will have
those direct conversations with
them. We have some some very
good, very positive contract
improvements that are going into
effect on July 1st.
That improved sort of their
collaboration and I've got a
list of those I'd be happy to
share sort of what's starting in
July. We made some some big
improvements for January as
well. I've got a list of those
and then they there's some new
staffing and new network
adequacy requirements that are
going into the new contracts for
July.
It's a pretty comprehensive
list, so I won't walk through
the whole thing here. But maybe
what we'll do is just send that
around this committee. I think
there is accountable and what
improvements we put in place.
So, um, I will be happy to share
that with all of you. Thank you,
Mr Chair, and thank you, Madam
Secretary. I do. Um, um, wish to
just ask you as we close up the
behavioral health care
Aspect of this is in terms of
the long term behavioral health
care. It's unclear to me that
the state recognizes a long term
behavioral healthcare beyond six
months. Is that your
understanding? And are you
looking at sometimes behavioral
healthcare may need to be longer
than that. And how is the state
looking at maybe incorporating a
longer aspect?
Mr. Chair, Representative
Herndon. That's a great
question. I think we have
identified and I have heard and
seen issues with that that need.
We've had folks who have kind of
stayed in the hospital, for
example, for longer than
necessary because there's no
appropriate placement for them.
They just require that longer
term intervention, So I think
that's going to require probably
some really good thinking
around. Um, what kind of
providers are out there? Do we
need to build out some new
provider types that are really
designed for
That long term behavioral health
struggling with serious mental
illness, and probably needs a
longer term placement or
solution, So we are very happy
to discuss that. I think it has
been an issue. I do acknowledge
that and will continue to work
on that. See if we can build out
that network. Thank you. Madam
Secretary, Mr. Chair there. Just
two other quick questions for
clarification.
As we look at the recommendation
for Tanith, and the
recommendation was to 90% of the
federal poverty level. Well, I
just want to point out Mr Chair,
Madam Secretary and analysts
that the poverty level is
$14,580, which 30% should be
used for housing. And so, Mr
Chair, Madam secretary and
analyst I'm concerned is why
aren't we at 100% of the federal
poverty level?
Poor present for providing
Tanith and tennis is a temporary
assistance.
Could you please help me to
understand why it is in 100, Mr.
Chair, Representative Herndon.
Um, it's because of money. I
think we're trying to really get
where we can go incrementally. I
think we'd love to get to 100%
of poverty. Um, right now. New
Mexico at 85% has one of the two
lowest levels in the country,
and we also are one of the
highest poverty states actually
the highest poverty for Children
0 to 6.
Um, many of whom are in those
kind of families, so we just
we're trying to do an
incremental increase. We did
with the legislative support and
increase to the town of cash
benefit last year, and so we're
trying to tackle the eligibility
threshold incrementally. And I
do want to just say that that
tan of increase that supported
by the executive is not in the
legislation.
So, um, Mr Chair and Madam
Secretary just for
clarification. The Secretary
does support 100%.
Uh, Mr Chair, Representative
Herndon. I support what's in the
executive budget, which is to go
to 90%.
This year, Um, looking at sort
of an incremental path to get to
a higher threshold. Thank you,
Mr Chair, and thank you, Madam
Secretary And then one last
question, Mr Chair and Madam
Secretary. I just and be
referring to the handout with
the different sheets with the
There is a statement in the, uh
under income support.
And if I'm looking at page 12 of
15, there is a language that
says the lfc recommendation
included language specifying
that 500,000 from Tanis. Revenue
be used to implement programs at
the Public Education Department
for teenage Fathers. Please tell
me what is that program?
Uh, Mr Chairman, representative.
That's it's it's attentive
program. It's um gone on for a
while. I don't have too much
information about that program.
It's it's a longstanding
program and
What's that?
Grass Grads program.
And Mr Chair and Mr
How are women? Who are the
mothers included in that
program.
Madam chair. So, um
Yeah. If you look at 10, if, um
it's it's a federal program.
Um, it's
It's uh and one of the main
goals of Tan if the federal from
the federal side is to support
fathers that are, uh you know
young fathers, uh, within the
system, so that's is, uh
A part of that. Excellent Mr
Director sleep. Is there
anything you'd like to add to
that? Thank you, Mr
And we will fix that microphone.
Sorry about that. Mr Chairman,
Um, Representative. The Grads
program is a
A team pregnancy support program
that is offered to the public
schools that historically is
primarily supported teen
mothers. Um, a couple of years
ago, the Legislature added some
specific money. In addition to
that, um
From Tan if to support team
fathers as well.
So there's more money in their
supporting teen mothers
throughout the state through 10
F, as well as other funding
sources and some of the tan if
money is now being put into
support team team fathers Thank
you, Mr Chair and Mr silly and
just for clarification. That's
to support them to graduate from
high school.
Correct as well as, um,
nurturing of their lives.
And thank you, Mr Chair, and Mr
Solis for that response. I'd
like to see if I could the
allocation of funding for the
women and for the for the
mothers and for the Father's,
maybe at another at another
time.
Thank you. Thank you. Thank you
very much. Representative
Herndon. Next, we're gonna go to
represent Luhan and represents
Sanchez.
Well, and we Yes, please go
ahead. Can you hear me? Okay. I
was like, Can you
Yeah, there is, um I just want
to say thank you, Uh, Secretary
in all your staff to our lfc
staff for all the work it
Has gone into putting this piece
of our budget together. It's a
lot
Um
And
I think representative Herndon
kind of grabbed a lot of the
things that I'm
I'm acutely, um, interested in
in this particular part of the
budget and as well as
representative had, um, you
I think they are just, you know,
uh,
Disabilities portion of this
budget needs needs.
Some more attention, and I'd
like to see how lfc could tell
us that there were any other
parts of any of the budget that
we're missing. We're we are
looking to supplement not really
supplement, but we're funding is
going out.
For, um
Our disability programs and also
for behavioral health programs
by one question.
Because there was a lot of
information already did I agree
with
For my colleagues. Here is the
federal dollars for behavioral
health. I like to know where
those the planning is of the
funny there specifically with a
$20 million. I've asked this
question before. I'm not seeing
this reflected and then
Um
In our high level.
Budget outlook here. I'm
concerned with the behavioral
health provider rate increases
in the discrepancy there
between um the executive
recommendation. LFC
recommendation that's flying 46
galaxy. I would like to know.
If they're if I'm missing, I'm
not seeing some information here
because from our behavioral
health collaborative report here
in the last few years we are we
are reaching rates or the
highest increases with
behavioral health and substance
use disorder, Um, with alcohol
abuse being the highest and in
the nation.
And another substance use
disorders as well. So if there's
something that I'm not, I'm
missing in the capture of all
this.
Reflected in the dollars. I'd
like to hear both.
Where is the plan from HST
without funding the federal
dollars and if
You know that's integrated and
why we have this discrepancy
from LFC budget If we can
elaborate on that. Thank you, Mr
Chair.
Uh, Mr Chair and representative
just just one thing I wanted to
kind of point out. And, um,
actually, actually, when we were
talking with representative dela
Cruz earlier
Um, I failed to mention this,
But on if you look on page 22,
it's our specials and
supplementals recommendations.
Um, you'll see $20 million in
there and it's ah, especially
it's actually from the the Gate
Fund, the Government
Accountability Trust.
So that's uh for four year pilot
to expand evidence based
behavioral health services,
including screening, brief
intervention and referral to
treatment.
And certified community
behavioral health clinics to
sustainably Bill Medicaid once
fully operational, so part of
what this is is to actually
build up those behavioral health
services, you know, and then we
can look, uh, on and later years
also for greater rate increases
for those providers must
actually get up and running. So
if I'm correct, Mr Chair
So that would be, um, in a that
would go to Medicaid and
supplementing the need there. Is
that correct? That's correct.
Thank you. And then I like to
hear from secretary in regards
to that.
So, Mr Chair representative
Luhan a couple of questions. I
think that you built in but
please feel free to correct me
if I misunderstood anything, so
I'm going to go first for the
$20 million for Children's
behavioral health, because I
think you asked about that. So
those dollars, um, have been
allocated allocated, Um, the
human services department is
hanging onto about $2.5 million.
We have started spending that
there are two sort of program
areas where we're spending those
one is Native American. Um, and
the other one is some support
through the income support
division. Um, and so those have
been sort of designated for
those purposes and we are
suspending down those dollars.
The remainder of the funds have
been transferred over to the
Children, Youth and Families
Department. They have a plan.
They are executing the plan. We
have convened because I know
there's been a lot of
accountability concerns related
to this very quite fairly. I
mean, I do want to own that part
of it. Um, we have created an
executive leadership team around
this set of dollars to make sure
that once a month we're tracking
the spend down the burn rate on
those dollars.
Per initiative and make sure
that we're measuring that those
are actually going out the door.
So that is underway. And that is
the current status of those
dollars.
Okay. And then you report those
those spending down Mr Chair to
lfc when we inquire, Um, sure.
Mr. Chair, Representative Luhan.
We'd be happy to share that
information with you right now.
Those are internal between the
leadership of HST or Hcea and,
um Children, Youth and Families
Department. But if if you all
would like to see that would be
happy to share. So follow up
question for Mr For me. Mr.
Chair would do you know the plan
from C Y F D and how they're
spending down those dollars to
your meeting.
Yes, Mr Chair, Representative
Luhan. We do. We are aware of
the plan. We worked on it
together with them. We'd be
happy to get it into your hands.
I would appreciate that. I want
to see all the monies that we
have that hand to be expended.
So then the next question would
be
Also related to that discrepancy
for the Medicaid and the, UM,
line item 46.
Mr. Chair, Representative Luhan,
I believe. I mean, I think the
discrepancy again. It's just
that we're trying to the
executive Bridget Budget takes
those behavioral health rates up
to 150% of Medicare. Um and
legislative comes in lower,
like, think that's the best way
I can state it. But if you want
to elaborate, Mr Chair, how
would that affect our providers?
If we don't get to that 150%
100?
If we don't get to those higher
numbers.
True, Mr. Are you asking Mr
Chair, Representative, Luciana
and clear. Are you asking me?
Yes, Mr So we are trying to
build out that provider network
and really invest dollars. I
think we should that table on
one of my slides. You could see
that investments we made in
2019, and that concentrated
effort really does work and we
have doubled the number of
visits.
I want to see that double again.
I want to make sure that we have
enough providers. Um and the way
you do that is really by
investing in the network so I
can't predict with certainty
what will happen, But I would
say that growth might slow or
stagnate a bit, um, in the
behavioral health provider would
be of concern to me, Mr Chair
because, as I mentioned, we are
having these growth weights and
you know, specifically in these
these later years after Covid
specifically
Um And I'd like to really
address that. And and in this
really, This is a place to
address this, so I'd like to
Then, um, build upon what
representative Herding was
saying and and look at our
collaborative.
And you know some a lot of the
discussions that we had, um
With our and Madam chair is
here. Um, representative lived
Thompson in regard to how we can
do that and working and
adjusting.
Per se, the collaborative
working with our local
government specific specifically
with the opioid settlement fund.
Um
That you have you have mentioned
here in different aspects. And
as I see money as being used for
HST programs from the opioid
Program already, and there's a
discrepancy and that amount of
money to but we'll have that
discussion later, because that's
gonna something's gonna move
without. But I see that l C
wants to chime in here, Mr.
Chair, Mr Chair just just real
fast. Also, if you go to page 21
in our in our hand out also
I wanted to mention that the
executive has 100 million and
the LFC has 120 million.
Um, for the rural healthcare,
Um, fund right? And so
That's another big chunk of
money that's out there to
support.
Uh um, Behavioral health
services and expanding those
services and, you know
Uh, growing that out there, So
that's that's on top of the 20
million that I mentioned just a
minute ago to really that could
be used for behavioral health
and physical health.
That that's gonna be really
important, Mr Chair as we are
putting all these things
together around behavior, health
and then looking into, you know,
um
All aspects of our state and and
and looking towards.
The solutions rather being
punitive. Another another
places so I want I want. I
wanted to highlight that in our
budget, So thank you for that. I
wanted that to be all put out on
the table as far as information
for the public, and I
I just want to say thank you
again, but
There. Um, There are other
things we need to work on. And I
think representative Herndon and
all of us that work on health
and human services committees as
well. We have some. We have some
specific things that we want to
talk to you about. Thank you.
Present. Sanchez, please. Thank
you, Mr Chair, Madam Secretary.
Uh, most of my questions have
been answered, Um
You brought up food insecurity
and New Mexico being AH, number
one.
For seniors.
I guess. What are you doing to
address this issue? And, uh, are
you working with aging and long
term services Are you working
with uh, or Central economic
development district? Tripoli's,
I guess. How is your budget?
Addressing this?
Mr. Chair, Representative
Sanchez. We do are doing all of
those things. We work very
closely with the aging and long
term services Support Services
Department. They actually just
sent us some additional money
recently from one of their funds
for additional food banks
support, especially during what
this unwinding sort of people
are challenged to get food
benefits. So we're providing
that immediate food, banks
support and some grocery
vouchers through partnerships
with them.
Um, the budget. The executive
budget really tries to address
directly address the food
insecurity issue through that
additional supplement the snap
benefit taking that from $25 to
$150 a month.
For our aging senior.
Thanks, Mr Chair,
representative. I didn't just
want to point out that in the
don recurring appropriations.
There is a $5 million
Special for food banks,
Emergency Food Bank Services
Army That's on the executive
side. I don't believe it's on
the lfc side, but I just wanted
to point out that there is that
additional non recurring money
for for these types of needs
across the state.
Mr Chair. Uh, so are you
targeting seniors specifically
with any of this money or it's
just in general.
Mr. Chair, Representative
Sanchez, the senior supplement
would be for the scene for
seniors who low income seniors
who qualify for the snap program
and the disabled population. So
there's sort of both of those
two sets of populations. The
food banks are more general.
They provide service to sort
everyone who is experiencing a
media if you have food
emergencies or food insecurity,
so that includes
Including our Children, who
sometimes you can't get food
unless they go to school or
other other circumstances, But
we are trying to directly
address that senior population
through that supplement.
Request. Thank you, Mr Chair.
Thank you very much, Mr Sanchez.
Next we're gonna go to represent
Pettigrew.
Thank you, Chairman and thank
you for the presentation.
Um
And thanks for the brain. Don't
by the way, 42 pages and three
volumes plus 52 pages today.
I appreciate it.
Um
I have notes on every page and
every volume, but I have a
couple of things that
Like to get some clarification
on
Um
It's like it's like, go through,
and I think this one's going to
Uh, first paragraph on page 291.
Has a statement under the
turquoise care piece that LFC
will be looking for very
specific.
Um, targets and improvements.
Oversights.
Preventive services, etcetera.
Is this something?
Uh, Chairman that that
The executive and LFC have both
agreed to Mr Chair,
Representative Pettigrew. Yes,
we do have some cross some
crusts metrics with the lfc that
we share in terms that we've
agreed upon. In terms of
performance. The agency also has
some additional performance
metrics that we monitor for them
CEOs. We put those on our
website. Those are updated as
often as the data is updated. We
have a performance scorecard
also.
That includes a number of
metrics for the managed care
organizations that's on our
performance. Scorecard and
updated regular. Thank you,
Chairman. Thank you, madam
Secretary.
So as I continue through this,
like I said, I have questions on
every page and
Um
A lot of them scare me. There's
pieces inside the cell SC report
that aren't very kind.
With respect to if you if you
drill into the depths of it, and
yeah, this is inadequate. We're
not. We're not performing here,
and it's like go through
Chairman like go through the
metrics in volume one.
There's
11.
Performance models.
And
True we have read
In 10 of them.
Into that means we're not
performing well. We have yellow
and lunch, and then we also have
one, which is income support.
That is all red.
With respect to that, and I'm
secretary Chairman. Madam
Secretary, Would you mind
talking to me about
What improvements is going to be
the focus within and the
increase in budget with respect
to the income support? What? How
that's gonna address each of
those red items and you can do
it at a high level. Well, I
don't um
It just concerns me that we're
increasing the budget by
Somewhere between 7.5% plus
58 million and and specials.
The, um
I just like to know how to use
it. What we're gonna do.
Mr. Chair, Representative
Pettigrew. I think so. I just
want to be clear. I did not have
this in front of me. So just
looking at it now, But I do
think you're referring to the
income support division
performance metrics on page 123.
So we do know And I think I've
acknowledged today that we're
having some operational
challenges as the result of the
Medicaid unwinding typically and
prior to the unwinding or
timeliness for benefits was was
good. We were meeting those
timeliness standards.
Um
We've been sort of handed, and
all states are actually
struggling with this right now.
I think there are I was at a
federal meeting last week. There
are three states that are
performing well in terms of snap
timeliness. Almost no state is
doing well and it is because of
the abrupt ending of Covid 19
pandemic related assistance. Um
and flexibilities, and so we are
in a challenging operational
period right now, but I do not
anticipate that that is our
permanent state for the agency.
I do believe this is going to
stabilize. We will start
Get back to normal with our
operations.
Um, so for that's true for snap
benefits, um, and the timeliness
measures, the tennis ones are a
little bit more complicated, and
I acknowledge that I think is a
really complicated program. It
requires work supports or
education and training. We are
again coming out of the pandemic
When some of those some of those
things were shut down, so I
think
You know, we have work to do on
tan, if especially, um it is a
pretty complicated program. For
example, once you are engaged in
the town of program, there are a
whole host of requirements of
people fall off before they they
actually, like, meet those
requirements. And so I think,
um, you know, and from our
perspective, maybe these
performance measures don't
capture the full
Complexity of the programs. Um,
but our agency performance is
really important to me. And I
think on timeliness we will
Be performing again in the green
very soon, hopefully in the next
few months
Thank you, Chairman, Madam Vice
chair. And and thank you,
Secretary for that.
As as we talk about
Coming off of Covid.
Ever.
Oh, page of notes of questions
that I want to ask them. Like I
said, I'm not going to war but
With respect to the matching
funds if I read
Volume two correctly and
Um
Medicaid has been reduced by
0.91%.
Correct.
Mr. Chair, Representative
Pettigrew, I'm sorry, vice
chair. Sorry about that. Madam
Vice chair, Representative
Pettigrew. Um yes. So during the
Covid 19 pandemic, we received
an enhanced federal funding rate
of about 6.2% that has then
since then been phased out that
started that phase down started
this year.
In addition,
That's federal match changes
every year based on the economy
of the state and the income of
the Avenue Mexicans, for
example, per capita income and
so that also has goes up or
down, and so that impact that
overall impact is
Thank you, Madam Vice chair and
thank you, Madam Secretary for
that so
If you could.
Help me.
Pre covid.
What was our standard?
Rate.
Um, for Medicare.
Or Medicaid. Sorry, matching.
What it's
Say 25 cents from the state 75
cents from the federal
government. What was that
number?
Coming out of Covid.
What was that percentage
And what is the 0.91 do in
relation
Two.
The old number.
When we when we try and add
Um
An extra 68 million back into
Mr Question Makes sense. Yes, it
does. Madam Vice chair,
Representative Pettigrew. I'm
gonna cue this one up for CFO
for Medicaid. Lisa Walker Moran.
I think she probably has the
most, um, not in depth knowledge
about those those impacts in
terms of dollars, so she's going
to talk. Walk you through.
That pre pen pandemic federal
match rate what it was during
the pandemic, and then that post
pandemic. Imagine that we're
headed into so
With your permission, Madame
chair. Okay, um
What
Adam, Vice chair, representative
Wake up, Okay? I don't believe
so. Walker Moran. I am this CFO
for Medicaid. Um, so for the F
map, which is what the federal
match that sorry. There's a lot
of eco, um, that the Medicaid
program receives.
Okay, um, Prior to the public
health emergency, the F map was
close to 73.71%.
And then it went up to 79% with
this so you can see that
significant increase. Now we're
back to 71.68%. So we've
actually decreased If you look
at just some basic without
speaking just to touch louder,
please.
Can you hear me now?
Okay, So if you
If you look at the base F map,
72.71 and now we're at 71.68.
You can see that you can
understand that we have
decreased about 2% just in our
base alone.
And then on top of that, we're
no longer receiving the 6.2. So
F map has gone down almost 8%
from before the public health
emergency. So another point of
information I'm gonna give you
is at the height of the public
health emergency. We received
$4.75 for every dollar in
general fund that the state
invested.
So that's a pretty high rate 1
to $4.75. Now in our 25 request,
we're down to $3.45 for every
dollar, so that's almost a $2
rate increase. Sorry, a
$1.50 rate decrease that we're
getting from the feds. So think
of it that way. I hope that
helps.
Thank you, Madam Vice chair and
thank you that for that so
I guess The straightforward
question for me is
Are we as a state wanting to
make that
Dollar figure up
In other words, the federal
government has removed that and
we're wanting to make up.
From pre pandemic.
A dollar 50.
I don't understand. Why why
we're doing that Mr Madam vice
chair and representative
Pettigrew, if we don't make up
that federal loss of federal
funding
We will be in cost containment
mode for our Medicaid program,
and I do want to just articulate
how challenging that is so for
each for each dollar that you
cut out of Medicaid, you have to
cut
You know 3 to $4 out of your
program. So if you're trying to
cut 30 million out of the
program, you really have to take
100 and where you usually will
have end up cutting benefits and
services or provider rates, So
that's really what it means in
terms of real concrete cost
containment. It is not. There's
not a lot of room elsewhere to
cut the budget, so if you don't
there's a real risk.
That we will run into pretty
serious cost containment,
cutting benefits and services to
members or cutting those
provider rate increase preventer
rates that we've invested in.
Thank you, Madam Vice chair and
yesterday here If I may, Madam
vice chair I just wanted to
point out to on
See here.
Line 21 on that high level.
She
You'll see that both lfc and the
executive recommended the the
increase in General fund for
that match.
And that's that equates to about
$68.9 Million for that, 0.91%.
Thank you, Madam Vice chair and
thank you.
Offer that the so that's 68.91.
Took it takes an investment of
Sorry, madam Chair. Mr. Uh,
representative pedigree didn't
hear the last part of your
question. Sorry.
We taught online 21.
Making up to 68.9.
53 million.
Um
What is the return on investment
on that?
So we're gonna put that we're
going to make that up goes into
the budget. It's gonna come out
of the General fund.
What's the return back from the
federal government on Madam,
both chair representative. I
believe if I if I understand
what you're asking, um
I believe the return on
investment would be what Elissa
was just mentioning with that
$3.50 federal. So every dollar
of that 68.9 million will have
$3.50 of federal added to it, So
I can't do the math that
quickly, But that would be your
return on investment. Um Madam
Vice chair, Representative
Pettigrew, I do. This is a very
important point you're making
because
Health care in our rural
communities is sometimes the
only economy, so I said this
earlier, but I do think it's
really important to mention
that, um if you were cutting
your kind of eliminating some of
the economic growth here in New
Mexico, which is really around
healthcare and Medicaid
investments, and so when you do
invest $30 million you're
getting really a total of $100
million investment in your
communities in your doctor's
offices and
You know, in many of rural parts
of our new state, there might be
a health clinic, maybe a grocery
store and not much else. And so
I think it's really important to
think through how those
investments really directly
affect our communities here in
New Mexico because health care
is an economic driver, and it is
an engine here and in many parts
of New Mexico, those health care
jobs in rural communities are
the only jobs and so I just
think it's a really important
point that you're making in
terms of
That return on investment and
that those dollars going
directly out to New Mexico
communities.
Thank you, Madam Vice chair and
thank you for that. I look at
Economic development
differently. I understand
I look at health care as
something we we need to do. I
don't look at health care as an
economic driver. I look at it as
one of those things that if it's
not there, there is not going to
be an economic driver. There's
not gonna be business that goes
there. There's not gonna be
growth on that. But I look at a
little bit differently, had a
similar conversation with NRT
yesterday on the same thing.
Not saying that we don't need to
do the cleanup. I don't think
that the money that comes back
should be determined should be
based off economic drivers.
Should be based off presented.
Pettigrew, Could you pull the
microphone a little bit closer?
Thank you, madam Moisture.
So, but I do hear what you're
saying. And I appreciate the
answer and it gives me
confidence on on why the
decisions being made that way.
Uh, um, Madam Vice chair.
There's a comment on page 291
about two thirds of the way down
that says the committee
recommends adjustments to
include 1 million for rural
receptor, clinical clinical
training data. DA
For the state's 20 smallest
rural hospitals.
And vice chair. Madam Secretary,
can you
Direct me somewhere. That gives
me that. Look, I couldn't find
it in the books. Madam Chair
representative. I think this is
a bizarre to eligible
legislative items,
Madam Vice chair and
representative, I can get you
that list. I don't I don't have
the list with me, but I can get
it for you.
Thank you very much. I think
there's several people up here
that
Represent rural communities.
Maybe it's something better to
give to the whole committee.
Um
On page 292, and I'm gonna stop
here and probably have some
offline conversations after
this.
This this
The top paragraph, says the
authority requests
Includes 50.
55.7 million in general fund
revenue, which would generate
another 100, 101, 192,000 and
federal revenue. So
I get that right? We're gonna
spend
55 million to get 190,000.
Uh, Madam Vice Chair
representative. I apologize.
That's actually a A
Missed that one. It's actually
109. Thank you. I was just
trying to figure out whether or
not that was a good investment.
As we look at that.
It finishes that this has an
annual cost per member.
Of 95,000.
So for each person
Uh,
That incident rolled on this
waiver program, the costs for
each person to the state of New
Mexico.
Whether it's state money or
federal money is $95,000 a year.
Um, Mr Chair, um, Representative
pedigree White.
I haven't seen. I don't have a
copy of the book, but just I'm
gonna answer off the cuff here.
I've got folks who run the D D
program who can kind of answer
just to verify the number that
you're talking in terms of the
95,000 per member, But these are
our most disabled. Um most
vulnerable new Mexicans they
require.
Prepare to live. Um and so they
are expensive and it is our
obligation to take care of them.
So, yes, they are. They're
expensive. We try to serve them
in the community so that they
don't have to go into
institutional care. Um and
providing that wrap around
support and those services that
help help him lead good lives is
really important to us. And so
that's really what those
supports are for their They are
among the most vulnerable among
us. So
Thank you, madam.
Share. Welcome back. Um and
Madam Secretary for that. I'm
not debating with their the
need.
I'm just trying to make sure
that I understand what the what?
we're basing the costs off of,
and so and I get to
I would assume some of that
could go as far as into our
school districts into, uh, care
of people like Yeah. In in Lee
County, we have leaders where we
have disabled and and we're
serving those sometimes in homes
of wonder. Four people and we
have Caribbean provided to them.
Through that way, I assume it
covers the whole gambit.
Is that a fair statement from
from birth all the way to to to
great from cradle to grave.
That's basically what we look at
as a standardized cost. And if
that is, do we feel like that's
the that that investment is?
Meeting their needs.
Um, Mr Chair, Representative, Um
Let me see how I can put this.
Um, So if I understand
correctly, I don't have the book
in front of me. The average cost
is being reported as $95,000 per
person.
Um, so a lot of this is because
there is a smaller number of
people that require a lot of
services on the waiver, and they
can be far more than $95,000 a
year. Um, and if they are much
higher, you don't need that many
of them to push up your average.
Um, and again I don't have these
numbers in front of me. I
apologize. But my understanding
is that the majority of people
that are receiving services on
the waiver
Are not quite at that level, um,
but that there are some
populations that are higher,
medically fragile, I believe is
a higher, um, rate and so I know
that
In this past year at D. O. H, um
they had been making some
changes to try to identify when
services were duplicated being
build things like that to pull
back on them to lower the cost
of, especially those high
dollar, Um, clients that are
receiving waiver services, so
that helps you at all. It's
very, very variable. Um, but a
lot of that is driven just by a
very high cost clients on the
way.
Thank you chair and thank you
for that answer Once again. I'm
not trying to
Call foul on anything. I'm
trying to understand the masses.
We as we grow and going back to
the beginning, part of the
conversation where we have 11,
different metrics and
It's very few of them are
performing well.
And and so
As as I look at that I'm trying
to question okay. Are we doing
the right thing in the right
places, and that's that's all.
I'm trying to dive into.
And I do appreciate your time. I
do appreciate the presentation
and thanks for the brain dump
with all the information.
Thank you very much represented
Montoya.
Thank you, Mr Chair and
Secretary Armijo. Um
To go well.
Before I go to that. I just want
to say the
The assumptions made by LFC and
assumptions.
Made by your office since two
Oh,
What Medicaid enrollment will be
as
Quite a that is a big leap.
And I would like to find out
what the justification is.
In the departments.
Suggesting that enrollment will
go up that much. I just
Are we going to be? Is the
justification Are we looking to
try and bring more people onto
it? That then would naturally
come on.
To the program.
Um, Mr Chair, Representative
Montoya there. It's sort of
everything. I think there's a
few factors that influence and
we've got economists who work
every quarter. We do a new
projection for the Medicaid
budget. The enrollment trend
influences, of course.
You know what we asked for in
terms of budget?
Typically there's there's
multiple factors as I mentioned
so workforce participation, um
Historical enrollment trend, um,
and then utilization, So right
now we are in this unwinding
period and we've lost. We've
lost some folks. We think
they're going to come back. Um,
prior to, um the
Perhaps the initiation of the
unwinding Medicaid hit its all
time historic high enrolment. We
exceeded 1 million members for
the first time in history of our
state, and so we're we're
starting from a pretty high
place in winding is causing a
dip, but we think those folks
are going to come back. They
still there's nothing to
indicate that they're not still
eligible.
Another factor. I think that
influences the cost is that the
likelihood is that they will
come back on when they need
something so rather than kind of
staying, enrolled and sort of
being a low cost member, If
someone is sort of uninsured,
and they're going to the
hospital, that hospital is going
to get them back on, we're gonna
have a hospital claim to pay.
And so that's another factor.
That's kind of influencing the
budget here.
Um, we have about 2.4% growth
built in to our enrollment
trend. That's a lower than pre
pandemic, but we still do assume
growth because there's nothing
historic to indicate that we are
going to lose people permanent.
So thank you for that, Um
Mr Chair and and Madam
Secretary.
It just seems to me, Uh, lfc
staff has been pretty good at
predicting this in the past.
And so I'm just surprised that
the massive
And this is massive $48 million
is a massive difference.
So, um, Anyhow, that's
That's just something I'm gonna
have to
If if I'm gonna go beyond the
Voting for anything beyond the
LFC request.
Um
I'm I'm gonna need to see
Some justification. Besides
We don't know that they're not
coming back.
Mr. Chair, Representative
Monteria. Our enrollment
projections historically have
been within a 2% margin of
error. So we have been pretty
exact on our enrollment
projections on the executive
side. I do want to just call
that out. Historically, we've
been pretty spot on proud of our
team of economists. They look at
the state of all the time. They
really kind of look at that with
a lot of rigor and fidelity to
the model.
So you know, we'll stand behind
the executive request and I'd be
happy to provide any additional
information or answer your
questions about what goes into
that enrollment trend.
Thank you, Mr Chair. Um
The
To go back to. I think the very
first line of questioning
This afternoon from
representative had a meal.
Um, about the M. C. O s.
And that was a big issue for
For particularly for this
committee last year that dollars
that were being given
That we're supposed to get to
the providers at the CEOs were
Kind of not passing that on, So
I'm glad to hear
At least in your response that
you believe that is happening.
By and far that that's the case.
Um, but in your response you
mentioned something about
I think your exact words were
That you would support
If we wanted to require and
audit.
So could you is my understanding
that M. C O s are already
providing
Or at least the in state Emcor,
providing an audit to the office
of
The superintendent of insurance.
Um
But I I understand that in
state, um I don't know that
That's the case with Blue Cross
blue Cross blue shield since
they're out of state.
Um
Are you aware as to whether or
not their local subs subsidiary
is having to provide that?
Mr Chair representative, where
they do all have to do financial
filing and have to go.
Look in terms of and kind of
coordinate with the
superintendent. Insurance of
insurance in terms of the depth
of
Sort of like how how nuanced
that data is, and whether it
shows sort of that out of state
parent company. How much has
been shifted out? Our contracts
do have a lot of financial
oversight in them. We're
actually moving to a street.
more strict profit cabin on July
1st. So we're kind of really
ratcheting on the financial side
with them. We also collect a lot
of financial data from them.
Including what's paid on claims
All of that gets reconciled as
we do the rates heading for them
CEOs, So we will be taking a
closer look at this. And I thank
you for flagging that concern
and I'll take that back. I
honestly would have to go back
and sort of reassess those
insurance filings to determine
for those out of state
companies. How those dollars are
reported. I just can't answer
that right now, but I'm happy to
follow up on it.
Thank you, Mr Chair. If you
would, Madam secretary because I
It's my understanding that it's
not clear.
As to whether or not blue Cross
blue Shield since they're out of
state are actually providing.
An audit. They might be
providing information, but I
don't know that it's an audit.
Um, I also have a question as to
mr Chair as to whether or not
Um
The new Medicaid providers that
are out of state as to whether
or not
There is a requirement for them
to provide an audit.
Um, I think the reality is that
that was like I said last year.
That was a big question for this
committee.
To make sure that the M CEOs
were passing, uh, the money that
should be going to the
providers, so if those audits
don't exist,
Uh or some requirement for those
out of state.
Um, providers. I think there's
several of us on this committee
would like to work with you to
make sure that that provision
Um uh, can be can be
Hopefully, we can do that this
session.
So, um, Anyhow, I'll talk to you
about that offline, but it does
appear as if there might be some
questions whether or not
All those all of the companies
that we're dealing with.
All the M. C. O s that we're
dealing with.
Actually providing an audit. So
miss chair. I'll leave that. But
I would like to
Um, I'd like to have that
conversation with you offline.
Thank you, madam. Much
representing Gary, please. Thank
you, Mr Chair. Thank you. So
much for your presentation. And,
um, in terms Secretary Know
Secretary designate Sorry,
Armijo. Thank you for being
willing to take this on and your
entire staff for working in
state government when many of
you could make a whole lot of
money elsewhere.
Um, I want to thank you for
really putting a spotlight on
Medicaid reimbursement for
providers.
I want to thank all the
advocates in the audience. I
recognize a lot of you because
you come day after day, year
after year.
And I want to thank all the
providers that serve our
Medicaid and low income people
and treat them with dignity and
respect.
And
Expertise, even when their
reimbursement rates aren't all
that we are trying to do, and
and I think we all want to get
those rates up because we have
such a high percentage of
Medicaid. All I want to say
thank you, Mr Chair.
Thank you very much. Represent
chair Thompson and then
represent Chatfield.
Thank you. Thank you, Mr Chair.
Thank you all for allowing me to
be here today. Thank you, Madam
Secretary and your staff. It's
wow. It's a lot. Um, so first
I'm going to start with
workforce, the interim
Legislative Health and Human
Services Committee that has been
our
Our number one priority for
since I've been on it starting
in 2013 and so
11 years so far, so this is
about Medicaid rates if we do
not raise Medicaid? Is this
cutting in and out?
No. Okay. Okay. Um, if we don't
raise those, we are not going to
get workforce period when half
of our state is on Medicaid.
Another percentage have no
insurance and go under
uncompensated care. Um people
can't stay in practice if we
don't pay them enough and
There had for about at least 10
years that I know of You and M
has been doing a healthcare
workforce study. And in those 10
years, there has never been a
mention of malpractice insurance
as a reason that we can't get or
retain, Um medical people that
the reason is because they can't
make a living. Essentially, Um,
if you're losing money on every
patient eventually you can't do
it anymore. Unless you happen to
be independently wealthy, Um
Really, really wealthy so
I really want to put in a plug
for
For increasing the Medicaid
rates for pretty much across the
board, but especially for those
folks who've been left off in
the past, and then just a quick
follow up with what
representative Montoya was
talking about. I passed the bill
that will take that took effect
January 1st called early is easy
Enrollment and what that is, is
when you fire taxes. You can
check the box that says someone
in your household doesn't have
health insurance, and then it
will go to determine if you're
Eligible for Medicaid or for
something on the exchange, so
there will be people coming on
to Medicaid.
Um, based on that, so so being
concerned about the numbers
being high, I think they may be
actually low, and we've never
had anything like like the
pandemic in our history, at
least that, um, that affected so
much, So we have to really be
careful of that. My next point
is
We need more oversight of the M.
C. O s. The perception is that
they are untouchable. And this
is an example that I want you to
keep in your mind when you think
about it.
So I sit on the tip Tobacco
Committee as well. Um, and for
years, the M. C O s had been
getting per member per month
dollars for quick lines for quit
services for nicotine tobacco
products. We found out that none
of them had it. They hope
offering them to the state
funded Quit line.
So that took that kept money in
the pockets of the M. C. O s and
took money out of the pockets of
our statewide Quit line. Um, and
I'm not sure that that's not
still the case. So that's just
one example of how the M C O s
can light their own pockets and
cost taxpayers more. So I really
think oversight is important.
The third one is the D. D. S D
providing rates, Um and
representative Garcia said. We
need to worry about people
coming off the waiting list. We
also have to worry about people
who are in services. As most of
you know, my son is, you know,
group home and just about every
weekend. We'll pick him up.
There's a new staff member. It
costs money.
Um and Eric is 6 ft seven
Stronger than any human I've
ever seen, has intermittent
explosive disorder as well as
autism and what you couldn't
deal with him. He's near species
on ceilings breaks any glass
that he comes in contact with,
including windshields on
vehicles.
If you have a choice of working
with him 99% of the time he's
wonderful, but that 1% is really
scary. If you have a choice to
flip burgers at Wendy's or deal
with my Eric
And you make more money at
Wendy's.
It's a no brainer as far as I'm
concerned, so people who are
already in services stand to
lose those services if Eric's
group home closest, um I don't
know what we'll do. I won't be
here. That's for sure. Um, so
and some of you may be happy
about that. But, um, And then
there are a lot of, um
Occupational therapists,
physical therapists, speech and
language pathologists,
Residential Dahab all that
stuff.
That are either closed
permanently or on moratorium,
And that means they take no new
people. So you make it allocated
to the waiver, But there's no
one available to provide any
services. So it's an allocation
in name only, so we really need
to look at that and make sure
that we're making it a cochlear
for people to be in direct
service. Let's say it takes a
calling. It's a hard job, but it
can be
Lot of fun. My career has been
in in that.
And then I'm just still really
concerned that the, um
The rate increases were held
back for four months. I mean,
let's think about our own budget
if we didn't get
The increases that we were
expecting. For four months. We'd
have a hard time making it and a
lot of the agencies. A lot of
the group homes etcetera are
having really having a hard time
the group home that my son is
there. The CEO told me that one
weekend he spits 5000 extra
dollars just staff.
Just because people quit because
people call in sick You have to
be trained. You have to. It's
It's really, really bad. It's
great that we ended the wait
list, but we haven't fixed the
system. And then the final one,
Mr Chair and members, um in
terms of rural hospitals, I
believe that only three of our
rural hospitals are not owned by
bigger corporations. So when we
put money into rural hospitals
We really need to be careful
that it's not going to Tennessee
for profit. We want that money
to go to the New Mexico
hospitals that are New Mexico
based
That aren't multi billion dollar
multi state corporations padding
their bottom line with New
Mexico. Taxpayer money, So thank
you, Mr Chair.
Okay, Representative Chatfield,
Then we'll have representative
vice chair Dixon and myself to
conclude
Thank you, Mr Chair. I would
like to continue the discussion
about the small rural hospitals.
I represent district 67.
We're talking about Clayton
tootin. Kerry Clovis Las Vegas.
Hospitals. Ah,
They have a very low number of
patients. Low number of traffic
goes through
Part of those folks.
Don't have Medicaid, Medicare
insurance or money.
So
So they don't they don't they
received nothing for that
service.
Part of those people.
Have Medicaid.
And to my knowledge or losing
money on
On those patients.
Some of them have Medicare.
I don't know what's happening
there.
Uh, some of them have private
insurance, and I think they
probably
Break even or make money on
those on those patients.
Uh,
Insurance is driving them.
Out of business.
Many of these hospitals we're
talking about the hospitals
being owned.
Many of them are owned locally
and they're managed by
Mm. CEO by larger corporation.
Uh, we need those small rural
hospitals.
Yeah. All of us. Need them. The
people that live there, the
elderly that live there. They
need the services. They provide
any of us that happened to be
driving passing.
And we get the car wreck. We
kind of want somebody to pick us
up off the road brushes off.
Stabilize us and send us to a
trauma center somewhere. We need
those hospitals.
I don't think that changing, uh,
Medicaid or
Are those services. I can't see
that it would change the income
enough.
To make those folks be able to
Stay.
I believe that we need some
type.
Of a base pay for our smaller
rural hospitals.
Uh, we've been
Kind of beating that idea around
for a while.
Ah!
I don't know what it would be
have got a number in my head,
but we're gonna throw it out
there today.
Have you guys talked about this?
or where are we at on that?
Mr. Chair, Representative
Chatfield? Yes. So, um, a few
things. It's a complicated
question, Unfortunately, But
there there was funding and
hospital too, as you know, to
take the hospitals and increase
their reimbursement rates. I
can't hear you Sorry about that.
there was money in hospital to
to raise reimbursement rates for
hospitals up to 100% of
Medicare.
So we have executed that when we
When we did those increases we
actually categorized hospitals
because the bill the language in
hospital to really directed us
to focus on rural hospitals, Um,
we we gave them a higher share
of the money so more greater
share of those funds went to the
rural hospitals. They received a
greater percentage of the rate
increase.
Up to that 100% threshold.
Um And so they kind of they got
something through that. We've
also been working on a what's
called a directed payment for
our rural hospitals to try and
float some some difference here.
We know that there are some
immediate challenges. We've done
that with some of the hospitals.
We've been able to give them
some additional funding. It is
challenging because
Those payments have to always be
based on utilization and when
utilization is low, or
discharges are low. Um, you're
kind of challenged and how you
can get those dollars out the
door. But we have been working
on that so like a higher
payment, just recognizing that
they have really high fixed
costs compared to their
utilization. And then the third
thing that we're really working
on is a legislative solution.
There will be a governor's bill
this session with that provider
assessment to generate, um
Over a billion dollars in
revenue for New Mexico's
hospitals. We've been really
thinking about how to get that
get those dollars and how to get
that share out to the rural
facilities and they've been
working with us on that group,
So I think there's a lot of
support around that, um, and a
lot of reassurance around what
those dollars could look like
for them. So Mr does that look
like
A base pay for each of those
facilities or something that
does that.
Um, Mr Terry Representative, Um,
that would look like a base pay
on discharges, so inpatient and
outpatient discharges plus
equality payment. Um, and that
base pay would include to
address representative
Thompson's point earlier, a
minimum threshold for
reinvestment in New Mexico. So
in services and workforce here
in New Mexico
So
I don't want to. I don't want to
just keep hammering off. Yes,
but I want to understand it.
Base pay on discharges. We just
said they have a really low
amount of people that go through
those hospitals. So base pay on
discharges probably doesn't help
as much as
Base, pay Mr. Chair,
Representative Chatfield if you
want to use the Medicaid
construct or the Medicaid
program, you've got to tie the
payments to discharges. We are
unable or too quality like
equality and kind of pool. So
those are the two avenues that
we really have the way that it
would be designed to sort of
have a higher amount. I think
for the rural hospitals on those
discharges then compared to an
urban as like the base pay, and
that would be additive to their
Regular Medicaid rates.
So I hope it's a very complex
program. But I would be happy to
sit down with you, Mr. Chair,
Representative Chatfield and go
over those numbers for your
district. We have We have pulled
those. So thank you, Mr Chair. I
would love to do that I was
Invites you to give me a call.
Thank you very much represents
Chatfield advice critics.
Thank you, Mr Chair. Um
Most of my questions have been
answered, which is nice when you
are at the end of the list. Um,
but I wanted to just comment
that I appreciated
representative Remedios question
about the cara funding. I know
that That is an issue of great
significance, uh, to a number of
members on this committee, and
so
I am pleased to see it in the
lfc recommendation. Um and we'll
follow along to see how that
progresses.
Um
Hmm. Mr Chair, Madam Secretary.
I'm curious how the Medicaid dis
enrollment.
Is factored into both Medicaid
growth scenarios.
Since it appears that we have
one of the highest percentages
nationally of procedural
descend,
Mr Chair, Miss Madam Vice chair.
Um, why not? Why don't we start?
I guess on the legislative side
and then with your permission
all have a Lisa Walker Moran
describe in greater depth. How
that's factored in.
You know that the LFC
recommendation essentially took.
Um I believe it is the October
Uh um.
Projection that the department
produces and we we looked at a
different starting rate, which
was
Um
Alright, a different starting
place, which was the October
statistical report that comes
out from the department.
We noticed that it's it's lower,
right? And, um so then we we
applied there. Same growth rate
to that number and arrived at
the, uh, the growth and and and,
uh
Medicaid.
And I just wanted to point out
one thing. So we we got a, uh,
projection.
We got a projection on Monday
from the department.
As as looking at it just now.
And, um
Their projection in
See in October.
Um
I was about 938,000 for the end
of FY 14 or FY 24 Sorry.
Um and then
This latest projection has
actually, uh
Reduced that, um
Number down to about 904,000. So
there's there's like 25,000 some
odd
Um dear friends and
That enrollment projection and
so I do think, um
There's probably a good
possibility that that number as
we go forward in the year is
going to continue to decrease
and that's sort of where we came
from. Thank you, Mr Chair, and
then Madam vice chair. Just real
quick. Um, I agree. Yeah. The
procedural closures have been
occurring. Um, and before Miss
Walker Moran kind of gets into
the details on the projection
trend I would just say about
70,000. People have already come
back. So we're seeing a lot of
fluctuation right now. So
There's been drop offs, but
those people are coming back and
they're coming back within the
1st 3 to 4 months after falling
off, and so I just want to
highlight that because we are
starting to see that comeback
action occurring and it's gonna
take a little time to bear out
in the projection, but we've
already re enrolled 70,000.
Thank you, Mr Chair. Um
So the way we approach the
enrollment projection is
We looked at who would be
December rolled in fiscal year,
24.
And so we recognized we
prioritize the maintenance of
effort population and we
actually
Projected that population pretty
closely. I think we were off,
you know, maybe 10 or 20
clients. Um, so those were the
primary the first
A group of people that we
prioritize. Then we looked at
the regular how many people will
have to re certify month to
month now, as secretary, Armijo
said. There's a lot of
uncertainty.
And we've done a lot of
outreach, so some people have
come in and re certified as
secretary, and we hope that some
people have not. So what we've
built into the forecast is the
assumption that those people who
are still eligible for Medicaid,
will it Some point comeback so
in that will impact our fiscal
year 25 numbers.
And so even if they don't come
back in, you know, two months or
six months, they will come back
when they have a medical need as
secretary pointed out, And so
that is built into our FY 25
forecasts, So we have a lower
baseline in 24 because of all
the people who have rolled off.
But then we've included
adjustments upward, um, to
adjust for people, Not everyone.
but several of them coming back
and going back to a regular
growth. So despite the people
who have closed, we have seen
new people coming on during the
public health emergency and we
looked at those new clients that
were coming on and what that
growth rate would have been.
Without the people who are being
maintained on the roles. We
looked at that growth now our
growth rate is much slower than
what we had there prior to the
public health emergency, so we
did lower that growth rate,
assuming less people will come
on, so we do have a lower
baseline, but
We still assume that people will
come back. So that is a brief
explanation of how we approach
the enrollment.
Thank you, Um
Am I correct? Um
That the recent Medicaid um
projections show $41 million
surplus.
Is that
Um
Mr Chair and representative, or
I'm sorry, Senator. Oh, no
Represent. Sorry. Uh oh. I don't
have my glasses on. I apologize,
Okay, um
So we do have a reversion in 23,
and we're now projecting a
reversion in 24, but those those
were based on the lower
enrollment that we have, but
also it's based on the revised
capitation rates that we set for
calendar 24.
So in light of utilization, um
and acuity by members with in
their M C O s. We reviewed that
we also we reviewed the use of
medical data. Of course. Um, we
also
Um, looked at our Baigent.
And we set rates that were
appropriate for the utilization
of members and assuming, um,
since we have lower enrollment,
the Q itty will increase, but
maybe utilization is declining.
So what that means is the per
member per month. Costs may be
slightly higher because those
remain
On Medicaid use more services.
then the people who were
remaining during the public
health emergency they may have
been on but not using as many
services. So the per member per
month cost was lower, so we've
made adjustments to the
capitation rates, which reduced
costs but also, um lower
enrollment in 23 and 24. And
that's what gave us our
reversion.
Thank you, Um
My Serie. Um So for $41 million,
though, and I think
That's money, though. In fiscal
year 20 for that
Is not able to be used for
something else, right? I mean,
that's what happens when we have
reversion. Right? We are we're
setting money aside.
For a future budget that is not
getting spent in the budget year
when it could be, um and so I
just want to flag that that's an
opportunity costs that I think
lfc is really taking into
account, you know, with their
lower, more moderate
projections. I think a number of
folks have sort of, um, brought
up the fact that
The projections are very
different. And so you know,
we'll probably want to learn a
little bit more about those and
have some folks to dive into
that, But I did want to flag
that.
From my perspective. I certainly
appreciate the
Uh, um moderate and opportunity
cost approach, not saying one,
you know.
One is bad, but, um, my last
question, um, is about
The state Health benefits
program.
I am.
Confused, Just like this is new
for me, sort of the employee
premiums.
Um, so there's a difference
between the executive and the
LFC in how that's funded. Is
that correct?
And so
Is LFC, assuming that employee
premiums will cover that, and
the executive wants to fund
those with general fund dollars.
Uh, Mr Chair and Madam vice
chair. That's correct. And Mr
Chair, and Eric is it normally
funded from the premiums? Is it
a switch this year that the
state would now be absorbing
those costs in the past, It has
been funded through the
administrative costs have been
funded through the fund.
Through through the fund. Okay,
that would be you know, and I
think it would be helpful to
have a little bit of follow up
because that you know that's
sort of a policy shift, then as
well, So I just wanted to flag
that That's all I have. Mr.
Chair. Thank you very much,
Madam. Vice chair. Thank you,
Madam Secretary into your team.
Uh, briefly, Madam Secretary.
Around the increased benefits,
both for I guess for older new
Mexicans and disabled new
Mexicans.
That's not necessarily connected
to those new Mexicans coming
into the workforce. That's a
more just sort of a need. That
is likely pretty acute,
particularly in rural areas.
Um for, uh, for younger new
Mexicans, though, and for their
families is their consideration
for upscaling and moving able
New Mexicans into the workforce
as part of the benefits
increase.
Um, Mr Chair, I think, um
Sure, I think that there are
lots of opportunities and we are
partnering. I think we talked
about like how we're doing that
in child support with DWS. We do
that with 10, if as well
Um
You're currently Medicaid is not
really connected to employment.
Uh and there are some states
that have tried to make that
mandatory And then there's been
a lot of legal action about
that.
What I'd like to do is sort of
suggests that as the agency and
there's a lot of cross agency
work going on on this, and I was
actually in Washington last week
with the secretaries of early
childhood and Workforce
solutions, um at a a 17 state
meeting to really talk about the
cliff effect, that we really
come back with a thoughtful set
of solutions for the 26 budget.
I think there's a lot of support
around that. And as I said, I
don't think our programs today
are fully designed to be a
trampoline. They're kind of
Like land here will help you And
sometimes people end up kind of
staying there because the
incentive, um kind of follows
them to keep those benefits so
we're really supportive of doing
that. I probably personally
wouldn't support any kind of
mandate around work and
Medicaid, but, um, you know, we
want to smooth those edges of
poverty and really make that's
that Cliff effect. More like a
stairway so that people can kind
of step down into a really
improved life. And really so
families can drive here in new
So offering that as a thank you
for that, madam Secretary.
Um
With regard also on the benefit
the proposed benefit increases
has there been any executive
calculation as to what impact to
the childhood poverty rate.
In New Mexico would be, um
Mr Chair. That's a great
question. We'll take a look at
that. I do know that one of the
one of the recommendations for
most experts in terms of child
poverty is to sort of implement
that continuous eligibility that
we're really excited to have
just implemented in January for
Children 0 to 5, and that will
really help families so that
they aren't worried about losing
their Medicaid coverage. So
we'll take that back and see if
we can look at that.
Um, child poverty rate that
didn't come. Tax credit is like
another solution. We saw dips.
Real dips in child poverty
through that earned income tax
credit that occurred during the
pandemic. We saw real movement
there. That was really exciting
for us to see. But I think we've
kind of moved back with the
elimination of some of those
supports thing, Madam Secretary,
of course, securing New Mexico.
I think we can be proud.
We've included a childhood
tracks credit at the state
level. In fact, we're you know.
We just talked about it on
Monday, a couple of days ago
over a billion dollars in tax
relief since 2019 through this
legislature, and with this
governor, the vast majority of
which has been targeted towards
in those exact areas. Um, uh, I
guess.
I would ask on the workforce.
Component. I take your order I
share. Frankly, Madam secretary,
the aversion to work mandates
and some other fairly blunt and
what have proved
Frequently, very ineffective,
very punitive, sort of worst of
all worlds solutions. On the
other hand, Madam secretary, we
know we do have a lower
workforce participation rate.
In our quest to make progress
to, um, diversify our economy.
One of the challenges we face is
Arlo Workforce Participation
rate, You know, we have all the
things but if folks if
There are questions about
workforce that can inhibit the
economic diversification. We're
all so clearly fighting for.
And so I would ask Madam
Secretary. You're proposing sort
of
For New Mexico unprecedented
although very defensible benefit
increases.
For FY 25. We have to start down
that road of workforce
integration were not made. We're
not proposing mandates, but
there should be integration in
that.
Um
Yeah, and appreciate very much
that inappropriate ranking
member Armstrong is here. The
work on the cliff effect.
If you were to share ideas.
Connected to funding needs.
I imagine you would receive a
lot of excitement and interest
from the committee in this
legislative session.
So I would encourage you there.
On the other hand, as we've
talked about the
The
Enrollment, um, challenges the
enrollment projection
differences and the resulting
financial sort of implications
are the most significant. We've
faced in to do the entire
executive recommendation would
Significantly curtail this come
to fund, other important
programs and other important
agencies. So there's gonna
obviously need to be a lot of
with that, I think will close
We're gonna ask for of
Motion from the vice chair. We
will adopt the LFC
recommendation.
We're gonna gonna name a quick
uh, albeit sort of large
subcommittee to do this work.
This year. We want to be super
clear there is going to be a
large executive role in our
subcommittee. There's a
conference table in the House
Appropriations and Finance chair
office.
Will need to start this work
soon members and even if you're
not on this initial
subcommittee, I want to maintain
the ability to add other folks,
Perhaps ask people to look into
as it's so large. It is so
complicated with that, Um madam
chair and vice chair, would you
do? Thank you, Mr Chair? I would
move that the committee except
the LFC recommendation.
Okay, It's been moved and
seconded. Is there any
opposition to that?
I cannot see any opposition
members to start with and expect
some additions here as we go
through some of these program
areas, I'm going to ask Vice
Chair Dixon ranking member
Armstrong Percent had Emilio
represent Brown represents
Sanchez and representative
Herndon to be the initial group
that starts this work.
I would ask that we meet this
week. Uh,
Soon. Director Sally thank you
to you and your staff. Um, will
want to meet this week and
continue that work here because
we have a big golf to apologize.
Mr. Chair. Could you give me
that list One more time? Little
slower. Uh, we have Dixon
Armstrong had Emilio Brown
Sanchez and
Again to be clear. That's to
start with. I will very likely
ask additional members to look
at additional areas because it
is such a
diverse, important and new with
the a this year.
Madam Secretary. Thank you for
your work. Thank you to our
analysts, Um
Thank you, Mr Chair and members
of the committee. Okay, now very
appreciative will ask our
Veterans Services Department.
Uh, to come on up, please.
General. Thank you so much for
being here. We're gonna
transition quickly since we took
obviously a good amount of time.
Uh,
Kelly. Great to see you. We'll
go straight to you, Uh, please
introduce, uh, other your
companion analysts And then
general. When we get to you,
please feel free. Introduce.
Introduce your team General. And
please, When we get to you
please feel free to introduce
your team. That's here. Thank
you. Absolutely. Kelly, please.
Thank you. Mr Chairman. Members
Committee Kelly Clint
Legislative Finance Committee
were on agency code 670.
670 the Veterans Services
Department with me today is the
acting secretary Jameson
Herrera and my DFA counterpart
Laurie Sciacca, which I set it
right.
Um so this will be a quick
presentation from us and then
I'll turn it over to my dif, a
counterpart so both
recommendations increase the
general fund revenue. Um, but
the executive was about 2
million above the LFC. DLC
recommendation for General fund
was about a 5% increase while
the executive was about 33%
increase for general fund
revenues.
Both recommendations increased
personnel, the executive
recommendation was 769.2000
above the LFC majority of that
was in expansions for veterans
services officers, as you can
see in the expansion table
below.
The 24 operating budget has an
estimated 260,000 in vacancy
savings for personal currently.
Executive recommendation was
570,000 above the LFC and
contractual Services for Suicide
prevention, Honor Guard
services, veterans
transportation, burial, equity
and homelessness initiatives. I
will note that the LFC
recommendation also has
increases for transportation.
just not the rate that the
executive does.
Um, Executive recommendation
increase other costs for
additional travel and outreach
certification processes for the
new Via so's they recommended
and per diem for the advisory
council and risk rates. We
reconciled performance measures
and come to consensus.
And with that I will turn it
over to my DFA counterpart for
additional comment. Thank you.
Good afternoon, Mr Chair.
Members of the committee. My Lfc
counterparts summarized the
differences very well. And I
have nothing for her further to
add.
So with that I will pass it over
to acting Director General
Herrera.
Take one.
Good afternoon and thank you for
the for the honor of
representing our veterans here
today in front of this esteemed
group.
I'd like to start with
introducing introducing some of
our our team that is here.
We have our state approving
authority, Miss Kathy Snyder.
We have our acting A S D as well
as our CFO Daniel Lucero.
Um, healthcare coordinator Diane
Morning Brown, Our field
services director Robin Wilson
and her business operations
specialist, Mr Jesus Palomino.
Cemetery and state benefits
director is add Mendez.
And his executive admin Michael
Valencia. We have our P I owe Mr
Ray Siva here.
And my exact Mr Shannon
Quintana. All we've had
Uh, a lot of work put together
here is as for this presentation
here as well as uh, much, too,
with all the predecessors that
have, uh
Participated in this budget
endeavor.
I'd like to start with
Just, um, page one page two.
Actually, we'll just, uh we'll
just start with that as a brief
synopsis of our mission and our
vision.
And our mission and our vision
are very closely aligned with
it. With the exception of
there's a big gap between the
two on education for veterans
services.
Uh, we obviously have increased
a lot of service activities
throughout the state for our
veterans.
Um, And those are the ones who
know about the services. I know.
We've all been in other
presentations where we are
harping on the outreach in the
education and telling our
veterans what they own.
And that takes a lot of effort
and there's we still have a
large gap to fill their
Um, So as we move along, I'll
explain some of that. Go to Page
three.
It's a brief synopsis of our
Breakdown. I think it's very
similar to, uh
What the outlet the what was so
astutely? Uh, summarize before I
started here.
Was it the the difference in the
salary and benefits?
From the executive budget
recommendation.
To the LFC.
I'd like to point out the salary
and benefits. It's pretty self
explanatory on on the number of
the additions, obviously, uh,
exactly.
Recommendation of the 26 FTE s
we requested in our budget.
Request to the LFC. Um the exact
authorized US 12 with funding.
And the LFC gave us three
With a final minor increase with
internals spend
From from our budget.
Contractual services.
We were. The differences were
$570,000.
And the LFC did not include any
money towards burial equity.
Which is a new federal law.
That, um, allows the state to
bury non qualified service
members that it no longer that
don't qualify for federal
Internment at our national
cemeteries, but they are allowed
to bury that based on our in our
state cemetery that we currently
run.
Suicide prevention.
Honor Guard services were not
encumbered.
Nor anything towards
homelessness.
Um, in the L. C recommendation.
Excuse me.
In our 400 category.
Um the, uh
Delta was $480,000.
Which was
Which does not provide with the
LFC recommendation for the
expanded outreach that we all
hold so important to getting our
message out the GSD leases for
vehicles as well as additional
space for the additional
personnel in some of these
counties that are not
represented at all.
The obviously the
Some of the furnishings as well
as the infrastructure
improvements for our do it and,
um
Local area network stuff that
would have to be done and again
marketing.
Um
We don't see a lot of marketing
for our veterans services and
what services are available,
except for
Uh, small town local. You're
talking American Legions are
veteran service organizations.
you might see it or hear it on
local radio stations, But
there is no uh, large
Umbrella of of
Any of our advertisement for
services. We started that this
year with our transportation
services. We actually have
billboards up and we are getting
into some radio ads and some of
those things in in English,
Spanish as well as in Navajo so
we can reach some of these areas
and start expanding that they
Volume. Other things not
included in the contractual
services was anything for VSO
training as well as
New V S O s, But we also have,
um
Continuous training that is
required for them to maintain
their certifications as well as
all the changes. As we know the
I'll give an example the Pact
Act has changed three times
since it was initially put out
and that takes training and
expertise for us to then
advisors individuals and that
takes time training and
experience in order to get it
done properly.
Hmm.
If you go to page four
It's just a brief synopsis of
what we do in each of our
service areas.
We've talked about our field
service areas, and that's where
VSO is largely unpopulated.
State benefits managers are
state benefits, memorials and
cemeteries.
Health care is the education
piece connection veterans to our
community resources with our
social work and working with
local community partners,
Managers of transportation and
the homeless initiatives
currently
Um, that the healthcare also,
um, serves on the governor's
Suicide committee.
The state approving agency.
This makes sure that we are
taking care of our service
members in the in the best way
possible and that the agencies
that receive veterans funding or
actually meeting the the mustard
and making sure they're doing it
properly and supporting our
veterans to to the extent of
their benefits.
Veterans betters the our
veterans business Outreach is
helping veterans to start small
businesses in our local towns
and maintain or improve their
efficiencies based on some of
the funding that's available
through the S B a through grants
and making sure that our
Veteran owned businesses
actually have an opportunity to
excel and thrive as they leave
service.
Or tribal liaison is working
with our 23, nations, tribes and
territories to ensure that we
get the message out to those
areas. Obviously, we have we do
have some connectivity issues
out there, so we spent a lot of
windshield time driving out to
some of the chapter house is to
ensure that they get the message
and they have something to hang
on the refrigerator if necessary
to understand how to get in
contact with us and get the
services they need.
The women's Veterans program as
much like the tribal, um
Veterans or veterans, but there
are specific challenges that the
women veterans face that are
women's veterans program is
trying to get after and bring
resources to our state to better
serve our women, veterans and
liaison closely with our V, a
hospital to ensure that the
treatments being received or
what's necessary.
Go to slide five.
Our state benefits division.
Um, that provided a quick
synopsis of fy 23.
What were accomplished and the
right column there is basically
to the end of the second quarter
of what we've accomplished.
Um, and I'll point out like the
tax exemptions.
That's not even at half and
you're like, Well, you might be
down a little this year.
This is this time of year when W
twos come in, and everyone's
like I'm gonna file taxes this
year. They're going to get that
certificate.
That's the reminder every year.
We see this next quarter between
now and April 15th as a huge
spike in requests for those tax
exemptions for personal who
didn't know it existed. And or,
um
Move further, so that entails
quite a bit of manpower.
Go to the next slide. These are
a claim filing for for this
year.
As as we've talked about this
We've increased claims in DVs
VSO offices by 173% from last
year, largely due to the Pact
Act and the changes
As well as
The efforts that we've made to
get out to the communities to
get to veterans who had not not
would not have normally filed
because they're unaware of some
of the benefits that they're
they're unable to do. They may
have filed in 1965 and been
denied.
With the pact act that becomes
an appeal.
And that becomes another
initiation of contact with that
veteran so we can then
Assist them to get their
conditions met and and start
moving things along, So it's not
just that initial interaction
that we're dealing with people.
We may have 10 to 12
interactions with a veteran over
time until they're satisfied
with the level of their claim,
or it's been adjudicated
properly.
The appeals. I just spoke to
that. Obviously, the 219%
increases is largely due to the
revisited tax. Um
On the pact Act.
We've seen a large uptick in
veterans benefits request again.
Knowledge is power, and we're
starting to see a lot of these
survivors that didn't know that
they had benefits pending or the
level of the benefits they had.
Um and this is largely due to
the Veterans of World War two.
Um
Passing away and now we're
starting to see the the majority
of our Vietnam veterans coming
of age with additional health
problems at that this juncture
And, um, being a child of
Vietnam veteran the
communication from some of the
Vietnam veterans was Yes, I
served at times and there might
be other other information until
we can dig it out of the the war
chest later, so and
And I say that because we're
finding a lot of cases where
that's happening.
Go to the next slide.
This is our transportation
program.
And yes, the LFC did include
some funding for the, uh
For the transportation program
to this year. Up to this point,
we've already spent $375,000 of
which that was my initial ask
for our budget for state funds.
We've been very blessed to have
a $250,000 via grant this year
that is already expended.
We're mid year.
We're at our second quarter and
we've already expanded that
because of the of the need that
has been generated through
through our talks in our
meetings with veterans groups.
The word's getting out and we've
really increased our, um our
projections and I strongly
believe that the 864 on your
therefore F way projection is
probably going to be eclipsed.
Because there is such a such a
need.
And you can see there on the
bottom there. The funding
expansion.
The number of veterans each of
those areas that are not served
currently.
Hence the reason for for that.
And
A grant is a grant. It's
granted. They have money and
they want to give it to us and
250,000 we received this year
was almost twice as much as last
year.
For the V A.
And if that grant were to be
reduced
A lot of these services
certainly would not be, uh,
taking care of
Hence the ask for the 375 from
the state from my budget
request.
Program, funding the additional
programs that were not covered.
The honor guard support.
Last year. We we spent $189,500
On
On honor guard support, and what
that does is that provides for a
rifle detail.
A flag detail and a bugler at
every authorized veterans. Uh,
funeral.
Hmm.
It provides for uniforms and
equipment to ensure that the the
these groups look professional.
At all times and that they meet
the protocol.
And it also provides for
training and internment
protocol.
Currently, you know, in our
cemeteries.
We have 437 New Mexicans
interred in our in our
cemeteries. It's 100 and 38 in
Gallup, 112, an angel fire. 187
and Fort Stanton we're averaging
about 100.
Um, internment per year in our
state cemeteries. We anticipate
that to go up significantly with
the new the passing of the
Garden Reserve bill that was
actually passed in 22.
And we weren't prepared for this
last year, and that's why the
the requirement for the burial
equity was at 200,000. And, yes,
I asked for probably a little
more than I needed but to stand
at any program up, we need to
ensure that we have the funding
available. Once you say there's
a service that it will have the
funding available to provide it,
George her veterans, and that's
at an approximate cost per
burial.
Equivalent to the V A at about
of approximately 1200.
Um
Includes the headstone, the plot
expense and plus it obviously
internal operations cost for for
that to take place.
The honor guard has been
expanded from 19 to 26 teams
based on the demand signal
that's been
Presented throughout the state.
We've had a large influx of
Increase. I'm sorry in, uh
In the internment. Obviously, we
had many leftover from covid
that were retained so they could
have the proper burials. And
then the the the continued
passing of of our veterans.
So we have 26 teams now so we've
increased. You know, in a number
of teams that we're going to
need to support throughout the
state, so we aren't paying
mileage for people to drive from
Santa Fe to Taus to cover a
funeral because of the lack of
support or from
From Albuquerque to gallop
because of lack of support, or
we don't have these fields,
These veterans service
organizations are stepping up to
answer our call, and we've got
to make sure that they're
trained appropriately and that
we give each veteran the the
service that they do.
Just a quick update on the, uh,
Carlsbad Cemetery. Should we are
pending right now. In cycle, the
Via goes, goes through their
cycles of awards towards the end
of our calendar year, and we
should be looking at
Quite possibly next year that we
could be awarded a grant to
start the movement on our our
Carlsbad.
Veteran state cemetery to to
accomplish that.
Um and obviously having manpower
in place to start that work, it
is necessary to follow these
contracts and make sure that
we're holding everybody
accountable through the build
process.
Hmm.
Page nine.
Or staffing personnel.
Um
I think everybody's well aware
more or less of the
Of our staffing of our staffing
models.
And I know that the in the
comparison of the executive in
the LFC the arguments that we
had left $594,000 on the table
at the end of FY 23.
Um 82% of that was for unfilled
of expositions.
Alright, that was $360,000
another $130,000 worth for V, a
funded
Programs that could not be
expended because it did not meet
the requirement of the scope of
work for which we were granted.
There were some personnel
issues, some fields there as
well. So largely the amount of
money that was left there, Um,
was
Much less than
What's been broadcast and for
the reasons Obviously, the
dollar rally hasn't changed. But
the reason why I think it's
important that you all
understand that it wasn't it
wasn't mismanagement.
And you can see the and I and I
just explained what's in the
final column there.
The difference of personnel and
the request. As I said before I
came before the LFC and I
requested 26 FTE s
And that was to feel
Double field some of our
offices.
In in throughout the areas of
the state that are under served
or not served at all.
We don't have offices and so in
many counties and some of your
represented counties don't have
anybody there.
Therefore let incurs a veteran
driving hundreds of miles to get
to just one of our veterans
service officers offices to
receive education or services.
And, um
I think it's it's just
unacceptable as as a state and
how we're how we're getting at
this problem, and that's why I
asked for so many. And I
understand that you know, we
have to be realistic as well.
You know that's a want and the
need is somewhere in between.
Um, the executive authorized 10
new funded positions, and I
think that's critical because
again, I'll go back to the
outreach.
And the education piece.
And if I have somebody driving
You know, for three hours to get
to a chapter house, I'm closing
a veteran service office.
That might have 4 to 5
appointments scheduled for that
day.
So I can go and deal with one
veteran that can't get to me.
If I had two people in that
office, those appointments could
maintain my outreach and my
personnel. It's good still
continue to serve the veterans
that are aware of the benefits,
not just doing the outreach.
So every time we have a one
person shop
That's the decision that I'm
having to make is
Wow. Close the office for half a
day. Let's do outreach. Let's go
do a table in the event and get
that information out. Go do the
presentation and then get back
that impacts our veterans.
Um so
I think the executive
recommendation of 10 is
certainly much more palatable
than in the three.
That I would be taking out of
hide.
Uh, to accomplish this, this
objective just wanted to do a
quick overview on the capital
funding that we had laid out.
Excuse me.
The veteran Resource Center was
it was an act of 12 million,
which is a projected build in
the city of Albuquerque Offer
Gibson Boulevard.
Which is within two miles of the
V, A hospital.
Um, but 3.5 miles to the
Kirtland Air Force based
commissary and base exchange
privileges, which many veterans
do and and can can utilize those
services for money savings as
well as other services provided
to veterans that are specific to
that.
As well as um, There's a new
veteran integration center that
is
Within that same vicinity.
That we could collaborate with.
and obviously with with with it
being in the metro area that
It's a one stop shop where we
could actually house many of the
of those state agencies that you
see listed there.
To ensure that a veteran could
show up in a parking lot.
Take care of whatever business
they need to at one building
rather than running all over
town.
And it's set up strategically
there as well with some of the
hotels that we could actually
Book for services if we needed
to for veterans who needed
multiple night stays for
services to be rendered.
Without having to encumber a
lodging facility and take on
other things on behalf of the
state.
So using existing resources to
maximize our impact for our
veterans there.
Next pages. Uh,
I believe this is going to be
carried as these. We asked for
this under capital. It's the
mobile. Um
The DBS Mobile unit, and this is
an asked for us. It was
$600,000. Do you have a mobile
unit to go to these locations?
Throughout the state, and it
will be staffed by Veterans
Service officers.
And and
Basically go out to, uh, areas
where we don't have coverage and
set up.
Rendezvous with some of these
people through either using some
of our senior centers as a as
landing spots as well as some of
our other partner agencies with
it throughout the state D O. T s
office spaces, conference rooms
of We've already started talking
through through a lot of with
the secretaries on availability
so we can maximize the
partnership among state
agencies.
As well as American legions, RV
As well as American legions, or
As well as American legions, RV,
FWS and are disabled American
veterans locations so we can
maximize again. The
effectiveness of having this
this site go out with our
professional.
Special
It's special. Okay, okay.
Which has been told it was a
special instead of capital. So
thank you, Mr Chairman, members
of the committee. I would just
like to add a clarification
here. The agency did submit that
request as a special
The executive thought it was
better student as a capital
request and have supported it as
such. Whereas the LFC has thank
you. Thank you for the
clarification.
Uh, obviously two of those new
those FTS that we requested
would be encumbered with this
DVs mobile unit. We we will
utilize that.
So in a nutshell. I'm I'm
request relief.
And respectfully asking that,
uh,
We are the executives budget
recommendation for the
Department of Veterans Services
to maximize veteran services to
Throughout the state and
essentially ensure that every
veteran has an opportunity to
get to the services that they
require. Thank you very much,
General Herrera, uh, Secretary
designate, um, we will go
straight to questions first to
represent Garcia.
Thank you, Mr Chairman. Thank
you, Secretary General.
Uh,
First question I have is
The governor formed of, uh
For now, we I'm not an outreach
advisory group. How are they
working out doing any
Would you touch on that, please?
Um, Mr Chair, Representative
Garcia? Yes, The governor's
veteran's Advisory council was
was appointed in in June.
There's a 11 members on that,
And, uh, excuse me and
They have come together for two
meetings. We had a public
meeting in December.
And they've been serving is is
sensors in the community working
with our veteran service
organizations, much like a field
office to where they're able
able to have conversations where
they're they're not an employee
of of any sort and actually
gathered data so they can bring
back to us on the issues that
are out on the field that either
are much worse than we thought.
Or that. Maybe we're not
tracking it, Um, to accomplish
that, so
That that committee has been
very valuable in bringing
insight to
Me and our staff to ensure that
we're looking at the right
problems and not trying to solve
problems that don't no longer
exist.
Thank you for that, general. Uh,
Next question I have is how many
years old do you have right now?
And how many do you think you
need?
Um, thank you, Mr Chair and a
representative Garcia, the
number of the s O s. We have
right now is 24
I think it's some of the
narrative. It shows that we have
29 and that is because
Since the beginning of this
cabinet. The V S O s have been
carried under
A different classification
because there was not enough of
them to actually provide a
classification for veterans
service officers there under the
The
The eligibility interviewer, and
that in itself is caused a
problem with retention because
it's a much lower rated
position, then the
responsibilities that are
provided to a VSO. I've already
started conversations since I've
been here with spoke to ensure
that we get to the competent
class and get a proper
classification for RVs OS and
get them on the
Correct a band based on the
responsibility commensurate with
with their duties and get away
from that. So we have 24 v. S. O
s.
In 18 locations throughout the
state.
No thank you, Secretary and you
know to clarify a VSO is a
serving veterans Service
officer. My correct
I'm just bringing that out to
people more what we're talking
about other because some people
don't know what of years Always
But that that's what it is. Uh,
next question. I have Mr
Chairman and Mr Secretary.
Hold reaching out to our Native
American veterans like you
mentioned earlier about chapter
houses and so forth. You know,
my my district is so rural
The
People just don't get visited
out there And how what? How do
you prove proposal on addressing
those issues?
Thank you, Mr Chair representing
Garcia, so I personally have
been out to the never whole
nation. Um and I've met with
with 18 of the 31 chapter houses
of the eastern, uh, coalition
and that are largely in the
state of New Mexico and tribal
liaison has been keeping very
close tabs with, uh, the Native
American community. Um, we
actually had to cancel or we
went virtual last week because
of the snowstorm last Thursday.
We're last Friday. Um, we
actually had a
Symposium set up
At the Fire Rock casino in in
Gallup, so we were going to be
meeting with all the tribal, uh,
Veteran service liaisons and and
certain and opportunities for
people to bring their issues to
us and out in that area, so we
are expanding our outreach as
much as possible. And we like I
said, we are going out to
individual chapter houses to
attend meetings as required last
night, we were actually in La
Laguna for their request to
address some of some of our
issues are better services.
Or field services director went
out there and attended meetings
yesterday. So we are, there's a
lot of windshield time involved
right now again if we had
additional staff
Then.
Maybe a lot closer.
I think I'm secretary and Mr
Chairman, You know the problem.
Virtual
A lot of these people out there
don't have electricity or
running water, and there's a lot
of veterans out there because
I'm out there all the time with
him, and there's a lot of issues
and maybe with more VSO souls.
We could do a little bit better
out. Reach these chapter houses
because you mentioned you had
visited 31 chapters. There's 135
of them up there.
Needs to agency.
And you know, these people are
just not getting the service
that they require, not
necessarily just from veterans,
but overall picture.
They're just being left almost
of the time and I don't need a
matter for that. What are we
doing for women veterans?
Um, Mr Mr Chair and represented
Garcia for the women's Veterans
program. Obviously, they are
working closely with with our
field services officers that are
RVs OS and doing a lot of the
outreach. They will go to
American legions. They're doing
a lot of presentations where
there are proprietors of women
veterans were also, um
Utilizing all of our services
and getting involved with our to
our transition assistance
program, which is our tap all
active duty members go through
briefings before they come off
of active duty and sign out. We
are they're presenting.
To those individuals as
perspective that are going to
stay in New Mexico as well as
we're doing that for our
national guard, um soldier
readiness processes when we go
through on every year we go
through a process to ensure that
we're
Ready for deployment. Should it
be necessary. They are
presenting it at those as well
and we're also including our our
national guardians and
reservists with our our boots to
business, and that includes
women owned veterans businesses
as well.
Thank you, Mr Chairman,
Secretary. Uh
All that money that was spent,
Mr Secretary. I'm glad you
clarified as to why it wasn't
spent.
Because you know when the budget
comes out
That reflects on what they're
trying to give. You are not
giving because that's the first
thing you hear is well. He
didn't spend what he had.
And I'm glad you clarified that
I'm really glad you clarified
that and now.
With that being said, I don't
have any further questions other
than happy Veterans Day, and,
uh, they, Gilman, please
remember the well veterans who
would not be here.
It's very important. Thank you,
Mr Secretary.
Thank you very much for Sam
Garcia. Next we have ranking
member Armstrong. Thank you. Mr
Chairman. Thank you for your
presentation and thank all the
veterans for their service and
for us to be able to sit here
and be here. So, um, I just have
a couple of questions. The main
one is are all of your VSO. Are
they all filled or do you have
any vacancies?
We currently have A, um Mr Chair
and Representative Armstrong. We
We currently have a couple of of
current
Vacancies that that just took
place within the last month.
Those are both staffed in
recruited and are being
interviewed to be filled again.
So
Thank you so much for that,
general. I appreciate that. I I
would just be advocating for
more VSO s across the state of
New Mexico with 100 and 80,000
veterans and 29 ish b s O s, um,
I think we could We could up
that to help our veterans, so I
would just advocate for that.
Thank you so much, General.
Thank you so much. Thank you.
Remember, Armstrong? Next we
have represent backup, please.
Thank you, Mr Chairman. And
thank you, General for your
service and for all veterans,
Um, I'm extremely supportive
veterans. My grandfather's both
served in France.
Father is certain to Vietnam. So
I understand the importance that
so my question, Uh
Mr Chairman and secretary.
Is. What are we doing for the
homeless veterans? I mean, it
really bothers me in the metro
area when we see
Folks that are, um
Ms Fars homeless.
Or, uh, like about a good
housing.
What types of outreach are we
doing to try to connect them to
field service officer and
connect them to service, both
mental health and for shelter?
Um
Mr Trevor.
Mr Chair, Representative. Vodka.
Thank you for your comments and
the question So we We do
participate in a lot of homeless
stand downs that happens
throughout the the the state of
New Mexico. We don't host them
personally, There's a lot
because we are part we are a
partner to those individuals
that start them up. You have
American legions of the FWS
Other service support groups
that start those homeless stand
downs.
Were there to assist them with
with materials as well as
information and doing the
outreach to ensure that if
there's a veteran in need that
We can take the information that
they have and get them to one of
our collaborative partners that
can provide services to them. Um
and I'll use like the Metro the
Metro area. Obviously, the
veteran integration center is a
is a large, uh, service provider
here, and we've contracted
directly with them to take care
of those types of services
because they provide the
wraparound services.
Of not only housing for for
temporary but for long term to
those people get on their feet
as well as the additional
counseling and stuff. Those are
all services that are encumbered
with this. The service we we are
contracted with them. And thank
you, Mr Chairman just to
comment, because I know the
challenge. It took 30 years for
my dad to actually receive his
services.
For, um, the issues that came
about Vietnam.
So I think that for this
population, it's even more
important that we be
intentional.
About reaching out and making
sure that we're connecting them.
It's our veterans shouldn't have
to wait 20 or 30 years to
receive the services.
You know, for for their line of
duty or for putting, you know,
for their service to our
country, So I do also support
that we do need more field
service officers. I do think
that we need to target those
groups that have not, you know,
as far as the Native American
populations in rural
populations, because, regardless
of where they live, they served
our country.
Thank you, Mr Chairman.
Thank you very much represented
Baca. Next we have represent
pedigree. Thank you, Chairman.
Thank you, General.
Thank you for the presentation.
That's a start with saying that
my first two summers, uh
In the legislative body. I sat
on the military and Veterans
Affairs Committee, probably one
of the most frustrating
committee to have so many
people.
Sit on a committee like minded
working for our military and our
veterans.
To have
Every year. The bills that we
bring forward and endorsed by
the committee.
Destroyed by the legislative
body.
So it's very frustrating.
Representative Could you pull
your microphone closer? I'm
sorry. Could you speak a little
louder? Yes, ma'am. I can't.
Thank you.
So
Um
I feel your pain of of working
with people in your in your role
for last three years, and so
I wanted to offer.
One suggestion chairman, uh
general with respect to
Your discussion about
advertising.
One of the things that I've
noticed over. The three sessions
that I've sat through is we have
a department within the state of
New Mexico. That doesn't amazing
job and that's our tourism
department.
And I would ask that your team
reach out to that department
understand that budgets aren't
what you want them to be, but I
would venture to guess they can
take a dollar and and take a
dollar from you guys and turn it
into $10 worth of advertising.
So just a thought. With respect
to that, Um, Chairman and
General. But the
The request that you have with
respect to transportation.
You know, in our neck of the
woods, my neck of the woods. I
used junior money for
transportation.
To provide services to our
veterans to get them to our
clinic and hubs.
Sometimes to get them to
Two big springs because as
you're aware
If you're in Hobbs, Orly County,
or if you're in Curry County
along that eastern side, you're
either going to Big Springs.
Or you're going to Amarillo
because you don't exist to the
state of New Mexico.
And that's a that's a problem
for me.
And so
It's unfortunate that we have
such a separation Chairman
general with respect to the
budget, just because that shows
that we're still going to be
without
And on the eastern side of the
state.
We're gonna go without those
transportation needs the you
talk about in your expansion
request, and and and I
Will continue not sitting on
that interim committee. I will
continue to help you guys fight
for that. It's something that we
need to do. We need to treat our
veterans with respect.
The
They did.
And I say that because the
minute you decided to sign on
whether you went to war or not
You're gonna go with they called
you
And so it doesn't matter whether
you went to war doesn't matter
whether you went overseas
Chairman General
You put your name in the hat to
do that?
And there's a level of respect.
The level of dignity.
It's deserved and earned.
Um, my last thought was respect
to to this.
If I remember correctly in the
summer of 21
The
Department of Veterans Services
was down to 14 v. S. O s. Is
that correct?
Mr Terror and represented
Pettigrew. Um
I can. I can try to find that
out. I certainly was not that
directly connected at that time.
Chairman in general, it seemed
to remember that number a matter
of fact, there is even
conversations about joining you
guys up with offices of
Workforce solutions just so you
would have a second person to
help out with the extended at
that time we weren't paying for
for per damn, we weren't paying
mileage for RVs, OS or anything,
and so
Ever respect your requests. I
hope that, um we look a little
bit deeper into how we can feel
some of those voids and and help
you help our veterans.
I appreciate what you do. Thank
you. Thank you. Chair. Thank you
very much Present pedigree and
next week represented Indiana,
please.
Chairman and thank you, General
Loretta and all all you do and
all your staff all the things
you do for our veterans. Um most
of what the questions have been
asked. But I do believe RVs os
are very needed and do we have
29 or 24?
Um Mr Chair, representative
Marijuana. There's 24. Okay. And
and you think about 100 and
80,000 like representative, Um,
Armstrong, said 180,000. That
means it's almost 7500 veterans
to one VSO, and that's not
acceptable. We need to and Mike
representative Pedigree said. We
need to prioritize it.
Veterans. Within our there's
only a few of us left within the
house and the Senate, and we
seem to be pushed back too much
so hopefully
As we this year, we can make
more of a noise and what we need
and I agree that we need more
more help with the VSO area, and
I would like to see as far as
this transportation. Um
This, uh, TVs mobile unit would
like to see more than one but
whether it's capital or
expansion or specials. We need
to have this for veterans,
because if they can't come to
us, we need to go to them and
support them in every way. We
can, um
I think most of what I wanted to
say was covered, but
We have to
We have to work together to make
sure everything is given that
needs to be for our veterans.
Um, I have a district
That we have a lot of homeless
veterans. We have a lot of
suicides. We have a lot of
people who need help, and we
need to make sure they find what
they need and in your department
can help them and I need to work
closer with you. Because because
of these people because of these
veterans that need a lot of
help. My family is very
military I've to in the
military, Air Force and Marine
and
And I was there force and my
dad's army. So this is very much
a big part of what of of what we
need and what I can support and
please call on us for what you
need.
How to get the word out. You've
heard a lot here today, but I
think it's going to take
everyone to help you. And I
think we need to. We need to
really
Get everyone to understand that
our veterans what we do You
know, we can say Oh, you do so
much. Thank you for your
service. But we're not seeing
that thinks we're not seeing
what we need for our veterans,
and we need to make sure sure we
do. And I want to work closer
with you this year to get what
we need and
Get the word out there and, uh
I can push a lot of people and
get them to help and let's do
that together this year, Right?
Thank you. Thank you,
Representative. Thank you,
Representative Karenina
represent Garrett, please.
Thank you, Mr Chair. Two
questions. The first one is of
the 24 v. S. O s. Does that
include the college campus
veterans offices or is that a
separate category?
Uh, Mr Chair representative
here. That's a separate category
that that of of what they're
not Veterans Service officers on
those on the the campuses,
They're providing benefits for
the education for people to
utilize their G I bill and other
education benefits that are
exclusive that are funded
through the V A to those
institutions.
Okay. Thank you. And my other
question is, I know that the
National Veterans Cemetery as in
the planning stage for the west
side of Berlioz's county.
Um, and then the news article,
it said it should be actually
open before 2030. Do we know
when the grand ground bring it?
Mr. Chair, Representative
Garrett. I've been in, uh, in
contact with them, and currently
they're they're about
They are currently ready. The
planet design phase, and they
believe that that's the same
information that that that I
have received for the
Albuquerque National Cemetery.
Um, and it's the progress that
they're at currently.
Okay. Thank you very much. And
thanks for being here.
Thank you very much for Sam
Garrett. Next we have represent
Brown.
Mr Chairman. Thank you very
much.
General. Nice to hear your
comments today. I
I'm very sympathetic to the
needs of the veterans. Um
My husband is a veteran. My dad
was a veteran. Um, first wave
Omaha Beach actually.
So, um
We have to do right by these
people. Um, in current terms of
current events, my youngest son
is first lieutenant in the Army.
And I've read raised that
because I've had some
discussions with him about what
he's finding in terms of mental
health of people serving in the
army, and he's very concerned,
and he's Mr Cherries had
responsibilities to counsel
people who are having troubles
in life.
And the suicide ideation is very
high.
So we have to anticipate that
the needs for veterans services
will only increase from where we
are, and that's just one aspect
of it. There's so much more
And Mr Chairman, and, um,
General, I think this is the
year we need to do more for the
veterans in a very significant
way. We have no excuse not to
Mr Chairman, We have $3.5
billion of extra revenue for
2025.
We've we've we have currently
3.5 billion extra. So that's 7
billion altogether, and that's
above and beyond what we
normally see.
So this is a very small agency.
I believe your annual budget. Um
correct me if I'm wrong is about
8.3 million.
So, Mr Chairman, This is a small
agency any increase?
Sometimes appears large. If you
look at the percentage aspect of
it, but if you look at the real
dollars
Being put to use and invested.
In our veterans. It's a very
small increase, actually, so
I'm just going to take a
position that we need to
Um for sure. Give everything
you're asking for. And, um
Be open to doing more in the
future, and I do have one
question specifically, Mr
Chairman and general. It's
Regarding the Veterans Resource
Center that's being proposed.
It's one of your key capital
funding requests for FY 25.
Um so it looks I I see the photo
This schematic of it, Um, it is
that likely to be an
Albuquerque, Mr. Chair.
Mr. Chair representative around?
Yes, it should be right off the
Gibson right? About two miles.
West of the V. A hospital in the
Kirtland Air Force Base, Mr
Chair. That was what I was
trying to find out. As I know we
have the V, a hospital having
them geographically close would
be a really good idea. So I
appreciate that.
And Mr Charron generally are
looking for $12 million. Is that
correct for this new facility?
Correct. That's the initial ask
for for for this facility, and
that was based off of
Obviously the beginning of the
year, Um, construction costs of
about $483 per square foot.
And obviously, the longer we
wait, The more it costs will
will continue so but that that
was the ask for for that
facility. Yes, ma'am. Very good.
Thank you.
So, Mr Chairman, um
That's a small request as well
in the whole scheme of things,
and I would be fully supportive
of
This committee getting behind
the bigger number. Thank you.
Thank you're upsetting Brown.
We're going to go next. 4%,
Alison
Thank you, Mr Chair.
Um
Mr Secretary.
At the November 29th meeting of
the Indian Affairs Committee.
You gave us a presentation.
At that time I told you
My story of attending a few
veterans meetings and Shiprock.
And
When we met, we met in a
makeshift tent.
While across the street, there
was perfectly uh, built veterans
center.
And because of local government
controls and fighting over who
owns the building.
We had to meet with the veterans
in a mix of 10th.
It was sad to see
That, uh
The veterans.
First of all the building bears
their name, Northern Agency of
Veterans Organization.
It bears their name, but they
were not allowed to use
And I ask you who owned the
building.
You had said that you were going
to get back with me as to who
owns the buildings, and that the
state owns most buildings I have
not heard to this day as to who
owns the building.
And then I also said that
One of my, uh
Promises to the local veterans
was to assist them in building a
veteran's rehabilitation center.
We've got some money invested
into that.
And, uh, I was asking you at
In the interference committee of
your department could help us in
any way to help us get more
funding and this stay, Mr.
Secretary. I'm still waiting for
an answer.
So, Mr Chair.
Mr. Chair, Representative
Ellison. I'm if I retire
conversation correctly when you
once you told me that it was,
said Northern agency that it was
not a state, um, building that
is a Navajo nation. Um, property
that we have. The state of New
Mexico doesn't doesn't own that,
Uh, second, so I apologize for
the miscommunication at that
time if it wasn't clear
Second
We have agreed that I would get
a poc that I could work with
that rehabilitation center so I
would be invited into the
meetings rather than
Um, inviting myself to provide
an opportunity from the state of
New Mexico for advice to
The esteemed personnel doing
that so
If you like. We can get offline
today and I get that poc and and
we can go from there.
Okay. Thank you for that, Mr
Chair.
From the Neverhood nation
government side. They say the
building belongs to the state.
And then
Uh,
When it comes to part time to
pay in the utilities.
Maybe that's the time that they
say belongs to state when
somebody has to pay the
utilities, but I didn't know
that it was owned by the Neville
Nation. I'll give that feedback
back to my constituents and at
that time VSO the local VSO was
at the meeting and I thought she
was going to help. Get back to
me as to what kind of assistance
Your department could give me
but I have not heard anything
She's at a meeting at the one
the Chapter house today.
Thank you very much. Thank you,
Mr Chair.
Thank you very much represented
Alison. Next we have
representative Herndon Sanchez.
Thank you, Mr Chair, and thank
you, General Herrera. My
question goes back to page six
of your presentation, and I just
wanted to make sure I
understood. Uh, your
information. You talked about
the appeals and that they've
increased by 219.48%. So it was
unclear. You talked about taxes,
But are these appeals helping
veterans and do they have
attorneys assigned to them?
Mr Terror and General
So so the the appeal process
once they engage with with with
with legal adviser or lawyer
Their power of attorney is owned
by that legal firm or that
representation, and we can no
longer see their case.
So when we do an intake with it
with a veteran, they give us the
power of attorney to provide the
information and to act on their
behalf within those systems.
And and the appeals that I refer
to
Given given example of Vietnam
veteran who had applied for
services for, um inhalation or
possibly has cancer today that
might be covered under the new
pack decked the changes in rules
so that individual who filed and
was
Declined. Initially that becomes
an appeal for the new services
that are available.
To his original claim and
anything else he's claiming at
that time, so then we can engage
with the power of attorney
When I say there's texts and
Texas involved based on the
percentage of disability they
will get a tax benefit for being
over.
A certain percent because some
of them may be receiving active
duty pay. And if they're at 30%
Yeah, they get one or the other.
If you get over 50% as a veteran
on it becomes untaxed and you
get your full pension and your
full disability, which is also
tax free. So there there are tax
liabilities. Case to case So
thank you, General Herrera and
Mr Terror and in general, I'm
just trying to understand how
your department is affected by
the cost of these appeals. You
provide a power of attorney they
can appeal attacks proceeding.
Please help me to understand
that because we want to make
sure that the money and the
legal services to support the
veterans is absolutely in place.
Thank you.
No, I I would like you to
Mr Chair represented Herndon. So
We don't provide legal services.
Okay. Um, the VSO receives that
power of attorney
And acts on their behalf to
ensure that their claim is
Clear, complete.
And and and
Correct to the to the to what
they're eligible for, and we
make sure that the what was
submitted
Meets the test of the
adjudicators, and we don't
locally adjudicate the claims
they go to the Veterans affairs.
Um, region by region to ensure
that
If they're going to be awarded
the claims they're making. Thank
you, Uh, General Herrera and Mr
Chair One last question. There
is a woman in pin Osco, New
Mexico who would like to
dedicate a memorial for the
veterans from that area. Who on
your staff is the person to work
with her for that?
Um, you could just have to get
in touch with me and we'll work
it out. Thank you, Mr Chair.
Thank you, General. Thank you,
Please. Thank you. Mr Chair. I
just wanna say thank you to your
department, Mr Edward Mendez and
Mr Walker for the support
they've been providing to toss
colony with their veterans.
Cemetery. I know I've been
working with them. I'm not for a
while.
Also, I'm glad to see you guys
are finally asking for more
money. I think it was three
years ago that myself and
representative Garcia had to
tell the secretary to come back
and ask for more money for BSO.
So
Um, I I definitely support
increasing your budget. Thank
you.
Thank you very much represents
Sanchez. I steer Dixon.
Thank you, Mr Chair. Um
Lots of great comments here
about the need for additional
CSOs to support the great work
that you guys are doing. Are you
having issues filling positions?
And where are you finding staff?
Mr Chair, Um, met him vice
chair.
We're getting on average of
about 70 applicants per job.
But again, the quality of those
is probably your top.
15 to 20% that actually have the
skills necessary for VSO once
they realized the
responsibilities and some of the
stresses of that job, Um it
becomes a very different
narrative.
But we're not having problems
soliciting, but the quality of
the candidates as we continue to
move through these
It has increased.
Which is concerning because
they're classified and properly.
We bring them into the state
employee and they're gone before
we know it because they're going
to get right into another state
agency.
God bless you, Um
Because of the skill set that
they do have. So it's it's it's.
It's a double edged sword for
us. Thank you, Mr Chair. Thank
you, Secretary. Um so
Given the reversion of last
year, Um
I guess What I'm looking for is
confidence that you know if the
budget were increased to support
additional F t E that
The agency would be able to get
those filled and get those
people on the ground. Um
Completely.
Mr Terror Madam vice chair.
But it's my honest assessment
that we would absolutely be able
to execute those dollars.
And by getting the dollars in
the in the budget where they
belong. Rather than taking from
some of our other programs to
pay for a temp services for
employees to do some of these
services without being certified
the lower administrative stuff,
Um, because we're right now we
have a band aid on a sucking
chest wound. Um, um and that's
where I'm trying to get great
some stability in the strategic
plan so we can continue to grow
as the demand signal continues
to
Okay. Thank you.
Thank you very much. Vice chair,
Dixon. Briefly. We're gonna go
to chair Alcon, please.
I think I got it. We go. I got
it. And you know this. You know
this stuff. Thank you, Mr Chair,
You know what said briefly.
Okay. What do you think It's
time? 100
to
represent. They've heard and
comments on the, uh increased
claims. Okay. Government passed
the pact Act and the battery and
castration, of course, has been
turning Everybody down.
Everybody applies to apply. And
then, of course, uh, deputy a
session, not reclaim.
Your appearance are going to go
up the interest does that they
personally, Hmm.
Uh, there's going to be two
constitutional amendments under
ballot. Ah, What is your role in
promoting this constitutional?
No man mints or to be a for the
veterans.
Mr. Chair, Representative Alkon.
I've not seen those amendments
that you're that you're
discussing there was a
constitutional amendment that
passed the house, the House and
the Senate last year.
Be under ballot November.
We have not cheated. No, I have
not.
We need to be aware of that,
because one of them was no
percentage disability mother
would if you got a 50%
disability, your backs that you
have a 50%.
This guy,
Texas is the other one. Just
increasing, finally crazy from
total housing dollars to $10,000
to tax graduation of your house
veteran.
Support. 1000 has been there
since 1978 or something like
that, that one friendly 10,000
and we get this ballot measures
passed.
So I'm hoping that you
are somehow helping to promoting
student
can help.
Help me anymore. I'm gonna 100%
But you've got to help the
veterans that, uh
Made this qualifications.
I didn't have a question is, uh,
Richard Chairman Advisory
Governor
get my regional producer
money from
Mr Chair representative with one
They do get mileage and per diem
and that comes through my
office. It's part of the
operating budget I had requested
as well.
To support that that committee
I Zarina Council. Why is she
coming out of her budget?
In. Thank you. I think we have
to. We'll have to keep moving
quickly. We'll deal with that
later. Okay. Thank you. Just
wanna little thing, Mr Chair. I
really you might
so in every county in the state
of New Mexico and even if it was
just a
challenge, but
How? How
That would be something that you
would accomplish. Honestly, Mr
taking the helm
job because he took it out of
nowhere.
Thank you, General.
Thank you very much Chairman
Circle.
Okay, Thank you Members. I think
it's very clear that this
committee is committed to adding
to this budget. I do want to ask
for the lower recommendation.
I'm gonna appoint a
subcommittee. It's going to be
represented. Garcia webs of
Sarin Yana, representative
Brown.
General. I think we anticipate
adding substantially given our
committee's comments. We want to
work with you and our lfc with
Kelly and others to ensure that
those funds are most effectively
targeted and that we work very
closely to have the highest
degree confidence that the
committee's intention for
increased investment is able,
you're able to utilize it.
And what also note this is
something that vice chair and
others pointed out that there
has been an uptick and really a
good amount of positive work
coming out since last year, when
there was a 12% increase, So
thank you for that. We want to
continue to support you and look
forward to bringing back in
England with that, Uh,
Go to represent Garcia. Thank
you. Mr Chairman. I don't want
to tell you Thank you for four
minutes Subcommittee because
it's very important.
To me. I'm I'm, a Vietnam
veteran, also to the general
and, well our veterans standing
Mexico important that we support
them. 100% of what they deserve.
Thank you. Absolutely. Thank
you, representative.
Uh, Mr Chair. I would move that
the committee adopt the LFC
recommendation for this agency
with the formation of a working
group.
The second. Okay. It's been
moved by Vice Chair Dixon second
by percent. Santayana. Is there
any opposition to that casing?
None. We've adopted that. Thank
you, General. Okay. Committee
members. Couple of quick
announcements one. We're
delaying the start of this
afternoon until 230 so we'll
have time for lunch too. We're
gonna now open our 15 minutes up
to 15 minutes. Public comments
session.
We need that. Take all of that
for folks who are here in person
who want to give public comment.
Uh, we asked that it be two
minutes or less. Please come on
up to the microphone and the
vice chair will start us off.
Well and we want to focus the
comment on today's agencies. Um
Anybody in
Here that wants to provide
public comment in person.
Please, Ma'am, come on
suspected. And you can I
apologize. You can stand right
there. They're actually
directional microphones above
you where you can. Yes. Can I
sit? Yes, please.
If you want to Thank you. Living
wage, okay?
But yeah,
Um, make sure that the green
light is on. Okay. How about
now? That's perfect.
Great. Good afternoon, Mr
Chairman, members of the
committee. Thank you for having
me my name is Lucy French, and
I'm a licensed midwife here in
Santa Fe. I practice home birth
in private practice and I serve
families within an hour of
Santa Fe.
Proper. Um and so I wanted to
speak to the this morning's
presentation relating to
Medicaid budget. Um
I am currently
Like
The other 50 licensed midwives
were actively practicing in New
Mexico. A very small number. I'm
only paid 77%.
Of
The rate that an M D is paid,
and I'm providing the exact same
service.
And I'm building the exact same
code.
For Medicaid, so I'm paid a
substantially less significant
rate. And so what I'm here to
speak about is to advocate for
pay parity, Um in the budget,
moving forward, which to my
understanding, and I've learned
a lot in the last few hours
sitting here and listening to
all
Of the questions and the
presentation is that that is a
part of the executive budget,
and it was not included in the
LFC budget pay parity for
licensed midwives like myself
for providing a really essential
health care service in this
state because we serve rural
families. Um and we provide
I'm biased. We provide really,
really individualized special
care that's mostly in the home.
It would be transformative
honestly to have
To be able to receive the same
rates that doctors are receiving
When they deliver babies. I went
to school for four years. I have
a small business. I pay the
mortgage, a
Support my family and I would
love to be able to experience
that financial parity. Um it
actually impacts my ability to
take on
How many my it impacts my
ability to take on an X number
of pregnant people in New Mexico
have Medicaid every year,
because when I look at my income
in my financials, I can't just
take on Medicaid clients. I have
to take on cash pay clients.
Please, please conclude your
thought. Okay. Thank you. Yeah,
not used to presenting this
forum. That's all I have to say.
I'm just here to advocate for
pay parity for licensed midwives
there about 50 of us practicing
in the state. That would be
wonderful if that was
Given some consideration and
thought, Thank you. Thank you
very much.
Please come in.
How many 80% disabled veteran I
was
You know, officially
So, Mr if you could sit down
Yes, please. Thank you.
But you are clearly have come to
some agreement about the need
for more VSO. I'd like to make
two other points real quickly.
One of the things about to be
that to be s O s need is they
need a living wage.
They are in pay band 55.
They are not just clerks in
order to do their job. They get
deeply into a veteran's life and
the veterans experiences.
V. U. S. Veterans
Administration.
Is the most god awful
bureaucracy in the history of
the western world.
And the V S O s job is to
navigate veterans through that
maze in order to do that, given
the range of services, the V
eight provides
They have to be well trained.
They have to have
I psychiatric social workers.
Almost. So when you're thinking
about the budget
Please remember that if he if
the general is successful, and
you support him with 10
additional V S. O s. It's not
pay grade 55. They need to be
paid.
On the basis of the incredibly
important personal work they do.
Second point and then I'll be
done is
Hmm. Mostly. We don't think of
it this way. But
We spend five. I don't know what
it is 500 Million on tax breaks
to the film industry.
In order to because doing that
generates jobs.
Which means salaries.
In New Mexico.
Well, every time a VSO
Can qualify a veteran for
benefits.
That's an economic positive
impact on the state. I had 80% I
get $2200 a month. It's tax
free.
I spend 100% of it. And you,
Mexico.
So this could be viewed
Depending on how the numbers
work as an economic development
proposition, not just a do good
proposition for veterans.
And people don't think of it
that way. But
I urge you and your analysis to
look at that dynamic. Thank you.
Thank you very much.
Is there any additional in
person public comment?
Okay, let's go to our zoom.
Okay. Uh, we're gonna go first.
Please be brief. We're going to
first go to net Dean.
Thank you, Mr Chair. Um, Madam
co chair. Is the microphone on
you Bet.
Thank you so much. My name is
Nat Dean. I'm a disability
advocate, and I'm also a person
with multiple disabilities. I
really appreciated the thank you
that the committee member made
of who's always there in the
room Advocating I am one of
them. Although you don't see me
in the room today, I am either
watching online or I am in the
room.
Um, I wanted to state that, um,
crisis management is an
oxymoron. Crisis prevention and
prices. Crisis intervention, um,
have two different levels.
Crisis prevention has a lower
cost crisis intervention has a
higher cost and crisis
management generally is doesn't
achieve as much as
As the other two options. The
cost drivers are. Let's not pay
more later, let's pay less now.
and the you hear the horror
stories, so I won't re numerator
any of those cases. But thank
you so much for how hard to work
and what a heavy lift This is
and the attention to the detail.
That really makes a difference
in people's lives with that. I
conclude my statements. Thank
you. Thank you so much Net.
Okay, Next, we're going to go to
l and pines.
Thank you, Mr Chair. Can you
hear me? Yes.
Great, Um Ellen pines
representing the disability
coalition. I want to go back to
the Healthcare Authority
Department budget that you heard
earlier this morning and focus
on that's a really big
department. And it's getting
bigger all the time. Um and I
want to focus on a small program
that they run that seems to have
been overlooked, and that's the
Brain Injuries Services fund.
Which provides short term
services for people who have
experienced either traumatic
brain injuries or acquired brain
injuries. Traumatic is probably
pretty self explanatory.
Acquired brain injuries result
from things such as strokes or
tumors or shaken baby syndrome
or things like that.
This fund has been funded
through money that comes from
fines added onto tickets for
traffic violations. And I'm sure
you all remember House Bill 139
in last year's session, which
was passed and eliminated, all
of those add on funds, including
the one excuse me the add on
fees, including the one that
funds the Brain Interest
services program.
The bill included a delayed
implementation date to give the
department the various
departments time to line up
replacement funding, and that
does not seem to have happened
with the brain Injury Services
Fund. As far as we can tell,
there was no request for funding
in the H CAD budget when it was
submitted and there is no money
included in either the
legislative or executive budget
recommendation.
So I hope when the working group
that you appointed this morning
looks into this budget, they
will make some changes to ensure
that that fund does get adequate
funding in the F i. R for HB 139
H S D reported that they
expected $600,000 a year and
that's money that we can ill
afford to lose for these
important services. Thank you,
Mr Chair. Thank you very much.
We're going to go now to Jess.
Good friend.
Yes. Thank you, Mr Chair,
members of the community. I
appreciate the opportunity to
comment today. My name is just
good friend. And I'm a new
Mexico licensed midwife, which
I've been for 15 years. Um, with
all of my practice experience
being, um, and rural community
in northern New Mexico. I also
currently work for a national
organization called Birth Center
Equity that works to support
birth centers across the country
that are run by black,
indigenous and people of color.
I appreciate the opportunity to
comment today on the inclusion
of paper party for licensed
midwives and the budget moving
forward. Um um Lucy commented
earlier with the current pay
rate for LMS at 77% of that of O
Bs. Pay parity is very impactful
for are relatively small but
important provider group, many
midwives in independent practice
currently live at or below the
poverty line in New Mexico, and
this pay parity would positively
impact.
This is the ability of our
practice in the state.
Whereas we all know we can't
afford to lose any more maternal
child health providers as a
former executive director of a
rural person, Er, um, in
Espanola, Breath of my heart
birthplace. I'm acutely aware of
the incredibly difficult margins
for provider reimbursement for
organizations that are located
in majority Medicaid pair
communities such as Espanola.
And I'd like to point out what
an important impact this pay
parity would make for small
midwife organizations and birth
centers working to provide
essential services in rural new
Mexican communities. Um, as a
midwife now working with a
national focus, we see New
Mexico as a Billy important
model for regulatory
environments for licensed
midwives.
However, we're also aware that
despite friendly regulations
were not expanding this
workforce currently in our state
and part because of the low
rates of reimbursement
Birth center. Equity is invested
in all the ways that we can make
anybody for your practice
economically sustainable,
particularly for black,
indigenous and people of color
midwives and recognize the ways
that reimbursement rates also
improved economic conditions for
private for writers who have not
previously been represented.
Conclude your thought.
Alright. I appreciate that the
opportunity and the
prioritization and maternal
child health in the budget and
hoped to see this pay period
paper any reflected moving
forward and thank you very much.
Thank you very much. Okay, We
have two more public comments.
We have Cassandra jah.
Yes. Hello? Can you hear me?
Thank you.
Good morning, Mr Chair. Members
of the committee. My name is
Cassandra Jaw. I'm a licensed
midwife in New Mexico and the
executive director of the
National Association of
Certified Professional Midwives.
My experience includes over
seven years and executive staff
at the National College of
Midwifery and Taus and a decade
running a private home birth
practice in the state.
I think it's important to note
that the birthing options
program is considered a model of
national excellence and
community midwifery regulation,
however.
Licensed midwives face a
critical issue.
For identical services and
Medicaid billing codes. New
Mexico's licensed midwives as
we've already heard, twice
received 77% of the Medicaid
rate paid by physicians.
This discriminatory practice not
only undermines our professions
sustainability and growth but
also continues.
I'm sorry, uh, also contributes
to the continuation of maternity
care desserts serving primarily
rural communities. The
approximately 50 licensed
midwives in New Mexico typically
provide services within a 1 to 2
hour driving radius.
Achieving reimbursement parody
for those midwives would have
minimal fiscal impact on the
state and yet have significantly
enhanced sustainability for
midwives and greatly benefit the
rural communities they serve.
Additionally, community
midwifery care has been shown to
be cost effective, actually
decreasing healthcare costs
increasing lactation rates and
reducing treatment costs through
early detection and referral for
conditions like postpartum
depression, ultimately saving
lives. Therefore, the National
Association of Certified
Professional Midwives strongly
advocates for the inclusion of
reimbursement parity for
licensed midwives and House Bill
two.
This change is essential for
supporting our midwifery
workforce and ensuring
comprehensive maternity care for
New Mexico's communities. Thank
you for considering our request.
Thank you, Okay, and we'll
conclude today's public comment
with Bianca. SOC PENA
Think Utd. Good afternoon, Mr
Chairman and Committee members.
My name is Bianca Association,
the organizational director for
Breath of my Heart birthplace.
We're indigenous led birth
center and free community
midwifery clinic focused on
providing culturally relevant
care for low income families and
the Espanola values surrounding
regions and eight northern
pueblos.
We're working to increase the
number of midwives from
indigenous and historical New
Mexico communities and increased
access to out of hospital
birthing options.
Um we include comprehensive
reproductive health care and
maternity, baby care and other
maternal and family support
services.
I appreciate the investment in
maternal child health that has
been put forth in one emphasize
how this needs to remain a
priority in the final budget.
As a clinic that serves the
majority of Medicaid clients. It
is vital that our midwives are
valued and given equal pay to
other Obed providers.
As a nonprofit birth center.
This will be transformative in
the sustainability and
continuance of our services.
You're serving rural communities
where there's already provider
shortages in the reducing many
of the barriers that our
families are facing in accessing
care.
Midwife pay parity is an
important way to address
inequities and maternal child
health outcomes, especially in
tribal nations and communities
of color.
For too long reimbursement rates
for midwives have been so low
that many midwives cannot afford
to stay in practice when they
are the solution to many of the
problems our communities are
facing.
Pay parity for midwives will
support and increase the
provider workforce that are
indigenous black and peoples of
color that directly represent
the communities being impacted
by reproductive health and
equity in our state.
Mexico is in a key place to set
precedents for other states and
leading this work and valuing
midwives for the traditional
cultural role.
And vital service they have
always provided for our
families.
Thank you so high, appreciate
this opportunity for comment.
Please ensure that pay parity
for midwives is included in
House Bill two.
Thank you very much. Okay.
Members Act includes for the
this early session. Uh, thank
you all. Please grab lunch again
as an announcement. We will not
be starting our afternoon. Uh,
subcommittees at 130. Instead,
they will begin at 230. Thank
you all very much.
