Representative Dixon.
Here.
Representative Ezzell.
Representative Garcia.
Here.
Representative had it up here.
Representative Hochman Vigil
here.
Representative Lane.
There.
Representative Lara.
Here.
Representative Sarinana here.
Representative Sweetser your.
Representative Trujillo.
Vice chair small.
Here madam chair here.
All right we have we definitely
have a quorum for this evening
and and good evening everyone
with a change in gender around a
little bit we're gonna start
with house bill fourteen that
was a bill that we have down.
And just the speaker sent back
to the committee so I need to go
to Representative small for the
motion thank you madam chair I
would move to reconsider HSC has
appropriation and finance
committee action on house bill
fourteen as amended and make it
the next order of business and I
need a second also in the madam
chair okay we have a motion and
a second to to re consider house
bill fourteen Representative
sticks.
Thank you madam chair I would
like to
Then move
House appropriations and finance
committee amendment one we need
someone to move the amendment
for discussion.
Madam chairman of the amendment
to our discussion.
Second the second going and
Representative.
Thank you madam chair this
amendment does everything that
the amendment yesterday did but
it also strikes the word
nonprofit so that there is no
confusion regarding anti
donation clause thank you madam
chair all right we had a lot of
discussion on that yesterday we
don't need to bring that back up
Is there any opposition to this
amendment.
I don't see any so the amendment
has been adopted we need a
motion on the bill.
The.
Okay.
Representative Herrera and
second was was that Sweetser or
been beat up Hochman Vigil all
right we have a motion and a
second Representative Herrera
and Representative Hochman Vigil
four do pass as amended.
Is there any opposition to that
motion.
Saying Representative Dixon you
have a you can.
Thank you madam chair and
members.
I also want to take up house
bill two thirty eight that was
one that we skipped over
yesterday.
Representative Armstrong are you
ready on that one.
Yes thank you madam chair
tonight I'd like to present to
you house bill two thirty eight
but I do have a floor substitute
and I believe you all have
received copies of it so I want
to committee substitute or our
kids all I'm sorry it's it is a
committee substitute for house
bill two thirty eight.
We need to have a motion
Representative move small I
would move the HSE Committee
substitute for.
House bill two thirty eight also
watch the motion for discussion
of the committee substitute
already go ahead representative
Armstrong I thank you madam
chair for that what happened was
I accidentally put in my bill
that I've run for the ran for
the last two years and there was
several changes mainly because
of where the fire marshal is now
it's under homeland security and
not the PRC so as I needed to
they also amended it they
started saying bill on the other
side the Senate side I'm here
bill Senate bill two fifty six
and they had May had made an
amendment on that so I waited
until it got through over there
and then did my for substitute
so I would only our might
committee substitute so I would
only have to do it once so
that's the the reason for the
committee substitute and what
this bill does madam chair is.
it will remove the cap from the
fire protection grant Fund to
access a hundred percent of the
monies for the fire departments
across New Mexico and any
unencumbered balance will go
back to the general fund this
also helps with the ISO ratings
and creates a more affordable
insurance in the area there's
about seventy percent madam
chair of those of
the firefighters in New Mexico
are volunteer at so we we have a
stipend in there for them for
that I do have some expert
witnesses madam chair if you
would like.
Okay we can give them just a
couple minutes we don't need
lots of detail but and we left
the experts and or introduced
some yes ma'am that would be
Randy of are a lot.
Robert Larry R. grant and
madam secretary cabinet
secretary of homeland security
Bianca or tease directing them
and Robert learn younger is the
fire grant council chair and
Robert bell right I have is the
deputy fire marshal.
Okay let's just have a couple
comments if we could please.
Go ahead madam secretary if
you'd like to start.
Thank you so much madam chair
and members of the committee
Representative Armstrong thank
you for sharing this bill the
department of homeland security
and emergency management
supports the committee
substitute for house bill two
thirty eight throughout the year
our team works closely with
municipal and district fire
departments will stand to
benefit by this legislation in
the Emergency Management
community many of the state's
emergencies managers serve the
community wearing multiple hats
and sometimes that can be as a
volunteer full time fire chief
so we know that providing
additional funding to these
departments will make a positive
impact across New Mexico there
are many reasons that we support
this bit legislation but one
reason highlight is that it will
assist with fire departments
training and retention which
makes a huge difference
especially in our more rural
areas for the needs are great
thank you for your time tonight
and we appreciate your hearing
the bill and for your
consideration.
Okay
Sir anyone else of the experts
that wanted to make a comment.
Robert where you can make a
comment.
You.
I think.
Madam chair members of the
committee thank you very much
for hearing us apologize forget
in they can get it to function
properly anyway they were just a
few points that I like to make
and they were that the critical
needs are that we serve are both
in rural and metro areas we've
got three hundred sixty five
departments that we serve that
are certified there are other
departments in the state and we
would hope that at some point
they come under the umbrella of
the State Farm Marshall's office
Last year we processed a hundred
and thirty one request and we're
only able to sports fifty of
those request because of the
lack of funds
Does anyone have any questions
for me.
Well we're gonna go to Mr were
all up first and then we're
gonna go back to the committee
so Representative excuse me
Representative Mr Perella.
Chair members of the committee.
Yes our FY twenty one we get
about six point one million
dollars and grant monies to our
party parties out we actually
granted fifty departments and we
had a hundred thirty two request
and the total request robin the
thirty million dollar range and
the other thing the legislative
backing out since we started the
grant program back in two
thousand eight we had a hundred
and fifty two class ninety
partners debate thanks to the
grant we have sixty grant my
apartments to just stand back
then we at sixteen so the grass
is really supporting our fire
departments in the state as
supporting of communities with
their insurance rates in
lowering those rates for our.
For the people in the state of
New Mexico.
Thank you all right very good
gonna go to the committee on
this the committee substitute
but before I do I wanted to
clearly understand how the
reversion piece works.
Representative Armstrong thank
you thank you madam chair what
the the way the reversion would
work as we go back to the
General Fund and in the
unencumbered money would do that
and madam secretary if you want
to add anything feel free.
Yeah my point is I just don't
want to make sure that just put
out there and hopefully get
spent that actually is goes
through the process and then if
it isn't spent that is not one
of those things at the end of
the fiscal year we're trying to
get money spent just so it
doesn't revert back to the
general fund I want some
assurance that that's not how
this is going to work.
Mr Larian Jaga.
Yes Representative are we
understand that that is a
concern the government version
for the fire protection fund
Madam chair are you specifically
speaking about the fire
protection fund to the fire
grant Fund.
The the the capitalization of
the program funds that you use
to provide equipment I'm not
sure which one of those sources
that is.
But generally it is our practice
that we don't allow
reverting funds and I just want
to make sure that if we allow it
in this case that anything that
is that is still there.
I was back into the general fund
and that it's not one of those
things at the end of the year
all my gosh you know we're gonna
coming up to the end of the year
we better get this money out.
Madam chair if I might have just
Requip explanation go ahead.
Right so the fire grant Fund
gets right now forty prove point
two percent from the fire
protection fund the rest goes
back to as.
I'm sorry about that that was
mine
so fifty nine point eight
percent goes back to the general
fund the money that is in the
fire protection grant Fund is
used to supplement any of the
monies are received from the
fire departments in the state
for the fire from the fire
protection fund so to ensure
that there is no reversion we
would be willing to make sure
that there is language in it
would require an amendment to
make sure that there's language
in there that will revert from
the fire protection grant Fund
insuring that there are no
money's left there because
there's not a mechanism
currently to allow for reversion
of the fire protection grant
Fund back into the fire
protection fund allowing it to
be reverted to the general fund
so yes we can we can assure you
that that that language can be
put in.
Okay I think what I'm gonna do
this the gentleman I need to
take another peek at this bill
that and so we're going to pick
it up at our next meeting
Representative Armstrong because
I'm completely confused now.
You madam chair unless you want
to try to explain it I'll give
you one more shot at trying to
explain this madam chair what
I'd like to do is let Matt staff
all in.
The.
Matt can you explain it better.
Is there I'll just reared
prepared to give it a different
way right now the fire
protection fund is actually the
source for the fire protection
grant Fund that funnels money is
out to the different fire
districts is from our bill with
the amendment that we put into
Senate bill two fifty six puts
it back in the reversion cost to
the general fund from the fire
protection fund last year.
The the fire protection fund is
what is actually having the cap
lifted so it's going from that
forty to forty point two percent
cap which was thirteen million
last year to now get allowing
for the full hundred percent
which would be an additional by
last year's numbers twenty
million so the reversion
language is there that's on the
laying the.
I'm sorry on the on page two.
Section one B. page two as of
June thirtieth of each year the
remaining unexpended balance in
the fire protection fund shall
be transferred to the general
fund.
All righty that's what I needed
to know so let's go the state on
the bill is there any other
questions from the committee on
this committee substitute.
I think we're good madam chair.
Representative Garcia yeah I
have my hand of their school
Madam chair of this SO question
is for Mr out of Nevada.
You have quite a few of
education is for the for funding
last year I imagine that think
it was and you said that the
only so many qualified my
question let madam chair Mister
another how do you pick the
people that gets funded.
Your through your is grant
funded you have.
Madam chair members of the
council yes council has
established a set of guidelines
that allow us to look at the
department's highest so standing
the level of their critical need
as described by them in the
grant application and then mount
of money that's left is how we
face on.
Okay the base the number of
departments from.
madam chair.
do rule
small fire departments have of
of the same opportunity to get
this funding as a bigger part of
partners doing in the state.
Madam chair members of council
that that is true we support
rural and municipal departments
one of the qualifications like I
mentioned is the fact that the
the actually the first you know
we look at is there are still
standing and because of the
nature of the rural nature of
the departments in the size of
the role departments as a
general rule they have an ISO
rating of in in some instances
we.
On nine eight since sevens and
those of the first department
that's the first criteria that
we look at so yes they they
actually do have programs your.
Thank you madam chair and slide
not only question I had want to
make sure rural departments have
a good opportunity this thank
you.
Anybody else was on the subject.
Right what's pleasure the
committee.
Madam chair.
Do not pass on house bill two
thirty eight and a do pass on
the house appropriations and
finance committee substitute for
house bill two thirty eight
second second Representative.
We have a motion and a second is
there any opposition to that
motion.
Right saying it is a do pass
thank you madam chair we're
gonna go back through this
calendar and that was my
understanding a number of these
bills by at the request of the.
Sponsor we're going to be tabled
we're gonna run through the US
you have a Representative small
yes madam chair I do.
Good.
Sorry okay
Go through the list that you
understand that are to be
tabled.
Thank you madam chair I
understand based on servers
house bill eighty six house bill
one hundred house bill one
thirty two and house bill ninety
four are to be tabled.
Those are at the request of a
sponsor so we'll make that in
one motion Representative small.
I would move that we table the
bills set forward just now by
the Sanchez.
Also eighty six house bill one
hundred house bill one thirty
two and house bill ninety four
right is our second to that
motion second.
We have a second rate
Representative Anderson is there
any opposition to that motion.
Seeing none those bills have
just been table.
Okay now we're going to go to
some of these other bills and as
most of you know or maybe you
don't our new new members is
that if the bill is not in the
budget.
And it'll probably be tabled.
And if it's going to be handled
by junior what we're trying to
do is table the bill and hold
the bill into we see that money
and junior then we move it out.
So we have to make sure that
they coincide will know that by
Saturday.
And I understand that it's going
to be the situation for house
bill forty eight Representative
Zamora.
So you're going to get just a
brief time to talk about this
bill we don't need lots of
discussion on it because this
committee deals with the funding
piece of legislation we don't
get in all the policy discussion
as usually handled by the
committee prior to this one
the mentioned last night to our
group we're the last stop before
somebody goes to the floor so
you have the floor now for a
brief presentation on house bill
forty eight.
Thank you madam chair.
Thank you madam chair and
members of the committee.
I have a committee substitute
house bill forty eight but
Canadian substitute house bill
forty eight is it appropriates
money to the board of regents of
the state a universe the state
university.
The New Mexico State University
for the support and and
expansion of network.
Weather stations throughout the
state.
And.
Yes Representative is it is of
the house Appropriations
Committee substitute or as a
committee substitute for another
committee.
I'm sorry madam chair I I
couldn't hear you.
It was for else bill forty
eight.
You have a committee substitute
for forty eight.
Madam chair I'm sorry I just I
just now got my volume the work
it could you please repeat madam
chair.
All right on my agenda it says
committee substitute for house
bill forty eight is that what
you have is a committee
substitute for this committee
yes madam chair it's committee
substitute house bill forty
eight okay we need somebody to
mall make the motion.
We're discussion on the
committee substitute so much
madam chair so move right
Representative Ezzell do we have
a second.
So.
Armstrong so we moved for
discussion of your substitute
now you need to talk about that
tells what it is briefly go
ahead.
Madam chair committee substitute
forty eight makes appropriations
to the board of regents of New
Mexico State University where
the support an expansion of a
network of weather stations
throughout the state.
Representative why would you
need a committee substitute for
that what's different from the
regular bills what what happened
is there was a clerical error in
the in the first building
Original Bill we rode up okay
and it and it mistakenly
inadvertently asked for the
three two point eight million
dollars to be right recurring.
Okay so we know what this bill
is for.
We know it's a committee
substitute but at this time
Representative with understood
and and what you've told me it's
it's not in the budget
currently.
But I understand that you and
some other legislators are going
to be applying your
Your supplemental in other words
your junior funding to this is
that correct.
Yes madam chair and I already
did that today and I have the
document here to the show you if
you want to see it on the on the
screen or what I did talk to you
bill your help are there in your
office and he has he has that
copy okay.
What we're gonna do is the.
Madam chair I might.
The.
The bill was substituted and in
fact see it's not a committee
substitute for House
Appropriations it's already
substituted and that's the bill
be present.
Okay.
Okay.
Let me just explain you what
we're gonna do Representative
Zamora what we're gonna do is
temporarily table this bill.
And the reason is is we want to
know if there's going to be any
Senate junior money coming
across so I my understanding is
is that they took action on
their bill today.
And it gets sent across to us
and then what happens is we roll
our junior amendment which is
seventy members you know we all
get to put funding into it will
get rolled in as an amendment
into the Senate bill.
What we need to do is to make
sure that whatever dollars are
provided by Senators ties to
this so it's not that the bill
dies but we need to temporarily
table at so we can tie it down
to any junior funds.
Okay okay then.
You just so we need a motion on
that please madam.
Go ahead process Sweetser I move
to temporarily table the house
agriculture water Committee
substitute for house bill forty
eight seconds.
Yeah we have a motion and a
second to temporarily table this
bill is there any opposition to
that temporary table.
Thank thank you very much
Representative Zamora will be
looking for those funds coming
from the Senate side also thank
you madam chair members of the
committee.
The next one that we have is
house bill one six five.
Representative Anderson and
Sweetser we need somebody to
talk about this place thank you
madam chairman I'm prepared to
talk about it
are present house bill one sixty
five isn't concept that comes
from the legislative finance
committee I might all and the
you you madam chairman are also
a sponsor
this eight page bill creates a
four year pilot project on
budgeting there's no
appropriation here this is about
budgeting and what we're doing
is taking of the thirty nine
agencies of state government
you know convictions that have
budgets of less five million
dollars annually and we're
saying in this our house bill
two process that we go through
each year that these these
thirty nine would be under by
the annual budgeting meeting
they would be coming in.
Re two years and we would be
approving their budgets for two
years and yes in between that
two year period there was a
problem they would have the
opportunity to come in sooner
and last but not least I
emphasize this is a four year
pilot project meaning to two
year budget cycles for these
thirty nine agencies.
with that Madam chairman
Representative Sweetser and I
would stand for questions.
Representative Sweetser do you
want to make a comment on this
bill.
No madam chair other than just
to reinforce the fact that this
was a suggestion making out of
legislative finance committee
interim as a way to help both
the agencies and the US Senate
finance and house appropriations
and it lightened the load a
little bit okay all righty
all right let's go to
it the committee I don't know
that we need any experts or do
you have any no ma'am we don't
okay let's go to the committee
do we have any questions from
the committee.
Make a comment or go ahead
Representative Brown and then
Representative Dixon.
Yes yes thank you madam chair so
my
question is have we studied any
other states that are on a two
year
budgeting cycle and and what we
know from that.
I believe the short answer to
that is the biennial budgeting
state by state is not uncommon
but over the last several years
seventy years according to the
what I'm reading the there
Spencer cage on biennial budgets
of work for a biennial budget
process and that is because more
legislature's have become.
Of.
Unlike New Mexico they have
become a paid professional meet
of mostly year round and have
more time to spend on the
smaller budgets and as we've
said many times it's a shame
that we spent of.
Relatively long period of time
on a small budget and that
certainly short changes us on
time for some of the bigger
budget items so I believe that
that although the trend is away
from biennial budgeting.
It is not the last in the
opinion of the legislative
finance committee a good time to
begin a two budget cycles four
year pilot program.
And madam chair and and
Representative Anderson so
because of our budget being so
largely based on oil and gas
revenue.
and the volatility that's
involved with that does that
Work in favor of doing a two
year or or one year I would
think one year madam chair.
Good question and I skipped over
fairly quickly but this just not
simply say that if you're in the
two biennial budget process you
simply don't have any choice but
to live with that the second
year of the two year budget and
the of the other thing I would
point out not forget is birch
many of these agencies run on of
of other other revenues for
example the board of architects
they run on.
Other state funds that are
collected from the architects
and they they to have a balanced
budget requirements so I think
that some of the state agencies
just do not merit District date
the hard share the expense the
difficulty of as we often hear
in the budget cycle there's no
difference in the DFA and LFC
recommendation of they're in
agreement they're in agreement
on the performance appropriate
measures and quite frankly
they're running they're running
their shops well so
this all adds up to
I think a of it's a it's
positive because in my opinion a
particular in that thirty day
session we need to focus on on
the larger components in our
budget and of this
recommendations is backed by all
of those involved in the
budgeting process to accept this
as a pilot project so it's it's
an idea that says this isn't
forever but we're going to do it
for four years and let's and I I
happen to think they're going to
make it work.
But that's a long answer to your
question representable.
Thank you madam chair that's all
I have.
I'm thank you madam chair and
Sanchez of this bill.
Representative Brown actually
asked my main question so I
don't need to ask that again but
I did want to take an
opportunity to let hi you know
how much I appreciate
the willingness that you've
shown to think outside the box
and see if there are ways to
make government more efficient
and so I really appreciate that
thank you madam chair thank you
very much.
Representative Ezzell.
Madam chair thank you my
questions have been answered I
just forgot to and raise my hand
okay very good Sir any other
questions from the committee.
Saying west pleasure of the
committee.
The past second that.
Andrew did you want to make a
comment before we take action.
madam chair members of the
committee if if I may.
I thank you I really appreciate
this opportunity for those young
no I'm into my I'm the acting us
the budget division deputy
director and I just want to make
a brief comment on this bill.
If they does have some concern.
Thank you at DFA does have some
concerns regarding this bill
namely we are set to begin full
implementation of a new budget
system this summer for the FY
twenty three request cycle and
this new system is built around
annual budgeting and it's going
to require extensive training of
all relevant agency DFA and LFC
staff and it's gonna take
probably a couple years to get
everyone acclimated to the new
system and implement the full
functionality but it's a really
good system and we think it's
really going to improve the way
that we do budgeting but we do
have some concerns that
introducing a bi annual budget
pilot project before the system
is fully implemented could
impede or possibly delay
successful implementation of the
new system which this is been a
major investment for the state
we also believe that the new
system incorporates many time
saving features such as a
integration of share financial
HR data that we'll achieve many
of the goals of this bill at
last I just like to offer that
we believe that there are
opportunities to work with the
legislature to reduce the time
investment in the budget process
that might not require
restructuring the state budget
into sort of two different
tracks of for example perhaps
there could be a consolidated
list of agencies with identical
or similar recommendations at
all be heard together at one
hearing and that if they would
be happy to work with the LFC
at HFC before during session to
identify opportunities like that
to and implement them so let's
just all I'd like to say and
thank you I appreciate the
opportunity to comment.
Thank you Andrea thank you for
the information that was new to
me and I had not heard that when
we were endorsing legislation
back in January the LFC
legislation I am will surprise
we hadn't heard anything about
that until right now don't leave
the Sanchez knew that either.
So.
There was a bit of new news
there and and of it.
It's a pilot project and as we
heard earlier today this is not
going to be unicorns and
unicorns rainbows.
You know I suspect there's gonna
be some unexpected turbulence
going forward and I am confident
that these young budget
of managers in both the LESC and
the DFA are going to work out
these issues I'm sort of think
we ought to go forward
personally thank you madam
chair.
All right anybody else we do
have a motion and a second.
Any other discussion on the
motion.
Okay we have a motion and a
second that motion is at the
house.
So is there any opposition to
that motion recognizing that it
is a pilot.
And that this will be a lot of
work in a way to get this off
the ground is there is there any
opposition.
Saying oh Representative staring
down are you not in part in
opposition and then opposition
it seems like it would be we
we're getting a whole new
program but but yes I mean
that's fine we have one.
To okay we have to in
opposition.
Representative Trujillo and
Representative Sarinana is there
anybody else.
All right the.
Bill has received a do pass.
Thank you madam chairman madam
chairman I would just the young
gentleman you introduced I
didn't catch his name I think it
was Andrew that I certainly hope
he will try to catch me Monday
or Tuesday before this comes on
the house floor and we can
discuss his concerns
Representative Sweetser and I
because we're more than willing
to.
Listen
two of.
Some new concepts that we
touched on thank you madam
chair.
Yeah I think that's a very good
point because every time.
We do any kind of tweaking
particularly with any formulas
that are tied to the state
budget there's gotta be some
chair there's got to be that
flexibility somewhere in there
anyway we've got a deep pass
remove almost go to the next
bill house bill one sixteen as
amended.
Representative Thomson.
Thank you madam chair I will try
to be brief so this bill is is
to put all school what what I'm
calling duly licensed
professionals that work in
schools on the three tier system
that includes people like
interpreters for the deaf social
workers psychologists.
HM and language pathologist to
Houston PTA's those kind of
people and the reason for that
we were we were left off all
those years ago and madam chair
the reason I wanted to bring
this this bill should have
essentially no fiscal impact.
Everyone who was working in the
schools you are not going to get
a physical therapist
occupational therapist for forty
thousand dollars most of these
positions are.
Either entry level doctoral or
entry level
master's degree so I was.
Madam chair I was very upset
with the fiscal impact reports
so I talked with funding and how
in the world could be three
million dollars to just put us
on the three and I said I'm not
I no longer work in schools but
I still how can that be three
million dollars to put people
who are already making more
money than the minimums on the
schedule and what he told me was
very disturbing madam chair he
said they didn't get the
information from PED so so if
somebody works one day a week
like I used to.
They don't they don't know that
so I'm if I was making twelve
thousand dollars for working one
day a week they bumped it up to
sixty thousand dollars because
that would be the minimum for
and so if people are being paid
out about the funds such as.
Federal idea funds they they
didn't take that into account
because PED did not provide that
information so these numbers are
extremely inflated and it's very
frustrating this would help to
address the Yazzie Martinez
lawsuit and madam chair I don't
know I I would guess most of the
people who most of the members
of this committee have also had
bills that essentially were
killed before they could be
adopted because of the FY ours
and I'm very upset madam chair
that somebody who was an elected
has the capability it may not be
conscious it may not be
intentional to essentially kill
a bill before everyone has a
chance to be heard and having
this is probably at least the
tenth bill of mine since I've
been here that the FIR was a
hundred percent wrong I couldn't
get it changed and it can get
through your committee with
those bad numbers on it and we
are getting those bad numbers
from a lack of information or
somebody has a biased against so
madam chair I just wanted to get
this out in the open that we are
FY ours are killing us to be
able to make progress.
Okay.
Let's go ahead and is there
anybody in the audience I I know
that we've got L. E. S. C. out
there we've got Rachel did you
want to make comment right here
in place.
So madam chair I am here I
missed part of the conversation
I was not in the office so I
just heard you say my name.
Okay where you're gonna be
familiar with this bill I mean
it's an education bill and it is
house bill one sixteen and what
I'm looking at the Education
Committee amendment.
It says the effective date date
on section six this July one
twenty twenty one and when I
look at the FY artists FY twenty
three.
So what's the effective date of
this bill.
Madam chair I am pulling up
years Representative and you
don't get yeah it's the bill
summary it says the affected
date of July one twenty twenty
two.
Well that's not what this.
Yes
yes.
All right let's go to have a
COVID of Rachel on this you
madam chair I am looking at
amendments in context I am going
to what the hell.
It looks like effective date
that was in fact I think it was
twenty two or twenty three west
rock and inserted twenty twenty
one so the effect is amended by
how sad is up FY twenty two.
Well that is going to be a big
issue for us because not in the
budget.
Regardless of what the dollar
figure is so let's say you have
any other comment
Rachel.
Madam chair I don't okay let's
go to the committee
Representative Sweetser you have
to have the.
I did madam chair but it was
only for the year discrepancy
that we pointed out thank you
madam chair okay Representative
Anderson of madam chair.
I think the Representative has
has.
Brought up a a complaint that
has long been around the halls
of the legislature and that is
in my mind
sort of the sink or swim
the impact of the FY ours and I
thank god for the purposes this
evening I am concerned about
the.
This.
The effective date with one the
money's not in there and to
although I am sympathetic to the
concerned about a bad FIR and
its impact on legislation that
any one of us might be trying to
carry I'm not sure we're ready
to advances bill at this time
thank you.
Representative Trujillo.
Yes thank you madam chair and
you know Representative Thomson
has brought up a good point I
think the FIR is are extremely
inflated a lot of these bills
and it pretty much dooms are
requests for any kind of an
appropriation secondly again I'm
raising the point that we have
to bring in bills appropriations
bills after the budget is
created so unless we have really
spoken to you direct plea or
David or somebody with a lot of
stroke our bills don't get heard
or considered thank you madam
chair.
Representative Trujillo every
bill that comes to this
committee gets for.
Every Bill Gates talked to by
this by the sponsor.
Representative Crowder.
Representative Crowder thank you
madam chair.
Madam chair I I go to concur
with the Representative Anderson
commented on I'm not confident
that this bill is is right for
passage it because there is a
discrepancy I I do know this
panel is very well and I think
that the.
It is a very good analyst and I
know that the analyst can only
provide enough are based on the
information that the agencies
provide to them.
And so I I don't want to lay all
the blame at the foot of a of an
analyst it doesn't FIR when in
fact.
all all I can work with is the
tools that are given to him by
the agencies and I I would madam
chair to staff I I.
Know that this will have some
kind of an impact I know that
it's not in the budget and I
just don't believe this is ripe
for passage at this time madam
chair.
And madam chair if I can.
Representative well I know you
will table this I've been on
this committee long enough I
just want to point out the fact
that we are not being allowed to
have good things happen because
someone has and and I am not
blaming the analyst by any
stretch you told me what
happened they have to come up
with numbers but when they don't
have the data that will fill in
those numbers it is really
unfair to the to in this case
the students of New Mexico
because we are not allowed to do
something because PED what
either doesn't collect the
information doesn't share it I
don't know where the problem is
I wanted to be heard tonight so
that I could point out that this
is happening I know I never
expected you to pass this bill I
would I would celebrate if you
did but I don't expect you to
but I I just think we need to
take a deep look at how we are
allowing FIR is to just I mean
like I said someone along the
way who doesn't like this bill
can essentially and I'm not
saying anybody did in this case
or in any case they can
consciously or unconsciously
slip in and an extra zero or add
something in that doesn't I'm
and we all everyone who sits on
this committee knows that about
FIR will kill your bill period
end of story and I just wanted I
just wanted to put that out
there publicly and and hope that
we can figure out a better
system because the system does
not work.
Here's one thing I'd like to
point out to the committee if
you look at the fiscal impact
report what stands out in
glaring bright light to me is
that there's no response from
the public education department.
So I think that needs to be
noted and that needs to be noted
to the sponsor that the number
one agency that this F. R. would
be built on is what they get
from the public education
department.
So it's going to Representative
Sariñana.
Thank you madam chair I just
have a quick question for
Representative what numbers were
you thinking it should be you
have around a ballpark number
madam chair and representative
Sarinana I think it will be very
close to zero because as I said
you are not going to hire a PhD
or master level occupational
therapist at forty thousand
dollars it just doesn't happen
most districts pay well over the
minimums just to get those
people because most people can
go work in hospitals they can
work.
They can work a variety of
places so there are none I want
to say not there are very very
few individuals working in the
school system for less than the
minimum just because they can
get twice that anywhere else.
Madam chair representative but
if they move up the tears
they're still going up about ten
thousand eight years so you
don't think that would make a
difference Madam chair
representative Sarinana it may
at some point but as I said most
of these people have master's or
PhD is they are not working for
forty thousand dollars they're
coming in at more than forty
thousand dollars thank you madam
chair they do we have any other
comments or questions from the
committee.
Representative small for the
motion I move to table house
bill one sixteen as amended
second.
Okay we have a motion and a
second tabling motion for this
and again I just wanted to point
out it would be I I believe and
I've been around these FIR is
for a long time I believe it
would be very very difficult but
something like this together
without a response from the Key
Department.
So we have a motion and we have
a second tabling do we have any
opposition to that motion.
We don't that I can see.
All right I'm sorry it is been
table thank you Representative
thank you madam chair members of
the committee for hearing me.
Thank you.
Okay the next bill that we have
is house bill one twenty one.
Your I. P. table.
We have a motion to have a
second I'll second the motion of
the second table is there any
opposition to that motion saying
none it's been tabled.
Let's go to house bill one
seventy five as amended is there
anybody here for that one.
Yes.
Representative.
Great if we could have Rachel
gradually believe the director
of L. E. S. C. is is in with us
thank you madam chair so this is
proposed language for a hold
harmless that differs from house
bill two in the the hold
harmless language arts and house
bill two so this would allow the
public education department to
take a portion of the SCG
allocation to hold districts
harmless so to guarantee school
districts funding from the
school year headed into a very
uncertain next school year this
is super important because it's
going to set up for for school
funding headed into the next
school year we know that we have
a lot of students that for
whatever reason are not in our
public school system has left
and it's leaving a huge issue in
terms of funding for the next
school year on this is going to
give districts certainty in
their budget making process
again that they're going to know
that they're gonna get the same
funding from that they received
from this year into next year
and the certainty is all
important because school
districts are currently making
their budgets and will need to
submit those by early may on
this proposal also does not take
credit or or attempt to take
credit for any federal money on
that may be headed in to the
school district school districts
excuse me there's also broad
support so Madam chair of the if
you go to public comment after
my opening remarks you'll see
support from unions in house
education their support from
superintendents association
of school boards charter schools
you so all of these groups
support this bill and it's all
built around certainty for the
upcoming school year in their
budget making process I think
some of it some of the issues
with house bill two is.
that in gross enrollment growth
units are not typically used in
the way that house bill two it's
it's proposing and they're going
to add that level of uncertainty
for school districts that would
look to at how and by what
method they're going to have to
add those enrollment growth
units in order to keep their
districts hole on the
superintendents association have
pulled their superintendents
with about seventy
Superintendents on the call and
zero said that they would budget
in those those enrollment growth
units and I think that's a
that's a real cause for alarm
when we're dealing with the
potential cost and funding in
our schools that could mean
Laos and in teacher layoffs at a
time when we're trying to
rebuild our our education system
the other thing is that if
there's a proposal to take
federal stimulus money we have
to remember that federal
stimulus money has not
proportional to the districts
that the stimulus money is
flowing through title one on
given to high poverty schools
on.
Around the state so it's not
proposed proportional also and
finally madam chair I think the
problem with using federal money
in the first special session
from last year the governor at
the text language around
utilization of of federal money
citing the Attorney General
saying that the the federal
money was not subject to
legislative appropriation
But as I said madam chair we
have the director gradual here
with us to provide support and
if you allow for public comment
there are some people as well
here to speak in support of the
bill.
All right Rick Rachel did you
have a comment.
You madam chair we're here for
technical questions.
And it interesting also on this
and I are that there's no
response from the public
education department we have any
idea why.
Madam chair we don't we still we
checked today and we still don't
have a response like that the
last bill I just checked one
sixteen no response from PED and
none on this one as well.
So are we to assume then they
stand quiet on this issue madam
chair I just spoke to doctor.
Ryan Stewart excuse me
Representative Trujillo
you go through the chair when
you're called on.
I wish to speak when you're
ready all right.
Madam chair I apologize Jerry
just texted me and said we did
get one I think it probably came
in
there is eighty analysis there
is is there are some things that
we might be able to get.
I could send it to you right now
if you would like.
When did you get this just now.
All right let me check
it couple weeks ago my
apologies.
I'm not sure.
It does LFC is analysis say
there's nothing from PED.
Yes it says that there's no
response received I'm guessing
the date on that
that FY occurs in the analyses
are prepared for the first
committee meeting and so these
were prepared.
The sex.
I'm not quite sure looks like
ours we did incorporate PED is
LFC is doesn't have.
Okay is that what you're gonna
share with those Representative
Trujillo.
You madam chair thank you I just
spoke to Dr Stewart and he says
that they are producing these
FIR is and he doesn't understand
why they're not being included
in the discussions because he
said that his staff is working
very hard to ensure that we get
those FIR so I'm not sure what
the disconnect this exist okay
all right okay we're gonna allow
for about one minute on this
bill and then we'll go to
committee so you can you bring
those people and Representative
small yes madam chair it okay.
Hello madam chair members the
committee Kerry robin burner
with public charter schools of
New Mexico we do support this
legislation and thank you for
hearing me.
Thank you.
Stand rounds going.
Thank you madam chair Stan
rounds for the school
superintendents association this
was our top past coming out of
our provided a recommendations
to the legislature we find that
the need for sure T. outweighs
other needs the may be there and
so madam chair we urge the
committee to adopt this allowed
to move on to the Senate thank
you.
All right is there someone else.
We have anybody else on this
bill is.
Chris is that Chris are you on
this bill.
Yes madam chair thank on on the
districts that for Las Cruces
public schools and we much
public schools madam chair
members this committee we are
supporting strongly supported
house bill one seventy five we
ask you please to to pass this
piece of legislation because it
allows us to have more stability
but what it is right now on
house bill two thank you very
much by the chair.
All right do we have anyone
else.
Yes ma'am madam chair my name is
heather Bassett with Albuquerque
public schools and we consider
this our top priority for the
session and we thank sponsors
for we think it brings us to
bility mechanism to funding for
budgeting for next school year
so more important and the the
dollar amount but the certainty
to be able to plan for the
school year is really important
thank you.
All right anybody else.
Do we have anyone else.
I don't I don't see anyone here
Representative small you madam
chair there may be one other
member is is miss burns staying
here to comment on this item.
I am thank you madam chair.
Members of the committee I rise
in support of house bill one
seventy five this evening.
A more accurate statement would
be to say that our rights in
support of hold harmless that
the house bill seventy five
teams to achieve specifically
holding districts harmless from
the fallout of just decreased
enrollment of students cost by
the on going pandemic educators
support holding our education
system harmless from forces
outside of our control coupled
with house bill to use language
providing comment related sick
leave salary increases for K.
twelve transportation and higher
education professionals and the
support for our students and
families the falcons madam chair
we service classrooms we believe
we will be able to whether this
pandemic specifically the
difference between house bill
two or one seventy five are the
transportation.
Cost is that we are specifically
worried about and thank you very
much for hearing me nine okay
thank you is there anybody else.
Okay I don't see anymore let's
go to the committee we're gonna
start with Representative
Anderson.
Thank you madam chairman Madam
chairman of the I'll try to be
shortened to the point this
evening of I cannot remember the
last time I talked to every one
of my school superintendents of
asking for consideration on on
really language of language that
that addresses hold harmless we
heard I think earlier that that
HB to try to address eight of
hold harmless language.
Here's to me this bill has a
more practical approach to.
Hold harmless which I believe is
probably shared by all so I'm
I'm very supportive of of H. B.
one seventy five because of I
believe that we opening our
schools is so important and that
we've got to in this pandemic
upset of our economy and the
education of our children I
think we probably ought to have
the best hold harmless language
we can find and it seems to me
that when I hear impacts that
suggests teacher layoffs I think
good grief a year ago we were
talking about we didn't have
enough teachers and now we're
talking about coming up with.
Perhaps language that would
aggravate teacher layoffs in
state that short teachers so I'm
hoping that we can send this
forward and get it over to the
other side where H. B. two is
and apparently has the language
that that we adopted in I'll be
honest I don't remember what
that language was but I think
the of this bill all of the side
by side with HB to as the Senate
finance committee considers
thank you madam chair.
All right let's go to
Representative Trujillo.
Yes madam chair and I just move
a do pass.
I'm not ready for the motion
Representative I'll just go to
Representative Crowder.
Thank you madam chair and the
chair I noticed in the analysis
is one of the analysis that I
have the
the LFC set aside ninety seven
point four million as a hold
harmless number I I am very much
aware that number was not just
graft out of thin air there was
a lot of research and effort put
into arriving at that number.
But as I look at the FY are in
front of me I cannot figure out
what the financial impact number
is so that I can compare those
two numbers so madam chair my
first question is.
What what is the financial
impact.
Of one seventy five.
In in where do we go from there.
You might be able to answer that
but I'm looking for a number to
compare.
Yeah madam chair and and
Representative Crowder the the
number that we had heard and
director gradual can correct me
if I'm wrong for for this would
be nine to fifteen million
dollars.
For this hold harmless director
gradual is that correct Madam
chair representative LFC
estimates this could be anywhere
between one and a half million
to six and a half million I
think we estimated it was around
nine million dollars keep in
mind it's working with in the
whole of the appropriation for
the SCG so it's not requiring an
additional appropriation but it
takes it off of the top of the
SCG and would require PED to
distributed a little bit
differently to districts to meet
the hold harmless amount.
Thank you gentle lady madam
chair let let me read you what I
have here in perhaps you
understand.
So is the house passed version
of HB two contains ninety seven
point four billion within the
SCG distribution for FY twenty
two the public schools and
charter schools to hold the
schools financially harm most
due to declining enrollment.
And so that's a very solid
number that I realize is there
for a very specific purpose it
when I hear you say that this
one only has a fifty million
dollar impact.
Maybe a twenty million dollar
impact well I think we'll get
all that what we need to do this
is they've got ninety seven
million set aside so some amount
I'm convinced there must be a
much bigger price tag on this.
Renewable the the one seventy
five and then what this bill out
for.
Yes madam chair my second
question is just kind of based
on something that heard in the
news recently about the R.
Albuquerque public school board
it continues to vote not to
bring their their students back
into the schools like a lot of
the rural areas are and I wonder
if the house bill one seventy
five.
Provides a lot more money if you
don't bring them back to school
for a while because the numbers
are scared more than the schools
that are trying to put their
students back in the classroom.
And so I I just a.
I feel like I don't have
anywhere near enough information
here to make a.
But educated decision.
You're simply put it is the
session made by the Albuquerque
school board the to to stay
hybrid or or primarily online is
that gonna affect.
The financial of one seventy
five is going to drive the
number.
Madam chair and and
Representative Crowder I don't I
don't know about driving the
number up I mean there's a
potential there is yes
Albuquerque public schools does
state hybrid into the next
school year but for now since
they've remained to remain
hybrid I don't think at this
point on it would affect the
number.
Madam chairman Representative.
funding once for next school
happened in the first few weeks
of February and the
First of December so given when
PED authorized schools to go
back and those decisions it's
highly unlikely that the
February cal was significantly
impacted
by APS's decision I think what
you're asking though as well you
see further fines and enrollment
and APS you could but they
wouldn't necessarily affect
funding distributions because of
the timing of those funding
kilts.
Thank you Mr so I appreciate
that what they asked my question
the opposite way it's
Albuquerque public schools were
to open their schools to in in
class learning.
As soon as possible get their
students back in the class.
With the cost of the impact the
lessons.
I'm I'm just trying to find out
is that decision made by
Albuquerque school board.
Based on house bill one seventy
five driving the numbers in one
direction or the other.
So I'm.
Madam chair representative I
don't think it would have an
impact on the hold harmless
because you're looking at how
much funding what would be
generated next year now no I
think we're you would see an
impact as of students come back.
Come back to the district you
would see a small or hold
harmless so APS in particular is
down about fifty it was fifty
six hundred students they're
typically only down about
sixteen hundred students
surveyed.
they've got a larger decrease in
enrollment.
And they typically would see if
those students didn't come back
they would have a larger hold
harm less than if they generated
enrollment growth units and some
of those students did come back
okay thank you Mr Gillette and I
think that's probably where I
rest I I believe that if the
students get back into the
classroom the classroom so the
students will begin to come back
sooner I think we're losing
students because of difficulties
with the the technical issues
and and web based school again
and things of that nature and
and I think that's maybe where I
see the differences if we open
our schools the kids will come
back I believe.
So madam chair tech anymore your
time thank you for allowing me
so much time manager and madam
chair I could briefly just
responded that I totally agree
and that's the intent behind
this that if we can get all
school districts that certainty
in order to vote and allow for
the federal money to to help
along the way that we would see
our students come back in a big
way but we would also have the
teachers and the staff at the
school to welcome them back.
Representative Syriana.
You madam chair most of what I
was going to say it's been
spoken but I do agree it's not
it's not only a state stability
issue it's an equity issue if we
don't find enough to we have to
lose teachers those teachers are
going to go to another school
and trying to get them back for
our kids is going to be
difficult a lot of our kids
don't come to school right away
it takes some a good couple
weeks to months to get back to
school so we can populate our
school would be thirty to sixty
four kids each year so I just
think if we start if we under
fund this
is active only it's going to
hurt our lowest are most most
at risk pools thank you madam
chair.
Representative Lane.
Thank you madam chair I found
it HB to a language on page one
hundred sixty eight.
but I'm just wondering I'm sure
about
this idea of budgeting and
estimate Roman growth what
happens if the school district
over.
Budgets on the estimated growth
units.
Yeah Representative land what
I'm gonna do is I'm going to
call on Representative small to
talk about this as he chaired
the subcommittee on public
education and remembering of
course that that's what this
this
formula is supposed to do it is
supposed to adjust whether
there's a decline in enrollment
or an increase in enrollment and
course we we discuss about
federal funding coming in the
amount of money that's going
into each one of the districts
what we saw the coming in
December what we anticipate
coming in with the bike and
Administration so I'm going to
call a representative small but
I'd like to get the questions
out first so if you'd like to
ask you questions go ahead okay
Representative Herrera did you
have your hand up.
Thank you madam chair I I did I.
I don't know what it means to go
back to school anymore I mean I
if you have a hybrid model I I
just happened to be living with
two of nephews who back to high
school and all they did was go
back to the computer class and
the teacher was still online so
they said well heck with that
I'll just stay home do that
computer I mean I don't even
know what it means I don't even
know what a hybrid model means
what we're and it seems to be
different in every school
district so that's what I'm
struggling with I certainly
don't want schools
to the penalties for the
pandemic and I I think we need
to make them whole but I really
don't even know what that means
and if it's and if the school
district is doing it differently
I I just I don't know where we
are any more I guess I just want
to say that not I don't know if
anybody can answer that.
What I do as I said I'm going to
have Representative small talk
about in this whole concept and
the way it was brought forth
through LFC way we endorsed it
in the house bill two model and
and go from there go ahead
Representative small I don't see
any other hands up so go ahead
no madam chair thank you very
much madam chair madam chair.
There are multiple safeguards
that are included in house bill
two as we pass the budget that
protect the state and schools
and ensure when districts choose
to go back to school they will
have those resources madam chair
and committee first the LFC the
our budget allows for school
districts two budget based upon
their expected students they can
set those expected students at
FY twenty one levels they can
send them higher if they
anticipate higher or if they
anticipate lower they can set
them lower madam chair
committee.
Screen of the SCG the school
equalization guarantee is
designed to work.
And ensure that the funds are
there for districts in a worst
case scenario madam chair and
committee a school district
budgets for more children or
then.
Who who start school in the fall
or madam chair and committee if
a school district eight.
If they budget for more children
because they're worried about
who will come out or if they
don't if they just graduated
based on FY twenty one levels
our language on page one sixty
eight of the budget as passed
through the house.
Allows and I won't read the
entirety of the language madam
chair and committee but it
allows that after.
All of these occurrences after
teachers and students have gone
back into the classroom.
And if the SCG continues to be
less than the budgeted fiscal
year twenty twenty one so that
is if the SCG the end of all
this is less than FY twenty one.
Then madam chair and committee
we have in language in our
budget the public education
department shall provide an
allocation from the federal
elementary and secondary school
emergency relief fund
And then.
For administrative costs and
emergency needs equal to the
school districts or charter
schools budget in fiscal year
twenty one bottom line madam
chair and committee.
The.
Baseline FY twenty one number if
it's not reached through the
school equalization guarantee
and the additional flexibility
to budget for more units the PED
shall make those districts whole
using these federal funds and
madam chair and committee we are
all very clear that there are
over four hundred million
dollars that have flowed to
districts another forty million
dollars madam chair and
committee with the PED that they
can directive there discretion
which just language specifically
relates to that will more than
cover madam chair and committee
the delta even if Representative
routers
points earlier the ninety
million is is insufficient so
madam chair and committee I
think we can all rest very.
Is there school districts will
not go below FY twenty one
budget levels when they re open
with students and madam chair
and committee our language on
page one sixty eight of the
General Appropration Act makes
that very clear there is more
than sufficient funding at PED
from this federal package in
order to ensure that that does
happen sorry for the long
explanation but thank you I
appreciate it I appreciate it
Representative
Representative Allison may have
a question go ahead.
More more respond to that as
well thank you madam chair I
know I've called a
representative Allison for
question and then we'll let you
respond thank you madam chair of
the way to Representative small
explained it
it sounds like H. B. two has
already got everything covered
is it really necessary to
continue with this
H. B. one seven five I'm unclear
on the it sounds like it's a
duplication.
Madam chair all right.
Thank you Representative Allison
I'm not sure that that's a
question but Representative
Romero you wanted to make a
comment based on Representative
Smalls of COVID.
Yes thank you madam chair and I
think that what Representative
small is getting at is is what I
spoke to in the beginning is
that it's having the the school
districts
estimate what their
expected enrollment for the next
school year isn't factor those
enrollment growth unit says
enrollment growth units don't
come until after the forty eight
count in October so how we're
going to bill asks our school
districts and this is the
certainty part at the unions
superintendents school boards
are asking for their asking for
on them to stay flat which this
is what it is and it goes to
representative Allison point in
that this is different because
we are assuring that they will
remain flat on the front end
instead of waiting till October
on the back and one districts
have potentially already let
these teachers go the other
thing is that like I mentioned
with the federal money is
flowing through title one which
is disproportionate because it's
not going to every single school
district and it's going to title
one schools for their high
poverty students so I don't
think that we should be taking
credit on that and I did mention
that the governor had vetoed on
the
language taking credit for
federal money like we have in
house bill two currently during
the special session so it puts
that amount of PED federal money
that might be used to offset any
of these costs in in peril so I
think this is very much why
house bill one seventy five
needs to be heard and should be
passed thank you madam chair.
Okay I'm gonna go back to the
committee is there any other
questions.
Representative small he's going
to make the motion but will let
Representative Romero close.
Thank you madam chair I would
move there madam chair I moved
the I move to pass.
Sorry I did not accept I did not
accept your motion it was an
inappropriate motion at the time
I was asking for comments and
questions from the committee.
And.
I'll call on you I want to as my
prerogative as the chair for the
motion Representative I'd like
to allow Representative Romero
to make some closing comments.
Going.
Thank you madam chair I
appreciate the opportunity to
close I mean this is really the
question of certainty is making
sure that our school districts
headed into the next school year
that we all want our students on
to be successful we hope that
it's in person but this would go
a long way in making sure that
they have the school personnel
to staffing teachers are
available on the front end
before those students and for
our classroom in August and
that's really the importance of
house bill one seventy five in
ensuring that this bill go to
the house floor in over to the
Senate to to hopefully get these
these changes and I mean I think
the the fact that we have all of
the stakeholders charters unions
superintendents school boards
really speaks to the urgency of
the matter and the importance of
it and why this bill is needed
as opposed to the language in
house bill two with that thank
you madam chair of the committee
support.
Thank you Representative Romero
for your closing comments I'm
not going to go to
Representative small for the
motion thank you madam chair I
move to table house bill one
seventy five as amended.
Okay we have a motion to table
is there a second.
The manager okay we have a
motion and a second.
We're gonna call the roll on
this one.
So.
We get the staff to go ahead and
call the roll the motion is a
tabling motion voted yes means
the bill will be tabled a vote
of no it will not be able we'll
go back for a for an alternative
motion so let's go ahead and and
have the.
Staff are you there yes okay go
ahead go ahead Representative
Allison yes Representative
Anderson.
No.
Representative Armstrong.
Yes to table.
Representative Brown yes to
table.
Representative Castellano.
Yes.
Representative Jack Chatfield.
Table
Crowder.
Yes the table.
Representative Dixon.
Yes to table.
Representative Ezzell yes to to
people.
Representative Garcia.
Yes the table.
Representative Herrerra.
AS to table.
Representative Hochman Vigil
yes.
Representative Lane.
So.
Representative Lara.
So.
Representative Sarinana.
No I like to explain my vote.
Representative Swetser Sweetser.
Yes and I'd like to explain my
the.
Representative Trujillo.
No and I don't need to explain
my vote.
I share small yes.
Madam chair yes.
We have
We have thirteen yes says and
six knows.
All right we have thirteen in
the affirmative to table so the
bill will be tabled and we have
we have two people that would
like to explain their vote the
first as Representative Spanien
on.
Thank you madam chair I.
Madam chair I worry that we
don't get enough funding and we
can't and we have to wait for
this additional funding of in
the meantime we lose teachers go
to other schools.
And our most at risk kids are
going to be affected and this is
going to hurt our kids more than
anything thank.
Representative Sweetser.
Thank you madam chair having sat
on both education and this
committee it is it's it's very
overwhelming to to try to
determine which is the correct
path but when we look at the SCG
if we have confidence in the SCG
and we did increase in their and
we have the language in house
bill two when you have to have
confidence that the formula is
going to take care of itself and
take care of the districts and
so I guess in the end that's why
I voted to try to have
confidence and let the formula
work thank you madam chair.
All right I can't I saw your
hand up Representative Crowder
did you wanna explain your both
or.
Thank you madam chair yes I
appreciate the opportunity I I
struggle with this site I know
what they're trying to do but I
don't have a number to compare
it to madam chair and know the
foundation of the number that
the SCG foreman the LFC came out
west but I don't have that
foundation in in this bill are
in the FIR and and couldn't find
a reasonable number to give me
peace and I I just couldn't find
myself getting there but I do
appreciate the the sponsor in
its attitude to the process of
the more job thank you madam
chair.
Representative Garcia do you had
your hand up did you want to
explain your vote yes madam
chair the reason I voted yes is
I have full confidence in house
bill two the deal with these
issues will be taken care of
good bye or funding if we take
care of the house to the house
bill seventy five does it too
then we'll kind of doubling the
the the things on it like I said
madam chair I have full
confidence in the health field
to thank you madam chair.
Already Representative Brown did
you wanna explain your vote
please yes briefly madam chair
thank you so.
I will share the same goal of
wanting to hold the schools
harmless and I also have
confidence in the SCG and I also
believe we can make adjustments
when we meet again in twenty
twenty two January twenty two
and see where things stand at
that point and again I the goal
is keep keep the schools
Holderness thank you madam
chair.
Ready I don't see anybody else's
hand I want to thank you
Representative Romero and the
guests this evening to HFC.
Go ahead move on to house bill
one eighty eight.
Thank you madam chair also one
eighty eight actually then try
having amendments.
Okay let's.
The amendment discussion okay.
moved madam chair.
All right.
Thank you madam chair of the of
the amendment does is strip the
appropriations from the bill.
That's all it does.
All right then let me ask is
this in the budget.
No but this I was going to use
madam chair we use the junior
money for this bill okay.
All righty so
will basically if you're gonna
do is that you and your money
what we would do as we hang on
to the bill as I explained to
Representative Zamora when you
put this bill on.
We hang on to the bill and then
when the June here bill comes
across from the Senate side and
we add our amendment into it
that we know exactly how much
money we have for it then we let
it go at that point madam chair
so how do we hold it because
that my biggest worry is that we
don't get it through the Senate
because they do take seem to
take a long time to get our
bills through will we get it
through the Senate in time.
I can't answer that I mean we
have hundreds of bills that
we're working on as a house we
do lots of bills on the floor
and they're not here I mean I
hate to cast aspersions on the
other chamber but by candidly
they left at noon and aren't
going to be back until Monday
but I think the plan for us this
is that this would be.
What into language into the
junior bill and the money would
be tied to it then so we
wouldn't necessarily have to
have a bill to get this activity
done because in junior you don't
have to have a piece of
legislation to have something
funded.
It's just how specifically the
language you might have here
that you're you're probably
concerned about is that is that
correct that Madam chair that's
correct I'm I'm trying to get a
computer science endorsement for
teachers this is one of thank I
got to okay so
and that's a good point there
both of the subcommittee chairs
for junior have said to me that
we may not be the need to have
hearings that if things go
smoothly and I know both
Representative small and
Sweetser said that if that's the
case of a report that to me on
Monday or Tuesday of next week
then we're moving the stuff out
really fast so at this point
though did you did you want to
say any more about the bill
mentality doesn't just try to
get the endorsement first
computer science allows
procedures that's all okay let
me ask is there any questions
because we're it doesn't make
sense to take the amendment at
this point because you're going
to you're going to find.
Junior money we're not gonna let
the bill out know that works
Intel I can see that there's
junior money to pay for the US I
don't think we're gonna have to
wait for a whole week so and
that's what the two subcommittee
chairs are telling me so would
make sense that we're moving an
amendment at this time.
Representative Sweetser.
Thank you madam chair my only
thought is that it does show it
as a recurring expense and the
item I know we talked to our
subcommittees about there would
be no guarantee that any of the
money in the June your bill
would be recurring it could be
that Representative Sarinana is
back with us next year to look
at this again but that that's
the worst that could happen and
in my opinion thank you I think
so too and and I think that's
the case and we've been told
that that's for every junior
ask.
There's a section in there for
reoccurring in a section in
there for nonrecurring but it
all depends at the end of the
day on how the DFA secretary
books this amount and and how
it's booked so okay it would be
a good measure would be
reoccurring said only they only
have to create the endorsement
and that's it and then teachers
use it but I don't believe it's
a recurring but thank you madam
chair already.
Okay what's the pleasure of the
committee.
Temporarily table house bill one
eighty eight.
Okay we have a motion for a
temporary table is.
The second amendment okay we
have a second Representative
Lara is there any opposition to
that.
All right seeing no
Representative is temporarily
tabled we'll see if anybody
else's put anything in from the
Senate side we know you're going
to do that will make sure it's
in the junior bill and and the
languages as you requested it
here thank you madam chair
already.
All right let's go next to is
there anyone here for house bill
two oh eight.
Okay all right go ahead thank
you madam chair similar to the
last bill we are seeking fifty
seven thousand six hundred
dollars junior bill money to
continue the missing and
murdered indigenous women and
relatives task force through
fiscal year twenty twenty two
I'm happy to describe the task
force they've had incredible
incredible work done in the in
its first year of inception this
further develops policy
recommendations with the support
of providers experts and
community leaders and expands
the work of the task force
that's why this legislation is
still going to need to move
through the Senate even if we
wait on the junior appropriation
we we do want to expand the task
force to include
the co chair of women power and
elevate the department of public
safety is co chair of the task
force we need their input from a
public safety perspective so
that we know which data we need
to collect.
The development of the
implementation of the task
force.
Nations that have already been
proposed the Indian Affairs
Department continues advocating
for the passage of this bill
they're also on the line as
experts if there's any questions
and they have the authority to
operate the on this fiscal year
but because of the proposed
design changes that we do have a
need to move to the Senate this
will this bill will help support
that policy development and
implementation thank you madam
chair so we'll ask stand for
questions if there are any thank
you yeah we have a few was gonna
Representative Sweetser.
Thank you madam chair and this
one is but does nonrecurring so
I guess my question
Representative Romero you're
trying to extend the task force
just for one more fiscal year is
that correct that's correct
madam chair Representative
Sweetser that we feel strongly
that we need an additional year
to be able to continue that task
force work however it may turn
into a long term situation we
don't know yet but we want to
give that extra time and its
economy to the task force to
make those decisions and do need
the inclusion of additional
members to the task force as
well to help with that
understanding and chair
representative that was that
thank you madam chair.
Right do we have anybody else
that has a question on this
bill.
Okay we do not that
Representative Representative
Romero is just as you've heard
with two previous bills but the.
Process is here because you're
going to be using junior money
in the US it's a temporary
situation so I'm going to ask
Representative small for the
motion thank you madam chair I
move to temporarily table house
bill two oh eight.
We have a second a second and
then enter okay we have a motion
and a second is there any
opposition to the temporary
table.
Seeing none thank you
Representative Romero thank you
for being with us here this
evening thank you very much
thank you madam chair.
All right of bill are you on.
Chair I am.
I'm looking at the calendar here
is that does that complete our
work for this evening yes it
does matter chair okay all
righty well I wanted.
I want to thank everyone for the
work this evening and I
appreciate your help and looks
like we'll be back in business
on Monday will have other bills
to take up at one thirty
hopefully our immediately
following the floor session and
that appreciate your time thank
you everyone thank you.
Thank you madam chair you might
everyone good night.
