The DFA analyst before hearing
from the HSD from the
administration itself so with
that members let's start with
agency code three five six the
office of the governor and with
it's meant to start us off
please.
Thank you Mr chairman thank you
members of the committee again
my name is Jessica hits then I'm
fiscal analyst for the LFC I'm
joined today by sending Montoya
over at TFA and then we'll
handed over to the executive for
their presentation after we go
over your differences package
again the agency code is three
fifty six associated volume two
documents for this agency can be
found on pages one ten and one
eleven of going into.
We'll go ahead for this agency
myself and Cindy are going to I
believe she's on we're gonna be
trading off talking about the
different pieces on your sheet
here so I'll go ahead and begin
by talking about the revenue for
the governor's office of the
executive recommendation exceeds
the LFC recommendation for
general fund by three hundred
thirty five point nine thousand
this is all due to differences
and recommended person funding I
wanted to also note that the
governor came and with a revised
a recommendation which is what
you're seeing here before that
revision the differences totaled
fifty eight point eight thousand
and so without revision we're
now in a difference of three
hundred thirty five point nine
in general fund revenues I want
to note that the analyst
coverage reach consensus on
performance measures and I'll go
ahead and handed over to Cindy
to talk about the base.
Thank you.
Thank you Mr chairman and
members of the committee and
Jessica will brief in the base
the executive recommendation
fully funds the person services
and employees budget category
well the legislative
recommendation applies in
vacancy rates in regards to the
contractual and other category
both the executive
recommendation and the
legislative recommendation fully
funds the agency request which
is flat the FY twenty two
operating budget I'm as Jessica
mentioned we have come to
consensus with the performance
measures and with that I will
turn it over to treat that
because this the office of the
governor chief operating
officer.
Thank you.
Hi miss cause us.
Good afternoon Mister chair very
good to see you thank you very
much for your time today I
appreciate it so for those of
you who don't know me I'm three
six all those I'm the governor's
chief operations officer.
Sorry still on because my screen
went black.
That my screen went black and I
didn't if I was still that I
actually think it's all those in
the governor's chief operations
officer I just want to thank you
for the opportunity to present
the governor's office budget to
you today before we discuss the
funding request I want to
highlight some of our
accomplishments and goals for
the governor's office I'm in
Sydney if you want to go ahead
and share the
presentation I believe everybody
has a copy of that but if you
want to share that that would be
great so our staff continues to
provide direct support across
all agencies we're working with
our department of public safety
where we were able to
successfully rolled out the
state police tactical response
this temporary assignment a
state police officers to the
county of Bernalillo let's over
ninety three felony arrests
including individuals with
violent criminal histories this
is something we've done in the
past and we will continue you
know to partner with
municipalities with their need
with
Like safety assistance.
All the COVID numbers remain
high we are going to resume our
virtual cabinet in your
community meetings these will be
done virtually initially with
community leaders to learn of
some of the issues facing their
specific.
Well hold virtual town halls to
discuss issues with constituents
and assist in finding resolution
we are finding that many
communities are having issues
that they haven't had an
opportunity to get resolved
because of COVID and the
inability to
Reach out and work with agencies
or their local government so we
do want to resume those cabinet
in your community meetings but
we want to make sure that we're
doing it safely we also want to
highlight the emergency
assistance funding which
provided a one time cash payment
to approximately thirteen
thousand working families who
are eligible for pandemic
emergency assistance this
funding was made available
through the administration of
children and families tab if
program.
In addition we're also
continuing to work with the
department of finance and
administration the federal
delegation and the federal
government to assist applicants
with rental assistance and
utility assistance this is been
critical over the last two years
and today over thirty seven
thousand applications have been
approved with over eighty seven
eighty seven million dollars
being awarded thus far.
As we all know hiring and
retaining qualified employees
has been a challenge for all
businesses this includes state
government we work with agencies
and state personnel to develop
rapid higher events these events
are designed to attract
applicants and simplify the
hiring process by providing on
site job interviews being able
to make offers on site and
getting qualified applicants
connected with state government
entities so we've done several
of those over the last three
weeks we will continue to do
those and really look at how our
hiring process can be improved
so we can make it easier for
agencies to interview retain
the crew and then retain
qualified applicants and state
governments and of course we
continue to work closely with
the department of health and are
COVID nineteen response in
addition to planning our staff
is working both vaccination and
testing sites along with the O.
H. military affairs and other
partners in the community.
As you can see from the next
slide in constituent services we
continue to work to improve how
constituents services work with
state government we recently
filled a vacant constituent
services position that we have
this is a huge relief for our
staff as we continue to field
questions regarding COVID
unemployment rental assistance
motor vehicle issues and other
services provided by state
government.
Thank.
There is so many individuals
with little familiarity of state
government we want to make sure
we're efficiently responding to
their individual problems and
concerns we take pride in
knowing that we're assisting
people who are experiencing a
crisis or who need access to
government services during
fiscal year twenty one we
received nearly seventy eight
thousand phone calls at our
front desk and nearly seventy
six thousand pieces of
correspondence including mail
and email in our office the time
for resolving in closing a case
is now down to five days.
So we hope to continue to
improve in those areas and with
the added Sir person we feel
confident that we can continue
to meet the needs of the
constituents statewide.
Our fiscal year twenty three
appropriation request as a total
of five million one hundred
seventy four thousand three
hundred dollars as stated it's
an increase of approximately
twelve percent from last year's
budget the majority of this
increases in person services and
employee benefits you're
probably wondering why we're
asking for an increase when in
fact we reverted nearly seven
hundred and ninety thousand
dollars last year nearly five
hundred thousand dollars of that
in person services.
During the prior year we had a
very high the can see right
although the positions are
important to our office it was
very difficult to on board
individuals well everyone was
spread thin in response to
comment in addition the salaries
being offered was a barrier to
hiring this fiscal year we've
been able to fill some critical
positions we recently filled
several advisor positions
including hiring former
Albuquerque mayor Martin Chavis
who will serve as our
infrastructure adviser to
prioritize federal funding for
roads bridges and other projects
in New Mexico Mike Hammond who
previously served as the chief
engineer and CEO of the middle
Rio Grande Conservancy district
will also be working in the
governor's office and serving as
our water advisor Matt Schmidt
hat will be serving as the
director of office of broadband
and work toward centralizing New
Mexico's efforts to increase
high speed internet coverage
across the state.
These individuals with
specialized expertise were hired
with salaries outside of our
regional request in addition we
recently hired a public safety
adviser to work with local
governments and municipalities
to determine their needs and to
assist in the recruitment of
officers in all jurisdictions
across the state.
The increased funding in person
services will provide
opportunity for us to recruit
highly skilled individuals and
provide competitive salaries.
They can positions to be filled
include the deputy director for
federal affairs to provide
support to the governor's office
and state agencies in their
interactions with the federal
government ensuring that New
Mexico's interest are
communicated and protected.
This advocacy contributed to
billions of dollars in
additional federal investments
in New Mexico over the last
three years tracking and sharing
information about these funding
sources in addition to
advocating for additional
investments to proposals like to
build back better act will be a
core responsibility for this
position.
We'll be filling our
communications director position
which was recently vacated by
trips on the key will be hiring
our director of legislative
affairs and the deputy director
position in addition to serving
on the legislative team deputy
director will assist the
director of boards and
commissions who is responsible
for recruitment and outreach
interviews memos stakeholder
meetings data gathering
background approvals you know
drafting appointment
correspondence overseeing the
Senate confirmation process and
reporting for two hundred twenty
two boards with over twelve
hundred twenties.
Along with meeting specific
membership requirements
appointees currently reflected
geographic and demographic
diversity of the entire state
including members from both
rural and urban parts of the
state members of diverse
political racial disability and
cultural groups I believe our
director boards and commission
has made done an amazing job on
her own to recruit all of these
individuals but having somebody
in our office with expertise to
be able to assist will be
critical.
We'll be filling our education
adviser position and other
vacant administrative positions
in our office this increased
funding will allow us to fill
all positions at competitive
salaries.
As mentioned earlier we did have
a large vacancy rate and the
difference between our request
and out of the LFC is we are
asking to fill all positions and
there's works in a vacancy rate
with the small number of
individuals that we currently
have working in the governor's
office it is critical that each
position be filled we have also
in the past often set some of
our members from the Office out
to assist agencies when they are
short handed or on special
assignments and we need the
flexibility and the expertise in
our office to be able to
continue to do so batch as Cindy
mentioned are requests for
contractual services and the
other category remained flat a
request for the contingency
account also remains flat
So with that I will stand for
questions.
Thank you Mr Sato's let's go to
any questions we're gonna start
with Representative Hochman
Vigil.
Thank you very much Mr chair and
thank you Mr Senator for being
here today I just have a couple
of
questions so if your so if
you're director and by
structured legislative affairs
positions are still open at this
time.
What is the role of Mister
Schlegel who has been liaising
with the legislature.
Since the session opened.
Okay Mister chair Representative
Hochman Vigil.
Of the hill is our policy
adviser on economic development
so he works closely with across
the state with businesses and
works with our economic
development department on
recruiting and retaining
business in the state he is
working this legislative session
on our legislative team in light
of our vacant position okay I
didn't cone is also working as a
member of the Legislative team
as is our
chief of staff.
Thank you very much Mr chair
thank you Mrs Adams I just want
to make sure that I I know that
I'm talking to the right people
and that all of the genes of to
the community where the second
question I have Mister chairman
Senator it says and our volume
to that the governor's office
requested around a hundred
thousand dollars for travel
reimbursement and I just wanted
to know if you have this mis
misinformation Mr chairman
follow us if this amount is
lower than it normally is
because of the pandemic or or
you may not have that
information on just curious.
Okay I believe that maybe could
answer but I believe that the
amount requested is flat to
previous years
I know that we did revert money
in the last fiscal year for
travel there was not much
trouble due to comment we expect
that we will be out there more
this year and in light of the
new positions that we have with
the infrastructure adviser the
water advisor these will be
positions that they will need to
be out and about the state
meeting with groups and so we
anticipate that there will be
Well this next fiscal year.
Thank you very much Mr chair
that concludes my question thank
you Mr.
Thank you for your Hochman Vigil
next we go to Representative
Crowder.
Thank you Mr chairman and thank
you for your presentation is
because Saddam's.
Just a question on the employees
noticed on our worksheet that
your.
You have eleven vacancies shown
on the worksheet seven of those
are funded and for our unfunded
as far as you can see is so my
question is the three hundred
thirty five thousand is that
just for those poor.
The funding that we're
requesting will fund all
positions.
Okay well seven of them are
already funded in there's for
that are under funded so if a
level but you still have a
quorum to our she used to have
Thirty five employees
authorized.
yes so the additional funding
will fund the unfunded positions
on okay I'll cover some of the
cost for the increased salaries
that we've had to paid to bring
people on board thank you
Representative and just a
reminder briefly to go through
the chair I know it's always
hard overs in but just.
Sorry.
Thank you Mr chair I appreciate
it.
Yes Mister chair Mister because
god does he have any contractor
for use within the governor's
office through a different
funding source for the only the
laws are shown on a worksheet.
Mr chair Representative Crowder
we did enter into a contract
with an individual as an
employee to do some work on
The Yazzie Martinez initiative
with us and that contract is no
longer in place so we have a
contract in place thank you Mr
chair my final question is are
are the employees of the
governor assume are eligible for
the the seven percent pay
increase is being proposed by
both the executive and LFC.
Mr chair representative Crowder
any salary increase that are
approved for exemption ploys
would apply to employees in the
office of the governor
thank you Mr chairman.
Thank you very much
Representative Crowder listening
go to representative Garcia.
Thank you Mr chairman of the
school's out of state The
presentation which you again my
question is economic
development.
You know in my part of the world
I see no movement at all what is
happening in my district and yet
you look down and schools lost
in more rural areas I mean
they're thriving business what
do we need to do.
As a representative and probably
other Representative have the C.
bomb chairman what do we do to
draw.
More development work
communities do we have to you
know a lot of the stuff comes
into the state and economic
development this year's and
we're really wanted because we
need to have more movement to of
more rural parts or state.
I'm Mr chair representative
Garcia it's good to see you as
well
I believe that in our requests
for funding in this next
legislative session there is
money that we are asking for for
economic development to drive
more economic.
Structures into more rural
communities I believe we're
asking for legal funding that is
specific to rural communities
and other initiatives that they
are working on I would highly
recommend that and I will have
danced like will reach out to
you directly to talk about you
know some of those initiatives
that we're looking at and how we
can drive business to more rural
communities.
Mr chairman and present thank
you for that you know you should
that were of putting money and
would not allow.
Good money there before for
these projects to help
communities.
Question Mr chair representative
Garcia I believe the answer to
that is yes I think we have
invested in a lot of these
projects through economic
development I don't know that in
the past that we have been very
specific about those dollars
being spent in rural communities
and I know that there is I need
this year and we did put in
specific for rural entities
through the economic development
department.
Mr Chairman entry to thank you
very much for that because you
know all my part of the world
really struggling.
If you know the president went
away though.
Well our plan one way to
refinery one away goal mind in
jeopardy of going away so we
really need to all I hope all
well all rural communities thank
you Mr chairman thank you
present good to see you again.
Thank you very much
representative Garcia next we're
gonna go to Representative
Chatfield.
Mr chairman thank you very much
as you can tell I'm not
Representative Chatfield I know
we kinda resemble each other
with all the hair and all but I
do have a few questions Mr
chairman miss casada those
reserves and speeds is I think.
Thank you Mr chairman miss
because Saddam's appreciate the.
Information you have given us
today as far as our rural areas
go
the dilemma we're facing get in
southeastern part of the state
which is otherwise known as the
very capital of the southwest.
Our dairymen are going through a
real tough time right now we've
already had seven dairies shut
down operations because it is
not beneficial for the price
that they're being paid for milk
right now but if you factor
into.
What those dairies do for local
economy is the jobs are created
as the I don't know anything
about the utilities that are
being paid the.
Machinery dealerships the dairy
supply industry in itself it is
very troublesome we had a
meeting regarding this a few
weeks ago before we came up here
to session I was just wondering
what your.
A director is doing to alleviate
some of those fears that it not
only affecting our deres down
there that those in say the
Clovis area as well.
Mr chair representative is out
thank you very much for that
question I am not warmed with
the budget of you to the
department of agriculture others
with respect to Derry's I know
that there have been several
conversations and I knew that
there was an intent to put money
in and also looking at federal
dollars to assist with Jerry's I
am happy to figure out what we
put into that with our request
in the budgets and get back to
you with specifics on that and
Mr chairman of misconduct
assisted in.
Directed towards the department
of agriculture this is for
economic development because
what those dairies do for our
local economy and for businesses
and and everything else that
goes along with it it will be
devastating for those for this
trend to continue.
And it's very troublesome to me
the.
I better stop right there Mr
chairman thank you very much.
Thank you very much
Representative Ezzell in you had
checked in earlier so I
apologize for not getting on or
or not recognizing immediately
That agency costs autos briefly
a couple of quick questions the
three E. infrastructure advisors
that the executive is brought on
in I've heard very good things
about all three of them do any
of the additional positions are
they meant agency because I does
it at least partially to support
those three key infrastructure
positions within the executive
or they for other separate
purposes.
I'm Mr chair some of the.
You're talking the three
positions that we've already
hired you yes ma'am.
Are they scheduled to support.
Yes yes the the additional the
vacancy hires the that the
executive budget proposes to
bring in are they intended to
help support at least in part
what the work that for instance
Mr Hammond or more Chavis are
doing or or they kind of
separate.
Mr chair the positions that were
requesting to be filled with the
additional vacancy money would
be separate positions we are
looking to bring on some
administrative support with
budget that we currently have
that will help to support the
advisor positions and what they
are doing.
Okay thank you for that answer
yes given the incredibly unique
here and time that we find
ourselves in and the
The real a credible opportunity
for those positions working with
the rest of of state government
Martina who isn't from my office
as well it is joined S. actually
stepped off the Senate floor as
we're in session right now to
want to make sure that I was not
here available personally
because I know the work that
each one of you dies I've been
in here in your shoes before and
I know the amount of work that's
going to come in especially when
you have this much revenue you
know for the lieutenant
governor's office where we're
just grateful that we've had the
opportunity to meet all of our
goals as far as reaching out to
be available to be accessible
and to make sure that we're
meeting the constituent needs
which is a primary role
lieutenant governor's office I
can leave a look into the
committees and just knowing that
I've been to every one of your
districts I even through the
pandemic just gives me you know
the added comfort knowing that
we're all working together and
so I just wanted to take a
moment to thank you for the work
that you do but also to be
available to make sure that you
recognize that doesn't matter
what part of the state of New
Mexico that we're and we're
gonna work together to make sure
that we're available to provide
the resources and especially for
those constituents who often
times need assistance in dealing
with some of the constituents
are Mrs that's what we're here
for that so we pride ourselves
in and I want to say thank you
for the consideration of our
budget.
Mr lieutenant governor thank you
thank you for taking time at in
your incredibly busy schedule
and for your incredible service
to the state we go straight to
questions we have a first
Representative Dixon.
I'm thank you lieutenant
governor Morales that
presentation
Mr chair and Montana governor or
staff my question actually just
relates to the role of
constituent services in your
office and I'm very appreciative
of the fact that you work with
constituents and help them as
needed but I'm wondering if
that's somewhat duplicative
given that the governor's office
also does that and so I was just
wondering
you know what the specific need
was for two offices to do that
thank you thank you Mr chairman
thank you Representative for
that stand you know it it didn't
seem that a point that there
could be duplication of efforts
but in reality you know we're
all able to meet needs across
the state ten and primarily me
coming from a rural community
we've seen that a lot of areas
of questions that come and deal
with the rules a needs whether
it's in the southern part of
John County where the northeast
part of the state of New Mexico
we often hear of those concerns
and so we're glad to be part of
that but I think you bring up a
great point because you know
never did we expect that we're
going to be in a pandemic and
the amount of questions M. out
of concerns a constituent needs
that were there primarily with
workforce solutions ideally with
unemployment dealing with many
issues that we've had to deal
with you know even if that we
were stretched thin with the
governor's office what our
office with all of the agencies
so it definitely work together
and we see that continuing
because we're definitely in the
middle of this pandemic as well.
Thank you thank you Mr chair
that was my only question.
Thank.
Representative it is.
Proving.
up the.
student.
Yes.
Chairman you're breaking up.
Thank you Mr.
Garcia.
And then we'll go to that.
Okay thank you for that.
Okay sorry about that
Representative Lara and thank
you Mr can you hear me.
Hello yes yes okay thank you has
this been an interesting the
state thank you Mr chairman
thank you lieutenant governor
it's a it's good to see you
again and I hope more of our
time but I do question I just
wanted to to vouch and verify
that the lieutenant governor's
constituent services our our old
slide player very essential role
this past summer and and my
legislative district and I want
to thank them for that thank you
for that lieutenant governor we
really appreciate your help and
we really appreciate you coming
down and visiting our our
communities were affected by
flooding in the inner and and
putting a lot of concerns of our
constituents and these.
So I can first and foremost say
that that the outreach in the
constituent services does work
and it does reassure many of the
constituents who we work with on
on a daily basis and I just
wanted to thank you for that Mr
within the governor thank you
thank you Mr chair thank you
Representative Lara listening
representative Garcia.
Thank you Mr chairman I'll.
The governor good fuel Leger
here today.
I don't really have a question
just have a concern as you well
know under the governor are
veterans are really struggling.
All over the state no there's a
report out there that you have
transportation from their
doctors from good part of the
country into a groovy so you
know I would appreciate the Mr
the governor in all the
constituencies that your body
else's and I appreciate any help
you can do to by the very
eighties problem Mr the governor
Mr chair thank you good to see
you miss Williams.
Thank you Mr Chairman
representative percent thank you
for always advocating for
seniors and it shows in every
single meeting every single
committee that I hear you speak
and I mean you're right you know
when you have a better answer
having to get up at four in the
morning to get driven to their
appointments you know that that
are four five hour drives that
is a concern so I I am I stand
ready to work with you as the
Legislature to see what we can
do to help provide better
services and even extend that
working with our federal
delegation because there's no
reason why we can have more
opportunities for better is to
be seen closer to home rather
than traveling for five hours
one way each each time they go
for a visit.
Thanks for the the governor Mr
chairman of it also mentions
juniors when you begin to start
talking no other very often very
very important we need to take
care of all Sierra.
The veterans in particular we
are we all know that in the
thank you for your response and
reporter were to leave thank the
governor thank you Mr chairman
thank you very much
representative Garcia seeing no
further questions we would go to
representative suites are for
the most.
Thank you Mr chairman thank you
Mr lieutenant governor for all
of the work that you do in my
part of the world you are just
considered you know a neighbor.
It it's really nice to see you
here and see that you respond
all around the state and with
that Mr chair I would move the
executive recommendation great
there is a motion for the
Executive recommendations are
second
Mr chair.
Great I see save Representative
Lara as well as a number of
other members is there any
opposition to that motion.
See none we've adopted the
executive recommendation and the
entire committee lieutenant
governor really has shared their
thoughts of really that's the
you a deep appreciation for your
work surface and the way you do
all of it thank you.
Thank you chairman members of
the committee.
Okay now members let's go on to
HSD code three fifty this is
gonna be the General Services
Department we're gonna ask Mr
Conner Jorgensen to get us
started out Mr Jorgensen.
Thank you Mr chairman and
members again this is our agency
code three fifty it's the
General Services Department
with me is Mr Simon Miller of
the department of finance and
administration and I know I saw
Mr John Romero the acting
secretary Debbie Rodriguez W.
secretary I believe Michael
Lujan all from the General
Services Department on the on
the call as well.
So I just want to start I'm
gonna go over the I'm just gonna
move will program by program
through the packet.
GSD is primarily funded through
service fees insurance premiums
and federal contributions with
just over three percent of the
actual budget coming from the
general fund and the vast
majority of that general fund is
a one programs and facilities
management.
Overall you'll see that the LFC
recommendations about two point
three million dollars last
than the executive
recommendation.
Almost all of that differences
in risk funds program that will
we'll get through as we go
through the programs everywhere
else the differences are between
the two recommendations are very
very slight.
Let's say both recommendations
prioritize.
Additional funding for the
facilities management program in
terms of performance measures
the LFC and executive staff have
reached consensus on performance
measures and targets for all
programs.
Okay so moving on to programs
support this is.
A key code five ninety eight.
All the revenue in program
support comes from transfers
from the other seven programs
within G. S. B..
Both the LFC and exec will are
recommended fully funding the
requests for.
Mrs.
Contractual services the LFC
recommendation for the other
category includes an additional
seventy five thousand over the
FY twenty two operating budget
for IT security.
All the executive recommended an
additional hundred thirty four
thousand to fully funded that
request one thing I'd like to
note here is
There's typically language.
That states that any unexpended
funds remaining in this program
at the end of the fiscal year
shall revert to all of the
programs from which they came
that language was included in
the executive recommendation but
was not included in the LFC
recommendation it would be
staffs recommendation but that
language is included in this
program no matter which would
recommendations the committee
decides to adopt.
Okay moving on to the
procurement services this is.
Code is six zero four
There are no differences in the
two recommendations I would
point out that.
Both of the recommendations help
the general fund.
Appreciations Flack.
And relied instead on using our
procurement revenues these are
vendor paid fees from purchases
off of certain price list those
were the revenues that were
increased in this budget
recommendations.
Next is still correct and what's
on we're now on page five of the
packet again there are no
differences between the LESC and
the DFA recommendations both
recommendations fully funded the
agency requests and began all of
the revenue comes from
enterprise Revenue Service is
used charged to a state agencies
and nonprofit entities who
utilize the service.
Okay moving to page.
Six on the packet the risk
management program
risk management houses all of
the employees who oversee both
the risk funds programs as well
as the health benefits
administration so when we get to
those programs you'll notice
there are no FTP in them that's
because all those up to your
house and the and the risk
management program.
All of the revenue received by
this program comes from the risk
management funds program and
that's from.
Torrance assessments on state
entities and local government
participants in the risk
insurance program.
The overall difference in the
recommendations is about forty
seven thousand dollars or zero
point five percent when we come
down to that uses table you can
see executive funded.
Person.
For twelve thousand three
hundred dollars more than did
the LFC the big difference is in
the other financing uses
category where the executive
recommends fifty nine thousand
two hundred dollars more than
does the LFC the reason for that
difference that other financing
uses revenue it's center program
support so each one of the
recommendations for other
financing uses is also tied to
the right recommendation for
program support.
Okay the next program is
employee group health benefits
this is on page seven of your
packet.
first of that state that again
the only funding source for this
program is premium revenues and
that's the four hundred twenty
one point five million dollars
you see
That revenue is already built
into the our agency base budget
request.
And so there's nothing in this
recommendations that will
change.
Insurance premiums or benefits
this is a recommendation for
expenditure authority only in
that regard it's very similar to
how we deal with the New Mexico
public schools insurance
authority.
both recommendations fully
funded the agency requests for
expenditure authority.
The HSD request was based on a
growth factor of about five
percent which is pretty
reasonable that is in line with
what we see out of that.
Projected increases from the.
Federal center for Medicare and
Medicaid services as well as
from national organizations like
the Kaiser family foundation.
I'd like to pause on this
program for for just a moment
because it has it did come up.
A couple of times during the.
During this interim and the
reason I came up is because we
have had
a number of shortfalls.
The health benefits program and
so if you'll take a look at page
six.
In your packet we've included a
recent projection for the health
benefits fund.
I just want to go through that
projection.
Very briefly so you can see we
started out fiscal year twenty
to in the red on the fund
by seventeen point three million
dollars so there is a big game
year deficit and I'm already.
through January twenty twenty
two so you know contemporary to
help
batch.
Cash balance is right now
Negative forty nine point four
million dollars.
The legislature during the first
special session for the second
special session just ended
appropriated fifteen million
dollars to the so you can see
that
Down on the production line all
of so there's another fifteen
million dollars added to the.
When we look at the projections
for the rest of this year the
fund is currently projected to
end the year thirty five point
three million dollars deficit
position.
on the next page on seventeen
There's a history of a
nonrecurring appropriations that
have been made.
shortfalls and health benefits
fund.
And.
The takeaway here is that since
twenty twenty there are or
appropriations made to address
shortfalls in.
We health insurance but totaled
thirty two point six million
dollars.
Let's also point out the twenty
twenty one.
Special point seven point six
million dollars initially
included language stating that
the appropriation was contingent
on a plan to raise matching
funds from local governments and
higher education institutions to
participate in the GST plans and
on GST increasing health benefit
premiums FY twenty two.
That language was line item veto
and I would say it's significant
because GSP provides.
Coverage to.
The number of non state entities
so about one third of the GS of
pool is made up of local
government and higher education
Chloe's
so the intent but but was
communicated by the legislature
that every every participating
entities out of the paying their
share that was that was.
and then we did not see the
premium increases and FY twenty
one or twenty two and there are
no premium increases currently
schedule in FY twenty three now
that being sad there have been
some benefit reductions proposed
by GSD we think they'll save
around twenty million dollars
fund but those are not included
in the projection.
and I'm sure.
Yes the staff will be available
to answer questions
but I wanted to just point that
out in the health benefits fund
as I've spent a.
The topic of considerable
interest.
Moving on from health benefits
I am now back on page eight of
the pact.
This is facilities management
the facilities management
program is the only program yes
the which receives the entirety
of its funding from general fund
appropriations.
F. M. D. does not currently
charge building use fees and so
that general fund money is there
was.
For facility maintenance and
upkeep also pays the salaries of
all the folks over at.
FMB who oversee the capital
projects as well as we see.
The recommendations are are
really close with the LFC
recommending an additional one
point one million dollars of the
seven point one percent increase
and the executive recommendation
one point two million dollars of
sort seven point two percent.
Please the executive quickly
entirely about one point two
million dollars the person
category.
The LFC recommendation spread
that money around a little more
included six hundred fifty
thousand for person it also
included fifty thousand and
contracts amounts for facility
condition assessments.
another four hundred thousand in
the other cost categories and
that is directed for facility.
Moving to page ten the
transportation services.
There is a twenty four thousand
dollar difference
That difference is broken into
two parts in person the
executive recommended thirty
nine thousand two hundred more
than the LFC did.
and then in the other category
the LFC recommended fifteen
thousand dollars more.
The executive staff amount is
for fleet maintenance
That is all paid out of the
other category.
Finally on page or whatever is
the risk management program.
The risk management program as I
said at the beginning is
responsible for the for the
great majority of the
differences between the LFC and
executive recommendation
the risk management funds
program is it it houses money
from the public liability
workers compensation public
property sure the bottom and the
state and local unemployment
compensation funds and FY twenty
one actual expenditures out of
those fund totaled about seventy
five dollars.
The executive recommends fully
funding the agency base request
for expenditure authority from
all the funds.
The LFC recommendation includes
two million last executive.
the LFC recommendation fully
funded the request for all of
those funds I just named save
for the public liability.
the public liability I the
agency requests an increase of
six point one million dollars
it's about a fourteen percent
increase the LFC recommendation
included three point six million
dollar four percent increase and
again all of those funds
receive.
Better revenues from premiums on
participating institutions.
Of the LFC recommendation also
contains language that basically
states that there is sufficient
funding.
Within workers compensation and
public liability to provide
coverage to members of the New
Mexico mounted patrol that was
another area of concern we heard
about multiple times so that
languages and the LESC
recommendation it is not the
executive recommendation
Mr chair that includes why
portion of the presentation I'd
like to turn it over to Mr Simon
Miller for any comments from
the.
Yeah good afternoon Mister chair
members of the committee again
my name is Simon Miller and I'm
an analyst with DFA I won't take
up too much of your time here
since Connor with really went
through the detail but overall
the executive LFC budget
recommendations for the General
Services Department are very
similar there is less than a one
percent difference between them
in terms of general fund the
executive recommendation is
slightly higher than the LFC the
executive recommends general
fund increase of seven point two
percent all the LFC recommends
general fund increase of six
point six percent the majority
of this difference is in the
facilities management division
as Connor discussed this is the
division responsible for
overseeing state owned buildings
and managing capital projects
for most state agencies the
executive provides a bit more
funding in that program to fill
vacancies
for positions related to
preventive maintenance capital
project management and custodial
services so with that I will
hand it over to the to the
agency thank you.
Thank you Mr Miller secretary
Romero please we're excited that
you're joining us today feel
free to briefly introduce your
team and we look for your
presentation.
Thank you Mr chairman and
members the committee up I I I
would hope that the presentation
is accurate today probably
better than Connors because I
just have one correction the
first thing out of his mouth was
that eve's introducing John
Romero as the secretary actually
my name is John Garcia as the
new designate secretary for
general services so Connor if
you got that wrong maybe the
rest of it is suspect not
kidding kidding.
Mr chairman members of the
committee thank you for the
opportunity present today
I'll give you a quick overview
of the department
and then
I have staff available for
questions that would be today if
my honorable W. secretary Debbie
Rodriguez that is been a
stalwart in many agencies
including this one and it's a
great pleasure and honor to be
working with the W..
After knowing her for so many
years and also Michael Lujan is
our general services director
to me might administrative
services director and these are
with the state stand for
questions Mr Chairman.
Members of the committee at the
New Mexico General Services
Department we do not push paper
we're talented janitor's car
mechanics painters carpenters
electricians plumbers
construction managers painters
landscapers truck drivers and
snowplow operators hopefully
we'll get some snow and prove
that of course not everyone in
GSD where's our hearts we have
our share of skilled lawyers and
accountants but everyone at GST
is committed to providing the
best service possible to our
fellow state agencies and state
employees
that service includes cleaning
and maintaining office based
contracting for goods and
services providing employee
health coverage of producing
print and graphic projects and
supplying hundreds of plate
vehicles for all state agencies.
We're also helping fight climate
change by making state buildings
more energy efficient.
Rooftop and carport solar power
in purchasing electric vehicles
for motor pool yes I like to say
services are middle name and
that's not just a slogan it's
really our mission.
Mr chairman members the
committee just I am new to the
General Services Department that
this is my third run at a
cabinet level position of
secretary of tourism in the
Johnson administration also
secretary of economic
development.
It is a great honor to be asked
to serve by governor Michelle
Lujan Grisham and it is a
privilege to serve in this
capacity as well with that Mr
chairman members committee I'll
go through some of the
accomplishments for the
department of the brief and the.
And then I stand for questions
on our first slide today will
pull that up the.
On the screens.
And as we're doing so at when it
comes to a program support.
it that here.
Just the size of their.
Right.
And the program support we did
establish a social media
president presents now and I see
that a bunch of baby boomers
that are working as department
are actually working on learning
and doing social media actively
also it is extensive online
another marketing a state
buildings the green energy
product project esco and I think
you're gonna see a lot more of
these types of projects to to go
in the future but purchasing
electric vehicles installing
charging stations and other
climate change initiatives
Representative product we also
co lead to climate action
climate action team on state
leadership.
As well as we implemented Here
asset management module to
manage over eight hundred
million in state government
assets quite proud of that when
it comes to state purchasing up
the the the one thing we don't
notice about state purchasing
that you all see everyday is the
pilot paperwork would not have
actually get that that resource
to be a smaller but I'm proud to
say that little engine and
printing does a great job of
giving you what you all need an
all state agencies as well
I'll like to say in the only
thing I'll leave you with state
purchasing is that I think this
small apartment is one that is
quickly pivoting to a virtual
environment and just space
really good thanks and best
practices from that particular
agency
Well.
To
Transportation services we've
acquired thirty five plug in
vehicles in addition
adding to the hybrid SUVs and
pickups we've opened up a little
thirty electric vehicles
charging stations that Senator
state buildings and locations
The Santa Fe we are working with
the O. T. and excited about the
federal investment
in infrastructure where they'll
be more charging stations to
come we've been we implemented a
GPS tracking station just give
me tracking for all vehicles in
the fleet operations which is
excellent and I think when it
comes to transportation we do
still have our state playing
what we lose students to and
from New Mexico's to school for
the blind and visually impaired
on a regular basis and I want to
just highlight that without that
plane doctors would not easily
be able to get to see patients
and all of the four corners of
the state and so with that
resource it's vital for all all
people including those in the
corners of the State.
Mr chairman members the
committee when it comes to the
wrist Management Division and I
know there was a lot of talk
about that and it is a priority
for me as the new secretary
I have experience in working
with self insured pulls in the
past and excited about getting
this one back on track I will
tell you that some of the
highlights are that you can
implemented a value based health
care purchasing agreements
through
multiple health plan partners
and we have a really good
working relationships with those
partners today the bank began
offering supplemental coverages
such as whole life and
catastrophic illness protections
something we've not had before.
They also praise the inventory
of all public buildings insured
by
risks are in date those
buildings valued at over eight
billion dollars and also
successfully.
I had unqualified audits for the
past five years for that
property and casualty team a
proud proud about that as well
and then lastly we implemented a
new risk management information
system.
Mr chairman and members of the
committee there were has been
discussions with the LFC I did
get a letter from the chair and
I know she's not with us today.
Addressing we are addressing the
issues related to the fund at
the costs associated with that
group health benefits fund and I
I hope that you will give us a
little bit of time in me is new
to try to get around that a
little bit one thing we didn't
anticipate was by ari pressures
on that particular funds that
have not been addressed as well
as what the LFC recommendations
have sent to us when it comes to
highlights from the facility's
Management Division again I'll
just highlight a few things the
esco project we kicked that off
in July of twenty nineteen
thirty one buildings totaling
one point seven million square
feet we're already seeing the
savings its unique project and I
encourage all of you to become
by the monthly billing and you
can see a really incredible
demonstration of that is working
we also excited about the new
prime lab started in schedule
for completion this year in
September and also the DPS
secure storage started I think
you've seen that groundbreaking
here it's a big it's a big
project and scheduled for
completion in.
February.
And lastly I'll just wait that
we completed a security master
plan to evaluate our Santa Fe
buildings and are continuing to
work on
of the green energy plant for
all state buildings that
especially those
In Santa Fe area
I will tell you the governor has
directed me specifically to
have.
And and and look towards
improving the quality of the
buildings that we have
of encouraging and and
maintaining a high level of
energy efficiency in buildings
and of I want to say that
department is one that does a
great job and
I think we can have high
expectations for that
Mr chairman and members of the
committee Ali some of the rest
of the report due to see I will
not get into the details of the
differences in the district to
budgets yes they're close we
would hope and our preferences
that like the last two.
it is easy had just before they
got the executive recommendation
would love to have the executive
recommendation I leave you with
this last fact and that is that
three percent of our budget is
general fund budget three
percent or or so our transfers
and the rest ninety six percent
masamoto of the budget is
enterprise fund and so we do
operate off our own revenues and
expenses so madam chair thank
you Mr chairman members of the
committee secretary Garcia is
that's my presentation and the
stand for questions thank you
thank you so much Secretary
Garcia I apologize for it
inappropriately saying your name
thank you true they and thank
you for the long tenure of
service and for rejoining let's
go to questions first we're
gonna start to it was
Representative Hochman Vigil and
then we'll go to Representative
Dixon.
Thank you very much Mr chairman
thank you to US secretary
designate designate Garcia the
part of the presentation Mr
Jorgensen and also Mr Miller for
their presentations as well Mr
chairman I'm gonna start first
of my questions related to the
risk management funds program
I know that Mister Jorgensen had
already briefly touched on this
but he cited the agency requests
are anticipating a fourteen
percent increase in losses and
the public liability fund and
I'm gonna take the opportunity
right now Mr chair to ask
secretary designate what he
thinks that fourteen percent
increase are in costs will will
be what would be the cause of
that Madam chair of
the and Mr chairman and madam
Representative hi I can tell you
that I think that part of that
would be related to increased
costs we just started entering
the COVID post COVID era of and
so we're seeing some pressures
on that fund for that
Again I I know we have not
addressed the premium side of
that as well ma'am Mr chair all
outstanding allowances on my
maybe experts to.
Just answer better than nine W.
Mr Chairman representative
most of that is due to the fact
that our actuaries have
projected to.
Very high multiple multi million
dollar settlements will come in
and FY twenty three and so
that's why we requested a higher
amount and not in the public
liability fund and it's also
because if they both hit.
At around the same time and the
fund doesn't isn't budgeted at a
proper amount that we have to do
a budget adjustment request
before we can pay those bills
and so we try to to err on the
side of what our actuaries are
telling us will probably occur
in any given fiscal year and so
that's that's why there's that
particular increase.
Thank you very much Mr chair and
thank you for that answer that
helps clarify some of it I mean
are you as this litigation
already been settled in the
settlement amount determined or
is this just based on your
council's advice of what you
think might happen basis it's
based on a little bit on cancel
it by a lot more what our
actuary see coming down the
road.
Okay thank you very much thank
you Mister chair and and I'm on
to my next question which is
related to the decrease in state
staff are participating in the
employee group benefits benefits
program of the increases in
costs so it looks like right now
we are reporting an eighteen
point one percent costs and R.
eighteen point eighty one
percent raising costs and a
premium increase of eleven point
four percent can you Mister
chair Mister secretary designate
kinda at further elaborate on
what the what those costs are
based on.
Mr chair representative I
actually think I answered the
wrong the answer to the last
question was a different fund
but I think it is the pressure
on that that the cost of health
care costs going up
You know I can't tell you why.
People have left the pool but we
do want them in the pool of
having having a risk pool helps
us if we broaden that that risk
a little bit so but Mr chair
I'll ask for Duffy's comment on
the any more pressures on the
increase eighteen point one
percent increase.
Mr chair representative that
pressures are out and start
secretary designate the
procedures on the medical
inflation costs but.
Factored in properly as we go
forward so we're we're seeing
those pressures this comment has
been.
Big issue for us R. I think when
last we look and trying to keep
a tally to report to.
The LFC
as monthly basis but I think
we're at about twenty seven
twenty eight million dollars
comment faster testing vaccine
administration and then
treatment those were
anticipated.
Thank you Mr chairman and and
thank you Mr secretary designate
madam I is your last name W..
Rodriguez.
Okay starting with the first
name thank you at so I and I
have a couple of to gingerly
related questions to your answer
with regards to the COVID costs
are it looks like that some of
those costs could be reimbursed
to the federal government but no
reimbursement either as it is
has been order or the state is
not eligible for reimbursement
at this time so can someone
please elaborate on that for me
and if the state can anticipate
further remuneration from the
federal government on COVID.
price that we've had absorb Mr
Chairman representative we have
submitted our comment costs on
through the female but we
haven't heard anything back at.
So we're not.
We're not at all sure we're
going to see any of that that
FEMA funding and that's where we
were directed to go with our
request for federal members.
Mr Chairman representative.
I might so the the fifteen
million dollars that was
included in house bill two of
the special session that was
specifically designated for
COVID testing
costs and yes there are I
believe next year also has
request and with.
For comment reimbursement as
well.
Thank you Mr chairman thank you
miss your consent that that
actually confuses me a little a
little further because on one
hand the missed yes the report
we have reporting that we have
significant cost because of
COVID but yet we're also stating
that we are not having or not
having the same medical costs
towards the the group benefits
because people have not gotten
the same procedures they would
have normally because of COVID
and hospitals being closed so
can someone come and help help
me understand how we can have
two things being true at the
same time or and or is that just
my lack of knowledge on if I
some thirty would be very
welcome.
Mr chair representative I think
that was true last year but what
we're seeing this year is just
up we just talked to our
providers are are insurance
companies are health insurance
companies and one of my medicine
that thirty percent increase in
utilization.
Just in the month of November
so everything is shifting.
Not totally because of COVID but
comment related costs are
shifting now people are going
back and trying to get
procedures that are responsible
for awhile so that's why it it
sounds a little confusing at I
understand word where you're
coming from but it's really it
really is those two pressures
and when we look at our billing
so we're seeing between twenty
and thirty percent increases
just in the past couple of
months.
Mr chair and representative I if
I might so that was but focus of
some of the LFC is August brief
on budget and what we found was
particularly in FY twenty one
when when elective care was shut
down.
in response to a comment.
We really started saying that
overall spending all however but
testing costs we always want to
track those separately because
we always kind of had a
suspicion that they might be
eligible for federal funding so
from a finance standpoint we
wanted to kind of separate those
out but you're absolutely right
in FY twenty and twenty one we
saw you know us a slight
decrease in twenty one and
twenty one and then as all of
that care dot got rescheduled
one particular hospital started
opening up again
We did see the big bounce back
and the actuaries sort of
predicted that the thing is it's
happening a little bit later
than we thought we thought would
happen earlier and then it never
sort of materialized and now
W. secretary Rodriguez said
we're seeing really big
increases and the other thing is
medical inflation for the last
couple of years is in there too
so not only more procedures but
it's more procedures a higher
cost.
Thank you very much Mr chair
thank you Mr Jorgensen and going
on in my line of questioning
with regards to the group health
benefits plan and your mention
of the seventeen million dollar
deficit growing to soon be at
thirty five million dollar
deficit further mentioned that
GST has not increased R. and has
no plans to increase our
premiums I want to give the
secretary designate Garcia an
opportunity to respond to that
and ask the department what
their plan is to stave off this
growing deficits I'm so that the
state of New Mexico doesn't find
itself again and the place of
our you know.
Further paying for benefits that
some of these health plan
members pay for and some do not.
Matt Matt Mr chair
representative we are you know I
I reckon I would I respect this
is a contention with the with
the LFC and in it is something
that we are.
And must need to address one we
are looking at a study looking
at the cost right now we're
involved in the study looking at
the costs and benefits of of
where the pundits correct
currently right now excuse me
with consideration for comment.
The circumstances are a little
different I mean as of W.
secretary Rodriguez said it's a
little bit of a moving target we
are watching some people
delaying the procedures that
they probably should have had
otherwise now they want to
procedures and now they can't
get in because the hospitals are
full so there is a concern about
comment right now today but
there's also an issue of talent
we have a hi vacancy rate in
some of the agencies right now
the governor is focused on
retaining and keeping good
employees for a company just
like any other company in the
state of New Mexico and we have
to focus on keeping our our
employees here and that in light
of the circumstances that we're
in with the surplus and ended
discussions with the governor at
this point in time we're asking
that that be covered with the
surplus and that we not put
pressure on the employees for
premiums at this point we are
looking at our partners in the
in the fund in the pool however
were you near two of a four year
contract but some of them and so
with respect to the timelines
for our members and also
the poll itself at this but we
also need to address the
inflationary pressures on that
on that has not been addressed
there should be maybe and in
discussions with the executive I
think we're going to talk about
how we can.
Have those premiums increased
maybe over time so it doesn't
look like a big hit on the
employees but the at this point
we're asking for a subsidy in
this in this fun.
Thank you very much Mr chair
thank you second secretary
doesn't it I I appreciate your
honest answer I do I know that
we've had issues with hiring
throughout the state billing you
know several positions all
throughout the government about
I met in the levels so I I
understand the struggle and I
appreciate your answer it it it
it makes sense I do hope though
that as things continue to
evolve and change after that the
global pandemic that we can take
a hard look at the situation and
find a solution that will be
acceptable and then Fishel's
everyone I'm sorry capitalize
such time Mr chair is my last
question I promise I'm I want to
shift really quickly to our
facilities management's and I
just one question Mr Secretary
it shows that in fiscal year
twenty one
you basically shortfall personal
costs and you had to transfer
some funding from another budget
category for personal cost but
according to the analysis for
fiscal year twenty to you're
gonna have a surplus of two
hundred twenty thousand dollars
per person yet in we are
difference worksheet facilities
management I see a two hundred
and some odd thousand dollar
increase asked from the
executive so Mr chair Mr
secretary does not I was just
trying to get explained that.
Mr chair representative I don't
I don't know.
I know that we did not move
money out of personal services
and benefits of the amount of
the the reversion was from
rebates from our energy project
that came in at the end of the
fiscal year we can't we can't
spend that money because it's
it's counted as revenue so we we
did not move money I don't think
we've ever have a personal
services that since I've been
here for facilities management
division they're very resource
people resources and economic
intense those are janitors that
make.
Well less than fifteen dollars
an hour we do have a turnover
but.
Quickly as someone leaves we
hire someone else to take their
place and we we don't move money
out of personal services and
benefits and that particular
division.
Mister Mister chair Mister
Jorgensen looks like you want to
respond.
Yes.
I think.
The it was part into into person
and and what we see is you know
when we ran the mid year
calculations there was a slight
are.
So two hundred thousand.
Issue.
Surpluses in app and the act at
the time based on the data we
have that translated to about a
two and a half percent funded
vacancies so it's pretty
from our perspective that's
that's a really modest
And then just on the.
Clarify your question
Representative you were you were
curious about
the executive.
Request.
It did not reduce the amount
it was.
An increase yes it was an
increase of nine hundred
nineteen thousand.
Are you looking at the I'm sorry
Mister chair Mister reconciling
that the that Pico six await
facilities management are you
looking at a high level the
whole agency.
No the code six oh eight.
Okay.
Yes so so that that shows the
difference in the OpBud column.
The executive director for that
was nine hundred nineteen point
eight in the states what's
another two sixty three point
nine in expansion so that was
the entirety of the of the exact
rack and I think that reflected
the agency requests.
Okay thank you very much I am I
am capitalize too much time I we
will definitely to move on I can
take the rest the question
offline you Mr targets and and
and secretary designate thank
you so much for answering these
questions today.
Thank you Representative Hochman
Vigil next we're going to
Representative Dixon.
Thank you Mr chair and thank you
secretary designate for The
presentation and very pleased to
see you in this position
I have a couple of questions the
first are relate similarly to
what Representative Hochman
Vigil was talking about and then
another question regarding
procurement I'm first.
Mr chair and secretary designate
where does the money come from
when we're running a deficit.
Mr Chairman
Representative it depends on
where we're running a deficit
because we do have enterprise
fund and and then we have
general fund so maybe
specifically you can tell me
what your thank you Mr chairman
Mr secretary regarding the
employee group health benefits
so when there's a shortfall.
Mr Chairman representative when
there's a shortfall in that Fund
we are it does general fund for
that and that's why in this
circumstance it would be of it
would need to be subsidized just
like in the special session we
did get some funding and we
would have to ask you the
appropriating body for help.
Thank you Mr chair and Mr
secretary so essentially that is
a
thirty S. seventeen to thirty
five million dollar I don't
mind.
Appropriation that is not
actually being appropriated.
Is that correct the last Mr
Chairman representative we you
asked for it there you know I'll
just tell you that the total
fund is three hundred and fifty
million three for about four
hundred million dollar fund you
look at the deficit it's you
know my personality is as an
economist I look at that and I
said
we have not accounted for CPI M.
as we we at the time we started
the analysis might two months
ago the first thing we look at
was the packet CP I was actually
at five I have percent then
probably six percent now or
estimated to be that alone is
something that is five percent
if you look at the the the the
deficit now that pretty much
matches with inflation so it's
important that we address that
issue moving forward and I know
the the Representative Lundstrom
is sent us a letter the LFC and
we have a prescription a letter
from LFC requesting what we
should specifically due to the
fund but I'm just telling you we
do want to get a handle on it
but the deficit is a roughly
five percent of the three
hundred and four hundred million
dollars.
Thank you Mr chair and thank you
secretary
I think that you know I would
like to know when the study that
you're conducting when you'll be
able to present to the
legislature.
Options or a plan for getting
this you know the health benefit
right at.
Mr Chairman representative I I
can tell you that it is a
priority for me is that it is a
priority for the governor
yes my comments were firm about
what the governor and the
executive.
Would like in this circumstance
but there's a few things we need
to do look at the poll itself
the partners in the pool some
are government related somehow
because I government I'm not
sure that they're all not
government but having more in
the pool helps the risk we just
have to allow people to pull
that are less risky if you will
and that that helps is that the
pool so in management of this
type of the help group's plant
we have to look at our partners
are premium on our employees as
a benefit and also the market
itself and I can assure you that
is what we're doing the study is
to look at the benefits and
costs associated with what's in
the pond now so a combination of
all those things are partners
the the the the costs and
benefits of the fund itself and
the the market itself
and and the nuance of the non
tangible the employee benefit
side of it
at this point I thank her I I I
agree with the governor that we
we don't need to put the
pressure on the employees and
risk losing that at this point.
Thank you Mr chair and secretary
I guess I would like you know
some assurances that.
Ultimately we're going to come
to some sort of decision on how
to work with the local partners
in higher education of folks who
are we're in essentially we're
subsidizing all right now and I
do understand the concerns about
not putting an undue burden on
employees but the problem is
that we are now subsidizing you
know we're taking general fund
money and having to back fill
when you know.
There may be costs and increases
that participants
you know she should have been
supported so I appreciate
the discussion and I look
forward to the report I I'm glad
that it's a priority for for you
Secretary on the governor
Mr chair and secretary my last
question relates to
The past to the to pass
procurement evaluations
that found important
recommendations from previous
evaluations are remaining
unaddressed and I was wondering
if you could give us an update
Mr Secretary on whether or not
You guys are making
recommendations to address some
of those issues thank you very
much.
Mr Chairman representative of
clarifying question are you
asking about
you know what we're doing to
solve the sole source issue or
or the by New Mexico initiative
maybe I need some clarity on
your question please.
Sure my apologies thank you Mr
chair and secretary it regards
purchasing exemptions that
circumvent competition and also
the need to add guard rails to
the use of the statewide price
agreements.
Mr Chairman representative thank
you for the question when it
comes to what what occurred last
year with the sole source of you
know there was a circumstance
created by comment that that the
hi every all the departments in
a bind and rather than have one
final to go through for what was
I think and again I'm talking
from watching the outside of
the trying to get PTA's and all
the states and all the agencies
in the state had to compete with
each other on these on these
purchases and I think when we
look at you know was a fraud and
abuse in there are you know
we're we're looking at what that
what happened there but I think
I don't think there was much
there in at all report when I
get the final information but at
the time what was done was
needed and and at I would say it
was it it was it was reasonable
and fair on the other question
you have I can't answer the
second part of your question.
W..
Or.
Clarify the second part of your
question representative please.
I'm thank you Mr chair and
secretary I'm it one of the
recommendations was calls for
repealing some of the purchasing
exemptions that circumvented
competition and the other was to
add guard rails to the use of
statewide price agreements.
You know me Mr chair
Representative I'll have to get
back to you on that for a better
answer I I can't say I I can
tell you that we are
aggressively looking at opening
up the pipeline for procurement
without sacrificing
opportunities for fraud and
abuse so that a lot of the new
money's coming in the feds won't
be choked up it in one place the
guard rails when it comes to
certain pricing agreements I've
not heard that be become an
issue since I've been here
and I I I I credit that the
staff at the.
Gentleman in purchasing
department they do an excellent
job and they're quick to
try to help as much as they can
we are working on a by New
Mexico initiative of with you
with the legislature and up yeah
I can say this really good
things but I madam chair should
be Mr chair representative I'll
get back to you up on that
question thank you.
I thank you Secretary and thank
you Mr chair I have no further
questions thank you very much
Representative Dixon Mr
secretary designate briefly
Can you get to us I I appreciate
the
the energy savings the cost
savings to the state the enter.
The state that you outlined on
the buildings in the esco the
additional work that's being
done in the transportation area.
Can you get to us just what you
put in there briefly.
And also include just where you
see over FY twenty three that
going because I think that the
more money we save the more
energy we save.
The better it is for all of us
so that that's something I would
request offline and thank you
for addressing in the
presentation.
Secondly Mr Jorgensen can you
briefly go back to the Executive
language that you highlighted
that that you wanted to make
sure was on the radar screen for
us please.
Mr chair.
Members.
It was a program support
there is there is language there
that was not in the LFC
recommendation.
but states that basically any of
the funds in programs support
that remain unexpended at the
end of fiscal year twenty three
shall revert back to the
originating program
and that's done so that you know
all those those insurance monies
those premium money's revert
back to say that but risk
management from funds from which
they K. got it not included but
it should have been and so the
language is on page three at the
bottom got it thanks so much
I I and I want to go now to
madam chair Lundstrom madam
chair.
Already I just wanted to ask one
question Mr chairman is GST
considering taking private
entities life cell in this
building out of the GST health
pool yes or no.
Mr Chairman representative now.
And I'd like to know why not.
Mr Chairman it should be madam
chair representative at this
point I mean I think they would
be out of the poll if we could
prove that there are risks right
now they're helping the people
and their deposit government I
think if you're talking about
yes fully at this point they're
really helping the fund because
of the fact that we're pulling
the risk of our members and
spreading that cost the.
Among those members so if this
point.
R. we were just looking madam
chair that the help of the pool
and at this point they're not
risk.
As as it be paying their
portion.
Madam chair yes yes they will
call partners I just want to
make sure that the general fund
isn't picking that up thank you
Mr chairman thank you very much
madam chair and life the other
questioners the
the employee about health
benefits is is an area of deep
concern.
In one that I think is been
expressed very clearly today and
madam chair has highlighted
previously with that let's go to
Representative Sweetser for the
recommendation please.
Thank you Mr chair and thank you
Mr secretary designate Garcia I
would recommend or move the LFC
recommendation with the
inclusion of the language
identified in the program
support area.
There's a motion for the LFC
recommendation.
With the language and it was
second by who.
Excellent thank you
Representative segment seconded
by Representative Sarinana is
there any opt.
Seeing no opposition the LFC
recommendation with the programs
support non reverting languages
adopted Mr secretary and deputy
secretary thank you very much
for being here today and all the
work that you all do.
Over to.
Excellent at madam chair will
take the next item the state
into offices state engineer
manager.
Are any good afternoon everyone
we're ready to fire up with the
analyst.
You would please.
Thank you madam chair this is
Caitlyn one analyst with LFC
we're going to HSD it code five
fifty the office of the state
engineer here with me to present
the recommendations from DFA is
Andrew Miner we also have acting
state engineer John Romero and
director of the Interstate
Stream Commission Rolf Schmidt
Petersen from the agency just
some references to this agency
it and LFC is volumes in volume
one that you can find our
natural resources policy
analysis on page seventy nine
and agencies report card
beginning on page one fifty
four.
And in volume to it you'll find
LFC is all recommendation for
the agency beginning on page two
thirty.
I'm going to present the
differences in the HSD overall
and then and your and I will go
back and forth going after each
of the programs individually.
So it beginning with revenue for
the office of the state engineer
as a whole the LFC
recommendation increases the HSD
based revenue by more than the
executive but the executive
recommends additional general
fund revenue for expansion items
outside of the agency's request.
Recommendation significantly
increase general fund to replace
revenue from that you're
occasion works construction fund
and the improvements to the Rio
Grande income fund of the LFC is
recommended four point one
million dollar general fund
increased two point eight
million is for this purpose
while the executive
recommendation adds six point
two million dollars in general
fund.
LFC recommends a smaller but
still significant reduction in
trance revenue from the funds
based on projected FY twenty two
ending fund balances of
seventeen point one million and
two point four million in each
Congress actively.
In the base budget LFC
recommends an overall based
increase of two percent
primarily allocated to the
person budget well costs and
other financing uses were
reduced the executive
recommendation also reduces
these categories and keeps the
person and contract services
budgets flat rate overall base
budget decrease of two percent.
There are no differences in
language between the two
recommendations other than the
appropriation amounts that
reflect each budget
recommendations and there is a
technical correction to language
and one of the programs that
will mention when we get to that
difference.
I'm performance LFC and DFA
staff reached consensus on all
performance measure targets and
under expansions the agency did
not request any expansion in its
budget initiatives but the
executive is recommending
several items at a total general
fund cost of two point three
million.
I'll turn things over to answer
to get started with our first
program.
Thank you Kayla good afternoon
madam chair and members the
committee again Andrew Miner DFA
analyst for the office of the
state engineer so first just
like I Kaelin outlined in
general the executive
recommendation utilizes about
six point two million of general
fund revenue to replace trust
fund revenue in order to
stabilize those funds and ensure
revenue was available for the
intended purposes of those funds
and the recommendation also uses
two point three million in
general fund for selected
expansion request throughout the
agency to address high priority
areas such as climate change
drought in the water rights
settlement in dam safety and
infrastructure management and
also be mentioned as we go
through each program so I'll
start by going over the first
program that's the water
resource allocation program.
Revenue here the executive
recommends revenue swap of one
point six million to replace
irrigation works construction
fund and improvement of the Rio
Grande income fund revenue with
general fund the LFC recommend
recommendation replaces one
point four million of those
trust fund transfer revenue with
general fund and that seven
hundred and sixty six thousand
in general fund to the base.
For the base expenditures the
LFC recommendation as seven
hundred and seventy six thousand
to personnel budget for
recruitment and retention
executive recommendation is flat
on the base but then as
mentioned there are a few
expansion items that the
executive recommends these
include four hundred seventy
three thousand four I FTE to
address climate change and
drought issues three hundred and
ten thousand four one F. T. E.
and contractual expenses to
increase damn oversight and
management eighty one thousand
after one FTE to work on Indian
Water Rights settlement
implementation and go she Asians
and one hundred forty thousand
for increased water station
management and to make that so
that is a you take those
expansions into account the
executive recommendation is a
twenty one percent general fund
increase but because a lot of
that is part of that revenue
swap it's a six percent spending
increase.
Madam chair I just want to know
before you move on to the next
program it just was brought to
my attention that the committee
members are missing of the
different street that lays out
the differences between the two
recommendations but the agency
overall you have each programs
but you're missing that overall
agencies all right so we'll get
hard copies that you as soon as
possible and this and that out
in whatever way you prefer and
then if at the end of our
presentation you have any
questions about the differences
I can always share it on my
screen to go over it but just
that give you an overall summary
very quickly the total
recommendation from the LFC is
forty point two million dollars
the total recommendation from
the executive is forty one point
two million dollars that's a
difference of about nine hundred
sixty eight thousand and that
does include these expansion
items in the based request as I
mentioned the LFC recommendation
is higher than the executive by
one point four million dollars
so again happy to answer
questions.
On those total amounts later and
share my screen if that's
helpful but just wanted to give
you that summer and I apologize
for missing would you also
summarized the general fund
difference in total yeah
absolutely and madam chair that
general fund recommendation in
the base budget from LESC it is
four point one million dollars
that's a twenty percent increase
from the FY twenty two operating
budget the executive
recommendation increases general
fund by six point two million
dollars and as I said that's all
to replace transferable from the
irrigation works.
Fund and improvement in the Rio
Grande funds and that yeah I'm
gonna have you share that screen
to some folks do have the high
level it was distributed to the
members but just quickly let's
just pull that up so were people
gonna have a quick look at it no
problem.
A little larger.
Thank you no problem.
Okay so just review this again
while you're looking at it now.
This top row here is our general
fund
you can see the executive
recommendation is two point one
million dollars more than the
LFC in general fund and then the
overall recommendation the LFC
here.
The increase is a one point
three million dollars more than
the executive and then as far
column over here shows the total
recommendation including the
expansion items that the
executive recommended.
All righty okay thank you.
Take it down and will continue
thanks thank you.
Okay so I'm going to move on now
to the Interstate Stream compact
compliance and water development
program he could I I you.
So for revenue LFC recommended
general fund increase at and a
reduction in your Asian works
and improvement of the Rio
Grande provide revenue for it
net increase of four hundred
fifty four thousand the
executive also recommends
revenue slapped with the general
fund increase slightly smaller
than the transfer revenue
reduction for an overall state
budget decreased.
The LFC recommendation in the
base budget uses three hundred
ninety thousand dollars of the
General Fund recommendation to
replace trust Representative now
and the remaining general fund
increase is recommended
primarily in the person budget
for recruitment and retention
the executive recommendation
implemented budget reduction in
the other costs category.
On that language and this is
where we just need a small
technical correction to make
sure that the language
references fiscal year twenty
twenty three instead of fiscal
year twenty thank you.
And then under expansions the
executive recommendation
includes expansion funding of
eight hundred seventy two
thousand dollars and seven FTE
for a fifty year water plan
Indian water rights settlement
implementation and the grocery
ation climate change and drought
issues acequia and other
infrastructure improvements
support and interstate
litigation settlement
negotiations including these
expansions the executive
recommendation is a one hundred
fifty seven percent general fund
increase and the six percent
overall spending increase.
Thanks Kaelin madam chair
Committee members all go ahead
and move on to the next program
which is the litigation
education program.
Of revenue here the LFC
recommendation replaces six
hundred and seventeen thousand
in trust fund revenue with
general fund well the executive
recommends revenue swap of two
point six million both
recommendations reduce other
revenues by five hundred
thousand and that was for the
agency's request.
And the flip side of that in the
baseball of recommendations
reduce other financing uses
spending by five hundred
thousand.
The expansions here there's a
two small ones recommended by
the executive expansion for of
one hundred and eight thousand
four one F. need to work on
Indian Water Rights settlement
implementation and negotiation
at a hundred and fifty thousand
for it technical support
contracts for Indian water
rights settlements so including
these expansions that's general
fund increase in the executive
recommendation by a hundred
twenty five percent but again.
Almost all that is in the two
point six million revenue
replacement for the trust fund
so overall spending is reduced
by three percent of this program
thanks Kayla.
You madam chair our last program
program support and revenue at
the LFC recommendation increases
general fund by four hundred and
nine thousand to replace trust
fund revenue well the executive
makes reference crop of nine
point one thousand dollars.
Recommendations keep overall
based revenue flat with FY
twenty two.
The base budget recommendations
from both LFC and exec are flat
with the small re prioritization
of funds from contractual
services to person.
The executive recommendation
includes expansion funding of
eighty two thousand dollars and
one FTE for infrastructure
innovation and dance eighteen
and one hundred and nine
thousand dollars and one FTE for
fifty year old water plan
implementation.
He's expansions result in a
general fund increase of five
percent and an overall budget
increase of four percent for
this purpose madam chair that
includes our portion of that is
in addition and we can turn it
over now to acting state
engineer Dr Merrill and I asked
you director Rolf Schmidt
Petersen all right John you want
to go ahead and start.
Yes thank you madam chair thank
you for this opportunity to
present our budget can you see
me and my I can share okay.
good afternoon everybody thank
you again for the opportunity to
present our budget request you
today and answer any questions
you may have most of you know me
but for those that don't my name
is John Romero I am the.
water resource allocation
program director and water
rights director currently the
acting state engineer since
former state engineer John
Dantonio
the end of the year.
I have with me on video you'll
see Rolf Schmidt Petersen R. I.
S. I. S. C. director Jeff pram
our programs support director
and napped shakers our acting
general counsel
should have our hand out but it
but we'll be presenting it as
you see on the screen.
In a one pager fact sheet
I and I see director Rolf
Schmidt Petersen will present
our budget and will be available
for questions at the end of the
presentation thank you and Ralph
it's all yours.
Madam chair
Romero acting state engineer
thank you very much good
afternoon everybody I've got
about the ten or twelve slides
that I'm gonna go through here
relatively quickly with you
today the really focuses on
a lot of the the expansion
issues in the priority issues
facing the agency are tied
specifically with the executive
requests and before I started I
want to thank David Abbey and
Caitlin all other members of LFC
staff DFA to for working with
John Merrow myself and and
others at the office of the
state engineer I just see on of
the budget issues over the last
few months and really appreciate
that support as we've come to
move through this recent
transition and that and
appreciate to all your efforts
to support us in that regard
to date I'm gonna talk about the
six main topics or work efforts
better in front of the agency
that are tied with our expansion
and in the first one of those is
really watered administration in
the face of the continuing and
and and Jeff up you could pull
back together when I'm just
gonna go over real quick the
highlights here
so the first one is is really
watered administration it with
extreme drought and what we're
facing with a ready in climate
change Indian water rights
settlements implementation and
negotiation Interstate
litigation in settlement
negotiations that were involved
in implementation of the fifty
year water plan that the
directive of the governorship
without Grisham
it.
Restructuring reevaluation of
our capital project management
and technical support efforts to
better help to get shovel ready
projects developed and put him
on the ground and then
collaboration and data sharing
amongst a few other elements and
Jeff could you jump to the next
slide.
So our initiative associated
with extreme drought and climate
change
is is all about water management
and application processing in
the face of have you know
increasing aridity across New
Mexico
I think we're all aware that New
Mexico is the driest state from
a surface water standpoint of
any state in the United States
and the in fact when we look at
what increasing warming
temperatures of ready done it in
New Mexico we see that the same
amount of water doesn't go as
far for water users and so in
that regard we have a a proposal
here to increase our staffing
and particularly this is
staffing four of the rap program
the water resources allocation
program of four F. well I FTE
one FTE for program support and
one of T. for the I see that
would aid us in these activities
and in addition to that is about
a hundred forty thousand dollars
a year to operate in the team
all of the measuring and
metering stations that the
office state engineer has
established across New Mexico
over the last decade if not more
I would I would add in here that
I believe the LFC recommendation
does it help us significantly to
try to address this amount of
working directly would help wrap
in that regard but there's a a
little bit more FTE from the
executive recommendation if you
look across all of these
different items that'll be
talking about Jeff the next
slide.
So.
This next element is one that I
believe is absolutely critical
for the office to be able to
engage John at a much higher in
detail level that we've been
able to do today
Currently the executive
recommendation includes these
three FTEs one for water
resources allocation program one
for the I. Essie and one for the
litigation adjudication program
really to help us.
Right in maintain a Indian water
rights settlement negotiation
team that would focus on a lot
of the critical
if you want to write some of the
glaciations that we're engaged
in today and these are numerous
and that can describe the
details of them when we if we
have questions in that regard
but we already stretched you
know well across the agency for
implementing settlements of for
the Navajo Gallup water supply
projects supporting the Amit
settlement supporting the tell
Madam what largely for the I. S.
C. but then also engaged on the
Rio San Jose the real Hamm us
the upper Rio Grande and now a
request to by the six mill Rio
Grande pueblos water coalition
for a federal team to look at
Indian water rights settlements
in the middle Rio Grande of the
federal government has
designated teams to do these we
don't we have individual staff
led through the litigation
adjudication program because
that's what this is I mean it's
a legal center proceedings
proceedings on the federal
tribal and state sides in local
and and the lawyers pleaded
technical people supported and
so we see this is one of the
more important all of our
initiatives we think are
important but this is a critical
one and it's not specifically
address really within the LFC
recommendation next to.
Next slide.
What can I say about interstate
litigation and settlement
negotiations
but.
You know the history with the
New Mexico as I've looked
through it now in my head twenty
years working for the I. S. C.
thirty years or more working on
water in New Mexico is that
controversies arise about waters
that are crossing state
boundaries particularly when
you're a drought and the drop
that we're in today is as deep
as any we have been in in the
last hundred years if not more
and we're seeing these
litigation issues arise on our
borders you know what we on the
pay because we already did we
had a lawsuit with the state of
Texas that the state The New
Mexico one here about a year ago
now we have the continuing lower
Rio Grande litigation Texas The
New Mexico one forty one
and that is on going
mediation discussions are
occurring actually today
big portion of the technical
trial scheduled to begin in
March and then of the it's
anticipated that those will
continue well into next year and
and just last this last summer
we heard from the state of Texas
that they are considering making
another call now.
Same with the U. S. Supreme
Court against New Mexico on the
Rio Grande.
in addition to that on the
Colorado River the drought is
becoming very very severe that
area has both water and power
generation yes is issues
associated with that of my staff
and I are heavily engaged in
those and we are preparing a
really to support agreements
that would avoid litigation on
the Colorado River which would
be a really good thing to be
able to do and we've also
developed the agreement with the
hickory Apache nation anti and
see for we so water from hickory
Apache nation that would help
with endangered species
compliance for all of our water
users and ultimately the Navajo
Gallup water supply project on
the San Juan river in
potentially serve as a as a
drought for supplied for the
state of New Mexico if we ever
have compact issues well
specific compact compliance
issues on the Colorado River
we're trying to get out ahead of
those and let us be instead of
the responding to what happens
to us in that regard the thing I
want to mention on here is the
six million dollar request for
the lower Rio Grande this is a
coordinated request with the
office of the Attorney General
the request is for four million
dollars ours is for six there's
no duplication in those and we
believe both of those are
critically necessary and we
thank you you know support of
the executive recommendation in
that regard would be very
helpful next slide.
So talk a little bit about the
implementation of the fifty year
water plan to address climate
change
you all will be receiving a
report from the bureau of
geology and mineral resources
here probably in the next week
or two that is their peer
reviewed science
evaluation of the impacts of
continued warming in New Mexico
over the next fifty years on our
water resources and it's a
pretty start report
the I. S. C. has been working
with water users at the
governor's direction and in
addition to looking at science
we're basically reaching out to
water users across New Mexico
who are experts in dealing with
drought to understand what
they've done to be resilient to
be able to make it through the
dry times gather that
information assess resilience of
our water communities and then
make recommendations as we go
forward and this funding the two
FTE would support us going
forward for implementation of
that plan including for
infrastructure and the three
hundred fifty thousand a year
would help us complete the plan
this next July tying in a bunch
of infrastructure record request
that we will be coordinating
with the governors senior water
adviser Mike Hammond of for a
July deliverable on that and
then implementation
recommendations going forward
get in here two FTE two hundred
thousand dollars three hundred
fifty thousand dollars a year
Jeff the next slide.
So I'm at this is something
that's even more near and dear
to my heart Interstate Stream
Commission has a responsibility
for working with local
communities the safety is in
community ditch systems across
the state to to basically put
capital appropriations on the
ground to help those communities
and and actually help them plan
and design projects as we go
forward and we find that the you
know the what's needed from a
local level to the state level
you know to administrative
function and all other pieces is
not always in place in order to.
Easily move this money and do it
quickly and we know that's the
same for damn programs and and
we know we have a hot bunch of
high hazard dams within the
state in New Mexico so this
request and this initiative
piece is three F. T. to those
FTEs would really go to
well the first one would go to
the dam safety bureau for safety
and management issues the next
one to go to the I. S. C. for
capital project management for
safety is another infrastructure
projects and then they program
support bureau would have a
Stafford Aid with these overall
initiatives
and then finally from a funding
perspective two hundred thousand
dollars a year to the dam safety
bureau of wrap for capital
project management support to
move a bunch of projects to help
move them forward and then also
to develop a risk informed
evaluation of publicly owned
dams and and from that develop
risk informed dissent design
principles for New Mexico down
next slide.
And I'm almost done here madam
chair
the the the the last a real
initiative I want to talk about
is about collaboration and data
sharing and the executive
request has one million three
hundred eighty thousand in it to
help us Fund implementation of
the two thousand nineteen
Watergate Act this is
essentially going into the
agency's existing files and
making data more available
including what's called
meditative that so you know how
the data was collected and you
know how can be used in the
future and then a little over
three million dollars to
modernize our agencies water
rights adjudication tracking
system I think that's important
across the state for water users
all the way across the state for
the agency to become more
effective and efficient in its
activities but also support the
water data act
Let's move to the just give the
time let's move to a last slides
up.
So on this last slide this is
the budget sustainability and
trust fund solvency issue
you know as Caitlyn mentioned
the LFC recommendation is to
replace two point nine million
of the general of the trust fund
monies with general fund which
is a great thing to have
the executive is to replace six
million two hundred twenty eight
thousand of that as you might
expect to we very much support
the executive recommendation in
this regard and and there's a
couple reasons why I mean I
think one and and mace maybe
most directly in front of you
all of that six million dollar
recommendation on the executive
side gets us to the point where
we're actually on track with
implementing the five year plan
that we had put forward to the
legislature for reducing Trust
Fund dependencies and it also
puts this in a much better
position going forward if we
don't have the kind of good year
of revenue that we did this last
year we're the agencies not
facing a situation of making a
decision about moving the
project forward are being able
to have a flat budget for the
next year and so for the for all
those reasons we support the
executive recommendation in this
regard and madam chair with that
we stand for questions.
All right I appreciate that
did you want to add anything
else before we go to questions.
So we're good thank you okay
let's go head start with the
committee will start with
Representative Ezzell.
You madam chair thank you very
much
acting director.
Romero and Mr Schmidt Petersen
appreciate your being here today
and for presenting all of this.
I I do have a question I'm gonna
start out and John Romero if you
would mind answering this I know
that whenever I first started up
here eighteen years ago that we
were working then on water
rights adjudication can you tell
us what the status is right now.
Madam chair representative
Ezzell I'd like to defer to
naturally occurs he's on with us
the acting general counsel.
But thank you madam chair and
representative he's L. and
Caitlyn I think that can help me
more here than I was asked that
question on the Senate side
Representative Ezzell and
Caitlin was able to jump in and
say in the LFC is the LFC as a
summary of where we are in the
education statewide section by
section with the need to do the
creation and I don't have
unfortunately that age number
ready but again was able to find
it pretty quickly for inclusion
awards last week.
And I would I'll defer to her
but suffice to say we've made
good progress on a lot of
education and we have more work
to do you know there's there's
there's still more educating to
do we are committed to using
that process through for all the
water users in this in this
basis but I think you'll see
from the summary that there's
there's a number of them that
were we're.
Almost all intents and purposes
complete.
Representative these L. at if
you have LFC is volume three our
water rates education progress
table it needs seventy eight.
Okay go ahead.
Question.
Okay what I'm asking here is
eighteen years ago I know that
senator Wirth then
Representative worth and
Representative Servan tastes and
myself and there were several
other members that were on a
water rights adjudication
adjudication subcommittee of the
water natural resources
committee and it was imperative
in our opinion that all water
rights.
Because they are personal
property have to be adjudicated.
So my question is are all of
these bases that we are talking
about right now has water have
what is the percentage of water
rights that still need to be
completed and do we have enough
attorneys that are able to help
these people
make sure that that does take
place.
Madam chair Representative we
that table on page seventy eight
of the report does show the
percentage completion of water
race in the bye be sent for each
of the sections and roughly half
of them shows around the issues
the fact of the hundred percent
completion for education in the
sections the
The.
Agency is committed as I said to
seeing through all of these
education as you say these are
private property rights and as
such are the owners have due
process rights related to those
so that includes the right to
challenge everybody else's water
right as it relates to their own
and so the process is take time
we are you know we we have a
number of of attorneys and
hydrographic survey staff who
are working full time on these
occasions
we're prioritize it yeah we we
can't.
We don't we don't have the staff
to push every single one through
at breakneck pace but we're
pushing through all all of them
as fast as as we can with the
resources
that realistically available so
we're we're moving them.
Representative madam
representative madam chair.
I appreciate the response of
been reading this over I'm still
not seeing my answer.
Rio Grande goes can point that
out to me in this work.
Madam chair representative okay.
Go ahead I apologies in
discovering
madam chairman Representative
the lower Rio Grande there are I
believe
sections there were issues the
completion in that area the
along the upper Rio Grande
there's the Red River they're
you know they're several
sections on the upper Rio Grande
a number of those are complete.
The middle Rio Grande is not on
there and there's a reason for
that and one of the results
going down refer I get that but
I'm still in like the San Juan
is only seventeen percent
completed the will but I just
want to make sure that we're
finally going forward with this
because it is important.
But I'm not gonna take it
anymore time on that I
appreciate the fact that you all
are going to start sharing data
especially when we're working
with our Ag universities and
Mexico tech.
Whenever you John maybe you can
help me out here or.
Mr Schmidt Petersen.
Regulative water transfers that
always gives me great concern
because until that point of
diversion.
Is specified as to what it's
going for I'm not going to have
any land developers come in I
will throw a fit lad developers
come in but when we try to
happen in the past to move water
out of the basin to help another
area of the state to me that's
unconscionable would you like to
respond to that John.
Yes madam chair Representative
Ezzell that's something that has
come up and several cases in the
past the US Senate as the planes
comes up.
If we and we look at in our
evaluation of.
Answers are applications we look
at is there a place of use is
somebody going to be using the
water or they just moving it and
then trying to get.
Somebody to the water later you
know down the line.
In other words speculative so so
it is something we look at
The case over there they don't
have both senators in planes
they don't have of solidified
water users that were ready to
take the water it just presented
maybe this guy maybe this people
or this this policy so that is
something we look at all the
time
And it's something that goes
into our review process.
John I appreciate that because
that is a concern especially for
more rural areas of the state
because they're what's funded
time madam chair.
Speculator said Kevin they're
trying to buy a water rights
from on and B. B. I. CD in the
Roswell artesian based of to
transferred to Santa Fe and
Albuquerque New.
Madam chair I'm not gonna take
it anymore time to rest my
questions can be answered.
Can be just give the water
natural or whatever that
committee is gonna be called
that Ag sake is a water
committee I guess is what it's
going to be called but I just
want these gentleman to know
that I will be asking some
questions especially in regards
to produced water and the draft
relief activities along the pike
is and on the Rio Grande madam
chair thank you very much.
All right let's go
Representative Brown.
Thank you very much madam chair.
Madam chair and and Mr students
in your I have a question about
the your cation works
construction fund it's a marked
as page five on whatever
handouts.
It says at the beginning balance
is for awhile for FY twenty one.
And this is pre audit is fifteen
million two hundred thirty four
thousand dollars and some some
change.
the projected beginning balance
for FY twenty two will be
eighteen million one twenty
nine.
so the first question I'm I have
about that is
it appears that I'm looking at
the yellow volume that we have
a volume one and it has a
special appropriation request of
seven million dollars and it's
to replenish the depleted
improvement of the irrigation
works construction signed so my
question is with what appears to
be a pretty healthy beginning
balance why the special request
for seven million.
Madam chair Representative Brown
when the deferred to chef Prem
he can answer that question
thank you.
Jennifer you.
Yes madam chair what was the
rate was that in volume one of
the LFC recommendation.
Madam chair and the gentleman
it's a volume one and I find it
on page one ninety four.
And it's at the bottom of that
page under the call state
engineer.
And again the language says to.
Replenish the depleted
improvement of the irrigation
works construction fund.
Will point out insure that
Questions for seven million but
I believe LESC did not
endorse that.
Yes madam chair thank you for
the reference that was a special
appropriation that was included
among our special appropriations
requests knowing that both the
executive and LFC we're taking
that trust fund solvency issue
seriously but it it wasn't yet
established whether the
executive and or LFC would like
to do that through nonrecurring
means and a one time
short term fix or whether it
would be a recurring long term
fixed both the LFC
recommendation and executive
recommendation I have both taken
a path of.
Addressing the issue in a long
term recurring manner which is
great for the agency the
difference being that the LFC
our approach is our is a
slightly lower swap slightly
less aggressive I just walked in
the executive recommendation
included I hope that answers
your question.
Madam chair yes Sir yes it does
so could someone give us a
little bit more information
about the irrigation works
construction fund and this is a
page five of our packet
It provides the sources are
identified land grant permanent
fund interest loans when
maintenance fund again lost from
long term investments and that's
in the slightest so I see the
sources of revenue for the fund
up to tell us what the
authorized uses our lease
categorically.
Yes madam chair again Jeff
Graham programs support director
for offices state engineer I
just see the uses of the the
trust funds in particular for
irrigation works construction
fund we have listed the specials
and bar thirty these trust funds
have in the past been used
utilized as the revenue sources
for special appropriations and
also for bar at forty four some
items that used to be built into
our recurring budget but have
been pulled out.
And funded through the more
nonrecurring
bar thirty so it doesn't create
noise in the operating budget
the operating budget line item
is the operating budget of our
agency.
The forestry division.
Is the relatively newly created
forestry division
forestry management fund that
was created over in the
department of energy and natural
resources forestry Division that
has a standing appropriation in
the statutes that created that
fund that draw one million
dollars out of this trust fund
it also draws one million
dollars out of the improvement
of the Rio Grande income fund
which is the second trust fund
that I believe is on the sheet
that you're looking at that's
our other trust fund that is
administered by the Interstate
Stream Commission the final line
item under that you're
additional arts construction
fund expenditure are uses are.
Rose there is the acequia Fund
this fund was a fund that was
established in the same year as
the forestry division fund but
it's a little bit unique whereas
the forestry division fund is a
non reverting one million
dollars R. one million dollar
transfer out to that forestry
division from the acequia fund
is a reverting appropriation to
statutorily created as thank you
Fund that is our similar to the
program and it used to be funded
and I just see section four
appropriation that funds various
estate here
capital project funding programs
and the loan program in our
agency of that amount is going
to very high in terms of the
actual expenditures.
And as you can see there are FY
twenty two is the first year
that it's anticipated that some
of that two point five million
dollars might be spent any
unspent balances at the end of
the fiscal year in out of state
you're fund would revert back to
the irrigation works
construction fund.
Thank you madam chair I
appreciate the time that's
because the going into
explanation of this fund I think
my my final question is and I
appreciate the forestry division
and the Starkey of funds are
irrigation districts with the
New Mexico at all allowed to ask
for funding under under the
furnace Fund.
Why am asking madam chair
the card is bitter addition
district has been notified that
new gates are needed on the
Pecos and we set up your fort
Sumner and may be another
location and it's very very
expensive to do that and there's
No clear path in terms of how
that would get paid for it I'm
just wondering if you're cation
District would all have access
in any way either through a
grant to work through perhaps
interest bearing loan to make
use of some of this funding.
That's the I guess the best way
I can describe it madam chair
and you have an answer for that.
Madam chair representative I
think I can find an answer to
that the Interstate Stream
Commission has the re loan
program that we have utilize
that to believe we have
authority at and that just for
about half a million dollars a
year of low interest loans to
support programs but we've also
utilize these trust funds beyond
acequia and Community ditch
programs to cost share with
your addition Conservancy
districts
and on a number of issues that
are mutually beneficial and and
those can be historically things
that relate to your nation
efficiency river maintenance and
a number of different activities
but out to the best of my
knowledge not specifically
pulled in four of us in a
separate project for irrigation
district for small Jeff do you
have any other thoughts on.
Madam chair representative I
would not have.
Director of Peterson she is
correct there is five hundred
thousand dollars of the forty
normally granted within the
section for language for loans
to irrigation districts
conserved just Conservancy
districts and soil and water
conservation districts for re
loan to farmers to implement a
water conservation improvements
and then I would defer to I just
you staff to work with you on
any individual requests or
projects to see what you know
which of the programs might
complied to any given situation.
Thank you so much for that
information madam chair thank
you for the time I appreciate
it.
Representative small than
Representative Crowder.
Thank you very much madam chair
madam chair.
Acting state engineer and
presenters
Really two questions one
you you talked about a joint
litigation that proposal with
the Attorney General.
Is some of that is all of that
in this section of HB to are
there special appropriations
that are also part of that.
Share our John sorry.
Madam chair representative it's
small or vice chair I defer
again to all Jeff pram he would
know that answer.
Chair members of the committee
there is a unit of recurring
items that Rolf covered in the
slides that are included in the
executive recommendation having
to do with the staffing
and the Interstate litigation
are obviously it takes people to
get the litigations moving the
Texas New Mexico is not our only
litigation and there's plenty of
other threatened litigation so
what you'll see is in the
executive recommendation there's
both the recurring and
nonrecurring element the
recurring element you'll see in
section four of the general
appropriations act and that's
where we're looking for staff
and resources to dedicate to
those efforts because they keep
on growing is that the amount of
water gets smaller and then in
section five you'll see special
appropriation requests totaling
ten million dollars between the
attorney general's office and
I see I just see at this point
instead of the ten million that
was requested both of the
entities right now under the LFC
recommendations for special
appropriations are receiving for
so we're currently at eight.
As opposed to the ten that was
requested jointly thank thank
you very much to print and I
that's that's helpful then
secondly madam chair into the
presenters
We've outlined the that we're
heading we're only heading into
more scarcity where the same
amount of of moisture yields
decreasing benefits due to
higher temperatures and ready so
this situation we faces dire
for for this upcoming fiscal
year but do you.
You know to do we have enough
mechanisms in place and the
flexibility or do you think we
can create that flexibility in
order to respond to some of the
most dire situations that might
arise.
As we go into the summer of of
that calendar year twenty two.
Here Representative small all
Ralph would you please answer
that.
Yes thank you John I believe I
can madam chair Representative
small I believe in particular
for the the lower Rio Grande
related litigation and mediation
activities with that full ten
million dollars of the attorney
general's office is the lead on
all of this in the ICO C. would
be well prepared for anything
that's in front of us you don't
have to say on the Colorado
River
we are a small state compared to
a number of the other ones there
when it comes to a monetary
standpoint but that water is
tremendously important to us
we believe the request the
executive request will help us
get prepared but if litigation
does start you know in that
basin you know significantly
more would be expected I
currently do not anticipate that
to be the case in yeah twenty
two for the beginning twenty
three at least all because of
two weeks worth of snow in the
Colorado River basin.
Up one from nothing to ten feet
of snow in some areas on what
you know unfortunately not a lot
for us
okay thank you madam chair I
will follow up offline because
From a ledge just that
perspective the multiple
connections to NMED to EMNRD and
other agencies within the
watershed sphere and the
tremendous investments that
we've made including in the
special session.
I'd like to get a handle on that
I'll do that offline no and
thank you for the time madam
chair.
Representative Crowder.
Thank you madam chair just too
low there is a question of a lot
of discussion today Mr Romero Mr
Peterson
regarding the fifty year water
plant seeds what water plant we
operating under now.
Madam chair representative
Crowder Ralph would you please
answer.
Madam chair representative
Crowder we're currently working
under that two thousand and
eighteen state water plan
that we're we had an update from
all the regions and then
coordinated to pull all that
information together the fifty
year plan is a looking forward
document to understand the
science about what will happen
across New Mexico's landscape in
the face of these increasing
temperatures that information
will be pull together into a
series of recommendations for
policy in governments
infrastructure research and and
things people can do on their
lands are with their water to
help them do better this next
summer.
Caring into the twenty threes
calendar session and then the
the next update to the state
water plan would be in late
twenty twenty three.
Madam chair Ralph thank you I
was under the impression we're
working under a forty year water
plan right now is that correct.
Mr chairman for the Interstate
Stream Commission and for the
state that that's not correct a
lot of the municipalities have
required forty year plans that
relate to their portfolios Water
Rights and now we seek to
incorporate that information
into the state water plan okay
so madam chair and rough I think
I reset the state doesn't have a
a thirty year or forty year
water plan there's is different
is that correct.
Madam chair representative
that's correct okay thanks very
much but second question is.
Has that always CISC received
any direct funding as a result
of the cares are are both
funding anything related to
COVID.
Mr chairman I'll defer to Jeff
but my understanding is no no
yes Representative.
Representative we've reported
somewhat insignificant costs for
reimbursement but nothing
substantial.
Okay so what I think I hear you
say is nothing directly from the
Feds to the O. S. C. R. I S. T.
is that correct.
Okay thank you for all the my
following question to that is
have you been notified of any
funding from the infrastructure
bill the president Biden signed
is do you have any of funding
coming to the agencies from that
infrastructure bill.
This is John Romero we would
would please madam chair
representative I think I can
answer that we we have
definitely been coordinating
with the the governor's office
on infrastructure related
projects that could go into the
infrastructure act and we have
been coordinating with my canon
is new job just twelve days or
so on the job to coordinate
water infrastructure Act related
items but to the best of my
knowledge we have not learned of
any opportunities for funding to
come directly to the agency in
that regard for importation the
reason I was asking is the
eastern New Mexico border chili
Authority was notified they were
gonna get between three hundred
and four hundred and two million
and I I just began to wonder is
I. S. C. O. S. C. getting any
money for downs or any other
opportunity like that from the
infrastructure bill I think I
hear you say not that we know of
is that correct.
All right that's all my
questions thank you.
All right let me L. scam the
group here and see if we have
anybody else.
Sure doesn't look like at I
don't have anybody else for
questions so let's go to
Representative small for the
motion thank you madam chair I
would move the LFC
recommendation with the language
change in P. code five five to
to reflect FY twenty three.
All right we have a second for
that motion.
I'm not sure that language yes
Representative center small can
you tell us but that is again
remind me madam chair miss one
brought it to our attention I
believe it's a reference to FY
twenty two when in fact the
reference should have been the
FY twenty three I gotcha okay
are any.
We have a motion and we have a
second on this thank you madam
chair okay we have a motion and
a second is there any opposition
to this motion.
Okay we'll take the LFC
recommendation I want to thank
you for good presentation today.
Thank you very much.
Committee members thank you all
right can we move on to the next
agency please.
All right good afternoon madam
chair members of the committee
my name is Eric Shinya the LFC
analyst for the workforce
solutions department.
You today yes.
I just said welcome Merrick
thank you madam chair.
With us here today we have US
secretary doesn't that Ricky
Serna.
I believe he's on it CM.
And then the executive analyst
Simon Miller.
We're gonna be going over HSD
six three one that's workforce
solutions department.
I just wanted to point out the
pages and LAFC's Paul UNM's so
in volume one on page forty
three and one seventeen you'll
find sees policy right up and
Four cards on one seventeen
there is actually pretty good
table I wanted to point out are
they can take a look at and it
just shows throughout the
pandemic how much we paid out of
those you I trust fund balances
every week you know being gone
up almost a thirty million every
week and then the balance is
kind of going down but then we
got the loan from the or the the
the money from the coronavirus
relief fund and pay back those
those balances now we're sit
right at around three hundred
seventy three million.
In the trust fund in volume two
you'll see the LFC budget
recommendation on page two
hundred eighty one and then on
volume three on page eighteen
you'll see the you I trust fund
balances and a projection going
out several years on that.
I'm not gonna go through me and
Simon are not going to go
through every single page on
this there's not a ton of
differences I think we can go
over the just the first page and
you can see what all the
differences are on that first
page.
In general fund transfers LFC
didn't recommend quite as much
general fund transfers the
executive essentially in this is
that this is transferred that's
been going on for I don't know
eight ten years where do
The the workers comp
administration sends over money
to workforce solutions it's a
million dollars the executive
recommendation what replace that
revenue with general fund
revenue and so there about a
million above.
Down there in the expansion of
the table you can see that both
recommendations supported most
of the expansion you'll see LFC
recommended expansion of seven
hundred seventy five thousand
the executive recommended the
expansion of nine hundred
thousand.
and aside from that in total
LFC was about two hundred and
eighty three thousand of lower
than the executive and with that
madam chair all pass it over to
us Simon for any further
comments okay.
Thanks Eric good afternoon madam
chair members of the committee
like Eric said I'd overall the
budget recommendations are
pretty similar I think there's a
less than a one percent
difference between the LFC and
exec however there is kind of
kind of a considerable
difference in the use of general
fund and like Eric said it's it
has to do with that transfer
from workers comp.
The LFC includes the transfer
executive replace that transfer
of general fund and then the
executive provides a little more
funding for the implementation
of the healthy workplaces Act
which requires that most private
employers to provide a minimum
amount of earned sick leave that
goes into effect in fiscal year
twenty twenty three and DWS
server workforce solutions has
some responsibilities for
implementing and enforcing the
healthy workplaces Act so the
executive just provides a little
bit more funding for our for
those responsibilities so with
that I will turn it over to
to the agency thank you madam
chair if I may I I forgot to add
one little point to this
we were we've already taken the.
The committee already took the
workers comp it ministration
recommendation for the LFC and
that includes the transfer of
that funding over to workforce
solutions department so if.
The motion later on were to be
to not take the LFC would have
to do that clean up later on I
just wanted to point that out.
With that we can pass it over to
Secretary Stewart.
Mr stern.
Thank you madam chair good
evening members of the committee
again my name is Ricky Serna of
the acting secretary Department
workforce solutions I have The
presentation that I'm gonna put
up.
just weeks or.
I think that that that does it
Simon can you see the whole
thing great.
I've got some information here
really just provide you all with
an update on where we are
relative to unemployment
insurance claim and some of the
work that we've been doing and
sharing with you all over the
course of the summer as relates
to getting New Mexicans back
work
this first slide which is which
is increasingly becoming my
favorite is some trend data on
total number of unemployment
insurance payments that have
been received that are receiving
benefits and so you'll see of
course this downward trending
spikes down from up to fifty
thousand payments at the summer
of twenty twenty are to where
we're at now that clean if you
see there of course correlates
with the B. X. the exhaustion
date of federal extended
benefits in September and right
now we're sitting at about
eleven thousand four twenty five
payments receiving benefits was
just seventeen hundred more than
where we were pre pandemic.
in terms of employment numbers
we're taking a look here March
twenty twenty our January twenty
twenty compared to where we are
on November twenty one total
employment so you'll see here
that benchmark of eight hundred
and sixty three thousand lost
of working adults in the state
of New Mexico relative to where
we are now this is
what what's are tangled into
participation rates for working
adults in New Mexico so the
difference now is about the two
thousand five hundred workers
relative to where we were a year
ago in January R. years ago
rather choose being into the
twenty.
We also seeing an increase in
advertised advertised jobs this
data comes of course from our
our tool bit shy spiders in
every single job posting that
available to New Mexicans via
the web or those that are direct
people should begin our job
system and so we're seeing an
increase obviously in the number
of jobs posted are which
correlates of course with half
that number of New Mexicans not
working that were working in
January twenty.
To get a glimpse of where the
gaps exist right now there's a
difference of about thirty
thousand sat thirty seven
thousand seven hundred jobs that
of course means that a total
employed you know it by these
industries back in November of
twenty one I'm sorry November of
nineteen relative to where we
are
you'll see the gaps here I'll
point out a couple of these like
mining Health Care these are
hospitality local government
employment those are some areas
of course that create.
Twenty just on our end to
explore you know what's the root
cause of of that decrease in
jobs in some instances jobs are
posted and and the in the
employer can't find workers in
some instances you know the
employers may have reduced the
number of jobs that they can
make available to New Mexicans
and and others are maybe just a
temporary halt on on filling all
of those positions for a number
of reasons you can see that
there are some areas that have
have basically broke even or
have increased the number of job
workers that they had when
compared to two thousand
nineteen pointing to
manufacturing retail trade and
professional and business
services so we do see employment
growth in some industries and
and and others our break even
point for example and
educational services and other
services that are.
I did talk about this during our
our budget hearing I think just
a couple months ago madam chair
members of the committee it was
a project we were working on
with the Human Services
Department you see see the HSD
I'm sorry and the DFA we
essentially wanted to do as part
of our attempt to answer the
question how our workers
sustaining themselves if many of
them that were pre pandemic are
not working now and we wanted to
do was understand how claimants
are interacting with other state
resources and benefits that are
available to them or were
available to them during the
first endemic and so you'll see
here when we look at those
thirty two thousand claim and
that are essentially hit the
cliff right at the end of
federal extended benefits not
very many of them were
interacting with other benefits
the largest the the largest
other service in being you know
Medicaid the same is true for
the secondary subgroup of twenty
thousand eight hundred
placements the largest program
they participated in in addition
to unemployment insurance again
was Medicaid and then second to
that was snap benefits we are
monitoring through these new
partnerships with the sister
agencies how are you know New
Mexicans are utilizing all of
this one.
We are looking also to see
mobility there's as you all know
workers are are certainly on
leveraging the increased wages
to not only move from one
employer to another but in some
instances from one industry to
another so we did here is we
took a look at changes in in in
industry between eighteen and
nineteen and then compared those
changes in in mobility from
twenty to twenty one we'll see
here is it you know there's not
a lot of change in some
instances but also decreases in
mobility right so they're still
employed in the same industry
you see about three percent less
were employed in the same
industry when you compare you
know twenty twenty one to
eighteen nineteen so there is
some ability there but you'll
also see right on the far right
this table that shows that
decrease in overall workers so
we still have a high number of
workers although they aren't on
unemployment insurance benefits
are still the following out of
work first you need to be
they're not working and not
looking for a job or not or
working and and and cannot at
this time thank you that down we
can look to see what you know
what industries are seeing the
biggest ships so if you look at
where the blue lines are the
longest for example in utilities
educational services and health
care and public administration
these are workers that that
really do stick with those
industries and don't move around
a lot and of course where you
see the brown the the blue line
the shortest like arts
entertainment accommodation
services administrative and
support retail trade you see
that's where there's a lot of
ability meeting that those
workers at this point based on
what we see in wage data are
moving around a lot from one
industry to another which
presents you know the need for
us to focus on you pipelines for
those for those employers and.
Course talked a lot about
participation rates of what
we're looking at right now is
the need to really identify
those that are falling out of
the participation pool of
workers in the state identify
with their barriers are and
certainly look to upskill them
or or really close the gap in
skills between what they did is
the and what employers need that
are presently.
I would like to show this slide
because it breaks down
participation rate in a couple
of ways by gender but then also
underscores why we've been
focusing a lot on our
partnership with ECECD to
provide child care assistance
and press the gaps in child care
you may have heard earlier today
the governor launched another
measure that perhaps could
assist with our child care needs
for New Mexicans both of the use
of state workers and and the
National Guard so this light
here of course shows that
relative to the nation as a
whole Senator mothers in
particular children less than
six years old are participating
in the work force at lower rates
and that the nation as a whole
so we really are working on is
how we get out we to communities
and discuss some of these
challenges and and help them
overcome.
We've been talking a lot about
across agency partnerships in
this the list keeps getting
longer and longer we've been
working with HSD in early
childhood really care department
to to hit the streets and start
talking with communities about
the state of the work force and
presenting them the with the to
them the resources available at
our agencies information that
helps them you know understand
you know what what's going to be
workers in actually become that
resource hub for workers so that
workers aren't focused on
finding resources to come to
work instead the years our
partner in those finding those
keys purses so you know we've
done these infants were excited
will be in Los crucis later on
this month element for low later
on this month and then and we're
this just this morning I met
with Carlsbad officials and will
be moving there very quickly to
to have these information
sessions with employers but also
then up to use them as a
springboard for locals your
hiring event I'm DWS is been
working with the state personnel
office to focus in on hiring
state of New Mexico workers to
back at hiring events agencies
and so since December we've had
six rapid prior events more than
five hundred applicants and
nearly a thousand interviews
conducted to fill vacancies
within state government we
launched a program in
partnership with tourism
department a program that
assists Hospital are really
restaurants and hotels.
Help them screen a new pipeline
of workers to fill their
vacancies when we started we
obligated to provide million to
assist these employers with the
up to four thousand three
and eighty dollar training
reimbursement for new employees
the public EDD of the two
million here the help eighty six
employers for for than five
hundred workers out so we really
like that project and we're
we're working hard to get the
word out to employers who have
not yet heard about it the
programming purges a minimum
rate of pay for all fifty or
more and we're also working with
tourism because we're about to
launch a two hundred thousand
dollars direct marketing
campaign statewide to really
encourage work in this industry.
We also launched ready New
Mexico several months back in
partnership with higher
education department and as you
all know this created an online
portal where workers and
employers can come in to access
resources available by both of
our agencies essentially
training opportunities tuition
assistance postsecondary
opportunities and direct hiring
assistance and referrals and so
many New Mexico has been a
wonderful tool for us we also as
part of this project dedicated
two million dollars to fund
short term workforce development
programs mainly in partnership
with postsecondary institutions
and we've already committed
three quarters of a million and
twelve new training programs
have been stood up as a result
of that project and what we like
most about you know those
programs is we cannot be longer
than sixty weeks and they have
to the partnership with an
employer that insurers you know
workers are really getting
training based on the skills
that employers are looking for.
Over the past year we've also
locked arms very tightly with
the Human Services Department
and we are now the contractor
administering the New Mexico
works program I'm really wait
subsidy increasing programs for
Human Services Division so
essentially these programs
of support with the just the
direct referrals kind of
disappearance a pandemic
participants to come in and
require some case management get
the work experience necessary to
earn a livable wage on their own
so those rules come over to us
and we work based these
disciplines include work
experience opportunities that
help them essential be getting
gainful employment experience
and so we've been leveraging
this program of course now
understanding that the cost is
is very minimal no one or the
employers they don't pay them we
pay them we make the connection
we send them over we do the case
management to make sure that any
of the barriers that these
workers might have in those work
thanks yes sign in
are being addressed very very
quickly and so all the while
we're also helping helping New
Mexicans on kind of transition
budget you know started career.
Very quickly madam chair just a
couple more slides we do want to
underscore some of the state
funded services that have been
imperative over the last couple
of years years especially we
have over twenty offices
workforce connection offices
across the state that have been
open for funds and you know we
we've been getting the.
Hitting the drums hard here too
so that they can understand you
know our our cadence about
customize employee recruitment
services meaning that we can do
everything from help help
provide applicants screen those
applicant's interview those
applications conduct skill
verification or skill
assessments we also administer
employer tax credits federal
funding we can subsidize
training the cost of treating
employees up to fifty percent so
that workers so that employers
can you know essentially you'll
the cost saving when they bring
in a worker that's not yet where
they need to be but has the
capacity to do that.
We are work with apprenticeship
in I'm very successful we're
seeing increases in apprentices
across the state and we're
reaching a rhetorical for twenty
five percent increase by the end
of this year.
Are are in some of our our our
our budget for the upcoming year
of course as was mentioned by by
the allies we are looking for
some assistance in the
implementation of the twenty
just a quick update on where we
are with the presentation I'm
here we've the final the final
rate drafted we get the public
comment period on and the
hearing on December fifteenth we
have filled some of the labor
law administrative positions and
we're working internally to
identify you know where we need
to ramp up on communications and
of course our we're working on
you know how will communicate
with employers and
we gonna find what we're gonna
need by way of staffing
equipment and office space and
right here is a breakdown of
what we're what we're hoping to
attain as a measure for
enforcement of house bill twenty
so that we can hit the ground
running and and that's
essentially what's included in
our in our in our request so I
know that was quickly but I I
certainly wanted to be
respectful of your time in in
the not for for questions all
right thank you Mr chairman I
think this is excellent it
follows up on some of the
questions that we had during
your hearing and the LESC
committee but we're gonna go
ahead and go to the committee
members will start with
Representative lane.
Thank you madam chair
madam chair my question for.
Mr Sir Mr Sarna I'm sure he
probably knows I'm asking
because I ask them this during
the LFC hearing whenever this
agency presented in front of us
I would appreciate an update on
whether or not this agency is
going to eliminate two thousand
twenty from the reserve factor
calculation for employer you I
rates.
Thank you thank you madam chair
representative we are to be
quite honest with you we have
any interest we haven't moved an
inch on that just yet and and so
we got to continue to to put
paper a pencil on projections on
what that's going to do
Representative so I apologize I
don't have any additional
updates at this time but but it
is certainly something that we
need to look at what we can
share is that the new rates have
have gone out
as they typically do we didn't
see sharp increases but that's
but it's very early right we we
didn't see a whole lot of
increases generally speaking so
we've got to spend the next
several months and in in
probably before we we re
calculate rates on the balance
as of June thirtieth to
determine how we can if
necessary make will check just
commented that.
Thank you madam chair you know I
I I know there's probably a lot
smarter people in your
department and I am but I I find
it hard to believe that it's not
going to cause an increasing
rate given amount of claims and
just so people understand it
does this will affect rates
literally for twenty five years
if you look at the formula of of
every single private employer in
New Mexico
and so I would appreciate you Mr
stern a just keeping us at the
forefront of your industry money
because you know we're we're in
a state were private enterprise
small businesses would have been
troubling
and we're doing everything we
can rightfully so to try to prop
up those industries but I I
would love to see this not be
one more being that employers
have to gripe about about the
rates being increased when we
have twenty twenty such an
anomaly in terms of you like
claims to not act that and I
think it's very important and
then madam chair of my other
question
Comes from volume one in our in
both if I will I'm a little
concerned one of the the the
data points but this agency
reports on its recently
separated veterans retaining
employment after six months I'm
on page one twenty in our in our
volume one.
So.
So presenter veterans retain
employment after six months and
for FY twenty one it was it was
forty five percent which is you
know quite low so I just want to
hear what what the state
agencies doing to try to the
increase that obviously love to
see that number a hundred
percent I know that that's not
realistic but forty five is
pretty low so just Mister Sir
let me hear what you guys
efforts are to try to get that
percentage of.
Thank you chair representative I
I have with me if you if you
don't mind madam chair to defer
we have our executive director
for employment services who
oversees our field work and
specifically our efforts in and
Veterans Services Marcus
Martinez he can address that.
Martinez.
Thank you madam chair and and
Representative yeah we we we've
been looking at those veterans
numbers we've been we've been
really focusing on those we
we've had some challenges one is
in staffing we do tend to lose
our veterans representatives to
federal employment the Feds love
our veterans reps because they
already have security clearance
and those types of things so
we're we're constantly sitting
at about a thirty to forty
percent vacancy rate on our
veterans representatives and
those are the folks that are
charged and trained to work with
with veterans with with with
significant barriers to
employment so one of the
challenges there is staffing and
actually now we're actually we
actually have more of those
vacancies than that we've had
before one of the other things
that we're seeing with our
veterans specifically is M.
utilizing taking advantage now
during the COVID and utilizing
their GI bills to go to school
so we do help them with that we
help them with alternative
funding through some of our
workforce connection partners
but a lot of veterans that that
that are coming out now are
choosing to go to school and and
we love that because that that
expands the on the job
opportunities that we can help
with help them with in in the
future so those those are the
two biggest things that we're
seeing we're we're working hard
to recruit more veterans
Representative staff and we've
also engaged all of our other
staff in the local offices to
work with with the budget as
well but that that has that has
been a challenge we we do
acknowledge that I'm keeping
staff keeping train staff it
probably takes us about six
months to train the staff person
to truly understand how to work
with some of the challenges that
that are veteran population out
and and and like I say we're
we're we're turning over that
staff left and right ninety
percent of those folks are going
to federal jobs because they do
have that keep learns that that
the Feds are looking for so it
makes it makes it easier for
them but we we continue to focus
on that and we'll continue to do
our best.
To to to get those veterans back
to work and and I and I'm like
you Representative I'd love to
see that number percent.
Thank you Mr Martinez thank you
madam chair the those are my
questions all right thank you
very much just Representative
Crowder and then we'll go to
Representative Dixon.
Thank you madam chair chair all
my questions are focused around
the FTE positions I just wanna
make sure I understand this and
looking at their FY twenty two
operating budget on their
permanent they had four hundred
and fourteen.
it appears to me that LFC is
increasing that by a hundred and
thirty three employees the exact
is wanting to increase it by two
hundred and forty three
employees.
When I look at the totals down
below.
in FY twenty two that was four
hundred and ninety nine.
A total FTE.
The LFC is going to increase
that by two hundred and forty
two employees.
And the exact is recommending
four hundred and five employees
in my reading this correctly.
Madam chair or or Eric or
someone madam chair okay.
Madam chair representative yes
you're reading it correctly and
I think secretaries are I can
probably fill in some of this a
little bit more but you know
that the department's been in a
lot of flux lately because of
because of the pandemic
responding to that and trying to
get all that money out the door
you know that thirty million
dollars per week
budget that we're going out at
the at the top
the department ended up having
to staff up quite a bit over
time
LFC didn't see that continuing
through FY twenty three so we to
increase it in the U. I.
programs but that are at risk
are just Secretary Sir I can
talk more about this but there's
also another program that they
transferred over from
HSD which is which is the
pandemic of program you can go
ahead and explain that part of
it.
Thank you thank you madam chair.
You got.
Representative that's that's
absolutely correct so the first
thing is we need we have created
a significant number of
temporary positions over the
course of the last year to ramp
up in our unemployment insurance
Division and we don't anticipate
that will stay at those staffing
levels for for an extended
period of time but certainly in
the interim we will to address
some of the work.
We have increased by a hundred
fifteen FTE positions in in the
administration of the New Mexico
works program and that's
occurred over the last year
that's been kind of a step
increased so we are growing in
purple FTE that we that we are
creating positions for the
administration of those rates up
sitting permitting programs we
have the additional FTE ease as
well as requested for house bill
twenty implementation.
Thank you madam chair Mister Sir
I appreciate that so I I think I
heard you say that not all of
these are just from COVID some
other additional transfer
another agency probably in
excess of a hundred employees is
that correct.
Madam chair representative I'm
just actually let me clarify so
the FTEs didn't come from
another agency the program The
New Mexico works program it
actually used to be administered
by a contractor Regis do so when
we then assume the contract we
created the F. T. at our agency
to fill those vacancies so you
won't see like a decrease at
another age.
Okay with that thank you.
Madam chair I guess my concern
is that that's a high volume of
permanent employees that we know
at some point life should go
back to normal and and.
We're going to do with a whole
bunch of employees if COVID goes
away.
that seems like a real problem
to me it still kind of does but
I appreciate your explanation
that part of that is the
transfer my final question madam
chair is up are all of the
employees at workforce solutions
part of a bargaining unit.
Thank you madam chair
representative we we do have
asked me members at the
department of workforce
solutions not all of the
employees are bargaining
eligible on the other the other
point I wanted to make a
representative I apologize is
that in our administration of
the career Lincoln wheat subsidy
program okay we up so the way
that works is we get the
referrals over for tenants all
right and then we will work with
them and ultimately they'll be
deployed out work at another
agency for example or even a
private sector employer so the
way we've achieve that is by
creating temporary FTE positions
that these workers come into for
us to to point out.
We are are to be more than a
hundred and forty FTEs created
specifically for this program so
they are not necessarily state
workers for department of
workforce solutions there FTEs
that we created as the
administrative solution for how
those kind of participants come
in eight officially in
technically become state workers
but then we deployed offer that
work experience to other
employers I just want to that
that's a that's a high number
two up for you FTEs and bill
remain that way and they just
remaining influx for us to to
help those participants.
Thank you madam chair and and Mr
Cernat and and I can see on here
that there's a a grand increase
and determine the temporary and
I understand that but it was the
permanent the the huge number of
two hundred forty three under
the exact hundred thirty three
that that seems like a huge
number for me and and just one
follow up question chair what
percent of all of all of the
employees that we're talking
about are part of the bargaining
unit part of whatever you said
FC here.
Sure what what.
Sure madam chair representative
good news of eligible positions
I'm I'm gonna take a gas right
that would include much of are
you mainly all of our you wide
implement services I'm gonna
ball park it to be about two
hundred eligible positions
around there give or take are
that's going to be all your
employment services staff most
most of are you I staff and then
others throughout various
departments.
So if if you're sending two
hundred and and the LESC
recommendation is
seven hundred and forty three
them.
Fifteen percent twenty percent
so like that.
I can do the math I I'm just
curious so I appreciate it thank
you madam chair.
All right we're gonna get a
representative Representative
Dixon to be followed by
Representative Allison.
Thank you madam chair and thank
you Secretary srna my question
is about the rapid hire event
I've heard a lot about those I
just from other agencies
mentioning them and so I was
wondering if you could let us
know
what's the average number of
applicants at those events and
then what percent translates
into hires thank you very much.
Madam chair representative so so
we are we've had sixty bands and
we've come and we've had so
about a hundred.
Two hundred and seventy five yes
Representative at six different
events.
Sorry background.
Thank you madam chair and
secretary I'm sorry so a hundred
applicants on average at events
and then how many translate into
actual hires.
You are Madam chair
representative so you know our
our hope so we have the numbers
and I can pull them up very very
quickly primarily for the
December event the others
they've taken place over the
last couple of weeks of the
hiring is still occurring so let
me pull that up for you and I
can tell you exactly on the of
the event that we had in
December of the fund what that
translated to in terms of of
hires.
And that would be the the most
complete.
Set of data.
Thank you madam chair and
secretary and if it's easier to
get that information I just
relate back that would be
wonderful sure yeah I can do
that for okay time yes okay
thank you madam chair already
representative Allison.
Thank you madam chair this is a
question for the secretary I'm
gonna ask you if you are still
involved with PNM in the
dispersal of the funds that was
outlined in the energy
transition act.
Thank you madam chair
representative yes yes as your
as you're aware the ETA right
calls for direct involvement of
of some agencies that the
department workforce solutions
include it it is here where
Representative we're still
waiting right for the resources
to come through that come by way
of those of that bond sale that
needs to occur in order for us
to move forward with the work
that was done by the committee
even before I became the acting
secretary WSO I do want to give
the committee a lot of kudos for
the the community events the
input gathering and we still
have in the hopper a number will
not a number but the the
proposals that we did receive
from the participants about how
we might be able to create you
know new economic or employment
anchors in that region.
I'm not the last update we
received was just a couple weeks
ago and we're in the process of
coordinating the discussion with
PNM which were happy about
because you know there hasn't
been a lot of back and forth
there between them and us and we
we really need to put them all
of we need we need to ask for
them to officially identify
across their intentions to
produce that revenue as
prescribed by ETA so that we can
move forward with our work.
Okay thanks for that Mr
secretary my next question would
be so no dispersal has been
made.
Madam chair representative
that's correct we we've yet to
see the revenue that we need to
do the work that we're required
to do with any T..
Okay and then Mr secretary as
you probably know of the money
has been laying off a lot of
people a number of people are
these the people that have been
displaced going to be made whole
at any time.
So Madam chair representative
but that's a that's a great
question right I was so our
responsibility is to respond to
that war notification and get
out there and work directly with
the employer and all of those
workers to identify employment
opportunities before there's
gaps in employment and I've
personally been down to
employers in the northwestern
part of the state to to work in
me these employees correctly and
to really identify what kind of
economic opportunities are there
and so that we're focused in on
jobs they're not relocations to
bigger metropolitan areas and so
our staff have been in that
region on numerous occasions
with those and with the
employers
to talk about options and
opportunities for upskilling
these workers training them
secondary opportunities and
that's in addition to whatever
the employer is going to do by
way of severance packages or
other training opportunities and
that has happened in some
instances but not in all.
Okay.
I know that they early people
were laid off first of return
back to school some of them have
returned back to school and as
the students they are struggling
financially that's why I asked
the question will they be made
all.
Madam chair representative we we
I would love to connect with you
to be sure that each of both
students has been provided with
an individualized training a cow
of title one funding to support
their post secondary.
Costs we can also provide
additional supportive cost to
them outside of just tuition to
be sure that whatever other
associated costs they have are
being taking care of so if we
can identify those workers
individually we can be sure that
they've all been connected with
our title one partners in the
region to ensure that the cost
for enrollment are being covered
by to the greatest extent
possible that's resources that
we have available through
workforce innovation opportunity
act that isn't dependent on you
know sell bonds or other type of
requirements from EPA.
The.
The.
All right well I don't have
anybody else's hand up to ask
any questions so I think at this
time I'd like to thank you Mr
Serrano secretary stern and all
of your staff for today and I
need to go to Representative
small for a motion thank you
very much madam chair I would
move the LFC recommendation for
the workforce solutions
department.
And we have a second thank you.
Second from representative
Allison is there any opposition
to that motion saying that again
thank you very much thank you
for being here today thank you.
I think we've got one more on
the agenda for today.
Yes.
We have Veterans Services
Department already Kelly we're
ready thank you madam chair
thank you committee members run
agency code six seventy the
Veterans Services Department
today we have secretary Sonya
Smith purpose and my DFA
counterpart brain Chavis as one
program all just go over the
overall and then turned over to
pay for any comments you may
have.
LFC recommendation increased
general fund revenue four point
nine percent while the executive
increased over twenty percent
resulting in a nine hundred
twenty thousand point seven
difference.
We'll see recommendation
increase other revenue to more
closely align with actuals in
the base in personnel costs the
executive recommendation reduce
the vacancy rate and included
three hundred eighty six
thousand and expansion of T.
we'll see recommendation would
provide an additional five FTE
with the executive would Fund
twelve FTE.
The executive recommendation
increase contractual services
for veterans transportation and
honor guard services the
executive recommendation also
increase the other costs one
hundred and twenty five point
one thousand above the LFC for
travel and cemetery operations
we have reconciled performance
measures in expansions the
executive recommendation
included three hundred eighty
six thousand for additional
personnel both LFC and executive
recommendation supported
expansion for Carlsbad cemetery
however the executive
recommendation was ten thousand
dollars the LFC with that I'll
turn it over to Brian for any
additional comments.
You madam chair and Kelly did a
good job of summing it up no
further comment.
All righty so we can go ahead
and go on them.
Go ahead ma'am secretary.
Good evening I believe I am the
last on the list today yes ma'am
all right.
Thank you.
Thank you for your patience.
All right good evening everyone
joining me today is ed Mendez
director of state budget
memorials the state cemeteries
and we also have George Vargas
director of field services and
operations I'm secretary Smith
we have just a few slides and
because we are the last agency
we will not be labor the point
out we'll get through this we
are asking for full
consideration of the executive
recommendation and I hope that
the slides we sure will help
support act so every day is
veterans day at do yes in here
is a snapshot of the current
veteran population in our great
state you can see that we have
approximately a hundred and
forty five thousand that rents
fifty two percent of them live
in the Bernalillo Sandoval the
landscape Torrance Santa Fe
counties twenty percent served
in Vietnam and twenty seven
percent are between the ages of
sixty five and seventy four
years old and ten percent are
women veterans.
Next up is something I'm very
excited to share we realize that
part of our challenge is that a
lot of veterans do not know that
we exist so are remedy for that
was to put together a marketing
plan so last week we are proud
to say that billboards have gone
up on I twenty five facing north
and south and also down on
iTunes basting facing east this
is just the first letter of our
marketing campaign we will be
including radio TV and our
social media our goal is to make
sure that veterans know how to
reach us and how to take
advantage of the state budget
that they have earned and also
we are here to help them with
their claims so again I'm very
proud of our efforts in this
regard we take what we do very
seriously and we want veterans
to know that we exist and we're
here to help them.
So here are areas of
responsibility I'll go over them
a little bit more in depth but
still services state budget
health care our state approving
agency and I'll be back HSD
we'll start with those services
currently we have fourteen
offices we have to pending in
the land and our current of yes
so vacancy rate is we have four
open slots right now.
Why are you taking a look at
this I want to talk about just
so quick story here quick
success stories are Carlsbad yes
so that more young for help the
veteran recover over seven
hundred and thirty eight
thousand dollars from a claim
that had been originally did not
twenty years prior the veteran
came into the office last year
and that more was able to help
this veteran receive that money
and also to we have another
success story are yes so Daniel
Thompson in Ross will help to
veterans recovered two hundred
and thirty two thousand dollars
as a result of a previously
denied claims related to Agent
Orange so you can see how vital
our yes those are in with our
new marketing effort we know
that that's going to drive more
traffic and interest to was so
they truly are the cornerstone
what it is that we do they have
responded to over twenty nine
thousand emails and calls and
recovered almost a billion
dollars for our veterans.
It is also important to note
that our veterans are yes those
rather can help any veterans
from across the street from
across the state and also truly
across the United States but of
course this is here you know
honor veterans they are highly
trained to do that.
All right up next is our state
budget memorial cemetery
program our state budget help
veteran homeowners with tax
exemptions and waivers for their
property tax the memorial
cemetery program is our fastest
growing.
Area right now it is are
probably our most sacred trust
we take again we take this very
seriously because we want to
make sure that the final resting
place for a budget and served
honorably have distinction been
very properly so currently we
have three cemeteries and we
have the forth coming on board
fiscal year twenty three you can
see the number of interments
we're very proud of our for that
heroes ceremony that we did back
in September I have to
understand that because I do
kind of grapple with that
because we have not forgotten
them we do honor guard training
again this is a very important
part of the military so the
military ceremony and burial
piece and we will be breaking
ground on our hands still
Vietnam Korea while in angel
fire this spring.
Next is our health care
coordination and transportation
this is a question that we get
all the time and as I've been
listening to the other agencies
today talking about how
important transportation is for
our veterans I believe it was
Representative Garcia have a
question earlier we do have the
highly rural transportation
grant that includes the fifteen
counties that you see on here is
initial grant of a hundred and
fifty thousand it was renew four
hundred and thirty five thousand
you can see the number of rights
that we've been able to
to complete and this is an
ongoing effort because we hear
you we know that it is tough for
veteran to get up at four
o'clock in the morning for
medical appointments that may be
in Albuquerque so I have met
recently with the regional
director for the VA Medical
Center for our region to talk
about this to see what it is
that we can do to be more
accommodating there are thirteen
community based outreach clinics
that serve veterans there's also
the mission act that helps
veterans be seeing for urgent
and emergency care in their
counties we need to do more
education and awareness around
that so I'll be working closer
with the BA on that as well
burn kids in the desert storm
registry is another huge area we
have that are ones who need help
and assistance with that so
we're devoting more time and
effort in making sure that they
get the proper attention and
they need and get on the
registry for that and of course
we have our on going
collaborations Department for
homelessness and I disabled
veterans and suicide prevention.
Thanks next up are aware of
state approving agency they
oversee the coordination of G.
R. budget and.
For fiscal year twenty they
helped veterans were six sixty
six million dollars in GI bill
benefits and veterans readiness
and employment were paid to
veterans service members and
eligible family members to.
Their education it was said
earlier that a lot of veterans
during this time are taken
advantage of going back to
school and our agency helps to
certify it
colleges and universities to
make sure that they are
administrative the.
The Japanese fits properly the
we also have the highest rating
for our state approving agency
of satisfactory awarded by the
National state approving agency
we have the box again a lot of
entrepreneurial spirit was
developed during the pandemic
and the back is here to
definitely help you see the
number of contracts that have
been secured and also the dollar
amount that that equates to
thirty three new businesses
with started a hundred and
twenty one jobs created and of
course we help you with COVID
assistance and we have a very
popular program well it's to
business for those veterans who
are interested in starting a
business a rich costs will be
overseas this area was recently
recognized for his efforts
during the pandemic to insure
Veterans we're getting to help
and assistance that they need.
All right our analysts of are we
talked about the budget and
again I would just like to
reiterate that we are asking for
consideration of the executive
recommendation we we're
successful in getting.
Three people hired from the
rapid hire event recently very
proud of that so we have a new
CFO starting next week along
with a couple of accountants the
executive recommendation what
can will help us really saturate
the state more with the BSO's
again we feel that this
marketing effort is going to
drive more traffic to us and we
want to be ready and when we
paired we also note that the
returning veterans from the
Afghanistan war also need
assistance we're seeing more and
more calls from them for
assistance and we want to make
sure that this shows that are
currently handling that the
weight is distributed properly
so that they don't become turned
out doing this process so I
think with that madam chair.
That ends up we thank you and we
stand ready for questions and I
was not sure that that's okay
yes go ahead and has stopped
sharing we do have a number of
members that have questions will
start with Representative
Trujillo and then Representative
Hochman Vigil.
Thank.
Yes ma'am.
Thank you very much.
Secretary Smith for your hard
work in moving this program
forward I am my my E. focuses
both on the job and then.
That your efforts in trying to
provide medical care or at least
medical access.
A lot of veterans that are
struggling with the not just
from way back in Vietnam but
Afghanistan and most recently.
The wires and I think that.
That but you know I have a lot
of conversations with people
that I know and one of the
issues of concern is access to
behavioral health care and that
behavioral health services you
were stating that it's really
difficult for some of them to
travel far and wide to receive
services in in in the
centralized portion of the state
but I know that there's not just
didn't for veterans but everyone
in general there's a lack of
behavioral health support
for everyone in general what are
you doing right now to ensure
that these folks were still
waking up late at night freaking
out and doing all the things
that people with PTSD do they
get their homeless state the
struggle what are you doing to
try to help the.
And Representative thank you so
much for the question you you
are right this is an ongoing
issue which means this is an
issue that is going to require
collaboration from other
agencies one of the things that
the VA Medical Center is doing
is encouraging telehealth
appointments and they seem to be
going very well but we also know
that that is just a very small
percentage of people who are
willing to do that when I met
recently with the regional
director of for the VA hospitals
we talked extensively about that
and we still again that B. C.
box will be able to help with
that part of the challenge is
though that as you know health
care.
Challenge going across the the
country so having health care
professionals be available for
that is very challenging we're
also looking at what we can do
with some of our local hospitals
like Presbyterian Lovelace you
know Presbyterian is one of the
largest what I think is the
largest healthcare system in the
state so I'm having
conversations with them as well
to make sure that we're doing
everything possible it is my
hope the next so we have this
conversation I will have more of
a strategy to share with you.
Madam chair I I appreciate it
because.
I know a lot of people that are
struggling right now and or our
help because people who are
struggling so I appreciate that
effort
the hard hat.
It's okay and also madam chair
if I may just go back I do want
to add one of the footnote
regarding behavioral health we
are active participants with the
state's behavioral health issues
Conglomerate of coalition I I
publishing the said that off the
bat we so we are in constant
conversation with how we can and
Just make sure that we're
plugged in as an agency and
making sure that we're at the
table Representative our
veterans so that they can be
part of the ongoing discussion
so I do I forgot to say that it
is very important that you know
that we do participate in that
coalition Madam madam chair
Representative up the to talk
about our boots to business.
The hard hats with night is that
because labor unions to boots to
hard hats.
But that was my intention I
guess I was thinking that do you
also have programs that.
Our veterans into the.
Field of our.
Construction and you know labor
unions that are doing of
offering apprenticeship programs
like that.
Madam chair representative yes
we do last year and met with all
of the
This is that have that are meant
hiring programs to make sure
that they understood that we
still ready a we have a pipeline
of course we work closely with
our workforce solutions as well
you heard secretary star not
talk about veterans and efforts
to they're doing we work hand in
hand in that regard we are
looking forward to holding a
I want to call it not a
conference but you know what
will work
my words of misplaced me right
now but we have an event where
we can get businesses and
veterans together so that
they'll have an opportunity to
meet them of course we may have
to do a virtually but that's the
world we're living in right now
but that doesn't mean that we
won't still be innovative in
helping them absolutely.
My final comment you know I'd
like to commend you for the PR
campaign you're promoting I
agree with you I don't think
enough people exist in the state
that recognize that you that
your that your exist that.
I would have is that.
As you post all these billboards
and do keep the advertisements
and everything else.
That and yours your put your
creating opportunities for
people to call you are access to
online please make sure you have
enough people to respond to
those calls is made to make sure
that they respond to those
emails a lot of the concerns
that I've gotten from veterans
but anybody that is being told
to call this number there's
never enough our.
Response a rapid response from
folks who promote this to
actually.
Talk with these folks.
And to actually get our.
Short turnaround time to get
information about the needs that
they are warning meant and
there's nothing more frustrating
I think after you invite people
to to be part of something then
you don't have anyone to follow
through on the on the support
systems so you know if if part
of your R. F. T. E.'s are to get
people to respond I would
support that I know we already
have talked about doing the LFC
recommendation but I would urge
LFC and
and this committee to consider
supporting those FTEs because no
one is more frustrated than
hurting
consumer rate when they don't
get the response that they need
as quickly as they need it and
madam chair those are my final
questions I thank you so much
Secretary Smith.
Thank you.
Representative Hochman CEO and
then Representative Crowder.
You very much madam chair and
thank you secretary Smith I just
wanted to take a quick moment to
thank you for your work on
filling the vacancies for that
service officers and also for
mentioning the transportation
issue are bringing our budget to
to medical payments and other
services I know that I ask this
question during the interim you
Representative and your office
to gauge with me I'm so happy to
see the work you've done on this
thank you thank you thank you
thank you madam chair.
Read more Representative
Crowder.
Patter.
There we go thank you madam
chair
Madam chair of
my first question is for the LFC
analyst.
As I look at the different sheet
it appears to me that the LFC is
is authorizing five additional
FTE the governor is asking for
two additional FTE on the back
of a different sheet it says the
executive with Fund twelve FTE.
And I looked on the PS count
sheet of what directed think of
I can't find those other two S.
T. can you help me understand
that.
You madam chair Committee
without speaking for the
executive that's using the
average cost of what they put
into person versus what they're
actually spending so there'd be
enough for twelve additional
people about what they're
currently spending now.
Okay so so the funding is there
but not the authorizations for
FTEs if.
With the exact is chosen the.
Authorizer go from sixty seven
to two seventy seven is that
correct.
I'm yes if I believe
Representative Crowder madam
chair is referring to the PS cal
in the back of your yes which is
on page four for the committee's
information and so you'll notice
on Colin column and for example
in FY twenty two the agency has
almost six hundred thousand
dollars of funded vacancies and
dollars and that translates up
to call in the sh.
Yes thank you.
Funded bacon so they're they're
about eighty seventy five to
eighty thousand dollars with
budget correct do on average for
the state and so that's what
that's calculating at.
Okay my curiosity was I just
want to confirm that the
authorized if you choose to be
seventy seven now is that
correct.
The authorized FTEs or the
executive recommendation is
seventy seven correct.
All right so some additional
funding and thank you for your
responses appreciate it madam
secretary.
An opportunity to go out to the
edge of our cemetery and
veterans memorial recently and
it wrote the new wrote the bill
to go down to the cemetery I
don't know if you're familiar
with that but there are some
serious safety issues with that
road.
Yes I was under the impression
that that facility and all those
facilities are under the state
parks department but I found out
from secretary probes that
they're not they're all under
your agency.
And.
We've had a couple gentleman
from DOT wrecked the data and
George dot you're gone out and
looked at that road instead
unfortunately they fail to
design any drainage into that
road.
And it is going to continually
wash out.
The number one are you aware of
that number two is there any
funding available to fix that
road DOT Representative Cadena
and George both of dollars it'll
be about one point five million
districts that wrote.
And so I just wanted to bring to
your attention make sure you
know about it and then ask you
do you have funding plan for how
how do you plan to address that
situation.
Madam chair representative
Crowder thank you so bringing
this up it is my understanding
that that road is actually
covered by the county
I'm going to ask Miss Mister
Mendes to please comment on that
please because
that's my understanding Sir and
I want to be correct madam chair
may I have Mister Mendes and
inspired Madam chair
Representative Crowder members
of the committee all right yes
we have a been looking at that
road that road does belong to
Colfax County that's county road
B. four we are going to sit down
with the planners with their
Colfax County and asked Ms those
specific questions part of the
build out for the age of our
state veterans cemetery was we
asked Colfax County to come in
and and pave that road so that
was done on their you know
capital outlay dollars or the
road dollars so they did in fact
pay that up to the end of our
cemetery but again that is a
county road it is in a D. O. T.
road but yes we are in in our
conversations with them to see
what they can do about one
whiting it.
In a shoulder on it and then
like you said adding some
drainage to that so yes Sir to
answer your question we are very
aware of that that wrote in the
issues there.
All right I I appreciate I would
encourage you madam chair and
and Sir to give the DOT Mr today
and and Mr Dodge.
I I think that's a pretty urgent
safety issue announced that drop
off there's no carbon is about a
one foot drop.
It is icy and snow is it gets up
there in the winter time it's
gonna be very dangerous I know
DOT did a little bit of work to
shore it up but it it it's a
serious matter so I I hope you
work with the state thank you
thank you madam chair.
Right we have Representative
Sweeter than Representative
Ezzell.
Thank you madam chair I have no
questions I just wanted to
publicly and thank the secretary
and especially thank George
disincentive for help with
several constituent issues that
I've had in my district I
appreciate the response I
appreciate the timeliness and
mostly I appreciate the help
from my Veterans thank you madam
chair thank you ma'am right we
have Representative Ezzell to be
followed by Representative
Garcia.
You madam chair thank you very
much I too want to thank
secretary Smith for all that
she's done for veterans the
secretary Smith I want to and I
do have a constituent concern
that I would like to visit with
you about tomorrow every you
at five oh five three eight
three two four zero zero.
No ma'am let me give you my
direct line then number please
okay thank you yes ma'am are you
ready five zero five okay three
eight two.
Three nine three nine.
One nine and this.
And that's what I'm sorry.
I'm gonna stop talking because
I'm not a lawyer.
You madam chair thank you very
much Secretary Smith I do want
to point out it's very important
to me that our rural of better
veterans are knowledge to I was
looking at the map of your
transport everything thank
goodness we have very caring
people down in the southeastern
corner of the state we do have.
Donations made to help in the
way of the fans and the
volunteer drivers and everything
else that does make sure that
our veterans to get to their
necessary appointments that they
need to we also have places like
this administrative.
Read by mark green there and
Rossello some vicious done
dexter medicament that do help
these veterans and it breaks my
heart.
We we have that many homeless
and so any help that you could
do to help alleviate that
problem madam chair and
secretary Smith I would
appreciate it thank you very
much madam chair.
All right we're gonna go next
representative Garcia and then
we're gonna wrap it up with
Representative brown.
Thank you madam chair of sectors
is thank you for being here
today up.
Most of my questions are
answered all the.
On the on the mission act you
mentioned earlier.
The problem with the mission act
in the state of New Mexico is a
the.
The hospital wanted to Veterans.
And the reason for that is
because the VA is not paying the
bills.
Thank all of my own house the
mobile dongle Tommy prior
authority from the VA to so we
can see you.
Happen to go there on Friday for
a long weekend you're not going
to get seen a dollars to on that
want you to address those issues
Road to angel fire very
important ma'am we need to
address that one running
properly Representative Crowder
mentioned that you know all
about representatives I'll.
Yesterday and she was concerned
about initiatives happened in
rural community and there's no
reason for that were to happen
but she got discussed that with
you we need to take care of
that.
We need to do more outreach to
not just veterans to people.
There are involved veterans the
dual role one how to get service
from you guys.
Representative all Trujillo
squishing about help you
veterans get jobs I'm gonna be
carrying a bill the Senate bill
for the governor that is would
be a veteran's preferences.
Should be coming up pretty soon
and in all nighters although.
Members of this committee to
support the bill because these
a very important issue for
veterans to we've been left out
for forever and you know the
concern that I have thank you
for being here thank you madam
chair.
Hey we're hearing Representative
Brown.
Thank you madam chair
secretary Smith I just want to
also add my thanks for all the
work of of your agency is very
important I'm from the any
county area and we have been
waiting for the Carlsbad real
better is.
Excuse me cemetery now for quite
a few years it seems.
the expansion request madam
chair madam secretary
others some differences over the
amount I have between the the
governor the executive agency
and and also LFC it says it's
for additional personnel
Carlsbad cemetery.
Could you explain madam
secretary what exactly that
would involve would you be
adding someone to work on this
from Santa Fe or from someone in
the local community.
Madam chair representative thank
you for the question it is for
people to be hiring directly for
calls that I would just Mr
Mendez to please add any notes
in that regard he can tell you
about the timeline and anything
else you may have questions for
some estimate as would you
please.
Yes ma'am Madam chair
representative rounds those
three FTEs our for our Carlsbad
state veterans cemetery that's
for the interment supervisor
into interment specialist for
that facility so we just checked
this afternoon and we are
seventeen on the grand list for
that facility so I'm I'm I'm
happy to say just as soon as I
finish closing out the and wire
cemetery grant we were putting
in for that grant but they have
already approved us we just have
to ask for the funding for it
that has been on our schedule
and it's in my sights are locked
and loaded in my chamber I and
it is we are going to ask for
that a grant probably this
summer and hopefully I'm I'm
hoping that we can start turning
shovels this time next year in
the spring again I have to ask
for the grant by July they
approve it by the federal fiscal
year which would be October one
we get the contractor and then
you start turning shovels
hopefully right after that.
Madam chairman of Secretary Mr
Mendez so the list you referred
to that were currently are
seventeen is that the federal
list for rules okay yes you okay
thank you what we're if I I
could do anything to assist with
a letter of support or anything
please just let me know and then
finally madam chair I just want
to thank the secretary for
mentioning that more young Berg
she's based in Carlsbad she's a
field services advocate all of
us to work with and Dick more
know how incredibly good she is
at her job and I appreciated the
governor mentioning her in the
state of the state address as
well yesterday so thank you for
our for your kind words for dad
more thank you so much act.
She's the best.
Right of the four of us
Representative small for the
motion I'd like to have
everybody who is a veteran raise
your hand.
I'm on the right hand your soon
and.
Here's.
Okay I'm coming.
To do this to them late.
Okay Debbie we're sure hand.
Okay anyway I just wanted the
cabinet secretary to know
looking at our at our committee
and the members and our staff
are HSC staff how many people
are actually Veterans so that
being said Representative small
for the motion thank you madam
chair of I would move the LFC
recommendations.
All right all second chair okay
we have a motion and a second I
thank you all for your
presentation today is there any
opposition to that motion at all
standing so I want to thank you
again and on behalf of the
committee certainly for all of
your work and and your staff
work so committee I think where
we finished our work for the day
it is now five thirty I match in
HSC is the only Canadian working
at this time as as usual anyway
thank you all and then we'll see
you tomorrow same time same
place thank you very much right.
That.
