Representative Chatfield.
I see him there Representative
Crowder.
Representative Crowder.
Representative Dixon.
Representative Dixon.
Representative Ezzell.
Representative Garcia.
Representative headed up.
So.
I'm seeing that for a while I
can hear from the madam chair
sorry I'm here.
Representative Hochman Vigil.
Here.
Representative Lane.
Representative Lara.
Here Representative Sarinana
here Representative Sweetser
yes.
Representative Trujillo.
Representative vice chair small
here madam chair.
Here.
You've got a quorum ma'am right
thank you very much I presented
his after a.
Right thank you madam chair
Representative Crowder let me
know that the zoom link is says
it's waiting for the hosts the
lead and then I just thought
about what you know chair.
We.
My anchor bill.
We'll send it over again.
Except.
Sen
already thank you.
All right so well and I thought
I saw the so she on yes okay
okay good okay today is our
catch up cleanup.
work for the committee the way
this works is that everybody
should have the packet in front
of them.
And the staff will start out
with the bill David and and
Charles still take us through
each one of these items that's
listed on your cover page and
each item will require a.
Who will vote so
we're gonna go ahead and turn it
over to bill the start taking us
through the sections and if you
have a question about any one of
these items.
So I am basically through item
twenty five looks like this
first page everybody should have
one of these.
So we'll just go through it just
raise your hand and
Representative small will let me
know if you have a question on
any of those sections so build
David are you already.
Madam chair I am okay we're
ready when you are.
Madam chair I think you'd like I
can use this chair screen
option.
Yeah.
Hopeful I mean this is very
thick packet.
Mike if you would put up page
one.
The madam chair and bill if you
could give me just a moment to
share the screen of the
presentation.
Problem.
One Mike.
Madam can see each of those
lines are on there and we'll
switch back and forth between
that patient necessary pages as
we go through this the first
item the first item is provided
based building services which is
on page two of the Packer.
And basically this is the.
Operation to the legislative
building services.
Our our our.
Okay the Legislative Council
which makes this a General
Appropration Act you'll note
that the recommendation from the
LFC and exec aren't exactly the
same.
Madam chair that is that is that
okay only thing okay let's get a
motion Representative small for
the despite the motion will get
a second and then we'll get
approval for this report move to
approve the legislative building
services at the LESC level at
the LESC level okay do we have a
second a second madam chair
Representative Sweetser seconds
thirty opposition to that.
I don't see any so let's so make
the second motion to approve
this report Representative
small.
Move to approve the LFC and exec
the report or legislative
building services at the LESC
level.
We had a second.
Second.
Representative Allison is the
second any opposition for this
section of catch up cleanup.
I don't see any so it has been
approved.
Madam chair the next section is
the district attorneys and
that's on page three.
You see on your screen at right
now madam chair basically these
are this particular scenario
that's listed on the far right
is general fund additions of a
hundred ninety Meg.
Thousand dollars which is
halfway between the difference.
The does that mean put it this
way those district attorneys are
listed there were lower than the
operating budget with the action
was initially taken a hundred
ninety thousand brings them half
way back from the total
difference.
To do.
Addition of a hundred ninety
thousand.
To the general fund and this is
not an unusual practice rates
have state because we always
leave room for the Senate to go
back and make adjustments as
necessary so what you need to
look at committee is elected HFC
lines one through fifteen.
And then you'll see additional
general fund that we've added to
each one of these D. A.
accounts so was there any
questions if so Representative
small is gonna let me know
because I can't tell when we're
sharing screens.
No questions madam chair okay
let's go to the motion
Representative small thank you
madam chair I would move the HFC
staff scenario for the just
district attorneys we have just.
Second.
Router all right we have a
motion and a second.
All Crowder is there any of
opposition to that motion.
Saying we're good go ahead.
madam chair the next item is a
public defender department we
internationally taken the LFC
recommendation and you appointed
a group Representative Hochman
Vigil and brown and hopped a
group to consider this the on
pages four and five are the
public defender changes it
results in five hundred and
thirty nine thousand additional
general fund.
It's a hundred and eighty five
thousand for new attorneys to
address workloads and two
hundred thousand to provide for
rural salary differentials.
All those states.
Why did line seven.
Nine seven eight and nine is for
those three differences are not.
So you have additional support
workers.
additional attorney of Kate and.
Geographic rate differential
rural New Mexico those are the
changes chair okay who is this
committee that Hochman Vigil and
brown
I do have a question for either
one of them how is that
differential calculated on line.
Nine nine brown Hochman Vigil.
I'm madam chair and looks like a
line line the differentials
calculated and the addition of
rural incentives so if it's
going to be additional contract
attorney per hourly rates.
Or additional FTE but that's on
a different line.
Additional contract right or is
it increasing the contract right
is that what we're doing.
For the rural rate differential
yes it's it's more of an
incentivized at a rate in
addition to the contract right
so it would be a higher hourly.
Okay.
Representative Brown do you have
any comments on that.
Madam chair I I don't have in
front of you we did have a
rather nice a worksheet that was
worked out on that
if a man does with this maybe
she she could give you more
detail if you wish I just want
to make sure we understand why
we have the differential
And if you agree with what
Hochman Vigil says we're good.
Madam chair I it's my
understanding that what were the
representative said would be the
case and again those I think
that chart we can get that for
you.
Okay is there any other
questions on their
recommendation for the public
defender's Department.
The options.
Okay we have Representative
Anders Sen is there a second
Madam chair okay we've got
apercent.
Garcia.
Is there any opposition to that.
Thank you for the next bill
madam chair the next item is the
New Mexico Attorney General
okay.
And yes we had taken the LFC
recommendation originally
there's a two hundred thousand
dollar increase in that
particular item
If I can defer to David please
on the explanation of where they
go.
Madam chair he was having
trouble on his computer so he's
gone back to his office.
Madam chair.
Heard it but madam chair the if
you look at thanks seven one in
front of you prince the
differences in line three.
The swap that swap personal
funded with general fund to
consumer settlement fund there
is a the doctor the LFC which
was higher and reducing the
amount of swap Bernalillo forty
two thousand thank you general
fund and then the tobacco
settlement contract litigation
with new general fund for fifty
eight thousand that's the two
hundred.
Madam chair Representative
Crowder.
Representative.
Yes on on page six madam chair
says the increase will go
towards investigations of cyber
crimes and contract attorneys
for tobacco litigation.
Which were the attorney
general's to top priorities
that's correct madam chair.
Okay.
All right is there any questions
from the committee on the
agency's budget.
Does any madam chair.
Let me ask one quick question on
this bill
Where in this budget unless it's
under special it must be under
special so I'm good all right
let's go for a motion and move
approval of the HSC scenario for
the New Mexico attorney
general's office.
Second.
Second place Hochman Vigil okay
we have Hochman Vigil is the
second.
Is there any opposition to that
motion saying that we're good on
that bill next Madam chair the
next item is the taxation and
revenue department the executive
recommendation was accepted
initially on the proposal is on
additional six hundred thousand
general fund.
Our.
To increase other state funds
are rearrange throughout the
department and they're on pages
eight and nine.
I think that might does that up
there
Part of it I think got to get
back to them students checks.
The funds what.
The general fund
is one million.
We can hear you you can't speak
out I'm sorry chair at that was
okay
this is very difficult for me I
went through this that basically
went back to the LFC wrecked.
On the program support right.
Okay and adjusted the the
personnel costs in the motor
vehicle division my imagine
twenty eight and increased the
Person on swap it the
administration portion as well
as adding the.
Tax expenditure evaluation
initiative at two hundred
thousand okay Charles get in on
this bill discussed go ahead
Charles.
Hi Charles.
Yes madam chair of bills correct
the recommendation is to go back
to the LFC recommendation which
was higher than the executive by
six hundred thousand and then
address some of the departments
projected shortfall using Fund
ballots as you can see on the
subsequent pages to help with
the tax administration program.
Okay.
All right let's go to the
committee do we have any
questions on the tax and Revenue
Department.
I don't see any manager.
Okay let's go for motion.
Approve of the HSC scenario for
the taxation and revenue
department.
Okay we've got smaller Anderson.
Correct okay is there any
opposition to this.
It's fast the next one bill
madam chair the next one is a
department of finance and
administration of pages ten and
eleven I think we accepted the
LESC recommendation and added
one hundred thousand dollars to
that particular budget we also
get some fund balance change
the.
The R. one hundred thousand the
general fund is for person is
good for performance analyst in
the budget division.
And three hundred thousand in
fund balance for contracts in
the state of civil legal
services division.
You are lied.
On civil legal.
It will show up on this high
level madam chair this is only
the general fund but it will.
It is correct chair.
Charles you got anything else on
this.
Okay.
Okay.
I got it.
Okay let's go to the committee
is there any questions on the
department of finance and
administration.
Senator.
Okay committee we have a motion
for approval.
Move approval of the HSE
scenario for the department of
finance and administration.
A second.
This is the all right
Representative Herrerra is the
second is there any opposition
to this motion.
All right Representative
Sweetser do you have a question
I did thank you madam chair I
just noticed on page eleven if
the note says executive language
for local government division
should be used instead of LFC
language by adopting the AGFC
scenario we adopt that language
change is that right.
That's all right.
That's correct Madam chair okay
thank you all right.
I don't see any opposition so
that one is approved.
Go to the next one bill madam
chair the next item is the
General Services Department the
LFC recommendation was accepted
there is no additional general
fund involved here what the
right the proposal as is to
adopt the executive
recommendation on the.
The employee benefits are it
said or those funds if there are
pages.
twelve and thirteen.
You'll see the executive
recommendation other revenues is
what is we're right
proposing to adopt.
Okay just surveys where the red
line the red circle there as
the proposal for General
Services Department employee
group health benefits and risk
management funds is there any
questions from the committee on
this.
You're not general fund but we
still appropriate all funds to
all agencies.
Okay let's get a motion.
I move approval for the HSC
scenario adopting the executive
recommendation for employee
group health benefits and risk
management funds for General
Services.
We need a second.
You madam chair listen okay
Allison for the second.
There any opposition to this
motion.
Okay thank you.
Go to the next one bill and
madam chair the next one is the
the department of information
technology we have taken the
LFC.
Actually the proposal is that we
address in the supplemental
bills that we're going to put
together an the nine hundred
thousand broadband office.
It was funded AGS scenario and
five hundred again for the
broadband package.
Okay here's our suggestion.
I don't believe any action other
than that but in that remote
survey regular budget but back
over there and up in the new
budget necessary madam chair.
Representative.
Thank you
in our packets the next part of
the packet is act is the state
treasurer's office.
There is no supporting HM at one
madam chair okay understood I
followed language online.
Well one sided slide eight the
other side slide nine but
everybody can see agency co
three sixty one to see the
language their addresses
supplemental our our junior
bill.
So that's the action is there
any question so I'm not.
I have a question I I just need
to stand
what what I was just transferred
to the junior bill instead of
because it's a one time expense.
Bill is is a is identified as a
one time expense.
Our our understanding is that
this
You know you don't have to set
that up more than one time so.
Okay all right.
And we will be having a lot of
federal funds coming in through
broadband I I will play well I
think what the strategy is on
the US is to set up a division
within due west yes and then the
plan is is to you know that's a
one time expense is setting that
up and then those are broadband
related funds that all be
funneled into one one half kind
of gate keeper I guess would be
the best way is that right one
program when we get tracks the
we can track the expenses on
that then okay thank you madam
chair okay you want to make the
motion Representative Herrera.
I I move the I move we adopt so.
Yeah recommendations
Okay great echo three sixty one
but I hear somebody saying madam
chair
it's it's Representative
Castellano we'll go ahead and
check I just have a quick
question on the cyber security
okay would that be would we be
working on that like maybe some
federal funds are the cares Act.
Or because I know that was one
of the you know they were
talking about is just a question
chair.
Okay cybersecurity remind me
Charles was that in their based.
That's something that they
wanted to include in addition
the.
It was additional.
Okay this is the base changes.
The executive madam chair of the
proposal in the FY twenty two
general fund at several million
for cyber security program
and that's Benjamin it didn't
come to the LFC in the following
the request so the this these
recommendations don't address
that and and that's all it some
of the broadband money I'm sure
could spill over into dressing
cybersecurity needs.
Okay all right we do have a
motion from Representative
Herrera do we have a second.
Okay.
Okay we have Representative
Castellano for HSD three sixty
one based on the language
provided on this high level is
there any opposition to that.
Saying not let's move on bill.
Madam chair the next item is the
state treasurer
page fourteen that is a hundred
and fifty thousand dollars
proposed.
Representative Armstrong and
Alison were involved in this
particular.
The
proposal and it says a hundred
and fifty thousand general fund
appropriations above the LFC and
executive recommendation for a
total of three hundred fifty
thousand and that's to support
the work in state program and
for additional programs and.
Okay.
Here we give them a one three
hundred fifty one hundred and
fifty madam chair okay so that's
half.
Then if they want more they
better get over there and start
working with the Senate on this
so
is there any questions on this
Armstrong or is the other one
that was on this those are.
Okay you all have any comments
on this thank you madam chair I
have a quick comment that there
was there's legislation moving
forward to support this but at
the same time of the the they
are held accountable they are
being held accountable to get
this up and running a S. A. P.
where before when I was opposed
they had and they didn't have a
deadline and I wasn't okay we've
given them money with no
deadline so now there's a
deadline it has been
a committee sub is been put in
for the bill so I'm I'm good
with that thank you madam chair
Alex about you are you good
Representative I'm good with it
okay all right we need a motion
the.
Representative Allison.
I move that we adopt of the LFC
recommendation.
Okay where where where the HSC
rack where the HSC scenarios
what we have in language chair
so that's the motion to have a
second all second madam chair
this is Armstrong okay we got
Armstrong as a second is there
any opposition to that.
See non thank you very much.
Next.
The next item is the economic
Development Department page
fifteen of the fact that it
basically as a hundred thousand
dollars for the New Mexico
partnership.
Okay any comment on that
Representative Dixon.
Are you on.
She's she's on madam chair she's
right she she told us yesterday
she's got a bill in another
committee okay anyway it adds a
hundred thousand to the New
Mexico partnerships bases there
any let's get a motion on it
move approval of the HSE
scenario for the economic
development department.
Second from Representative
Trujillo.
Is there any opposition to that.
State not it passes next to
chair the next item is the
energy minerals natural
resources department of pages
sixteen eighteen there's a pro
pro will.
The proposal to approve a six
hundred fifty thousand dollar
increase in
General Fund and those items are
in the healthy forest.
There is there is a thank you Mr
the water problem.
Yeah.
They.
Tell us what line all right line
fourteen okay.
You'll save a are still vacant
positions at two hundred
thousand the okay okay on on
line twenty four the state parks
division is maintenance and
improvements about a hundred and
fifty thousand okay.
And on line thirty six there is
a bill that the position of fire
metal compliance enforcement of
three hundred thousand.
What is that do.
What it what is that
specifically online thirty six.
I'm sure defer to the.
Hey what are.
Charles on what exact small what
does that do thank you madam
chair those positions are
related to oil conservation
division permitting plugging of
abandoned wells and
basically mainly for the
permitting and allowing
continued production things like
pipelines and other things for
and that's line thirty six.
Okay yes already.
We have any other questions on
this budget plan the members.
Representative small for the
motion will prove of HSC
scenario for the energy minerals
and natural resources department
do we have a second.
It
was that place Sarinana okay
Representative of the Saniona
second.
Is there any opposition to this.
Saying it's approved next madam
chair the next item is a
commission of deaf and hard of
hearing.
And the executive recommendation
was.
Initially taken on the proposal
here is to adopt the LFC
recommendation which is two
hundred thousand dollars more
you do not have a supporting
page for that is just basically
switches debate through the help
on this.
Chairman and members of the
committee I think that one of
the things that we had to do was
make sure that we had to
We brought the.
The.
Money up a little bit and I
think of I believe we did that
with this okay make the motion
madam chair I move the staff
recommendation okay we have a
second.
Allison okay Alison.
Okay the motion made
Representative trail second by
Representative L. St any
opposition to that change saying
no that's been approved next
Madam chair in on the screen is
that DPC so if you don't mind
I'll I'll skip a few and then
come back to them a few minutes
later okay have the DDP see on
the screen okay that is the
staff staff proposal on this
agency and you can see there's
two hundred fifty thousand to
bring the LFC recommendations of
one for twenty to the twenty one
operating budget level and four
hundred fifty thousand to
provide guardianship services
for people on waiting lists
okay.
Thank you have a questions on
this one.
Work with Kelly on this or is
this just the staff work with
Kelly.
Madam chair I believe during
this hearing were asked you
asked the staff to to take a
look at this and that's know
what members about.
Okay I need a motion.
Move approval of the HSE's
scenario for that the
developmental disabilities
Planning Commission okay we
need.
It was the second place Anderson
Anderson okay.
They have a motion and a second
small down understand for the
staff scenario.
For the developmental
disabilities planning council
six forty seven any opposition
to that state not it's proved
thank you next.
Madam chair I'm going back now
to line fourteen on the first
page which is the early
childhood department and there
are page nineteen of your packet
we at the national action was
the LFC since that act was taken
I received a memorandum from
secretary Groginsky and she made
suggestions on how to re adjust
that recommendation that would
better help so that is exactly
what we did we adjusted the
tenth rearing eight hundred
thousand.
Basically the things that she
wanted to do on that front page
you
are aging the big dangers that
were made a line fifty seven
the pre K..
Was adjusted reduced by four
hundred thousand B. I. T. data
system better Gration arbors
regions by two hundred thousand
and the FY two provider reasons
increased by six hundred so
that's revenue neutral agency
requests of the department.
Okay this is a revenue neutral
change Charles so we want to
make a comment.
That's correct madam chair this
is a what the proposal is.
Framework of the money didn't
change is just how it was moved
correct and that's just from the
early childhood endowment fund.
It's not a general fund impact
there is a recommendation on
that front page to make an
adjustment to the tenant for
appropriations they were double
counted in the LFC
recommendation so just a
technical correction on that
chair okay.
All right any questions from the
committee on this on this one
question madam chair go ahead
chair Senators non reverting
language is that
a carryover commenters that new
language we're.
Madam
madam chair that's the was the
executive request that's not the
recommendation.
Okay so so the non returning
language will not be in there is
that correct correct.
All right thank you madam chair.
I move it to pass okay we have
Representative Trujillo do pass
on the HFC scenario we have a.
It.
I'm sorry who did the second
place.
Crowder.
Madam chair representative
Custer okay Castellano sits
Trujillo Castellano on this one
is there any opposition.
Saying it's approach next.
You're the next item is the
agent a long term Services
Department their page twenty of
your packet okay
Madam five hundred and seventy
seven thousand dollars was added
to the aging network.
That is line twenty six.
That is correct.
Okay.
Questions from the committee on
this.
Madam chair should say that's
half the difference so that that
said it could also adjust that
okay.
The difference we need a motion.
Move that HSC scenario for aging
and long term services
the young second.
Okay we have small and
Armstrong.
There any opposition to the US
saying that it's broken let's go
to the next one help them share
the next on the Human Services
Department and we have in the
packet pages twenty one to
twenty nine what is the
workgroup report I will do it
for two
Analysts to explain what the
cactus hoping James I
Charles madam chair I would turn
your attention to page twenty
two.
Okay.
Table.
The executive this was a
significant difference in the
two recommendations and so the
committee spent a lot of time
digging into the and it was
really in Medicaid LFC was low
outside of the Medicaid program
but the executive was sixty
eight million dollars in change
lower than LFC.
and its recommendation the
executive also included forty
five million and non recurring
fund balance to be carried
forward which is not
recommended.
Kind of mixing that not non
recurring and recurring the
committee started with the
executive
General Fund number.
And then added twenty million
dollars to that and recognize
that Medicaid needs to start
taking recognition of scale
efficiencies from having a
hundred thousand additional New
Mexicans on the program.
The recommendation acknowledges
that the new information from
the federal government that
Medicaid will be getting an
extra two quarters of of
enhanced Federal.
Medicaid participation so the
program will get a lot more
federal funding
And then there's opportunities
for the program to adjust how it
recognizes administrative scale
efficiencies as well as a profit
margins that it built into the
the range at the end of the day
the committee recommended
increasing the Medicaid a
starting point by twenty
million.
So it's an overall savings of
forty eight million.
At in terms of difference.
And the committee also
recommended
adopting the rest of the Human
Services Department programs at
the LESC level they adopt a
consensus performance measures
and targets that are part of
your the this long packet madam
chair.
Okay just so I got this straight
thank the committee added twenty
million to Medicaid they brought
in or recognize the two quarters
which is about seventy eight
million is that correct.
Correct madam chair about
seventy five million a quarter
okay seventy five million a
quarter.
Okay because we recognize those
two quarters that we've already
been told we're going to get out
rebel to say forty eight million
is that kind of the bottom line
yes a forty million from the LFC
so you can spread that out
elsewhere that's how you're
paying for some of these other
apps that you're doing about LFC
manager okay Representative
Sweetser and I think you have a
comment on this.
Thank you madam chair I just
wanted to compliment my work
group and especially compliment
the LFC staff because we were
we're looking at a lot of
unknowns
I'm predictions of what the
federal government was going to
do and we really just tried to
to come together with the very
best scenario for New Mexico and
it was mind blowing but the LFC
staff walked us through it and I
appreciated them very much.
Your mind isn't long you want to
make a motion on this.
What kind of loan but yes madam
chair I will move the AJS the
recommendation for the HSD
departments.
Have a motion and a second
Sweetser now your son for the
HFC scenario is there any
opposition to this.
Thank packet here bill let's see
I don't see any so it's proved.
You're the next item is the
department of health and pages
thirty through thirty three.
Basically the memorandum
speaks for itself our increasing
the energy transfer from opioid
opioid settlement fund for
public health program being
suicide Fund.
Prevention program reduces the
DD waiver increased by two and a
half million and that's on the
next few pages you'll see where
the lines are will show that to
you we're increasing the public
health program L. A. R. C. S.
program.
By five five hundred thousand
the facilities management
program increases two million
dollars and increased interest
to transfer revenue for several
facilities management program
right to make.
Add non reverting general fund
language for the GDP street
program.
again development disability
support program.
And add language allowing that
the health department to
transfer up to three million
from the fund balances to
various facilities management
program if needed.
In a technical adjustment of
public health program to reduce
contract for services.
And on page thirty one years is
that high level you'll see those
items line fourteen is C. L. A.
R. C. S. program and five
hundred thousand.
Line forty two of reserve bank
can see right I am a two million
dollars.
On increased Davy on the
development of life fifty eight
the reduction of two million
five hundred thousand it's
revenue neutral madam chair and
those are the changes that are
all.
Okay do we have anybody working
on health May Day at Charles Lee
you want to make a comment on
this.
I do madam chair so the DD
waiver as a beneficiary of the
enhanced Federal F. map.
through the end of the calendar
year as well and that generates
about seven million dollars in
general fund savings a quarter.
The GT waiver program has been a
non reverting agency and it had
a surplus of seventeen million
dollars in FY twenty and is
projected to have a surplus of
twenty point six million dollars
at the end of this fiscal year
for a total of over thirty seven
million dollars that will be
carrying Ford in FY twenty two
and that's the reason for the
recommendation to rearrange that
line fifty eight
thank you
us very fundamental question
here.
Why on earth would you do have a
surplus they're getting a
surplus because of two things
one is the enhanced F. map.
where the federal government is
paying a larger share of the
cost of the DD waiver.
And the second is the supports
waiver
the enrollment has not increased
for people choosing to come off
though to choosing to use that
service while they're on the
waiting list thank they're well
below their targets right now
and so that's generating savings
within the program.
That said when the F. map goes
away they'll have a general fund
increase need enhance the
rationale for the non returning
language to help balance the
program out and in future years
as well as help with shortfalls
in the facilities management
program.
We have any questions from the
committee on the house Madam
chair representative Garcia is a
not that last comment madam
chair of the first this is that
are using it but yeah we have a
ten year old the list on that
what how's that working out or
what's going on the vision the
vols pin drop somewhere to have
a ten year waiting list they
have that much money and people
are still in this way this what
what is going on for anybody
explain that manager.
The money as a Charles A.
explained they've got an
enhanced federal slug of money
that's gone then that helps.
Bill the gap with our general
fund but I think the other big
issue is enrollment is below
their targets so in other words
you know there's different
there's different
Classifications of DD and people
can get
all a number of different DD
help levels but apparently
they're relevant to people
aren't either they're not
choosing to enroll or there's
been a problem with getting
people enrolled.
So is there more on that
Charles.
I know madam chair you covered.
So I think what we'll have to do
then Representative Garcia
during LESC in the summer is to
really dig into why these people
are getting enrolled in a you
know quicker way it doesn't make
sense to me either but I have no
idea if there's issues related
to this COVID business or or
what but that I would assume
like with all state services
that's probably hampered.
The madam chair thank you for
that you know the the COVID one
thing that madam chair but this
issue has been there for way
before COVID ever started and as
we know this because you know
the people who wait forever and
I would look forward to working
on that matter thank you yeah
well we'll take a deeper dive
into that in the interim so with
that being said we need a
motion.
Armstrong I just real quick
madam chair I'm hi I agree with
Representative Garcia it's been
a huge issue I said on the
health committee and it since
I've been there
from a freshman this is been an
issue but one of my concerns
madam chair is there was no
money no I'm wrong never mind
I'll make the motion madam chair
that we
The H. J. F. C..
So there there okay we have a
motion to have a second
available all seven that that if
year okay we got Armstrong and
Garcia.
Is there a
any questions or any opposition
to this motion.
Okay we don't have any so is
there proofed and will bring
this up during the interim.
Thanks to madam chair madam
chair the next items to Mexico
Environment Department the LFC
recommendation was initially
adopted and this to add one
million dollars to that proposal
to the.
Committee action and
Representative Lara and lane
were involved in this on page
thirty four.
Is the buyer Department and
online's.
In between going for both you
and I.
I can't hear you when you're not
talking directly into the
computer okay sorry sorry sorry
I just we that's fine on between
late teens aligns thirteen
fourteen there's a line called
produced water act the
implementation of a hundred and
eighty nine.
What I believe it is a yes
and the client between lines
twenty twenty one years
inspector and enforcement
officer vacancies for two
hundred thousand.
And line twenty seven there's no
FDA for occupational health and
safety bureau of five hundred
ten point five.
Between eight twenty nine thirty
there is a medicines office you
can only be at one hundred
thousand dollars.
Okay Representative Lara do you
have a comment Representative
Eli.
Madam chair I'm happy to to
chime in here this is
Representative Lente.
So those those two items
specifically our line fourteen
was one of the priorities for
this agency.
And they also help they ask for
more help in person category and
so that was the the main
rationale for those two changes.
Okay Representative Lara are you
on Medicare yes I I do have up I
do want to bring up or make a a
note is that up based on the on
the passage of house bill ninety
to the agencies are looking at
an additional one point four
million dollars in revenue so
that was also a factor in our
decision for the.
Madam.
Contingent upon on house bill
going through.
Yes yes madam chair okay so we
have at all.
Where to make the motion.
Sure.
By the state happy my analyst
Kate or one just called and I
think.
On the line fourteen because of
what was just discussed the
prospect of legislation to put
these the intent was to move
four oh seven point three in
line fourteen to line eleven and
so I think we got one version
behind on the spreadsheet.
Okay I see Representative
terminal are of the subcommittee
nodding his head on that so if
we could make that a correction
on the sheet madam chair.
So.
Representative blank.
Thank you madam chair I think
this is L. two I. I will second
that motion okay.
Representative Lara you made the
motion.
Chair I I make a motion for the
the tears Agency scenario for
items six six seven New Mexico
environmental permit.
Recognizing we have the change
online eleven okay we have a
motion and a second is there any
opposition to that motion saying
that its approach.
Next bill.
You're the next item is the
military affairs department the
proposal is that one hundred
thousand dollars and it's the
purpose is to re reimburse
servicemembers group life
insurance premiums.
And this additional I wondered
thousand that's after the
difference.
From the request.
Representative Garcia for the
motion.
Madam chair I move that the
motion be carried on looking
there's Affairs okay the motion
is to accept the HSC scenario is
our second.
Second router Crowder okay
Garcia and Crowder on this one.
There any opposition to that
motion saying that is true next
madam chair the next item is the
New Mexico correction department
we accepted the LESC
recommendation initially there
is an additional one point five
million dollars
proposed Representative
Castellano and Armstrong were
involved in an ad hoc Senator
it'll and I would defer to David
or Charles for explanation what
happened okay Charles you're out
first.
So madam chair you can see there
is a significant difference
between the X. second LFC wreck
on line twelve hundred medical
contract that apartments are
projections are the department
the way that it pays this vendor
is on a per inmate basically
and they have guaranteed
minimums for how many inmates to
pay for the problem is the
department's projected to pay
for ten million dollars worth of
inmate health care for inmates
will not be there next year but
this does get the part just to
get the rex a little bit closer
it also reduces where LESC was
higher in facility maintenance
and repair online twenty one
and it spends a total of one
point five million general fund
we would recommend including
language
for the department not to pay
for inmates for medical care who
are not in custody with that I
stand for questions chair.
Representative Castellano or
Armstrong any comments.
Adam chair if I may.
Yeah I I agree with Charles at
the department's going to have
to look at changing the way
these contracts are written so
can I think you start saving
money instead of having to pay
for medical.
Medical needs for our enemies
that are not there thank you
Madam.
Representative Armstrong you
have a comment also on this no
thank you madam chair I agree.
Okay we're gonna go to
Castellano for the motion which
would basically be the HFC
scenario with the inclusion of
the language.
share madam chair if I may be
for the motion carried I had no
life fifteen this is a just of
vacancy rates we did get it will
calm the **** did.
Thank you just that they have
madam chair.
Charles.
Yes we are and then moving that
in some of those vacancy savings
and to order additional salary
increases about one and a half
percent for correctional
officers and public facilities
and then increasing the private
pretty and rates as well hello
that online sixteen and
seventeen.
Thank you madam chair.
Right any other questions.
Representative Castellano and
Armstrong.
madam chair I make connection to
accept the correction wasn't
budget as presented.
Second.
Okay the motion is to it is to
accept the HSA scenario with the
inclusion of the language that
was suggested by Charles is
there any opposition any
opposition to that motion.
Saying that it's better.
The other question I had before
we leave this Charles is that
justice department have an
opportunity to re negotiate that
medical contract.
Thank you a particularly if
there's a provision in every
contract that there's not enough
legislative appropriations than
they can renegotiate it okay.
Go ahead and which are we got a
copy of that contract.
I'll check with our analysts to
review that madam chair yeah I'd
like to see that and I'd like to
know for sure if they've got
that ability and certainly we're
going to be encouraging them to
take action in that direction.
All right let's move on to the
next HSD madam chair the next
for the department of public
safety the for we adopted the
additional adoption was LFC and
this scenario
rearranges that it takes it
takes the increaseper vehicles
out completely and shifts that
dollar amount on eight twenty
eleven and twenty four on page
thirty eight.
I just which is between that and
this and the vacancy rate the
pre disintegrate.
I thought I had a couple members
helping me on this department in
your mind me they were I don't
have that information I don't
recall who they were I thought
it was Herrerra some.
Sorry manager at one of those I
was one of those two okay lane
is wasn't Herrera.
Representative lane do you have
any comment on this thank you
madam chair so the the
department of they want to try
to decrease that they can see
right and so I think this was
the best way to handle that and
since they there chairman
members are down they don't need
additional police vehicles so
that was the reason for the
swap.
Okay Representative do you have
any comments also.
Madam chair she may be
presenting another she may be
presenting and on the bill in
committee yes somebody there's
two or three of them that have
told us that so go back
Representative lane for the
motion thank you madam chair I
move the HSC scenario for the
department of public safety.
Okay we need a second also in
the chair okay we have landed
our state that one is there any
opposition.
Saying it's approved next madam
chair the next item is a public
schools support its language
only.
That requires schools to use E.
S. S. E. R. and probably the
best situation is that have.
Proceeds going back because I
don't even know what ESSP arias.
Charles are you good I'm
explaining what you SSE are is.
Yes madam chair that's of
federal stimulus funds that the
school districts received
there are private employers that
were required to provide certain
comment leave comment related
Lee and the recommendation is to
continue that that expired in
December Congress is not
re implemented it yet but the
recommendation is for school
districts to have their budgets
approved would need to continue
those leave provisions
and PDA shouldn't ensure that
they continue it through the
budget process and they would be
able to use their federal funds
to cover that in case somebody
got sick with COVID or or add to
be quarantined because of it
they wouldn't use their own
annual or sick leave and I'm
sure.
Representative small Trujillo
honest sincere been leading the
pack on the Public at so
Representative small.
Thank you very much madam chair
madam chair this language that
builds off of what was primarily
in place is very important as we
move for re opening statewide
and so I just want to thank you
and LFC for the direction to
include.
Alrighty Representative Trujillo
any comment also so I concur
with the chair of the committee.
Okay let's go back to
Representative Trujillo for the
motion and then go ahead okay so
move this recommendation madam
chair.
We have a second.
A lot of.
Okay Lara I'm not one of
Trujillo M. and Representative
Lara on that one for item twenty
three language that I one sizes
twenty three to sciences twenty
four but we know what we're
talking about so is there any
opposition to this.
Saying that it's approach next
bill madam chair the next item
is a compensation.
Harris have been no action to
date that is on page thirty
nine.
This is a proposal to increase
salaries by one and a half
percent.
Across the board basically can
see on that page who and
includes benefits of course.
Sixty three point six million
dollars madam chair yes I I
think this is an excellent
recommendation and I hope that
we can approve it.
Motion.
Madam chair I move this
recommendation from this HFC
staff HSA scenario on
compensation to have a second
second.
In the house.
Chair yes the state up we have
the the compensation amount that
was in the public school budget
was three hundred and thirty
nine thousand higher than this
total of sixty three million six
hundred thousand and we research
to determine that the amount on
the screen she was correct so
well I it the I would recommend
adding three thirty nine
thousand to the public school
amount into the total.
Okay madam chair I forgot about
that and I agree I think it's
important to ensure that that
the that is included.
Okay is there any questions on
that David just explained it.
Okay we have a motion picture
here on the second from Allison
is there any opposition to this
motion.
Anderson is a no.
Okay we got one now.
All right approved next
madam chair the next item is on
page forty which is the transfer
authority section of the bill.
And you can see there basically
what it does and again it's been
explained that very well how it
works.
Well.
On Monday morning when we bring
the bill back you'll have a
financial summary and it'll show
that given all the non recurring
uses that are proposed from the
general fund appropriations
account that they'll be a need
to
Bring in two hundred and fifty
million into the operating
reserve subject to board of
finance approval
and we're gonna need to validate
these numbers over the weekend
anyway so usually point
technical cleanup committee and
this is what the very last thing
we do in at this point it's
close to an information item
that we will validate over the
weekend with the group.
And.
All right eight with that being
said that go to Representative
small for the motion.
Thank you madam chair I move
approval of the HSC recommended
transfer authority in section
thirteen okay do we have a
second.
Thank you madam chair.
It was the Representative Lara.
Yes chair okay a small are on
this is there any opposition.
Thank.
Yes.
Madam chair the next I was page
forty one is a nonrecurring
appropriations that'll end up in
the section five of
section.
Thank you you have a handle on
everything it's in here.
Your made
to order sure it will help jump
in to help was needed.
Madam chair the first.
I'm lying to you can see AOC as
requested a non reverting
language to use as a state match
for federal funds for court
appointed attorneys in child
welfare cases.
Line three this will be our our
recommended decrease to the
money in the.
The DFA for economic recovery as
well as specifying the use of
the remaining amounts which
would be six million it would be
used for that community
assistance council an act that's
implemented for economic
recovery efforts for communities
impacted by mineral and energy
development in coordination with
that or any federal stimulus
funding.
A line for would be contingent
on house bill fourteen or
similar legislation that would
create a grants administrative
division for two hundred
thousand.
Line I would be two million
dollars the department had
requested more money that that
is in the the base
recommendation for in doubt
early childhood positions in
higher education to address
recruitment and retention
particularly for bilingual and
indigenous educators
that would be Act contention on
institutional matching funds and
these would come from ECECD's
these are.
Private pre K. account balances
that's Avid for two million
dollars.
Workforce solutions department a
hundred fifty thousand
nonrecurring for individual
development accounts.
Line seven department of health
has requested to extend the
period of time for the.
Ten million dollars from the
general fund that you
appropriated in the special
session they've got about four
five million dollars worth of
vaccine distribution and testing
costs they were gonna spend five
million dollars on advertising
for public health advertising
for people to encourage them to
take the vaccine that sounds
like that's going to be picked
up by the tourism department now
and the department needs money
to help the environment
department to continue a storage
testing as a
As a strategy for detecting
COVID in communities through the
end of the calendar year online
eight
This would increase the
essential air service earmarked
for four million for a total of
nine million
the air service funding is
contingent on Senate bill one
thirty three being enacted.
A line the next line which
doesn't have a line number on it
Would be five hundred thousand
for the steam initiative that
PED there's a lot of discussion
about that in the public schools
our workgroup in the
presentation of that report for
to the full committee a desire
to to restore that and and this
uses public education reform
Fund balances.
A line line the proposal is to
help close the gap between what
the lottery scholarship would
pay next year in the available
funding to increase that I. five
million from the consumer
settlement fund.
Lying to.
just the higher education
department there was a lot of
discussion among the committee
about having better data and
whether high school students
from New Mexico we're
participating in progressing
through a college that would
just be a hundred thousand
dollar cost and that would come
from the public education reform
Fund.
Line eleven this is a priority
for the executive but million
dollars to support mental health
services for students and higher
education institutions that
would come from the opioid
settlements in the consumer
settlement fund that would be
all the section five related
adjustments to what you've
already adopted madam chair
would you like me to go through
the rest of yeah let's go
through the whole page.
So then line thirteen there's a
number of stranded funds in the
treasury.
The legislature has repealed the
K. three plus fund it's repealed
the two pre K. funds when it
created the new early childhood
Department their balances and
all of those funds that we're
recommending a movement of the
first two are the stranded pre
K. funds these would be moved to
the new early childhood
education and care fund that's
basically pretty funding future
pre K. services another early
childhood services that you're
you appropriate to the trust
fund the last as an executive a
priority there's a desire to
continue to have balances in the
state support reserve fund that
is part of your overall general
fund reserves and that fund is
used to help ensure that the
unit value is fully funded in
case there's a shortage and
either credits or overage on the
number of units and so this
would take a surplus K. three
plus fund balances again this
this fund has been repealed
and move those balances into the
state support reserve fund.
And then are you just took
action on line seventeen the
operating reserve and then there
two technical adjustments.
one is reconciling the tobacco
settlement revenues between
higher education
and the other is the the move of
the essential air service which
was in.
A section five to be in the
special transportation
appropriation sections of the
bills in the those are just
technical minor things but we
needed to get him on a sheet for
you to review chair.
Okay let's go to questions I
have Representative Hochman
Vigil handout so.
You madam chair just going back
to line line in the lottery
scholarship it's my
understanding that you have a
nine point seven million
shortfall so are there any plans
madam chair for them to make up
that additional funds somewhere
else and if so how how does the
advocacy for that work I
apologize I'm new to this
committee some still catching up
on house to the Senate if the
Senate wants to put more money
into it we're fifty percent of
the process and they'll get to
be able to work with them to see
if they'll put more money into
it.
Thank you madam chair okay
Representative Armstrong thank
you madam chair I'm curious on
thirteen and fourteen
that early childhood education
and cares fund is only access
the.
They I'm just concerned about
all that money it's a total of.
Seven eight eleven thousand
eleven million dollars is that
correct.
Charles it's seven million
dollars from the CYFD pre K.
fund and three million dollars
from the PED pre K. from both of
those funds have been repealed
and so these are stranded
accounts in the treasury then it
would move in with the money and
so the early childhood
departments big early childhood
education and care fund.
Okay I'm I'm just a little bit
concerned about that just
because no one else has access
to that money except for the
early childhood education and I
don't know why PED would be
giving up to three million
dollars and putting it in map
instead of.
Bring it somewhere else madam
chair these are both from the
prekindergarten program which is
administered by the early
childhood department so we can
keep keep that fund balance in
that same system and not move it
to another purpose.
And what would the total of that
fund be.
Do you know offhand.
With the other fund transfers
you have to be about three
hundred thirty million.
Okay thank you madam chair thank
you Charles.
All right thank you is there
anybody else on now so catch up
cleanup nonrecurring
adjustments.
Going I have a question do we
bring up the discussion also on
the pharmacy.
I don't see it here and I don't
know if it if it should have
been here not madam chair we're
gonna discuss as at another
time.
David.
Madam chair we had a lot of
analysis on this issue and
C..
Charles can you help me out you
follow the sole Warner go ahead
four hundred and forty two
thousand at the LFC recommended
and I think the agency is
looking for three million I
believe yes for software Adam
chair representative they're
looking for three and a half
million we went back and
validated that the department's
documentation that they provided
to the LFC last fall at a three
point five million dollar a
total project request the four
hundred forty two thousand was
to initiate and and conduct the
planning for that project they
told the LFC in the fall they
would not start the project
until next July.
and that's what the LFC made its
recommendation on since then
we've come to learn that the
department apparently has used
its operating budget yes to pay
for that initiation and
planning.
And then now it's at the point
where it feels it's ready to
purchase the software which
would cost about two point eight
million and it's asking for the
committee so essentially repay
its operating budget
and then by the the software our
concern is that that basically
that approaches circumventing
the entire I. T. funding request
process and putting you in a
position of
having to repay for things that
they didn't have a budget for
you didn't appropriate money for
that project and essentially I
initiated it going around the
department of information
technology and then asking you
to pay for that part of it in
arrears our recommendation today
is to continue researching and
looking at the departments eight
other projects that they are
asking for extensions because
they can't spend the money for a
variety of reasons and
Our recommendation is is for you
to.
Of the issue along and have
Senate finance continue to to
research it to figure out how it
might approach the funding of
the project or not.
That's what we know today Madam
chair representative of testing
on.
Thank you Charles madam chair
well I I agree if there we you
know the thing going behind the
back of doing the stuff that you
know the funding now if the user
and they want to get paid back I
mean that's something we need
they need to take a look at it
was just a question chair out I
thank you guys for information
clarifying that Charles madam
chair.
Okay anybody else on this list
here.
Yes Representative small
promotion will prove of the edge
HSC catch a clean up
nonrecurring transfers.
Second.
Second hello some okay we have a
motion and a second for small
and Allison is there any
opposition to this ketchup made
up nonrecurring.
All right it's been approved
let's go to the next section
please bill madam chair the next
item in the final item in the
package that's on page forty two
which is the center for
distribution of non recurring
role funding.
We do this bill and the General
appropriations act what we do is
we identify of funding for one
half the amount the rest of it
goes over to the Senate to
identify projects.
And we did have a workgroup help
me with identifying of projects
highway district.
And those that were approved or
based on recommendations that
come directly from the
department so these are projects
that they bring forward and
recommend either what they call
major major investments or
maintenance so that's why you'll
see some of them are smaller
amounts because they've taught
probably tied to a maintenance
issue in that district but I
just wanted to put this out
there now so if there's any
questions from anyone on any of
these projects.
Move adoption.
Okay we have a.
Representative Anderson for the
motion of adoption we have a
second.
B. Garcia on the second is there
any opposition to this.
I don't see any opposition but
again what I want to say on this
this crown total represents one
half of what we put into the
general appropriations act
framework.
So you know the Senate gets to
spend on equitable amount
sometimes they identify projects
and sometimes they don't
sometimes I'll just turn it over
to the department for for how
they feel best but these
projects are projects that were
provided to us by the department
so is there any opposition to
the motion.
I think that it goes into the
bill thank you what else still.
Sure at this point.
Yes that concludes oh we needed
to do today and I would suggest
that
the LFC will begin putting the
bill together substitute bill
with all these changes and all
the action of your previously
taken.
And what I ask is that as we're
working through this bill needs
to be proved it cetera and we'll
be doing that before Monday I
ask that you appoint a couple of
members as if we have technical
adjustments that need to be made
based on our actions that we can
just.
Contact them to get approval for
those particular changes.
We're gonna.
Let's put it Sweetser in Crowder
on this.
Right technical changes and also
small small Sweetser Crowder on
this.
What about all those bars
information that was provided
madam chair they.
I'm sorry I forgot about the
bars this is something that
needs to be a.
considered as well and there are
multiple pages NBA ours on here
I think the best thing to do is
have the hi David or Charles
explained what these are this is
something that happens on every
year every year we go for these
they are.
Languages that we put in the
bill so madam chair.
It's a separate hand out.
If we put it on the screen it's
just you can't read it anyway.
Very small writing
We can just have David and
Charles just extremities and see
where you want to go from there
madam chair but they need a job
what I have here is twenty one
of twenty three so I want to
David and Charles to talk about
what a bar is and then just
highlight the big issues per
page they don't have to go
through every one of them.
I'll start out Madam chair okay
going berserk budget adjustment
request and as you know the.
No money can be spent from the
by the from the state treasury
without an appropriation but as
you know it is necessary from
time to time to adjust budgets
so in the budget act which is
section six of the New Mexico
statutes chapter six rather
other provisions for the
executive branch and executive
agencies to submit proposed
adjustments to the budget.
and those adjustments could take
the form of moving money between
categories.
But budget increase which is
increasing the total amount of
spending in other state funds
and occasionally a transfer
among divisions or programs
three kinds of but budget
adjustments L. at their review
by the DFA submitted to the LFC
LFC has ten days to reject or or
to oppose the budget adjustment
leading to a hearing before the
committee the committee can
support or or denied the staff
objection are nevertheless the
DFA at the end of the day can
still implement the budget
adjustment despite all
legislative objection because
ultimately the legislature can't
delegate to a sub body like LFC
appropriation power so we get
hundreds of these every year.
LFC reviews monthly and
miscellaneous business all the
budget adjustments are recently
objections have been rare
probably the biggest was years
ago when they were objections to
moving money around in the
behavioral health area HSD did
in the tens of millions so the
guidelines for budget
adjustments for twenty one LFC
staff review these carefully
your HSC staff look at him a
little bit generally all of the
request for supplemental
authority for twenty one are
supported for specific amounts
and purposes so on the on the
very first one it AOC the
administrative records may
request increases again you can
see specific amounts in there
and typically what they're for
five hundred thousand for the
Water Rights Judy cation program
so that is supplemental bar
thirty for the current fiscal
year FY twenty one on top of the
original bar thirty that was
passed in the two thousand
general fund General
Appropration Act for FY twenty.
Secondly you have another packet
that is FY twenty two Barth
Authority.
For next year agencies right out
the gate submit a lot of request
for budget change authority
there's generic budget change
budget adjustment authority for
all agencies that authorizes
transfers among categories.
Person contracts and other
without any limit unlimited
transfer among categories for
all agencies and then up to five
percent budget increase
authority every agency starts
out with that a lot of agencies
want more than that generally
the recommendations of the
committee don't typically
authorize additional authority
beyond that generic under the
theory that let's start the year
and see how it goes and you
spent three months looking at
the budgets for these agencies
are given all that time and
effort to make sense to change
the budget and expansive way
beyond what you've spent thirty
days looking at so those are the
general guidelines and with that
I'd be happy to answer questions
on the madam chair okay wanted
like to do is to direct the
committee that page one.
Through page five is FY twenty
one because the other up on the
title recommended for FY twenty
two starts on page six.
So I just wanted to ask David
I'm looking at
page one through five is there
anything that you and our or
Charles has a comment on that's
not pretty standard here that we
would you know might want to
have some focus on the.
Okay the committee just a minute
or two to look at this.
I think if you look at the call
of that is the LFC approved
language HSC per limit merry
call.
For the actual language.
Okay we have we have a request.
From secretary Romero on is that
this bar stuff Representative
small.
Your no I think it's just as a
as some concluding remarks madam
chair okay well out of here at
the concluding remarks thank you
thank you.
I think what's important about
this you know Pete people thank
god gosh is just administrative
but the thes Authority the Bar
Authority issued can be
incredibly important and that if
it wasn't you would be saying
these FY twenty two is already I
mean gosh we haven't even got
into the into that yet but.
All right Representative
Chatfield anything between page
one and I.
Chair of the state money is more
just a question about the is in
general and I just see that a
lot of these requests are a
request to are some of them are
a request to increase the budget
according to leverage funds so
they're actually I'm alright
this request for.
To increase their general fund
appropriation is just a request
that would our money that they
brought in from other stores
your Madam chair representative
Chatfield the increase authority
up typically applies to other
state funds there's no authority
to to change general fund
appropriations I should also
probably mention that although
the federal funds is a column in
the General Appropration Act it
do.
Through some pretty complex
court decisions over the year
the legislature typically
doesn't have authority to
appropriate federal funds so
federal funds budget adjustments
are presented as information
items that go into effect on
initiatives.
Thank you.
Okay
is there any questions on page
one through five.
Okay let's move on to page six
through.
Twenty three.
Representative Anderson.
On page eight of twenty three.
I did a.
I'm almost embarrassed to
recommend that we give quick
consideration to DFA on the
screen and it is a matter of
five thousand dollars of other
state funds for a very
successful drug court and I've
been lobbied by a District Court
judge to take care of the drug
court.
Quick consideration would be
appreciated.
David why would we have
considered this.
I'll have to ask my analyst and
and try to have an answer should
keep going.
Madam chairman I I don't want us
to get hung up on this but I
would like to we have a very
successful drug court going down
there in the fifth and I think
you get a supporting it with
other state funds is appropriate
so.
Will make the motion
Representative Anderson will
change.
Madam chairman I moved in on the
fifth judicial district on page
eight we take the DFA of the
language over the column that
has LFC approved
I need a second.
Thank you for Representative
small is there any opposition.
Thank god it's okay all right
Representative Trujillo.
Yes thank you madam chair I'm on
seventeen.
Seventeen.
Item thirty three.
And the.
You know this I think this is
recommended because Yazzie
Martinez lawsuit.
And right here on the LFC.
Side do not recommend can FY.
Charles.
Our our David somebody on one
well I think you will find
between
of the General Appropration Act
or significant increases
for this purpose recurring and
you will also find that when you
get to junior their substantial
amounts for these purposes and
the junior bills that have been
it basically this would
duplicate the increases that
between General Appropration Act
and supplementals are General
Appropration Act Mr considering
and if they're short again you
spent thirty days working on
these appropriations and then to
make a million dollar budget
increase for the year started is
typically something that step
would recommend.
And madam chair this is really
should be section for language
it's just recognizing transfer
from one agency to another not a
not a budget adjustment.
Okay but there wouldn't what
time requests right.
And
chair representative and the
Budget recommendations that were
adopted there's a transfer from
PED to Indian Affairs of a
million dollars.
So the.
The best place request and in
our view.
This should be in here Christine
it's in the transfer language.
Okay maybe after our side
conversation you can put me to
that.
Okay thank you.
Okay anybody else on these are
our issues for FY twenty two.
Madam chair Representative
Crowder.
Are there any I know there's
always a.
Well group of requests for non
regarding language are we
allowing were it not regarding
language anywhere in any of
these I did.
Catch any that caught my
attention but I'm not going to
miss some so Charles rated nope
but none reverting is not in
our.
Thank you very.
Thank you madam.
Okay.
One.
Thank you madam chair
representative question about
Rowe forty one on page twenty
one.
Regarding the department of
Veterans Services.
And I I'm just curious this
would this would allow them to
pull up to seventy five thousand
from license plate revenues why
why this is not recommended
thanks again or just this was a
need to the Department it sure
been requested budget again
we're trying to every agency
you're starting out with a five
percent increase our priority
over and above what you spent
thirty days.
reviewing.
So generally across the
recommendations not to add to it
five percent.
Before the years even start.
Madam chair representative they
could budget that fee revenue
within their five percent.
Thank you madam chair.
Okay we have anybody else.
Representative small then for
the motion.
Thank you madam chair I hadn't
prove all of the FY twenty one
bar recommendation FY twenty one
and FY twenty two bar
recommendations in the HSC
scenario.
We have a motion and a second
which includes the one change
that we made.
Is small and Sweetser I think is
what I saw so your lips moving
anyway okay.
Small Sweetser.
And then you guys are gonna get
back with Representative
Trujillo on her question of how
transfers verses the bar works.
Okay is there any opposition to
this motion.
We'll see in a so thank you very
much that one is been approved
we have a request by
Representative
secretary Romero to come in can
can we bring our in.
Madam chair I think I'm actually
I'm able to speak so can you
hear me just make we we can hear
you just a little go ahead.
so just wanna take the
opportunity to think of the
chair and the committee of
Director Abbey the state budget
Division staffed in the LFC the
staff for where we are today I
think you know it's been
challenging under the
circumstances to work on the
budget but I think everybody
rose up and has done a really
good job I want to I'm very much
appreciative of the fact that
we've had some really good
communication I feel like you've
listened to what we didn't get
everything we wanted we we we
got a lot and so we're not done
us will be our first what we
need to on the Senate side but
just want to know how
appreciative I am of you know
the communication and the work
that we
we're able to get through during
this time so thank you madam
chair and thank you members of
the committee.
Thank you secretary Romero all
we we extend the same gratitude
to you and your staff
as you say it's it was
at unbelievable different kind
of situation for us to try to
work on our budget yet you know
through this virtual mechanism
for we've got.
The members here committee
members at home we've got some
all the virtual staff coming in
to help with the
difference different shades as
well as our LFC staff but I do
want to extend our sincere
appreciation to you and and all
the people from DFA that helps
put together our budget and also
like to extend great gratitude
to all of our committee members
and all of our staff LFC HSC
staff I mean this this was this
isn't easy for us I mean it's
been a left to say the least
I've got lots of other things I
want to say on Monday but for
now I want to just thank all of
you and if there's anything else
we need to talk about now bill
is the time to do it.
Madam chair at this point I
believe we are done.
What we really data okay
Representative Crowder.
Thank you madam chair and a
notice on our agenda on Monday
we are going to review the final
budget we vote on it on that day
or we vote on a Tuesday our.
Monday but.
I was.
Your letter chair will we have
an opportunity to look at the
high level report prior to that
meeting will get it.
Sometimes.
Saturday or Sunday here.
Yes we will.
And then
I don't know when yet
Representative Crowder we're
we've been focusing on this so
we're gonna get through this and
we just did so we will talk off
line about that wonderful thank.
Okay anybody else any other
comments that anyone else make
out of jail yes Representative
Garcia
I have one concern
Representative Crowder myself
worked on a working group now
that unfunded vacancy money is
sitting in the treasury in the
two of about seventy billion
dollars.
What's going to happen that
money is going to sit there or
how is it used for other
purposes of the state that we
need to address chair.
Money is in H. budget and it's
been a it's been budgeted
appropriately against whatever
those vacancy savings are.
So when you go back and you look
at each one of the
recommendations just come
forward
either LESC or DFA it'll tell
you what the vacancy savings
does we are not taking action as
an aggregate on all those
vacancies it would make sense
for us to do that we're going to
reach department department by
department and
at this point you all did a good
job on that and I think it
helped everybody but we're not
going to go in there and make
any major change with that
aggregate number.
Thank you madam chair.
Okay Representative Armstrong.
Thank you madam chair and my
apologies on I'm juggling a
little bit this morning but did
you talk about anything about
higher education and if we're
going to see that budget
beforehand or is that a done
process.
Madam chair I might.
They are action that was taken
out on higher education included
all the changes that were
discussed namely those programs
at New Mexico tech and at New
Mexico state and they are they
are already included as action I
as action already take those
adjustments were already made.
Thank you madam chair thank you
bill madam chair on that point.
Representative Trujillo yes I I
guess I'm a my to confuse myself
but again those of us who are
carrying legislation
For like higher ed information
and four hundred requests we
still have to listen to that
legislation request and how are
we going to.
Determine if they get Fund the
funding if the budget study.
Well it's just like we always do
if it's already in the budget
will strip strip the
appropriation if we need the
language in the bill goes on if
it's something that is not in
the budgets it'll be tabled if
it's something that it doesn't
need an appropriation and it's a
technical facts and it'll
probably go on it just depends
on what the bill is right see I
agree and I know we've been
doing it in the past but after
the fact when we show up to two
of.
Make that request and present
our bill we're told the money
isn't there so when in the
process do we actually make.
A get that request input into
the budget.
What it is this year we're going
to do a supplemental general
appropriations act and if it's
something that is of a small
amount yes I don't know what the
bill is
then it would be put in through
the through the junior process
but much of that I don't know
yet I'm going to provide that
information after we get this
budget stuff reconcile reconcile
I know there is a member of memo
that went out by this excuse me
the Senate finance chair we have
to go back and double check that
amount that was inappropriate
for him to put that out on our
side for the house side.
But now that all the adjustments
have been made my plan is to
prepare information a cover
ma'am all with the criteria and
send out everything to the
members all the members will get
a copy of this is just not ready
yet.
I I understand but I'm still
concerned that.
Somehow we did not to extract a
point where we could interact
with with the LFC staff to
ensure that there would be some
opportunity for us to support to
get money to support our bills
right I know I've done this for
ten years it's always a struggle
in the concern for me thank you
thank you very much anybody else
Madam chair representative yes
madam chair the.
I am still kind of looking for
an answer for the reduction in
the tribal colleges the
reduction of twenty six thousand
at a.
Mr Abbey was looking into and I
believe bill was looking into
that for me as well.
I I don't know build date David
you have an answer the bill
credit about.
The bill credit amount was
restored to the FY twenty one
operating budget level.
It was restored.
To FY twenty one operating
budget.
Okay.
Thank you Dave thank you madam
chair.
Thank you we have any other
questions from the committee
madam chair one may go ahead at
this point I would like to thank
David Abbey felt least New
Hampshire Conricus said a new
manager for all the dot thank
you very much.
Thank you Representative Garcia.
Okay is there anybody else that
has any questions madam chair
mine's just a comment on thank
you madam chair and also like
Representative Garcia said the
analysts on both sides us
secretary Romero this was a
great learning experience a lot
of numbers to look at and.
And I'm really looking forward
to working with this committee
madam chair and I thank you so
much I've learned a lot.
Yeah I'm glad to hear that
because that is a that is always
been a goal of mine as the chair
of this committee if you don't
learn something your first year
you've been asleep that's the
way I see it
and for people that have never
served on this committee it's
also it's an eye opening
experience it doesn't matter if
you've been here for thirty
years appropriations isn't like
anybody else I'm a we care about
one bill as I said our first day
and that's the budget.
But there's so much involved
with each component it's it's
it's all encompassing for the
first half of the legislative
session.
That's why in our thirty day
session we generally come in
early we come in at least a week
early to start our work just
because there's so much that's
involved with it but you know we
need to complement the fact that
we have to statutory committees
that work all summer but help
feed and all of this that's the
LFC and L. E. S. C. those two
committees work tirelessly
throughout the summer to bring
forth recommendations that then
go into either the DFA budget
are going to the LFC budget when
we look at the high level
spreadsheets so.
Real happy about that and a week
we could No Way just start this
in January and and get through
it without all the previous work
that started for the whole year
prior I mean basically as soon
as we're out it out here in the
governor takes action on the
budget we fire up again so it's
a whole year process in in this
Representative Ezzell.
Madam chair thank you very much
I find this whole process
amazing.
During pre in to me even though
I'm coming it at the middle of
the semester I do have to think
everybody that's helped me get
caught up I'm actually not all
the way caught up but it is
amazing what happens here thank
you very much thank you
Representative Ezzell yeah we're
hoping that you get all the
paperwork and information that
was discussed it's quite a lift
to get through it.
Anyone else before we adjourn
for today.
And so it looks like Monday and.
The bill what time on Monday
nine AM madam chair okay so we
need to make sure your other
committees know that out of that
you're gonna be we're gonna need
you here so they're going to
have to know that you have to be
excused do like a lot of the
two with two computer screens up
and trying to stay on top of
everything which is been a
nightmare but that's what we
we've been doing a lot of us
when you've got dual dual
responsibilities.
So with that thanks everybody
and we'll see you Monday at nine
o'clock madam chair health are
you going to be sitting out
there is a link and stuff right
away this weekend for Monday we
need.
Madam chair it I believe it was
sent out if not we'll make sure
it is you will get it.
Thank you can send another copy
appreciated madam chair I should
mention on Monday we will have
copies of the substitute bill.
We can't.
Email that the agency it's not
available that way it's huge
thank you to put it out there
emails going to be very
difficult for those of you that
are outside the building will
not be able to look at the bill
itself however any just changes
to be made certainly be
discussed at that point.
But I just want to point that
out madam chair.
Okay.
Takes a couple of trees per bill
it looks like it may well we're
starting to make copies the bill
is a very very thick substitute.
All right well thank you
everybody and have a good
weekend thank you have a good
weekend you madam chair.
