We went through some of the
presentations already and we
seen alive just had spent we've
seen her several times with
other presentations of New glad
to see secretary Romero here
with us and others so I'd like
to start of this meeting by all
and it to order and then
and it over to.
Of the people from L. C. S. O.
we're gonna be doing this a
little bit different than how we
normally do it before we listen
to one presenter at a time I
think of I think we're gonna be
listening to at least fifteen
agencies all at once and will be
taken action on hello the LCS
directs us so with that I'd like
to ask of adults Eldred.
For assistance and guide us
through this Mr allerede or Mr
bill Valdez how do you want to
do this process.
I'm sorry Mr Chairman started.
Would it be possible if you are
charters iron you have your
spreadsheet out there you can go
all through the spreadsheet
and look at them.
I believe there is a three page
spreadsheet there what the first
run.
It's all the items that are in
requests and the difference is
very secular indirect comment
and the LFC recommendations.
And there are the second sheets
are are those items were there
is general agreement between the
both the executive and the LESC.
Many other items I believe your
concentration needs to be on the
first T. as all the differences
my suggestion is you talk about
those items were there are
differences and go from that
point on.
Okay thank you for that bill
As Mr Valdez noted page two and
three of.
The executive.
Recommendation and the LFC
recommendations both are
exactly alike so all will do at
the end of the meeting is just
to accept the two pages as a
whole so we'll start with page
one and.
One.
One is the enterprise
comprehensive case management of
system project.
And that looks like there's a
difference of
Over half a million that the
executive is recommending.
They with.
When we get done with this of
we're talking about a distance
of thirty million and I don't
think that we have the money to
please everybody with thirty
million so
of course.
This site on that at the end of
our meeting of.
And you probably had a few
minutes to look at the whole
sheet as I said some of the
people have come before us
already like for example line
two and three the public
defender line eight nine tourism
and on down the line someone
have appeared before us before
and we gave them the LFC
recommendations so there is no
need to rehash that.
Okay
One of the first panelist ask
question would be Mr Crowder.
Thank you thank you Mr chairman
I was wondering if it might be
possible or appropriate to have
a one of the LFC analysts kind
of guide us through this process
just a little bit be able to
explaining the agency it's going
or or Mr chair.
And
gonna explain the differences
let the to LFC analysts and and
the exact analyst.
Kind of walk us through this
would that be possible or
appropriate Mr chairman.
Representative Crowder that is
very appropriate that's what the
we have talked about last night
with Mister Taylor and Mr Valdez
so we're seeing now analysts
guidance replace.
I thank you Mr chair thank you
members of the committee I
appreciate the opportunity to
talk about this Simon and I had
actually plans to kind of trade
offs on projects if that's okay
with you Mr chair also I think
Simon was going to go ahead and
start by talking about the AOC
project and then we can move
either take questions on each
project or we can go down the
list talk about each difference
and then take questions at the
end but we'll go ahead and
handed over to Simon Miller at
DFAT a little bit about
differences in the AOC.
Mr Miller thanks Jessica hi good
morning Mister chair members of
the committee again my name is
Simon Miller and I'm an analyst
at the FAA and I'm also joined
by cabinet secretary for
department of finance Debbie
Romero and the cabinet secretary
of department of information
technology Russia summoned
they're a lot smarter than me so
they should be able to answer
some of the questions that come
up but like you said overall
that the difference between
recommendations about thirty
million dollars the majority of
this difference is due to the
executives approach to support
full funding for these projects
as opposed to the LFC
recommendation which provides
partial or phased funding for
many of these projects
fees funding requires agencies
to come back to you individually
future years to request the
remaining amount of funding
needed for project completion
the executive recommendation
supports full funding for these
projects are for two main
reasons so first partial or
phased funding can ultimately
reduce lead to an increased cost
overall for the project and a
second phase funding can lead to
project delays so with that we
can talk about the the first
difference there which was that
AODA enterprise comprehensive
case management system project
that you representative Allison
referred to so this project will
replace the current case
management system used by all
thirty three judicial district
attorney's offices in the state
of New Mexico the current system
the current case management
system is seventeen years old
and has reached end of life this
project will reduce the number
of help desk tickets improve the
efficiency of data collection
and data sharing and improve
flexibility to support changing
laws criminal procedures and
business processes so but
overall the executive recommends
full funding for this project
while the L..
Let's see recommendation
provides funding for several
phases of the project but the
agency will have to come back to
the legislature in future years
to request additional funding to
complete the project.
So with that I'll turn it back
over to Mr hits then to talk
about the next difference.
Or make comments on that project
if you like.
Thank you Simon thank you Mr
chair members of the committee
just a quick no on the A. O. T.
a project I wanted to let the
committee know that the LFC is
recommending this project with
language for contingency so we
want to make sure that this
project is implemented using a
competitive procurement process
so that is one also small
difference the recommendations
in the language for that product
I'll go ahead and go on to the
next difference on your
spreadsheet I'm gonna be the
next red number which is four
item number four this is for the
taxation and revenue department
analytics collections and
compliance project.
Project is there actually
pursuing right to decide if
they're going to do one of two
options the first option is to
modify their current tax system
which is that Genpact to include
this compliance in collections
functionality on the other
option is to implement a
complete separate analytics
system integrate with that tax
and so we provided the LFC as
you can see with about three
million below the executive and
this was intended to provide
enough funding for the agency to
begin the planning phase in the
initiation of this project and
should be enough for them to
modify the current tax system
until they decide which opted
with I see whether it's going to
be an upgrade or replace so of
the recommendation with a little
bit well we're because provided
enough for them to to make that
decision I'll hand it to Simon
for any comments on that one and
then I see Representative
Hochman Vigil has a question
well it Mr chair if you want to
decide whether to have questions
now are at the.
I think it would be good to take
the questions as they come up.
Thank.
Representative Rubio.
Thank you very much Mr chair I
just more of a statement I've
been speaking with TRD on this
particular upgrade and I I
certainly support whatever the
best path the HSD determines
would be for them for either the
implementation of a whole new
system or at piecemeal
improvement I want to say Mr
chair is that any investments
that the legislature makes into
these tax systems are actually
in investment in ourselves it's
an investment in the state of
New Mexico it will allow TRD to
have a better chance of
collecting taxes that are due to
the state and so I would
encourage members of the
subcommittee to look at any
increases in the state agency
investment as not not just
expenditure but an investment
that's going to have to pay back
dividends so I I would really
encourage this committee to
support TRD and in that endeavor
thank you Mr chair.
Thank you for that
Representative.
Okay go on to the next the
agencies with the.
Red marks.
Okay Mister chair members of the
committee the next difference on
your sheet is going to be item
number eight for the tourism
department that's the visitor
information centre enhancement
project
at the executive recommendation
was what the agency requests at
eight hundred forty eight
thousand but since that time the
tourism department has found
another source of funding
seven you know that was after
the executive recommendation was
put together so we can go ahead
and move on to the next one.
Okay.
Thank you Mr chair members of
the committee what's going to
move on to the one right below
that we're gonna look at item
number nine this is also for the
tourism department this is
specifically for the inner most
are mobile office should be
aware of the department on the
requested a hundred fifty four
thousand you do a digitization
project of some of the artifacts
for the I believe that the the
price of the centennial event
that's next year I apologize
about the current and correct
the name of the event on the LFC
I did not recommend this project
however we did find funding to
the tourism department for their
marketing and advertising
purposes instructions six of the
our house bill two and so there
is funding for the tourism
department to prioritize this
budget if they choose to go.
Okay so this is then you're
saying that the funding that
they're requesting is available
to them otherwise.
Mr chair members of the
committee yes I apologize I
don't have the number associated
with the appropriation for your
spreadsheet
here it is it is in your section
six read sheet which you may or
may not have I apologize we've
appropriated four hundred
thousand to the ICO for planning
coordination and development of
the ICO that they received four
hundred thousand insect sex.
Okay so.
I'm I'm just saying that they
have enough money there to get
started and take care of the
event next year so we believe
so.
Mr chair if you wouldn't mind I
just like to comment on that
project section six
appropriations expire at the end
of this fiscal year so our
fiscal year twenty twenty two
and this project from ICO is at
the time lines about a year and
a half.
So I'm you know but that might
be something that.
We need to the legislature needs
to square away.
Okay so this is one of those
items that needs further
discussion.
I was in on the discussion with
this when they presented before
us and there was two different
groups trying to put the event
together one was a nonprofit the
other one was the tourism
department so at that time we
determined but money they were
asking for was adequate.
Mr chair I also just wanted to
know really briefly that the
tourism department also received
seven million from the last
special session for purposes of
tourism marketing and
advertising.
Not to be available beyond this
current fiscal year.
Okay is there any question any
further questions on this my
understanding is that there is
adequate funding for this event
at this time so we will not take
any action on this that was my
understanding.
Okay let's move on to the next.
All right Mister chair members
of the committee the next
difference is item number
thirteen which is the office of
the state engineers water rights
adjudication education system
modernization project.
So the purpose of this request
is to replace the current twenty
five year old water rights
adjudication tracking system
with the modern web based
application that will provide
the litigation division at the
state engineer with improved
data management and analysis as
well as improved document
generation and maintenance which
ultimately will improve the
efficiency of their legal
proceedings the executive
recommendation again supports
the entire cost of the system
replacement to be completed in
fiscal year twenty twenty four
the LFC recommendation provides
funding for projected up project
costs through the end of FY
twenty three so the HSD will
have to come back to the
legislature next session to
request additional funding to
complete this project.
Okay
I think
Mr salmon that was it's going to
make an extra comment on it yes
I do have a comment on that
Representative I'm in chairman
members of the committee this is
a prior application that is it
in a technically in my opinion
it's a museum because it's
twenty five years.
All so taking a modular approach
and the spacing in what appeared
that time will increase the cost
of doing business right now we
have multiple lawsuits on this
topic that the office of the
state engineers they're dealing
with it is based on that
permitting system and they have
to go dig through our extraction
number of systems to get all
this information do have a
unified again so I recommend
that be.
Take a closer look at this to
get the funding so that they
don't need to piecemeal it so
that they can implement that
holistic system and gain some
efficiencies.
Okay thanks for that
we got questions from two
members that would be
Representative Castellano
followed by a candies L..
Thank thank you Mr chairman and
much more.
The COVID as well I I think
these antiquated systems I don't
know why we're not investing in
and bring it and modernize into
to their capacity at I think a
lot of these departments are are
struggling and I think like
Representative Hochman Vigil
said right now it's us or the
constituents as in New Mexico
that are that are lacking in
losing out with the systems
result adequate itself I I think
we really need to look at as a
whole on a lot of these
projects that we are getting
adequate funding to.
We just piece million at and
making them work for another
five years and we have to invest
money again it would behoove us
to invest all the money I think
and and get these this
technology is up to date so just
a comment I just think we're
having a lot of disparity
between the LFC and exec thank
you Mr chairman.
Thank you for that
Representative.
this is I'll.
Mr chairman thank you very much.
I I am concerned about as Mr I
can't find his name right now
was stating if we're going to do
something like that I feel if we
have the money due to the oil
and gas production up to and
prices of oil and gas.
That it needs to happen but we
also need to keep in mind.
On recurring issues.
These funds may not be available
next year so the concerned
areas.
Are we going to spend every dime
that we have this year.
And just see what happens next
year should we be more diligent
and what we're doing to the
state of New Mexico about
spending their money so that you
know we can we can rock this
cradle both ways if you want to
call it that there is a concern
that we will not have the
funding Mexico round to be able
to come back and put more money
into these projects Mr chairman
thank you very much.
Okay thanks for that
Representative
Mr Crowder.
Thank you Mr chairman Mr
chairman I know that we
discussed this in depth the LFC
and on throughout their budget
and I guess two questions number
one is there anything in
specials and supplementals or
anywhere else in our process it
would cover this expense.
Or as an LFC analysts can you
tell me this has been
Why did the LESC go the way they
get in just partially fund this.
Mr chair representative Crowder
thank you for that question in
regards to the first part of
your question for and whether or
not this funding is available in
specials are supplementals I
would have to double check on
that I apologize I don't know
off the top of my head I know
that the state engineer received
several appropriations and
section five I however I don't
know that if any of them will
directly supplement any of the
funding however I do want to
comment on you know the reason
why we decided to fund a little
bit lower than the executive was
are we decided to provide
adequate funding for phase one
of the project and so you know
from our perspective there is
some benefit to having agencies
come back for more funding
because that gives us more
opportunities for accountability
to see how the project is going
to see if it's headed in the
right direction if that need
additional funds we see several
instances where agencies receive
funding and are not able to
spend it all in one in one year
so we see a lot of re
authorization of funding so we
believe that instead of getting
ahead of ourselves we you know
there is some benefit to having
agencies are take a phased
approach to ensure that we're
you know implementing the system
in a proper way through each
phase of that project so that
was kind of the perspective of
the LFC as well as also
mentioned it is difficult for us
to to come out and give
everybody a you know everything
at once but that was our our
intention of of providing
adequate funding for phase one
of the project to move that into
the next step once you've seen
how that first phase has has
kind of gone if it's been
successful.
Thank you Mr chairman thank you
Mr speaker I guess the
illustrate what you just said
all of page two and page three
of our packet or extensions of
time where they have not
expended the money they're
asking us for more time to hold
on to the money so I I see the
reasoning behind your your logic
and and I thank you for your
response thank you Mr chairman.
Okay thank you Representative
and thank you miss it's not
I think we got a question from
Mr cementum.
Quick comment chairs and members
of the committee also I just
wanna take a moment to respond
to our LFC analyst I have great
respect for her and work with
their so
we took that into consideration
but lately what is happening I
actually since the COVID
pandemic started the cost of
doing business has significantly
increased and that is a great
way wealthy a technology road
resources technically skilled
resources retiring and I are
resigning so I'll V. R. further
looking at the cost of doing
business increasing already the
CBI has gone up seven percent
for last calendar year and I'll
be expect that number to go up
with interest rates going up the
cost of doing business once
again I cannot reiterate this
topic multiple times we would be
looking at a much higher cost if
we take a phased approach so
that was considered and taken
into consideration in providing
the executive recommendation I
would also like to get that
cabinet secretary Debbie Romero
so opinion on that.
Madam secretary Mr chair and
thank you for allowing me the
opportunity and act you know I I
I do echo secretaries concerns
about the cost and I'd also like
to mention that you know the one
thing that you know we have
there's no oversight committee
this this is one of the the
appropriations where where
there's actually oversight
committee that LFC and DFA
posted on that oversee these
projects and so I think knowing
that there's going to be over
time this particular project I
think gives me more comfort
knowing that we can make sure
that this project is completed
when we talk about systems that
are twenty five years old and
older I think we definitely have
to consider you know making
those investments especially
considering that this is water
related we have lots of job
issues going on we've got it
we've got to fix the system so
that will we can do a better
job.
Thank you for that Mr.
Before we get to it.
Let's go ahead and go with the
well there's no other hands up
requesting so before you we go
any further Mr Valdez I'd like
to ask you the question of how
do we go about something like
this that we all agree on that
additional resources should have
been given to this agency okay
is it safe to say that we still
need to refer this until it
comes before the full committee.
Mr chairman the way can handle
it is.
To ask members that have
concerns about it to provide me
with information what we put
into the cleanup catcher.
Part of our process you need to
actually take care of this this
great she hasn't since right now
and then through the catch up
cleanup process we can consider
all these other request the
problem is we have to make sure
we are covered in our in our
finances and we don't overspend
so we have to be real careful
how we do this.
Okay Mr Valdez having said that
can we take the same approach
with the item for instead of
going back and forth on the
sheet at the end of the day this
is take care of of business as
we go down along the street.
Mr Chairman if you're here for
all the differences are.
And at the end of the day.
Anything that is not recommended
by the LFC and I'm sorry but
that's the way we need to
approach this because of the big
dollar one.
Okay if there are those items in
the should be read.
Further considered that we did
to do and catch a cleanup.
Okay thank you for that
clarification bill and I'm glad
the rest of the members that
from.
I hate to say the horse's mouth
let you heard it from Mister
bill this thank you Mr Valdez
the analysts go ahead and
proceed.
Thank you Mr chair members of
the committee will go ahead and
move to the next item your red
red dollar amount here is for
the department of health line
sixteen this is for an
electronic health records
project this is a project that's
also being pursued by the
corrections department this is
an existing projects of the
agency does have some pre
existing appropriations that
they're requesting extensions on
for this project and this would
be to implement a new health
records system to replace the
for dispirited stands that the
agency.
we provided the agency came in
requests full funding for the
project however again LFC is
taking a phased approach we
wanted to provide enough funding
for the agency to pursue
additional vendor analyses to
selected the appropriate
technology and vendor that they
were going to use to implement
the new system I'm all I have to
decide then if you have any
additional comments and then
questions.
Thanks Jessica Mr chair members
of the committee again this is
it kind of the same deal as we
talk about with a lot of these
other projects where it's based
approach verses the
versus full funding so with that
I can either move to the next
difference or if there I'll
leave it up to you
representative Allison I think
there's some comments and some
questions so before we move on
let's go with miss Fisher.
Thank you Mr chair I just
wanted.
with another clarification to
what Jessica said about kind of
the the theory of why LFC
recommended funding at these
levels for these projects and
and she's right for the most
part we were trying to fund just
the faces that would be covered
in the fiscal year for these
projects I know that's true for
the big hired system at the end
as well that's not an uncommon
approach and it's not
LFC staff Jessica has been
talking you know all year long
with agencies and do it about
you know what the necessary
required amount of funding for
this year and that's what we
recommend it it's not that we're
necessarily shorting the project
for here but we're not
necessarily front loading the
whole cost of the will take your
program into one here and
representatives results right
that that you run a potential
risk of like you know well with
this funding doesn't materialize
in the next couple of years
that's true but it's also true
that you know that might happen
anyways if we front load the
whole cost of the project and as
you know the secretary said it
is that costing you know twice
as much as we thought it did
bills have to come back for more
anyways and so but you know it's
it's it's just a difference of
you know how much do you want to
hear from these projects about
how they're going and you know I
just appropriations as necessary
on a year by year basis rather
than front loading of money so
thanks for giving me a chance to
just clarify that you know just
can I are happy to talk to any
members you know offline about
any specific projects and you
know given what we're detail as
well about so thanks for.
In the time Mr chair.
Thank you for more clarity on
that.
We go back to questioning the
miss everything on a.
Thank you Mr chairman
R. as please to be a computer
programmer and when we had a
program you needed to to have
the whole the whole thing you
couldn't just piecemeal it
because it's pulling from
different parts so I guess right
it just seems to me that you'd
need a fully funded so you could
implement it correctly and it it
it is going to cost more
as as everything's going up so I
I guess I just don't understand
why it would.
Understand what from what we
kill it make Micaela said but I
still think some of these
projects the applications need
to be fully funded so that it
works correctly
And that's and I guess I would
Representative I'd like to hear
from Mr
Mr something done about that
because it.
Mr chair and members of the
committee and representative
this one I can keep on talking
for hours right the electronic
health record it's a very
complex system of record and
that
maybe agencies many states
including private organizations
have moved on to such a great to
are an electronic health record
on an electronic medical record
I have been in touch with the
department of health
this is a little bit you know
close to home so to speak
because I do have my sposa help
get industry that you the
efficiency gains one can obtain
using electronic mail then
medical records and health
record you do improves the
process efficiency do it
minimizes yeah there's so it can
get it it improves the wall
arching wholistic process
efficiency that's given let's
dig this particular project as
an example if we want to rewind
time and go back in time like
three years the cost of this
project was locked lower right
now we won't digging at you know
fees the approach and this is
one project that you need to
provide the complete
funding request because it's
such a complex project nobody's
going to do it like out these
men are still Department of
health has been requesting re
authorization because they're
waiting for they and they have
set up monies to be allocated so
that they can get this project
implemented in a timely fashion
so specifically on this project
once again if you will go back
in time and look at it if this
project probably can be
accomplished for sixteen
seventeen million dollars three
years ago now we are looking at
twenty plus million dollars so
do you want to add more to it is
a lot of questions
that one should recognize and be
cognizant about.
So I'll I'll wait for any
questions thank you.
Thank you for that Mr Sam and
the.
Any further question this area.
No thank you thank you Mr
chairman.
Okay next we go to this Hochman
Vigil.
Thank you very much Mr chair and
you Mr chair I want to reiterate
my immense respect for LFC in
the analysts that do do this
work every day I know that they
are incredibly brilliant I know
they're dedicated to their jobs
and ninety nine point nine
percent of the time I support
them and their recommendation
however this is the point zero
one percent of the time where I
vehemently disagree.
The state of New Mexico not
having access to electronic
medical system Mr chair is one
of the reasons that whole that
were on the bottom I all the
back all of the lists and at the
top of all the bad lists this
issue has kept us from having
continuing continuing care
especially the mental behavioral
health round and it is
inexcusable that in the year
twenty twenty two the state of
New Mexico still does not have
an electronic medical record
system Mr chair this is the year
of big ideas and big finance and
we have a lot of money available
and I think this is an extremely
important issue that the
subcommittee needs to reconsider
I think this needs to be brought
back to catch up clean up
because you know this is one of
the big ticket items Mr chair
that is really I mean I am
shocked that we are still not in
a position where we can at least
fully fund the project as we
know it now if we need to come
back in the need to ask for
money later you know that's fine
there's nothing we can do about
that however we need to
implement this as soon as
possible and we keep taking a
piecemeal approach we're going
to ensure that we're gonna have
several more years of several
more budgetary cycles until we
get this done we cannot afford
to do that Mr chair thank you
very much.
Thank you Representative next
we'll go to Mr Castellano.
Thank you Mr chairman I just
want to echo Representative
Hochman Vigil and and we're
Senator in on on this as well
like I say really anything that
has to do with.
Any kind of technology in the
long run I don't think is we out
we get outdated by next year
with more technology and I think
we're falling behind every time
we try to be small Mr chairman
so I I also see if we can put
this on catch up in the thank
you Sir.
Thank you Mr president.
I don't see more hands and I
totally agree with the comments
that have been made thus far so
of.
Mr.
Bill bill this.
You think it's proper that we
make a recommendation on this at
this time.
Or do you still want to wait
until we're done with the whole
issue Mr Chairman if you're just
continue to go through the
spreadsheet when you give it the
and then you could have a a
motion I have been taking notes
on what I've been saying they
have said in this meeting so far
we will put items in the folder
for discussion regarding these
items and for catch of cleanup.
Okay I'm glad to hear that
you're taking those Mr bill this
because I'm too busy listening
to write anything down so what
analysts let's go on to the next
HSD yes thank you Mr chair
members of the committee the
next difference on your sheet is
number eighteen which is the D.
O. H. our client data management
system project.
So the purpose of this project
is to implement a comprehensive
care management system for the
developmental disabilities
supports division this division
oversees the DD Medicaid waiver
programs supporting individuals
with intellectual and
developmental disabilities this
division also maintains a
central registry of individuals
on the waiting list currently
the division uses multiple
distinct and non integrated
applications to track client
services and provider
information the proposed system
will be an integrated
comprehensive solution for
tracking client data which will
simplify program management and
improve data driven decision
making.
This project began in fiscal
year twenty seventeen to date
the legislature has appropriated
seven point six seven point
seven six million in state
funding for the project which
has been matched at a ninety ten
right by the federal government.
The executive recommendation
supports the requested amount
which is two million.
The LFC recommendations supports
half of the request at one
million and Sarn start to sound
like a broken record but I you
know that's the the faced
funding and so the HSD will have
to come back to the legislature
next session to request
additional funding to complete
the project thank you.
Thank you for that.
The health.
Thank you again Mr chair I just
want to reiterate my comments
from before and since we are
planning on using this big
surplus to eliminate the DD
waiver waiting list I think we
would be biting off our nose to
spite our face if we plan on
doing that if we don't also make
the necessary investments in
technology to get it done thank
you Mr chair.
I think of the more comments
from the state's economic all of
my miss and then Amanda.
Thank you Mr chair members of
the committee on this project I
just wanted to briefly note that
the department of health
currently has a seven point
three million dollars available
in previous funding for this
project it was intended to be
used for integration with the
Medicaid management information
system project the miser system
that you all are probably
familiar with however the visor
system is not supposed to be are
completed until twenty twenty
six and so the overseas addition
that that funding rather than
just re extending it every year
for the next five years is that
we could potentially the agency
could potentially be addressed
some of that funding to meet
this need and that is why we
only provided that the million
dollars you may also have a
previous again it does
appropriations that were made it
is sleek are being extended
again this year I just want to
make up for the the on this
project.
Thank you for that they're aging
so.
To make sure that this and what
you said there is enough money
in their budget right now to
continue what they're doing
without extending but ask.
Representative for clarification
we believe that they should
extends the appropriation but we
believe instead of re extending
every single year I think that
they should be able to to re use
that funding to support this we
believe there is adequate
funding if the agency receives
except this year serve the need
for FY twenty.
Okay thank you for the for the
the.
Okay Mister Sam.
Thank you state your full name
so I'll just say Mr Sam.
Works for me thank you chair and
members of the committee and so
my earlier comment about the
electronic health record you
know I'm probably I should have
identified this you know there's
like
In full of the oil hedge
projects all these projects are
important as the agency just a
guy mentioned bay tied to the
miser project and a larger I
picture so just not the
electronic health record the the
developmental disability
division services you know
taking that service from all
from inception to service right
be providing a holistic system
for right from eligibility to
services I think that's the key
that you know how soon can be
get yeah constituent service
from the moment that constituent
enters into the system to the
service delivery I think that
should be a key measure that we
should be looking at right we
can take you we can discuss all
we lock our all day long and all
we want but so soon Roger if
Raja is the constituent and he's
seeking that service from the
moment he and roll into that
service and how soon that
delivery can be update by having
a holistic system of these right
now they are all independent
desperate system by having this
ballistic MMI as project and all
these supplementary services
integrated into it we will truly
improve the user experience our
constituents so I think that's
the key that we need to look far
rather than looking at are baby
a different level of optics
looking at these as individual
project because the end of the
day they all tie this to my Sir
so we need to have a more
holistic look at the miser
project and that are related
projects because this is going
to improve every single citizens
live here in New Mexico who are
using the will have to admit get
me to get services.
Thank you for that for the for
the and the.
But this is L. in the right mood
I'm gonna say that.
The LFC analysts Micaela
Fischer.
The second we got Mrs Allen the
whole.
Mrs.
Allison thank you very much I'm
always in a good mate.
Mr Chairman Allison and members
of the committee.
This dating waiver it's been a
long time coming whenever all
the facilities that were shut
down six or seven years ago I
know that families were.
Beside themselves with worry
with their with their
the citizens.
And.
The service delivery to this.
As Mr I can say is money either
Mr sale was about yes the
service delivery is crucial not
only to the citizens but to
their families.
And.
Once again I will bring up the
fact that we do have to go over
everything that we are signing
with fine tooth comb because
these resources the money's may
not be available next year.
And we definitely know that the
renewables are going to feel
this way so Mr chairman and
members of the committee
I am going to support this is an
in its entirety on the date on
the D. D. Y. part is it
imperative that we do that Mr
chairman thank you very much.
Thank you Mrs L..
Thanks we have miss Fisher.
Thank you Mr chairman thanks for
letting me pipe up again I just
wanted to point the committee if
you've got your volumes in front
of you if you look at your
volume Monday that's holding it
up there on page one seventy two
we've got our quarterly report
cards that we do for I. T.
projects that are funded through
the section seven project page
one seventy two is the miser
project which you know is has
been you know it's it's had huge
cost escalations huge time
escalations it's been a it's
been a bit of a bit of a
boondoggle and you know for that
purpose and that reason again
it's it's one of the reasons
that.
The LFC took over approach of
funding in phases and funding in
phases of the agencies requested
and and gave us you know amounts
for so it's the piece Mealing is
not the right word but it's it's
funding you know the work that
can be done in a year and pass
these agencies to come back to
you in here and say what they've
done and give you a more
accurate read on what they need
and I know David Abbey are
directors here I don't know if
he wants to add anything to that
no okay thanks David thanks for
we pick up again.
Okay.
Really appreciate the periodic
updates on that and I know
there's a reason why LFC made
the recommendation that they did
and so we need to be mindful of
why they original
recommendation was made.
Okay with that I don't see any
hands up so I guess we can
proceed to the next as an
agency.
Well before we go any further
also on the team assignments
miss Meredith Dixon was assigned
to B. R. V. C. vice chair but
she is not here I thought she
logged on earlier but she's not
here so of one take the order of
promoting my good friend from
the south Mr Crowder to be my V.
C. so he can make a
recommendation for us when we
get to the end of these
presentations so Mister Pratt
are you willing to accept that
before we go any further.
Your muted my friend.
Thank you Mr chair I I would be
glad to do that I'm gonna follow
the lead of Mr Valdez and at the
appropriate time may make a
motion to move forward so thank
you Sir okay it's going to go
back to our analysts you're back
on.
You Mr chairman thank you
members of the committee what's
going to move on to our next
item this is also a department
of health project this is item
number nineteen this is a
request for an incident
management system replacement
project so this is a complete
replacement of their current the
incident management system as
you can see the LFC did not
recommend this project it was
one of the lower agency
priorities here
and the HSD correct you have the
distinct appropriations that are
submitted for re authorization
this year that have not been
spent and so the LFC and those
are available on pages two and
three of your your packet you
can see that re authorization
that they requested again for
available funding this year
whereas I believe DFA just fully
funded the request.
Questions on that so let's move
on.
All right Mister chair members
of the committee the next
difference is item number twenty
which is the department of
health facilities.
Disabilities licensing system
replacement project the purpose
of this project is to continue
the replacement of the legacy
system currently used by the
division of health improvement
for licensing and certification
of health care facilities
statewide the current system
introduces considerable risk by
not functioning at critical
times during investigative work
the new system will be more
reliable and will also improve
licensure timeliness
additionally the new system will
interface with the centers for
Medicare and Medicaid services
database when that database is
upgraded in the near future the
current licensing system at D.
O. H. will no longer interface
which will violate federal
requirements.
Hi this project first received
state CTE funding in twenty
nineteen the amount appropriated
at that time was three hundred
fifty thousand the department is
now requesting an additional
four hundred thousand in order
to complete the system
replacement B. R. again the
actually no this one is
different the executive
recommendation supports agencies
request of all the LFC
recommendation does not include
any funding for this project and
all in the back to just get
ready any comments you might
have.
Mr chair members of the
committee on this project I just
wanted to quickly no this was
the agencies lowest priority the
requests for a Billy I projects
and this is a similar situation
as the client data management
system agency has funding
available for integration with
my eyes are system which again
is not going to be completed
until twenty six so what was the
perfect LFC that the agency I
had available funding for FY
twenty.
And then I I can go to the okay
I see question apologies.
Okay Representative Hochman
Vigil.
Thank you Mr chairman and I mean
I just I'm I'm concerned by the
mention that if we don't do this
we're going to be out of federal
compliance
so I mean I can you please
reassure me that there is some
way or mechanism available for
the department to do this even
if it is the lowest priority.
Representative Hochman Vigil Mr
chair will just let me check my.
Notes on this this was again a
project that
will not be able to be completed
until it is integrated with MMI
us and so because HSD is delayed
on that project deal which will
also be is basically reliance on
and integration without system
in order to meet compliance and
so unless we can you know temple
integrate that system sooner
with MMI us with HSD
believe that the the agency
would not be able to spend
needed funding to to be able to
complete that I can also
definitely reach out to the
analyst for this because I don't
have as much details as I as I
would probably like so I can
definitely follow up with you
after the fact on that question.
I would appreciate that very
much that concerns me greatly
thank you.
Okay next.
Representative Crowder.
Thank you Mr chairman just like
to make Madam the.
The benefit of the of all the
members and all the people on
online today
One of the thing that concerns
me about this is we haven't had
an opportunity to look back at
the actual agencies department
health department Human Services
knows.
In our out volume three that we
get to analyze budgets
department helps as forty nine
million five hundred and seventy
thousand dollars in there the
cash balance operating fund
department Human Services has
two million seven hundred
seventy two thousand.
As of the publication of this
volume.
In the.
Representative over here sixteen
through.
The department of Human Services
reverted eight billion five
hundred fifty seven thousand
dollars back to the general fund
that they couldn't spend last
year they also transferred
Senator twenty eight thousand
other personal services employee
benefits they have more
authority to transfer they move
it out of personal service and
use it for other purposes.
In the department of health.
If I can find it again.
What is the number for the
agency number of department of
health and Mr chair
representative part six six
five.
Thank you.
The department of health
reverted forty five million.
twenty eight thousand dollars
back to the general fund last
year.
They.
Part of that is in phase and and
permits and different things
that they have taken in but
there was a substantial sum of
that was COVID money there were
there are a multitude of places
where the money came from but
there is a huge reversion last
year.
In their personal service
employee benefits.
They they bar thirty remove
seven million two hundred thirty
five out of federal money for
other purposes so it's not like
they have money if they if they
if it's a high priority they
have the authority and ability
to do some of these things not
all but some so I I just want to
make sure that everybody
understood that.
They're they're not dead broke
so that that's all Mr chair
thank you.
I'm sorry.
I believe miss.
Romero has a COVID.
Thank you Mr chair and I really
appreciate that you did not just
the act I just need to clarify
that again the reason that we
saw a lot of large reversions
especially for the public health
and safety agencies is because
the if you will remember the
legislature appropriated some of
the cares Act money and that
that the purpose of that was to
be pleasure to be place some of
the salaries that for those
public health and safety
agencies and so what that
resulted in doing as we use the
federal money and then all of
the the the funding that was was
not used actually ended up
reverting that was the whole
purpose of the allocating the
cares Act money so that we could
have more money going into the
general fund because at that
time that there we were really
struggling financially so it did
what it was supposed to it
worked the way it was supposed
to the other thing that I think
we just need to recognizes is
the cash balances in your
reports we're at a period of
time in November and so there's
been some differences we I can
tell you that the balance is
probably are lower than what
you're seeing in your volumes
but the other thing is you know
agencies need authorization to
be able to use cap cash balances
in many cases and so we have to
rely on the legislature to
appropriate money from those
cast balances not in every case
but in a lot of cases and so
agencies are somewhat limited in
what they can access as far as
cash balances and you're right
they can move money from the two
hundred two other purposes but
then on the other side we get
criticised when we do that and
so agencies are caught in a
really hard position when we we
we were forced to do that to to
cover costs like this.
Thank you for that Mr Merrill I
think we're gonna get March
thirty from Mr Miller.
Yes thank you Mr chair and
members of the committee also
the that that cash balance
report can be very misleading
without any context
the if you look at the L. C.
cash balances of you know tens
of millions of dollars in some
of those funds that are called
operating funds well those are
their funds for their operating
budgets in this current fiscal
year in many cases so lots of
times you'll see fifty sixty
million dollars there but that's
for their regular expenses for
the rest of the year that was
appropriated by the legislature
for this fiscal year so
I think the context really
matters for the specific funds
that we're looking at in terms
of cash balance.
so without alternate back to Mr
chair thank you okay thanks for
that
I don't see any other hand so
let's go ahead and move on to
the next HSD.
That would be the DPS.
Thank you Mr chair and members
of the committee the next
difference on your sheet is item
number twenty three which is the
criminal justice information
services enhanced cybersecurity
project for the department of
public safety.
The purpose of this project is
to upgrade GPS's cybersecurity
infrastructure for their
criminal justice information
services system.
This system serves as the
central repository for criminal
history data for every law
enforcement agency in the state
of New Mexico.
The executive recommendation
provides full funding which is
one point nine nine million and
but important to note here that
that one point nine nine million
would allow the agency to
complete the project by the end
of FY twenty three
and the LESC recommendation
funds half of the request so the
agency would have to come back
next year to request additional
funding and it would delay
project completion into fiscal
year twenty twenty four so it
therefore the department is is
really urging the legislature to
adopt the executive
recommendation for this project
in order to up push up that
timeline for project completion
into FY twenty three rather than
FY twenty four and all of you to
Jessica for any comments you
might have.
Thank you Mr chair thank you
Simon I don't really have any
additional comments on this one
I think Simon are pretty much
covered it however I did want to
just note that during the
request cycle on there was some
conversations with our secretary
St bent down and some of the
other individuals on that
project review committee just to
make sure that the project will
be in compliance with the
security protocols at I. T. and
potentially you know making the
appropriation
basically requiring DPS to
submit fiber plan that would
show how this project is going
to be in compliance with the
remainder of the state a cyber
security policies.
And that's that's all I have so
we do have to to secretary of
alright Mr house chair also.
Your thank you for that Mr Sam.
Thank you chairman and members
of the committee and thank you
Jessica yes I do have some
additional information to share
specifically on this DBS project
are for on but two of the DPS
project but I'll speak to this
briefly
so there is a need NDPS because
what we're the years there was
not sufficient attention paid to
cyber security and the cyber
security posture funded the B.
DBS Environment and slowly but
steadily but will based on what
is happening not only here in
the state at the national level
and international level the wall
the state agency to protect CJ
as information systems which is
FBI they have they are
tightening the screws and they
are taking a stronger posture to
maintain
I yeah robust level of security
for CJ as systems across the
country so and maybe just as
part of that so I. E. can wallet
for the need for the
cyber security measures that
they need to put in right away
this is not
going to help all we need is one
big system for the bad guys to
penetrate into this and I'm the
headline risk for us so in this
specific instance having worked
with Jessica S. right we had a
conversation and since then I am
in of the State W. more
additional information and the
details also recreated with that
maybe I can disclose that
minimal to close to setting but
based on some of the information
that has become out
are there that I have been
become out of there this is a
project that needs to be
prioritize right away and
address that you don't want to
be in the news are we already
know how painful it is to see
Bernalillo county in the APS on
the news and this is the last
thing we want aservice.
Factor but any part of the
government a that the judiciary
are the legislature are for the
executive branch that are at
risk that has been identified
and it needs to be addressed as
quickly as possible our cabinet
secretary Jason over there that
is a benefit I am in constant
touch with the SCO to make this
a priority because we need to
address the risk.
I'll stand for any questions.
Okay thank you for that
I believe that.
This is one of the agencies that
some agreement has been made so
of.
There's agreement that has been
made so I don't think we need
any further action on that of Mr
Kasiano.
okay Mister chairman I'm I
apologize I'm gonna see if we
could maybe send this item for
catch of clean up but if it's
already been agreed on of I'll
talk more later on about it
thank you Sir.
Okay thank you.
No more question on this let's
go on to the next of.
Language would be line twenty
four.
Thank you Mr chair members of
the committee of item number
twenty four is for the
department of public safety this
is the intelligence led policing
and public safety projects.
One second just to give you a
quick little description of that
project on this project is
supposed to implement a software
as a service solution this will
integrate data into a system
that leverages data analytics
artificial intelligence and data
visualization and should help
the PS implement comprehensive
investigations and intelligence
led policing again in a similar
story here the LFC provided
enough funding to implement the
first phase through FY twenty
three as well as a little bit
for funding to go into a fifty
for and the DFA analysts are
recommended for funding for the.
I have to decide if you have
additional comments.
Thank you Mr chair I know
additional comments there.
Okay then we'll go to questions
a representative Sarinana thank
you Mr chairman I'm this is the
I believe this is the one please
share the resources across the
whole state is that correct
And and that's just one.
The next one next one.
The intelligence okay
Here E. R. P. twenty six I think
is what you're referring to.
That's higher ed I thought we
were on public safety.
I'm sorry.
On the right track sorry Mr if I
may COVID Madam as out sorry I
Mr chair.
Representative Sarinana that
that complete your question.
Make sure with them Mr some yes
but that that completely yes so
they intelligent this policing
it will bring this that it been
independent system using
artificial intelligence and that
data analytics to I am visualize
the data so that BPS can find
these functionalities tools
smaller law enforcement
organization within the state so
everything is going to be data
driven out it is already in that
situation here in the state but
we need to bring the B. S. out
of our as it relates to our data
analytics so that they can
analyze the data and be out of
the car in terms of the policing
rather than after the fact so
this would be about a very big
value added for DBS to modernize
their system have got divisional
intelligence working for them to
compensate the state for that
you know the lesson number of
officers that we have out there
the I support this app as a as a
resident of the state as a
patent because the even
yesterday there was this is just
situation act that my daughter
goes to school somebody was
chasing somebody with a machete
R. and I've been I see those
kind of messages as a pattern
pop up on my phone in white good
turns right so the other things
of this nature by providing them
the necessary tools to these
agencies I think we can be a
little bit ahead of the curve
and provide the necessary
mechanism to mitigate it I get a
list of before it materializes
so.
Thank you for that.
Any further questions miss area.
Thank you Mr chairman.
Okay we have
Miss Armstrong.
Thank you Mr chairman and my
apologies for being late to the
meeting I was having a internet
difficulties
I was wondering if this Mr
chairman if this is a helps
rural New Mexico with any of
their radio systems or is this
just
data driven.
Who wants to take a stab at that
answering our.
Mr chair and members of the
committee
Representative yes this would be
the data analytics portion of
the process Bob holistically
that is element of radio
communication as well are part
of my out of innovation provides
that public safety radio
networking as a piece in that
process so if you have any
further questions I can probably
take that question and then get
that details to you.
Thank you thank you so much Mr
chairman I was just curious if
they're if they're married
together if this is all part of
like the the nine one one system
and radio we have real issues in
rural New Mexico with radios and
so if it's not that that's fine
if it's just data driven this
what I understand thank you
thank you.
Any other questions.
On the.
Line twenty for the public
safety project.
Okay said none I guess we can
move on to the next slide.
Thank you Mr chair members of
the committee.
We're getting close.
The next difference on the she
is project number twenty five.
yeah yeah project over twenty
five which is the higher
education department
longitudinal data system project
so the purpose of this project
is to create a data collection
and analysis tool that tracks
relevant student data from early
childhood all the way through
their participation in the
workforce as adults this
information will help you all as
policy makers and also program
managers more easily identify
what programs services
interventions education
practices and other factors have
an impact on student and career
success.
This will promote better data
driven decision making to
improve high school graduation
rates college enrollment and
completion rates workforce
preparedness and retention
employment rates career
longevity and ultimately broader
social indicators such as
poverty and health outcomes.
The executive recommendation
supports full funding to
complete the project in fiscal
year twenty twenty four the LFC
recommendation includesd half of
the requested funding so the
agency will have to come back to
the legislature next session to
request additional funding to
complete the project.
And I will again pass it to
Jessica for any any comments you
might have thank you.
Thank you Mr chair thank you
Simon members of the committee
on this project just a quick no
the LFC recommended as Simon
mentioned of funding adequate
for for one year they could come
back to still complete the
project by FY twenty four on
however there was the LOC under
excuse me.
Asian department gave us the and
it would be relying on
additional federal funding to
support this project on that
there would be an associated
federal match over AGD expressed
LFC that they are unsure whether
the federal program that
supports these systems will have
a funding cycle in FY twenty
three I'm sorry and FY twenty
two we believe that we would
fund half the project with the
intention that it would be would
pursue additional federal or
federal funding opportunities
and then that that'll conclude
my remarks Mr chair.
Okay thank you for that we got a
question from Miss Armstrong.
Thank you Mr chairman I was
curious who would be entrant is
information.
Into this portal.
Madam sorry Mr chair members of
the committee it would be a
repository for data from
workforce solutions Public
Education Department and the
higher education department as
well as the early childhood
department and I will pass it to
secretary Seneal and for a.
Probably a better answer than
the.
thank you same in Mr chair and
members of the committee and
representative yes I have very
high level what Simon indicated
is correct so it is a Labrador
project wing Jr multiple
agencies are participating right
from the early childhood M. and
workforce solution prime out by
a private education and higher
education department they all
collaborate they take it plans
to version off the information
and uploaded to a central
location so that we can analyze
the data and make policy
decisions so this is a very
useful tool for the rule makers
such as you Representative to
look at what the data is
suggesting right you know what
are some of the student outcomes
that enable local educational
agency level the local
educational agency level what
are some of the things that we
need to do basically this is an
opportunity for us to make a
effective use of technology to
track someone from any childhood
all the way out to demi entering
into the New Mexico state
workforce so we can base the
looking at that data looking at
that longitudinal data
policy makers such as you can
make that decision on that we
need to find doing that we can
have an impact that can have an
impact across the society here
in New Mexico.
Thank you Mr chairman thank you
Mr Sam.
Thank you for that and
Any further questions I don't
see any hands going up so.
Let's go ahead and go to the
final one on the state's.
Thank you Mr chair members the
committee we made it to the end
of the spreadsheet we're on line
number twenty six this is a
request from the higher
education department for a
shared services Senator
enterprise resource planning
system that's without your P.
stands for and also as a student
information systems let me just
a quick description of project
for you all apologize for the
shared services project this is
going to be operating under the
entity called chest this is the
collaborative for higher
education shared services on
this project will allow
participating colleges to remain
independent while providing
students access to the ones that
were not previously available in
their area this project was a
new projects funded last year as
you can see the LFC provided
about a third of the requested
funding we requested us a
smaller amount of funding for
this year because we wanted to
wait until their work further
contributions from federal
funding for other member
colleges are secured it was our
understanding that the
additional colleges were
participating in the in this
initiative would provide some
level of funding support over
that was not demonstrated in
this request and so the LFC took
an approach to fund the amount
needed for this next fiscal year
until again federal funding or
additional member college
contributions are secure I will
go ahead and hand it to Simon if
there's any additional comments
on that one.
It's Jessica Mr chair members of
the committee I do not have any
additional comments on that
project.
Thank you.
Okay we'll go to questioning Mr
Crowder.
Thank you Mr chairman Mr
chairman I received several
calls on this particular items
are requesting if at all
possible that that the funding
be increased a little bit this
program is already up and
running at the H. R. P. programs
and finance the mechanisms
within these community colleges
are already communicating with
each other the whole system goes
live in September.
And
They are hopeful that they can
receive a little additional
funding so I I would ask
respectfully request that the
LFC and in the DFA Alice see if
there's any federal monies are
are broadband money's or maybe
in a computer systems
enhancement fund or some other
fund if you can find some monies
to help supplement this
requesting in speed the process
up to get it a little quicker
would be very very good for the.
Small colleges I know San Juan
college's put some money into
this already they're not join
the process yet but are
anticipated to very soon.
But I I just wanted to.
I agree to be there cheerleader.
And hopefully some of some of
the others will help but I I can
see that a little more money up
front would be good I would also
say that if you guys could work
together and then maybe when it
comes to catch up clean up time
the it could be boosted up a
little bit so that I just
respectfully request that you
please research that look thank
you Mr chairman.
Thank you for those comments
Representative Crowder thanks we
have a Representative Sariñana.
Thank you Mr chairman I too have
been getting calls and and this
one just makes sense to have a
central repository for all our
schools in this if you have a
central enrollment program are
you gonna save quite a bit of
money is that in the long run
it's going to save millions I
believe
I think it's a good initiative
in integrating and consolidating
these things is a good approach
specially because kids at the
university level will go to C.
N. M. and then UNM or C. N. M.
in the New Mexico state or New
Mexico state UNM that they're
moving all over the place so
having enrollment that's
consolidated makes sense and
will save us money I believe so
I think this is great and I've
been getting a lot of good
comments on it thank you.
Representative.
this is gonna make a follow up
comment on that then.
Yes.
Chair and members of the
committee so I am in agreement
with the what that just to get a
indicated I'm a couple of other
representatives indicated
this is a this could be a true
example of collaboration and it
can but I would have had
educational institution of the
national nationwide map
imagine seven different
institutions of higher learning
doing this seven different times
and it'll cost seven times more
I mean that's a simple map by
the consolidation here providing
one use that involvement system
one yet the price of resource
planning system
across the state will immensely
be helpful and given the
resource going to be out of in
light began not higher
operatively technically
qualified I do staff so if seven
different agencies that the goal
after chasing our one database
administrator up to database
administrator this would be a
monumental that so all yes
subscribe to this project I
would be like it and it has
significant savings potential
and it also could be a good
efficiency came because of the
centralization and then using
common technology platforms so
we respectfully request as well
as Kroger Representative Greg
COVID pointed out in my
conversation with that
individual that's what we're
seeing the project they would be
very comfortable if we can get
this amount increased does some
of between nine and ten million
dollars.
Thank you for that
Mr chair.
You Mr you Mr chair just wanted
to add a few more pieces of
context to this you know this is
this is a proposal to help
essentially replaced the banner
system if you guys are familiar
with that at these colleges just
an old system and it's something
that you know we've been talking
with community colleges in
particular about I think for the
last five or six years the the
intent at the beginning of those
conversations was that the whole
community college system across
all of New Mexico would share of
the costs of replacing banner at
their colleges and then have you
know some added benefit of a
common application and some you
know common data sharing which
is which is really good for the
reasons that Representative
Sarinana mentioned of you know
housing that together.
The issue that we're seeing is
LFC staff now is that
conversation is moved from in
capsule and all the community
colleges in New Mexico to now
we're just down to five colleges
that are participating in this
project at San Juan Clovis Santa
Fe northern and CNM some of the
bigger colleges but not all of
them and so you probably won't
actually see a lot of
efficiencies in terms of like
stating you know personnel costs
from the system to ensure only
dealing with few colleges.
Still it's still a good idea but
would really like to see is that
tracks group bring in more of a
community colleges and as
Jessica mentioned try to go
secure some federal funds
throughout the year so the state
is and you know on the hook for
footing the whole bill for the
system so I hope that's helpful
information thanks.
Thank you for that and I want to
offer my thoughts before a loser
I appreciate the positive
comments from my colleagues and
I also really support this
initiative because of one of the
recipients would be my home town
called San Juan college and they
have done so much for the
community of very diverse and
it's just been very very
successful so just by
additional comments that then
we'll go to Mr it's me.
Thank you Mr chair thank you
Micaela for kind of echoing that
comment I'm I just wanted to let
the committee know you know
based on the request when we
analyze the request AGD did say
you know this funding that there
are requesting for this year is
intended to only cover those
initial five colleges additional
colleges like San Juan basin
lands Luna would be and future
waves and the estimated that the
total five year cost to this
project the upwards of fifty
four million dollars and so I
just wanted to reiterate that to
the committee and reiterate
meticulous comments regarding
you know our our perspective
that federal funding and
contributions from the
participating colleges up really
really be essential to the
success of this project and so I
just wanted to clarify that.
I wanted to just also note I'm
Dan Rivera thankfully let us
know that we actually missed one
project on our spreadsheet and
what was hoping Mister chair if
we could about one if we it was
the environment alright and
let me get the line number for
you all I apologize this is for
wine number twenty one so I
could just a some a couple
comments on that Mr chair.
Already so this document
management solution is being
requested by the environment
department's.
This project would convert the
New Mexico environment
department's paper applications
inspections licenses and permits
into digital cockpits the LFC
supported again fees funding for
this project giving the
environment department and US
funding to complete initiation
to select a vendor solution and
we wanted them the the priority
for LFC was to focus on their
existing project the as me
project and because the document
management solution would be
somewhat reliant on completion
of that other product and so we
provided our personal funding
for the tax and I'll have to
decide if for any other
comments.
Thanks Jessica Mr chair members
of the committee
yes again you know this is the
sort of the same story here with
all funding versus based funding
And and that that's all the
comments I have on a on that
project so thank you.
Thank you for that and we've got
a question from Representative
Armstrong.
Thank you Mr chairman you guys
are probably glad I miss thirty
minutes of it anyway I was
curious just a question overall
if I if this is all if the
procurement code is followed
through all of these different
projects or how are they
assessed through that process.
Thank you Mr chairman.
Mr chair members of the
committee I would I think the
killer might have something to
add to that but I would like to
have handed over she's kind of
our procurement expert or or
Simon if they have additional
comments.
Well.
Thank you Mr chair and
representative of our stars kind
of a broad question and I'd say
it depends project well all
agency they're on the hook
follow procurement code of
course and start off.
But saying that all I will say
that all what what we see a lot
of these I. T. projects that
come through this you to process
is they'll end up working with
the company to implement them
and I. T. company.
Based on what's called a price
list agreement rather than
accept you know putting out an
RFP and you know trying to get
budget felt will say we already
have to locate or you know
company expires in a priceless
they've already agreed to
certain trades will happen Jesus
project for us.
there's there's hazard to with
going that route for
transparency purposes I would
say we don't get the same amount
of
if you into who's doing what and
why and reporting back
necessarily on a price list
unless that standalone contract
is executed that this doesn't
always happen sometimes it does
sometimes it doesn't.
so that's that's what I'll say
about these these projects we
see a lot of these these big IT
projects.
Rather than you know in HSD
getting the money and then going
out to been putting on our few
they'll use an existing price
agreement to execute the work
and the other thing is is that a
lot of those price agreements
you know they'll maybe the
agency will.
Execute a standalone contract
based on the price agreements
but what we'll see is secretary
Seneal Adan mentioned sometimes
prices increased over the life
of a project and we'll see these
contracts you know double triple
in size of the life live life to
the project
we just saw some of that with
the CYFD contract earliest
contract support they double the
contract to a company that was
doing some of their
Database work over there so you
know it's it's something that we
as staff have to keep an eye on
and we hope to keep you guys
You know our our members as
informed as possible about it
but it makes it a little more
difficult when the price
agreement is used.
Thank you so much I think you Mr
chairman thank you Micaela for
that I I just remember getting
reports of also the chairman
emergency things that were out
and and it was a it was a little
overwhelming and and just want
to make sure that we're diligent
and that and thank you so much
for for the information.
Great thanks for that
Representative thanks again to
this is al.
Mr chairman thank you very much
this is just a broad question I
am.
There there's lots of
information that we were given
today but I guess the one thing
that really stands out in my
mind.
We saw what happened recently
with APS in the cyber attack on
them we've seen what happened
Dallas online park at their
casino with the cyber attack.
What are these agencies doing to
protect.
All this information that rig is
is in regards to our system
throughout the state.
What are we doing to ensure that
this isn't going to happen to
any of the state agencies and
I'm just going to throw that out
there to any member of the LFC
or whoever that might have the
really see answer for me thank
you Mr chairman.
Thank you Representative the
first Tennessee it is Mr Sam.
You're more than thank you Mr
chair and thank you
Representative and members of
the committee.
I would like to keep this act
that brought
Madam but try to address your
concern to the best of my
ability without getting into the
details which is have you know
in our opinion is considered
sensitive so
First and foremost
data that the VA we use data
their baby classified data has
given all the oil in a
period of time what we took for
granted ten years ago that we
would put a social security
number on our checkbook and and
and I know it's checked Lee that
has disappeared so based on this
by like in the late that that
you understand where I'm coming
from I just saw and so things
have a wall and the bad guys in
this situation are malicious
users that I would call it they
have a you didn't do this the
sensitive information I drugs
monitoring day to make up about
are to.
So with that said I'm
find out what action comment
saying that all of our systems
are secure yes I'm fat from on
my part as the chief information
security officer IDA chief
information officer there are
risk and be out trying to
mitigate risk a property in G.
asked me seem fit based on
available resources right so but
that is one piece of the puzzle
that I want to are the members
get going to stack.
what responsibility is with my
office.
The visibility of what happens
inside HSD is now is very
limited it to us
I have communicated this to all
parties that has come in contact
with me either in the
legislation through the
legislative process out in the
judicial process out on the
executive side of the house so
unless we have disability and do
what do you what traffic does on
what your data does but they
knew it and what I meant it is
hard for us to one side just the
necessary of recommendations
that you agency must do and then
to provide the necessary ID
controls that should protect you
so we are working on both ends
of that spectrum to put in the
systems that can effectively
operate to.
Protect the sensitive data so
that it's not all over the place
it's one central location and
then provided the encryption
mechanism so that if a malicious
use their tool but each into
your system of record for
whatever purpose
that that data is amended
useless and so that they can not
make use of it so these are the
principal elements that be
operate off of but
I can also indicate that there
is always room for improvement
then it comes to cyber because
right now we operate with a very
limited amount of funding I see
Jessica's hand out so I'll blast
here and see if I can find any
comments are and so any
additional questions.
Okay thanks for that Mr
this is that all you still have
for the question your hand still
up.
Mr chairman of I appreciate Mr
Sen bend them.
I came close maybe for the
detailed response but it is
still gives me concern over the
culpability of those that are
wanting to do harm and gain from
it so any.
I'm just very concerned about
all these.
That we went over today that
everybody here.
That is on a computer is
ultimately at risk Mr chairman
thank you and thank you Mr
saying.
Thank you for that
Representative.
Leave the this has been has
of follow up comments.
Mr chair representative for that
question I just kind of wanted
to find maybe a slightly step
back view of the the
requirements for these projects
you know as as the requirement
for being funded through this
section the computer systems
enhancement fund you know and
systems you have to go through
the technical architecture
review committee that looks at
their cybersecurity practices
making sure that their their
vendors are secure and their
systems are are going to be
following best practices related
to cyber security and you just
wanna also point the committee
to are your volume one again
your fund fund report cards on
page one sixty nine on there is
a report card for do it
enterprise cyber security
upgrade which as secretary us
event I mentioned is some of the
scanning that goes on on a
monthly basis for some of these
agencies and systems
you know part of the limitations
of that project are the reason
secretaries have been mentioned
you know visibility into agency
systems on the ability to kind
of say Hey you need to upgrade
this of the system you know we
can identify these
vulnerabilities but I think
there is some some limitation to
what do it can do in terms of of
implementing some of those and
so I think you know looking into
opportunities to either
centralized some of those
efforts so that do it can have
that ability to to push those
patches and and implement some
of these practices or providing
you know more stringent
accountability process these
four agencies that implement new
systems I think it's something
that is the committee would
definitely look at in for future
if your bills are legislation to
implement of that process.
Thank you very much.
Thank you for that Jessica of Mr
Sam I just want to quickly add
to that Mr chair and members of
the committee and representative
what Jessica indicated is
correct
as a matter of fact we have
representation from the LFC and
other agency in the process so
that we can have a more holistic
what we're safe mechanism.
Yes as she indicated that
technical architecture review
committee as the name suggests
that slices and dices the
technical architecture of the
operating platform are the
application platform and that
prior to them going through that
project certification committee
off of which you know LESC is
also a member up so as we find
this will work thank you have a
what we're site be taken in
phases right first we review the
technical architecture as part
of the plan plan and the
initiation and planning and then
be navigated through every
single again of project
management and we have a
wonderful team that the have
double up as part of the
following the best practices
using state practices as well as
project management institute
practices and then find the
necessity of property well we're
side what were these larger
projects and
I have them I didn't have an
opportunity doing videos them so
you bet your quick permission I
would take ten seconds to do
interviews is that David Beckham
told Yahoo is the new addition
to that do it family he is being
that before but then G. but
updated and then he was gone now
he came back as they ahead of
the function he is supported by
day and to be era very
knowledgeable individual that is
strong and that were in the
process that we follow and then
I also have Todd Barron whose of
general counsel in this meeting
so I want to take a moment to
recognize their presence and
that in that invaluable
contribution to do it and the
oversight process that you guys
are referring to are talking
about thank you madam chair and
representative and members of
the committee.
Thank you for that and that will
take us to the end of our
presentations and alas Mr Valdez
to guide us from here he was
direction
I believe that it's been a very
interesting session I appreciate
the secretaries in the analysts
and a whole team that came
together here to support us so
with that Mr Valdez give us some
direction.
Our.
Mr chair
yes Representative to your
motion would be to accept the
LFC recommendation as you'll
have throughout all these
budgets and we will adjust
accordingly
to any of the items that were
discussed through it catch up we
now serve the motion would be
to.
Adopt the LFC recommendation on
all three sheets.
Okay thanks for that bill and I
leave it up to my good friend
Representative Crowder.
Thank you Mr chairman and I do
want to comment that I've
learned a lot today it is
passion when it comes to this
field everybody is.
Stirred by by the thought of
protecting others and and having
more access to data I
Greatly I appreciate the Mr
secretary Raja's comments sent
in his attitude and and it's
good to see the passion the
holes for his job and with that
said the Mr chairman I would
move that we accept the LFC
recommendation in just the
analyst to work together and go
through this **** again and and
see if there's ways that we can
help you but I'm it's of the
people see if there's any way we
can move any of them in the
clean up catch up process so Mr
chairman that would be my
motion.
Okay thanks for that
Representative I need a response
I need a second.
Okay I see Representative seven
L. as hand going up for a second
we have a second.
Any opposition.
No opposition sounds good let's
do it.
Okay thanks very much.
Thank you everyone I appreciate
it on house pretty good Mr
Chairman let's do it you're
right
let's do it.
Let's collaborate.
everybody have a good safe we
can get a lot of people tell one
another have a safe weekend but
I like to say make it a safe we
can because you just can't have
it you've got to make it so make
it a safe we can.
Thank.
Thank you thank.
