The LFC process through the
summer we work this last summer
on this we just got a late start
otherwise it would have probably
been included because it's got
great bipartisan support the co
sponsors include the Senators of
woods in Griggs in the in the
Senate and and we had great
reception really interim
committees I think you
understand what the bill does
you seen it has four components
and if there's any questions by
expert witness Mr Tom Solomon
from three fifty dot org is here
to help answer those question
thank you very much Senator
Ortiz Y. Pino okay
very briefly is there anybody
who wishes to speak on Senate
bill eight Senate finance
committee as a great please go
ahead and please be very brief.
I was Sierra Club stand in
strong support.
Of this bill that helps bring in
a firm energy source that's
great back up for wind and solar
great way to diversify the
economy and build out new jobs
thank you thank you.
Mr chair members the committee
Charles good marker for natural
resources defense council just
wanted to rise and support this
bill as well it's very important
for our future and our state
thank you great thank you very
much okay there's one online
we're going to go to Serra
manning for as brief as you can
be mismanaged.
Thank you Mr chairman
The local economic prosperity
strongly supports additional it
will eventually be a game
changer for New Mexico and it
will allow us to transfer jobs
in sales from the gas industry
into the general industry to
rated as for our state thank you
thank you okay nobody else on
the list for gonna go first
Representative Sweetser than
some of.
That.
I'm ready to take the motion in
the Representative Lujan any
questions thank you Mr Yeltsin
talk that we as a as a co
sponsor on the house version of
this bill so thank you for
bringing four and I'm happy to
second the motion Mr chair.
Representative Pettigrew.
The.
We're.
Thank you recognize natural gas
is a clean field.
Other states that California's
me come up.
We usually follow them on our
processes.
With with countries on the other
side of the pond and have done
this as well as real life from
states that they've made.
So my position on the house bill
my position on this bill is an
until we sit here and start
making solid good decisions with
respect to clean fuel burning.
Natural gas fields.
I'm not in this for a more clean
energy and so that's where I
stand still today thank thank
you very much okay with that
we're gonna go to represent
sciences for the motion Senator.
Okay what N. lu Han
Representative Lujan seconds
please call the roll.
Yes.
Yes Representative I.
Representative Chatfield yes.
Yes.
Representative.
Yes.
Representative yes.
Well.
Yeah.
Yes.
I
guess.
Yes.
Okay thank you very much okay
thank you thank you Mr Senator
okay we're gonna go to Senator
Hickey this is committee
substitute for Senate bill four
fifty three as amended.
Senator Hickey please and please
be brief we banks were off the
floor but we need to be taxed.
Okay will do thank you Mr chair
and thank you committee for this
opportunity there are some
things being handed out but due
to the necessity for briefing us
I'm just going to give a very
brief description of them this
bill essentially does two things
one it looks at how the state
has been purchasing health care
benefits for its teachers and
then in Albuquerque and and
outside of Albuquerque called
NMPSIA and the unfairness of the
way that the benefits are
structure between those two
teaching pools as well as yet
fairness and state employees and
this has been essentially going
on since nineteen seventy nine
the when the I backed bill was
originally passed in four
agencies
as I just described
long story short and they've
been using eight track tape
technology continued into this
area there of wifi and that's
basically I have this fifty four
page the third one wants to read
it it's all detail but got some
consultants and went through it
this summer the other thing that
it does is it sets up the
governor's health care authority
and the governor's healthcare us
already the last time I heard
and described in committee is
really a purchasing entity and
both of these concerts but both
of what it is in this report and
what the governor wants to do is
to utilize for insurance the law
of large numbers the larger the
pool the lower the cost to
everyone the smaller the pull
the higher the cost because
insurance only happens to if you
so with the what this does is
set up mechanisms to transition
from where we are currently with
the hi back and they're about to
go out for an RFP and also
changes the way that we do
contracting so with that we're
in the wifi age seven other
states are well ahead of us and
the end point is a three per.
Percent annual increase in all
health care costs across all
sections of health care
purchasing insurance Medicare
Medicaid commercial and
Massachusetts is done this
they've done it been doing it
for twelve years we have the
great benefits of having higher
as they had a deal H. the former
head of the health care with
already in Oregon who in twenty
seventeen put the mechanisms in
place that they did in
Massachusetts for data analysis
and they are now in
Massachusetts and you'll see one
of the hand out doing their at
three percent annual increase
which is phenomenal.
Thank you very much Senator
Hickey is there anybody who
wishes to speak on Senate bill
four five three.
Okay
Say a so we're going to go
straight to the committee
Representative Chatfield.
Thank you Mr Mr chair there's
nobody setting out here that
agrees with you more about the
discombobulated system that we
have for for purchasing many of
the things for the state of New
Mexico including insurance
To to me this is a pretty
complicated bill it's not a
simple bill that some and not
and I haven't had time to read
those fifty one pages
and I would love to see this
thing go through the interim and
probably of what I'm here and I
have my love love to see a.
Pass on into fruition where we
can negotiate a good
deal for the state in New good
insurance for him Chloe's I just
the I really respect your your
knowledge of insurance and I'm
seeing you me where is pretty
deep hard about and I know you
know what's talk about but but I
don't.
And I have to vote on this thing
and I really don't I need a
little time to study and so I
hope that we can the pass on by
and run it to the NM thank you
Mr thank you very much
Representative Chatfield vice
chair ticks and fleas.
Thank you Mr chair thank you
senator
could you
Talk about the reporting or the.
What comes next to this summer
from DFA in LFC are they coming
back with joint powers
agreements from the different
entities.
they without this bill they do
not have to they were supposed
to back in seven ninety seven
but they never did.
and for for that role of this
committee is there at it's my
understanding that the
substitute bill has no
appropriation is that correct
that's correct.
in the Mr chair Senator
the agencies are already
starting to work together on
this is that correct Madam vice
chair and Mr chair I have been
working with all the agencies
throughout the summer they all
know what is is coming and this
will come to fruition through
the the governor's proposal on
the health care thorny you'll
see a lot more detail of
basically what's in this report
they used a lot of it to do the
thinking and then they have the
person who's done it and and
that's the best thing to do and
you're trying to do some
complicated is to get someone
who's done it for and succeed at
all Mr chair and senator last
question was this sort of the
result of LESC interim
discussions yes thank you Mr
chair Senator thank you vice
chair Dixon ranking member from.
Thank you Mr chairman
I was curious Senator why the
retiree health care authority is
exempt.
Thank you Madam minority up
caucus chair and Mr chair.
Because now this gets a little
technical so bear with that
trying to make it understandable
currently all the other agencies
and retirees pre sixty five are
under the self insured pools
that are all separate.
Over sixty five if you go if you
get your health insurance
through the state you have to
buy a Medicare advantage plan
that is under all the rules and
regulations of Medicare and that
is a fully insured plans and so
this doesn't it's kind of a
square hole in around pay it
doesn't it's just doesn't fit
ultimately in the health care
starting to figure out how to do
that ultimately where we want to
get to is having not just these
agencies but all the higher
education and municipalities
that they choose and you can
build a pool of four hundred
thousand people that negotiating
wise is tremendously powerful in
getting best pricing in getting
best outcomes and then the
health care authority will have
the individuals who can track
all the data and be sure we're
getting both and that have
financial rewards and penalties
but that's why they're out
because they're just they're it
is not bananas and apples it's
like bananas and Tigers.
Thank you Mr chair thank you
senator.
Thank you very much for making
member Armstrong Representative
Baca please thank you Mr
chairman thank you senator I was
kind of sitting here and I I
just I caught something right
here you're you're mentioned Mr
chairman and senator about like
APS versus the other schools of
pants and MCO okay.
Tell me the how this is going to
affect school insurance for
teachers and staff throughout
the state is my first question
in just a couple Senator okay.
The end point is.
It's going to be cheaper
insurance because you've got a
lot of large numbers being
applied truly applied.
To
the the charter schools in New
Mexico right now that there are
built to kind of get in level in
some ways but again it's still
very and even when they're all
in one pool they're going to get
the benefit of negotiating with
four hundred thousand members
and that the health plans will
definitely compete on and you
will get lower pricing plus you
will have requirements for
outcomes and better health in
that and so they can have better
health I know this sounds like
I'm talking this apple pie but I
believe this industry for forty
years one all sides of it and
there are the right ways to do
it and actually get a better
costs and most importantly a
better health outcomes thank you
Mr Chairman said I just have one
more kind of all so you
mentioned the three point one
percent increase so it means it
can increase no more than three
point one percent per year and
will that be borne by the
employee or the employer.
That will however the plan is
developed right now the employee
and employer however they split
it up paying between six and
twelve percent increase per year
with these plants so this will
be down to a three percent which
is pretty phenomenal so many
states in our copying
Massachusetts and Oregon
California has put in the three
year plan and or in
Massachusetts is the proof there
I have some slides to show that
they can do this in Oregon will
have in their law that if the
delivery entities and it's
mostly the house systems don't
have over three percent there
will be penalties in Oregon
starting in twenty seven thank
you Mr chairman thank you Sir
have no more questions.
Thank you very
thank you very much for some
Baca Representative Lujan and
Representative Garrett.
Mr chair and senator for this I
know that we've talked about
this is something that
something that I I feel like
this is just a great as soon as
it is work for the state and
understand you know understand
what you're trying to try I
don't know completely for all
the I think you're but as I'm
reading through this and you
know previous LESC of it policy
program evaluation is that the
IBAC agencies have been
unsuccessful and I just think he
cost drivers and what you've
been what you put together here
actually addresses in the chair
reference prices so
As retired because of race so
this would mandate or make it
mandatory that we reference
chair reference prices in the
negotiation process is that
correct Mr chair.
Representative Lujan you're
absolutely correct I'll talk to
one on one on this yellow sheet
but you'll see we are paying in
Los crucis and and run as well
five hundred plus percent of
Medicare is the average charge
price of those health systems
that is phenomenal the usual
prices somewhere around two
hundred we in New Mexico is a
states and there are paying
almost two hundred and eighty
percent of Medicare reference
pricing in the national averages
two hundred twenty four percent
so we are we are definitely an
out liar which is why this needs
to.
The health care story needs to
come into place and in this bill
as it gets up and makes a
transition easier thank you Mr
chair thank you for that and
then just on the technical issue
I have and I think this is come
before us with other this is a
question legislation is the the
need to approve for joint powers
agreements and.
Have you been talking with
agencies about that Mr chair
Senator thank you for that very
good question Representative
Lujan Mr chair yes I have been
in discussion with the agencies
throughout the summer about
what's coming and then with the
governor announcer Health Care
thirty day they see it they
actually they with one of the
provisions that that is already
in house bill two they have to
do a claims review on it which
is just the normal thing that
any large self insured company
does I can give an example of
one hospital.
Fourteen million paid out we did
the claims review on at my old
job we got four million back
thank you Mr chair thank you
Senator and we just passable to
today Mister chair regarding the
new
the new HSD if you will and how
they how they're re organizing
that agency and where they with
this Mr chair Senator.
This is the convergence of two.
The caller counteracting and in
which the Green River in the
call and it's just a
matter thank you Mr thank you
okay Representative Garratt
please thank you Mr chair thank
you senator so in your view
point it sounds like this is one
of the few if not the only way
that we can keep the insurance
costs rise that correct correct
thank you thank you
Representative Garrett my aunt
the COVID.
Senator Hickey I appreciate very
much tying this is the vice
chair talked about based upon
the LFC process beginning this
July with a report to the LESC
committee I think the Senator
it's tied very directly to the
the the LFC nonpartisan LFC
which I deeply appreciate with
that we're gonna go to vice
chair Dixon for motion thank you
Mr chairman that do pass on
Senate bill four five three and
this is Committee substitute for
Senate bill four five three.
Senate health and public affairs
committee substitute okay the
move by by two Dixon second by
Representative Lujan please go
ahead and call the roll Mr.
Yeah.
No.
I yes.
Go back to exploring of.
Yes.
Yes.
Yes.
Yes.
Of.
Thank you very much and what
Representative Chatfield please
so what.
Thank you Mr chairman Mr
chairman I don't have anything
against Iraq said I just saw a
few minutes ago and I know my
what would make it pass or fail.
But it's important before I go
down on record endorsing set up
and understand it north I
haven't got to do that yet thank
you thank you very much for
having one on one if you have
any Senator Hickey it is thank
you very much okay Center by the
we're gonna invite you up with
miss Russell please thank you
for being here and then for the
next bill will invite our own
Representative join you
center by the thank you
war to Senate bill three twenty
seven thank you Mr chairman
members of the community really
appreciate you coming back like
this to hear us every four years
I come before the legislature to
lift our suits use me to exit to
extend the repeal or a sunset
date on the approval of economic
development projects by the New
Mexico finance authority for
that four year period so that we
don't slow them down these major
projects Senator right across
the building is secure and and
so essentially they're able to
do their work within that four
year period that that's
essentially what we're doing
here it extends the the current
deadline to observe the yield
date to June thirtieth two
thousand twenty seven it
maintains our oversight as a
legislature over their work I do
serving New Mexico finance
authority interim as a voting
member of these are big projects
Mr chairman that ifs revitalized
downtown areas they have bills
and helped remodel and
revitalize you know massive
hotel you know but projects the
return on investment is you know
it's just great for them infer
what we're doing there there is
no affect on the general fund
and this just continues this
great economic development tool
an engine that we have for New
Mexico thank you very much
Senator Padilla thanks miss
Russell from Mexico I mortgage
Mexico finance authority
is there anybody who wishes to
speak on Senate bill three to
seven.
Saying none I don't see anybody
online we'll go to committee
Representative Chatfield.
Okay.
I I think you got a third
Representative Chatfield there's
a motion from Representative
Chatfield the second from
Representative Sweetser
yeah please go ahead and call
the roll.
Yes.
Yes.
The.
Yes.
Yes.
Okay by a unanimous vote of
sixteen in the affirmative you
have a do pass thank you Senator
by the thank you Mr chairman and
now we're gonna go members.
What happened.
If it's that point the session
okay.
Imagine what would happen if we
would have not passed the bill
that's.
Okay you if you were working
move quickly and members thanks
so much thanks to our staff
we're going to go to
Committee substitute for
Committee substitute for Senate
bill two eighty as amended
thank you Representative setting
on a will grab a chair yeah.
Representative.
And I did invite Representative
seven hundred and help me carry
the bill early on and she's with
us as well.
Yes.
Okay in please get a.
we'll get a copy of this
amendment to center by the go
ahead please thank you Mr
chairman and members of the
committee I think you know that
I have been either the chair the
vice chair of the science
technology telecom Committee for
the past eleven years for the
past to the
legislature's representatives on
unity the been the chair the
vice chair so we work on several
pieces of legislation together
related to technology I think we
all know that if we take a look
at the past decade we have had
some serious thank you ma'am
thank you we have had some
incredibly serious cyber attacks
at all levels of government and
all political subdivisions
school districts cities counties
the state at the state level
universities you name it most
recently that affected all the
work that we do here is the
regulation licensing department
that affected probably eighty
percent of things happening in
the state of New Mexico so that
that's really unfortunate for
us.
What has led us in this in this
situation the scenario is we
have about a hundred and seventy
hundred seventy six Mr chairman
of windows doors barn doors
sliding doors
the tiny window they put on the
bathroom you know over smaller
with a spill the homes like that
you leave one of those open it
really just lets the bad folk in
and they can run amok all over
state government so what we're
seeking to do is establish an
office of cyber security not add
to state government in any way
shape or form re purpose and
focus a portion of the
department of information
technology for this purpose in
doing so we believe that that
and we're charging that
office with establishing by the
way adding I could as I
mentioned no additional staffing
no additional head count at this
point anything like that FTEs
establishing minimum standards
for all one hundred and seventy
six state agencies and all the
other political subdivisions
school districts cities counties
you name it to do business or
have transactions with state
government they must meet the
minimum standards that will be
established by this office by
doing that we know that everyone
on the way and everyone on the
way out will be operating to the
same standards there are some
offices and this was work that
we did in in the Senate there
are some offices like the State
Land Office the secretary of
state's office the homeland
security department they have to
hear to significantly higher
federal standards so we did
exempt them from this
legislation because they're
already meeting that or greater
and so that's essentially what
it does we do establish an
Advisory Council for the office
of cybersecurity with
professionals from state
government cities counties
etcetera and and outside of
state government to advise the
chief information security
officer who would be the head of
this office currently that is
Russia I think will arise as
somebody who does a great job
there for us to advise that
person and also.
I don't know an artful way to
say that higher fire coach this
the the chief information
security officer we did have to
do some amendments and in the
Senate Mr chairman members of
the committee because a hotel at
this level but there's thirty
members of this of this this
advisory board six of them would
have an appointed by this is so
who would be hiring them so we
at we amended that to give of
the three of them that are from
the municipal league to the
chair of the current municipally
board and then the three there
from the association counties to
the chair of the association of
cap of the New Mexico counties
board event but the that's the
COVID Mexicans so since the
that's what it does of the
legislation I I I know we're
here in appropriations like we
did go through the the finance
committee over the other side
the committee that I'm a member
of but all of these dollars are
already accounted for an HB to
which we've all passively you
all did that fifteen point five
million dollars Mr chairman of
monies that sit in about three
or four different areas that
will help to fund the work of
this office thank thank you very
much Sir for the thank you to
our experts thank you
Representative Sarinana that's
actually great Safeway for us
because Center and
Representative we have on the
amendment
so I'm gonna move house
appropriations and finance
committee amendment one to
Senate finance committee sub two
percent rules committee sub two
percent bill two eighty and
members
so on page one line sixteen
seventeen it strikes me making
an appropriation.
And then
It strikes the entirety of six
and seven so that we don't
double fund the three hundred
thousand and this is there is
funding in the budget some of
that amendment second it's been
seconded any discussion on the
amendment.
Any opposition to adopt in the
amendment saying then we've
amended the bill.
Senator chairman I do also want
to acknowledge a lot of the work
that was done in the interim was
by a working group that was
chaired jointly by myself and
representative saying I'd like
to give an opportunity to talk a
little bit about our work before
we and I know that you're in a
time crunch but I think it's
important here for her as well
absolutely Representative thank
you presenting on these guys
Tiberian the general counsel and
course Russia right we've been
hearing about cyber sickness
cybersecurity in our science
technology but last about this
time we heard it in LFC we heard
about the urgency how many place
times are being hit by people by
people from all over the world
and and then we had a working
group who really worked hard on
this and candy was the the chair
can Mr but and and that's where
this all came together at the
urgency and getting it done and
we're almost there we just have
to get a few more things through
an oil we'll be where we need to
be and with great leadership we
we should be moving in the right
direction with cyber security
thank you thank you very much so
that's our presentation okay
great.
Is there anybody who wishes to
make public comment on Senate
bill to a.
A yes please tentatively there.
Have a wireless microphone okay
Mister chairman members
committee my name is Roy Soto.
A former cabinet secretary for
department of information
technology and I have actually
had to deal with a nation state
intrusion where we were looking
at.
Possibility of having hundreds
of thousands of personal
identifiers having been
encroached so this is I mean
this was during my tenure and
these guys have got those a lot
smarter there are you have more
sophistication they've got
better tools so this is way past
the time in my opinion that we
need to have an office like this
I appreciate that the a
favorable ball on this thank you
Mr chairman members of the
committee they very much deserve
so.
Hey I we don't see anybody
online we're gonna go to the
committee we'll go to vice chair
of person Garcia.
Committee chairman I got a quick
question somebody just happened
on my phone just two seconds
double I got a phone call from a
telemarketer and the the name on
the thing is not because I'm
your law firm publishes
happening.
Thank you Mr chairman and and
Representative I can't respond
why that's happening directly
but I can give you a tip you
want to go to do not call that
work and you have to register
every three years all your phone
numbers you have to do it every
three years and I'll take off of
those crazy was.
Thank you no matter how you do
it if you block of the call you
are number two minutes later and
that's you know that's you guys
are the coverage.
You know this is a problem
already I hear you this thank
you very much Representative
Garcia we're gonna go to
Representative Herndon.
Thank you Mr chair and of
Senator and members of the panel
I'm just looking at this Senate
Bill committee substitute for
Senate bill two eighty eight and
it says it's moving lose funding
from do it to a miss
cybersecurity office the
building new cybersecurity
office that's going to be
administratively attached to do
it but now we are also looking
at another bill that's moving
collecting data that's gonna be
done by the New Mexico
technology of institute and so
it looks like you moving a lot a
information away from do it what
is do it going to be doing thank
you Mr chairman and
Representative so the offices of
broadband access an expansion
which I created a couple years
ago with other members that that
helped us to get that done here
several members of this panel in
the office of cybersecurity will
continue to be administratively
attached have regular we we have
the secretary designate here
from the department will have
regular interaction with the
heads of the directors of these
both offices that's that's first
thing and there's a ton of
coordination it still has to
happen with to it so that's I
want to call that out there are
many other things that do it
does as well and does at those
as does as well.
I'm a little tired you know what
I mean so I think you might so
so that they manage applicant we
know what I'm just gonna let the
secretary doesn't respond will
give a better answer so and it's
all right I I think we're okay I
think Representative Kernan and
less there is additional pieces
and perhaps we can connect of
flying if there's
but secretary does have any
three other things Mr secretary
designate if you if you do want
to offer comment we always want
to make sure that there's
feedback gonna be really great
if you could make a quick
companies absolutely
Representative.
Mr Mr chair.
Committee members and
Representative Lujan earned up
do it it compasses many
different functions and so what
rather than describe all of them
I'll simply say that the big
reason that we're doing a
separate office of cyber
security has to do with
jurisdiction do it does not have
jurisdiction over.
Schools for example for all over
counties over municipalities
tribes Xcerra.
We are trying to coordinate this
we are trying to capture funding
from the federal level to meet
sixteen different points of
cyber security that will
straight the not just the
executive branch of state
government which is my statutory
authority but the state of New
Mexico all of us we are so
interconnected that you bet they
will attack our weakest link and
make their way in everywhere and
what this office does is make
itself of responsible to into
accountable to and inclusive of
all those other agencies State
Street that all of the state all
right thank you very much thank
you Mr chair thank you very much
Representative Harding thank you
Secretary designate objective.
Thank you Mr of Mr I'm just
looking to note from staff here
and I see that this interfaces
with house bill three eighty
eight which creates a
cyber security fund and do it
and it barely escape this
committee by a vote of eight to
seven and
that makes me think that
something has happened funding
was since that bill came to this
committee can you talk about
that a little bit actually thank
you Mr chairman members of the
committee obviously one quick
thing will have taught respond
as well as prepared so just as I
mentioned before the budget that
you sent over actually has not
been touched on in this area I'm
sorry it's been touched but not
in this area so fifteen point
five continues to be to remain
for these purposes and striking
the appropriation allows what
we're here for right at this
very moment to continue to work
Mr Verrill comment on three
eighty eight up with Mr chair
representative so.
During the committee this
committee's hearing on create
there is a lot of discussion
about whether there was any
appropriation to support the
cyber security really fun
and at that time The
appropriation had been taken out
H. B. two now has a ten million
dollars appropriation to do it
and three million of that is
this support the R. L. the data
breach incident we need a a a a
place to put that money in a
place at any age a set of rules
to administer that money so that
is what has happened and
transpired since the committee
hearing there's now three
million dollars that means a
place to go Mr chairman that's
what I wanted to hear thank you
thank you very much
Representative Chatfield by your
Dixon for the motion.
Thank you Mr chair I move that
house sorry Senate finance
committee substitute for Senate
rules committee substitute for
Senate bill two eighty as
amended costs.
Okay to move I. by projects and
second by Representative Cruz
please call the roll.
Yes which will give.
Yes.
Yes.
Yes.
This.
Yes.
Yes.
Yes.
Yes.
Great thank you very much
Senator think experts thank you
our own representative on and I
think chairman Kate members
concludes our business for the
day we can all go back to the
floor and.
And members please sorry that
vice chair reminded me please
take your books these are
provided volumes please go ahead
and take those with you thank
you members thank you at members
an incredible amount thank you
staff.
