To come on up.
Um
Go to the public Education
Department.
Agency 924. Of course, members.
This will be the second time and
full committee that we've had
this conversation.
And really appreciate, seeing,
uh
Ah, Secretary. Ah.
Romero. Uh
yeah. Um
Okay?
Are we good?
Oh, Miss Rodriguez.
Would you please take the rope?
Alison here.
Here.
Here.
Here.
Here.
Here.
Rip.
Uh, thank you very much. Thank
you. Everybody great to see
folks. Mr. Secretary to your
team, Great to see you. L E s C
is here to see you all. Yeah.
Ah, all good. Let's go ahead and
whether Mr Luthor, Mr Miller,
you'd like to present and then
Mr Secretary will go to you.
Thank you, Mr Chair. My name is
Sonny Liew and the LSC analyst
for public schools and I'm
joined here by Secretary or
Senor Romero is Assistant
Secretary Greg Frosted and my D
F a counterpart Simon Miller
will be talking today about PDS
agency budget. That's code 9 to
4 should be under Tab four, Tab
nine.
Of your binders, Um, just to
give you overall picture of the
differences between the
executive and LFC budget
recommendations, you'll see that
both recommendations our budget
increase from the prior year.
What the LFC being at 2.6
Million and the executive at 2.2
Million. The major difference
here, though, is that the LoC
recommendation is only a
$350,000 increase in general
fund.
While the executive
recommendation is a $2.2 million
increase in general fund, the
LFC recommendation leverages
more federal and other state
funding.
To increase the agency sees
operating budget.
Above recommendations do
increase the personnel costs.
Category two.
Um, support FTE and also
transfer some of the term
positions to permanent status.
Ah!
They don't support the agency's
request for 13 expansion FDA but
essentially keep the FD totals
for the agency flat. There are
some differences in other costs
As far as the L. C
recommendation being lower than
the executive. Otherwise, the
analysts have come to consensus
on performance measures and
targets and I'll turn it over to
Simon for additional comments.
Good afternoon, Mr Chair,
members of the committee again.
My name is Simon Miller and I am
an analyst with the S A.
Uh um.
As sunny indicated the executive
is, uh
Quite a bit higher in Ah
General fund about $1.9 million
higher than the LFC.
In general fund. Um the LFC
included
So some federal funds that the
department is is concerned won't
be available.
Um in FY 25.
Um
And so the big difference there
is, uh, you know, the executive
has, uh is $1.9 million higher
in General fund. The lfc $1.9
million higher from, uh, federal
funds and in your volume three.
I think it is. You'll see Table
of reversion.
And the reversion for ped. It
shows like over $9 million,
which basically would be half of
their general fund
appropriation. And that's uh
Hmm. Not the case. Um, that
The numbers that are pulled in
for business unit 9 to 4 also
include, UH public school
support appropriations. So you
all appropriated about 37
million, um
Towards ped recurring special
appropriations. This is, uh
things like steam initiatives
and, uh,
I believe that Indian education
fund was funded out of that, Um,
a few other items. So anyways
long story short the budget you
see in front of you, The
reversion was 612,000.
It's those other items that make
up the bulk of that 9 million
reversion that you see in the
table, so just wanted to make
that clear that they didn't
revert half their budget. So
Um, with that I will turn it
over to Secretary Romero. Thank
you.
Thank you, Mr Mr Chair, members
of the committee and Isa always,
uh, you know, it's a pleasure to
be in front of you.
Ah, really looking at our agency
budget, and we've had a lot of
conversations around around the
pss. Um really, I just want to
be able to share with you all to
start. The conversation is are
really changing philosophy. We
want to be able to be responsive
in local school districts. And
so you've heard me talk about
How we're starting to put
together the office of Special
Education and really wanted to
work directly with those, uh,
school districts and schools,
Whether that be our largest
school districts are some of our
very remote school districts and
to not just be here in Santa Fe
and kind of leading from Santa
Fe, so as we are doing this
work, I'm also very proud to say
that we are cutting
Our vacancy rate quite a bit.
We've been putting a lot of
effort into this been doing this
job now for about 27 years,
going on tape 28 years I don't
think I've ever and I could be
wrong and never seen our vacancy
rates so low. We're about 17%
now very proud of that, and
we're still continuing to, uh,
to add those positions so that
we can do the work that we know
it's necessary to be able to
support districts across New
Mexico.
But there is still going to be a
need somewhat to be able to
expand.
And I'd like to be able to do
that on a responsible basis so
that we can really scale up some
of our efforts and our different
bureaus and departments over
time. So, but with that I am
looking forward to answering any
of your questions. Thank you all
so much for having me here
today. Great. Thank you very
much. Mr. Secretary. We're gonna
go straight to questions. We're
going to start first with
represents Sanchez.
Thank you, Mr Chair. I just had
a quick question. Uh, I'm not
sure if this is specifically to
your department, but
Someone mentioned that there was
funding for Native American fund
and, uh
I think an African American
fund, but there was no funding
and, uh, the Hispanic education
fund.
I'm not sure if that's your
department. I was wondering why
there's not funding for the
Hispanic Education fund. Thank
you, Mr Chair, Mr. Chair
Representative. You I'm gonna
assume that we're talking about
some different budget
recommendations.
Mr Foster, would you mind give
me some specifics about our
recommendations?
Mm.
Sure, Mr Chair and
representative, so in the in the
executive recommendation, there
is funding to support the
different education acts,
including the Hispanic Education
Act, Black Education Act
Bilingual Multicultural
Education Act as well as the
Indian Education Act that that
doesn't exist in all of the
other budget recommendations and
sunny would you like to address
the budget recommendation?
Mr Chair. This is a referring to
Agency 993, which is public
school support.
Um
The executive recommendation
does include
Um 400,000 for Black Education
Act 1 Million for Hispanic
Education Act.
In 20 million for the Indian
Education Act, all in Section
five.
Um
Is that
Clarify your question. Does
clarify. I'm just wondering, Uh,
Mr Chair. How come there's not
more for Hispanic?
Education, I guess, uh, I know.
Well, education in general, but
I know we're talking about
minorities. Uh, Hispanics make a
majority of the minorities in
the state and
I'm just curious. Uh,
Why there's lower appropriations
towards towards the
That sector. Thank you, Mr
Chair.
Mr Chair representative. I
believe
What I could say is for our
executive request is at our
request is to be able to at
least keep things flat, so we
can continue doing the work that
we have in place. Um, I'm always
ready to take on more so we can
do more for any of our students
across New Mexico.
Thank you very much represented
Sanchez. Next we're gonna go
represent Luhan.
Thank you, Mr Chair. Thank you
for being here again. Um,
Something that I have been
bringing up over the since I
became a legislator even before
I'm working on
Education policy, one of the
things that I've really focused
in on after school programs and
out of school programs.
And following the guidance and
The policy of then Senator Harry
Morales are lieutenant governor.
And on principle and
And what he is. He has sent us a
message. Um, Chelsea in the and
I'm just going to make a quote
here, Mr Chair.
Uh um.
Looking at the factors such as
environment, access to
programming and family structure
accounted for two thirds more
impact on educational
achievement than in school
factors. And
Dot dot dot after school and out
of school programs.
Need to coincide with efforts
made for in class opportunities.
Support for
Are working families and for
support of our young people's
mental health.
Yeah.
There is some confusion for me,
and I think I've talked with you
sunny about some of the budget
and how
It's broken into different
places for P e. D.
In accounting and having a true
accounting of where those after
school funding dollars and out
of school dollars are and if we
are
Indeed, um, sufficiently funding
those programs.
I mean, this is
You know?
Evidence based information, and
I want to just ask that question
if we are, in fact fully funding
those programs to the point
where we need to when we're
We're having numbers like this
with the effectiveness for our
school for
Primarily
Our students are our families
and our educators, Mr Chair.
Mr Chair.
Just to clarify We are on the
agencies operating budget 924
for this discussion, but, um, to
your question, representative
for agency 993, which is public
school support. The, UM
executive recommendation is
requesting
25 million and Section five, non
recurring for out of school time
programs at the agency did
receive for this year. 20
million from the public
Education Reform Fund for that
initiative of the LLC
recommendation does not include
that non recurring
appropriation.
Thank you. Sunny. Thank you, Mr
Chair and sunny. I think that
this is something that it's an
oversight and I just feel like
we need to
May be out of order and talking
to different
Subject than than what you said.
But I think that this is
something very significant and
something that I have
continuously been advocating for
and making sure that we have
appropriate funding We even saw
with our districts that used the
ARP of funding for
Um, these out of school and
after school and summer
programs, the effect that it has
had and
And much to their credit. They
are not going to have that
funding available available to
them anymore, So I want to make
sure that we are covering that
because
To the extent and myself being a
working parent of single parents
need to have these. These
services in place for my fourth
grader.
Um and I we do use I do use
these services these after
school programs and summer
programs, So I just
And I'm one of like, you know.
All of our you know,
representing working families in
my district, but across the
state. Thank you, Mr Chair.
Thank you Represent behind
represented Garcia, then
representative Montoya.
Thank you, Mr Chairman. Mr.
Secretary. It was nice chatting
with you earlier.
Uh,
In towards the represents.
Sanchez just mentioned a little
bit ago of, uh, students of
color.
There was a meeting that we held
the Sid. Mr German that
Native Americans are lagging
behind.
And Spanish Americans.
Are not like behind their level
with everybody else do the sheer
numbers of Hispanics in school,
which is 60% of the population
is Hispanic now.
And it didn't make sense to me.
That they're saying that we're
not lagging behind on Spanish
speaking Americans.
Due to the sheer number. Can you
explain that to me? How that,
uh, judgment came up.
Native Americans are lagging
Spanish America are not due to
the number of students there.
now, if we went back and
said Curium secretary and had
the same amount of students
there would be lagging just for
risk of my, my correct
Mr. Chair, Representative. I
think you are speaking to a
larger problem that we have with
the New Mexico. We have over two
thirds of our students across
the board that are not great
level with reading. We have
about 3/4 of our students that
are not a great level when it
comes to math, and that's K
through 12.
All the way across. Now some
good news is that we have seen
some good positive gains with
our native American students and
reading We had 5 5%. Mr.
Secretary. Yeah, turn it off,
And then I apologize. You're
fine. I'm afraid I What's the
What's the sweet spot there? Um,
so
Again. We do. We do have quite a
ways to go with all with all of
our populations. Um, and as as a
whole there's a lot of work to
be done. And I know that we can
do this work. We have seen the
positive momentum that we're
seeing with structured literacy
having a positive effect on all
of our student populations. What
I was saying earlier is that we
have seen our average across the
state was 4% gains in reading
last year. That's that's a
sizable statistical game that we
would love to be able to see.
Year after year with
Native American students. We saw
5% gains. We saw a little bit
more than our state average,
which is a good thing.
But again, we have a lot of work
to do, and we continue to keep
moving forward.
Thank you, Mr Chairman,
Secretary just kind of bothered
me that they were
Comparing two groups of people
and one that Hispanics are up
level with everybody else. Just
because of the sheer size of
students, but like it's hit
earlier, if we're
10 to 10 would be in the same
boat that the that the Native
Americans are. Thank you, Mr.
Secretary. Thank you, Mr
Chairman. Thank you, Sam Garcia,
representing Montoya, the same
Garrett.
Thank you, Mr Chair. Um, thank
you, Mr Secretary. Um, um, Mr
Chair. I two I spoke today with,
uh um Lieutenant Governor
Morales. And and so
So I would like to if I could.
Um, that's talk to you offline
about that, that that is a
concern. Back home. Uh, the
Navajo Nation.
In particular, really relies on
those after school programs.
There are not, um other
Uh,
They're not other programs in
their community like Boys and
girls Club or other things, so
the school provides almost all
of those after hour.
Programs. So that is a concern,
Sonny. I'll talk to you about
that as well. Um, Mr Secretary.
Um, prior to
The beginning of this session,
There was some concerns from, uh
Our school districts or
superintendents about the the
rulemaking. Uh, and just
briefly, could you maybe let us
know where you are in the
rulemaking?
Thank you, Mr Chair
Representative. Yes. So we do
have a couple of rules in place
right now. And I believe you're
referring more so to the 180
rule where we are looking at
requiring all school districts
to have a minimum of 180
instructional days with
teachers. Um as we look at where
we are compared to other states
were in last place.
Ah, one of the one of the ways
that we can be able to start to
curve that is to be able to have
more time with teachers with
their students. Um, we were able
to propose the rule. We had a
public hearing. We got back
quite a bit of feedback, and I'm
really happy that we got there.
We probably got over 3000 pieces
of individual feedback We have
we had over 100 people that came
in person.
And so what I've been doing now
is really combing through all
that I've been I really want to
take this very seriously and
listen to all the feedback that
we're getting so that we know
how it affects what whatever
direction we go so to answer
your question. There has been no
decision made yet, And I don't
have really a timeline of when
that will happen. Um, but again,
we're looking at really looking
at the feedback we're getting
from everybody so we can make
the best decision possible.
Thank you for that. Mr Chair,
The follow up question. Mr.
Secretary is the other
Rule that was of concern was the
private schools and the B I A
and B I A schools. Is there
progress on that as well? Yes,
Yes, Thank you. Thank you, Mr
Chair Representative. We are
again has a lot of feedback on
that also, and so my intent with
that was to be able to create a
process where we can hold
accountability for public
schools.
I know there was some confusion
with how that affects private
schools and B III schools so we
have. I'm glad we got that
feedback. We've been able to
make it much more clear with the
language that it does not affect
B III and private schools unless
they ask us to do that. And so
we want to be able to be a
resource. If if we're needed,
Okay. Thank you for that. Um, Mr
Chair. Thank you. Absolutely.
Thank you very much.
Representing one player.
Next. We're gonna go to
represent Garrett. Then
representative, go door.
Thank you.
Mr Chair.
Thank you, Secretary.
Assistant secretary Long time no
talk. Just got off the phone
with him. Okay. Cover questions
first just on charter schools.
This is from Page 431 on volume
two.
Ped with holds 2% of each state
chartered schools aware of that,
it says, as the unit value and
enrollment and charter schools
increased the authorized
withholding them out will
subsequently increase. Can you
talk about that?
Because it's 2% and I had a bill
to keep it at 2% or below.
Is there a plan is that why the
governor vetoed it?
Hmm. Mr Chair and
representatives so that, uh,
that languages just referring to
as because it's a percentage of
the overall increases. The
amount withheld in the 2% will
also increase. There's been no
discussion that I'm aware of
increasing the actual percent
from 2% to a higher percent.
Okay, thank you Just wanted to
be clear.
The second thing in the funding
from P e D and I'm sorry. We
have all these budgets and the
paper that it would be nice to
have is some place over in an
office.
Um, the teacher pipeline funnel
was put in the expendable.
Fun for four years. I'm
concerned about that amount, and
I'm concerned where we're going
to get that money if the
expendable fun, it seemed like a
very low amount for four year.
Um, Mr Chair Representative. So
back to agency 993, referring to
your question. The expendable
trust does include about 80
million
Over the four year period, so
that would be 20 million for
educated clinical practice
programs. The current amount
that is going for those items,
which include teacher
residencies.
Principal social worker
counselor, residencies and paid
student teaching is about 21.5
Million. So it's
About $1.5 million less. We also
know that the department just
received a federal grant of
about 7.5 million for five years
for teacher residencies so
effectively, it would be flat
funding for those three
programs. Now what it doesn't
include which the executive
recommendation has is another 20
million for educator fellows.
That would probably be the other
component that
I would have to be bundled in
with that.
Gate amount.
Thank you, and we'll be looking
at a closer look in our sub
group as well. Um
Let's see.
Also, um, we have a bill from
representative Reira and others
for 30,000 minimum for school
staffing.
I don't think that's in
anybody's budget. But the L E s
C budget, can you can we talk
about that?
Mr. Chair, Representative. Yes,
you're correct. We've been able
to have some conversations
around around that bill. That
was not part of our planning. As
we're creating our own budgets.
You are correct. It is not
directly part of our budget. Um,
we do have some areas that maybe
can complement it when it comes
to that, But no, it was not
directly thought of as we're
creating our own budget.
Okay. Thank you. That or might
quit. Those are my questions for
now. Thank you so much. Thank
you very much represented
Garrett. Next we have
represented Figueroa Percent.
Chatfield.
Thank you, Mr Chairman.
I have questions about 993. But
I understand that's not what
we're on. So I'll wait question
about 9 to 4, though.
At the beginning of this
presentation, there was an
explanation that the executive
Recommendation has 1.9 million
more.
And in general, essentially and
lfc. The equivalent amount.
Federal if I heard it correctly,
the department expressed concern
that the federal money is not
going to be there. Can someone
explain what is the federal
money and why do we think it's
not going to be there?
Um, Mr Chair Representative, Um,
the additional federal funding
Included in the LFC
recommendation is, um Esser
funding.
And
The department.
His expressed concerns that
The that that funding
Can't be spent on personnel past
September 30th.
And so
If that is the case and and
Those funds can be spent past
September 30th on personnel.
Then the LFC recommendation.
For personnel that you see
there, which is higher than the
executive recommendation would
actually be
Lower than the executive
recommendation. Um
Okay? And I don't know, Antonio
if you want to.
Talk about it more Mr Chair.
Representative. Hopefully, that
answers your question.
Mr Chair. Yes, it answers the
question. I would ask Mr. Chair,
Sonny to explain why lfc things
it will be there.
Mr Chair representatives so
The department has more federal
funds than just the Aesir amount
they've been. If you look in
previous years, the federal
award amount has been about 35
to 36 million.
And so the LoC recommendation
takes into account that most
often the agency does have to
bar in this additional funding.
Part of it is s, er that is
correct. Um
I think it's worth digging into
how much of that will be
affected in this assumption, but
it only if you look at the LFC
number. It's taking account 33
out of the 36 million
The LFC recommendation also
includes another $600,000 from
the 2% withholding that
I think representative Garrett
pointed out earlier.
That's simply because the unit
value has gone up in the
department hasn't fully budgeted
what they could be withdrawing
from those accounts, and so
I think it's something that the
committee should consider if
they want to provide the
department more flexibility with
General Fund for their agency
operations. Um, but to also be
aware that there are federal and
other state funds that are still
available.
Thank you, Mr Chair. That's all.
Thank you, representative,
Representative Chatfield and
represent bucket. Thank you, Mr
Mr Chairman. I know I think you
also spoke about this first
thing, but I couldn't hear it.
So what if it wasn't such a
large number? I'd ask you again.
I wouldn't ask it again, but but
it is a significant thing to
talk about. I see a transfer in
volume three of over
$700,000 755,000 and the
reversion.
Of $9 million and I did. I did
think I heard you say something
about it at the beginning of I'm
sorry that I'm re asking it. I
just couldn't hear you, Mr.
Chair Representative Chatfield,
starting with the reversion
amount of 9 million. That
includes, um
Other educational
appropriations. Not just from
the time so sorry not just from
their operating budget, the
operating budget General fund
reversion was about 612,000
think that's a little less than
3% of what the appropriation was
in FY 23 so that the other 88
million or so
Was from other educational
appropriations, um could be
special appropriations capital
appropriations on junior bill
appropriations. Uh, those
recurring special appropriations
that PD gets that's part of the
big
Uh, spreadsheet for for public
schools. So long story short,
611,000 was the the operating
budget reversion. Mr. Chair. Go
ahead. Go ahead, Mr Chair
Representative, then to the, um,
transfer out of the two
hundred's. The bulk of that.
Was a federal funding from a
literacy related federal grant,
and they used
It doesn't make up the whole
700,000. I think 500,000 was was
that piece of federal funding?
Um, and they use that contract
with regional education
cooperative for, um, uh,
instructional coaching related
to literacy, So that's what
that's what the money was used
for Mr Chair.
Thank you, Mr Chair. I did hear
you and I do understand. Thank
you. Thank you Represent
Chatfield. We're gonna go next
door Percent. Baca. Thank you,
Mr Chairman. And thank you
panel. Um
I'm going to just highlight a
couple of things that I I hope
that the subcommittee and this
this committee takes a look at
that's important to not only
Myself and many others here, So
I'm not gonna ask like for the
details of us and then I'll get
one question.
Uh, Mr Chairman and Committee
one of the things that I think
this committee needs to look at
was the money that was set aside
for the school safety summit.
That was through lieutenant
governor and other cooperative,
So I want to make sure that we
go into our subcommittees that
we
Note, too, that it was. It was a
small amount that we had.
So many participants, which
shows the importance of that
that I think that we need to
Look to make sure that we
property fund out.
Um and Mr Chairman, uh,
I've said this many times
before. Many of my colleagues
have
And I know that we'll be looking
at ongoing discussions. C t. I
just want to highlight just as a
A large thing. We need to look
at that to make sure that we are
Funding and given opportunities
towards students.
Um, Mr Chairman and Committee
secretary.
Also our educational fellows in
teacher residencies. I spent a
wonderful morning.
With some of our future
teachers. And so I want to make
sure that that program
There's another program that
this committee and our other
subcommittees
Take a look at to make sure when
we talk about teacher pipeline
we talked about getting
qualified teachers in
classrooms. That's a
Important Avenue.
So my my question, really, with
this budget
Is, um Mr Chairman and secretary
and sunny
Is there money that's
specifically in this budget.
That will help you know the ped
or whomever with some of the
awards that are going out to
school districts, one of the
things that, uh, has been
communicated to to several
Where the award letters are the
amounts so, but school districts
can have budget authority.
Whether it be idea funds,
whether it be some of the other
forms so
Mr Chairman. I guess that's my
question is, Is there money and
this fund?
That will help to get those
funds out to our districts in a
more timely manner. Thank you,
sir.
Commission, Mr. Chair,
representative Baka that has
been one of our major goals is
to be a whole lot more
responsive in everything we're
doing from award letters to
request for reimbursements. I am
happy to say that I mentioned
earlier that we are down to 17%
vacancy. That's been a huge help
to be able to do that. We've
just hired
Nine people in our finance
Department. This will this will
be a game changer for us, Uh,
this last quarter, we did
average 30 days for our
reimbursements again. That's
been unheard of for a long, long
time, So I really want to give
credit to our Finance Department
and and Antonio there. They've
been doing some wonderful work,
but we're not done yet. We still
want to be able to continue to
ensure that this happens and we
can get under that 30 days.
Um, yeah. So representative, Mr
Chair Representative, we are
making some good progress. I am
not satisfied with the word
where we're at yet, but we're
going to continue to get better.
Thank you, Mr Chairman. Thank
you. And thank you, Secretary
for your answers. Thank you very
much Represent Baca.
I don't see any other questions.
I'll ask briefly, Mr. Secretary,
Um, first is there Do you have
an alternative budget for the
federal funds? Obviously,
there's a very large bucket of
different funding mechanisms.
Mr. Liu explained how we've sort
of matched the executive
recommendation, pulling some
from these other federal funds.
Is there a competing use for
them? Or is it part of a larger
undesignated bucket?
Um, Mr Chair.
Um
But not sure if this answerable
answer your question, but I'll
give it a go. Um what? What This
comes down to is
Uh huh.
The the extra money has to be
obligated by September 30th.
The department.
As indicated that personnel
expenditures can't be encumbered
beyond September. 30th.
So what that effectively means
is the extra dollars can't
support personnel.
Past September 30th and so, um
Perhaps.
Alex C, D F A and p D needs to
to
Get together to solidify the
answer to that. Um, because that
Obviously is a pretty big
component of the differences
here in the operating budget and
so a clear answer would be AH.
Would be good.
I could not. Thank you, Mr
Miller. I could not agree more.
I appreciate you sort of laying
it out, and unless there's sort
of a conclusion right now, it's
just something that we need you
to ask to ask you all to address
as rapidly as possible.
We know we don't want to revert
money.
Seems there's a shared top line
dollar amount. There has got to
be a way to get on the same page
and to have a disagreement.
Over funding sources that
obscures other, more important
issues.
Is at this stage of our budget
process. Pretty frustrating to
speak frankly.
Uh, is there any other? Um, I
don't see any other questions.
We're gonna ask vice chair for
the motion on the LFC
recommendation and look forward
to feedback before as we go into
tomorrow.
Thank you, Mr Chair. I would
move the LFC recommendation,
Okay. It's been moved by vice
Chair Dixon, second by represent
Chatfield. Is there any
opposition to adopting that
motion, saying none. Thank you.
Okay, We're gonna stay.
Except to ask Rivera.
Please turn the microphones off.
Mr Chair. I just wanted to point
out that it's actually just
Simon and myself again. So
that's good. Thank you. Thank
you. And thank you for
disregarding the attorney. Your
microphone off coming.
Uh, please. No, no, no. I was
making fun of myself. I
apologize, Mr Liu. Go ahead, or
Mr Miller. How are you guys want
to kick it off? Okay, Mr Chair.
Um, I am stepping in for Kelly
cars. Well, who's the analyst
today for Public School
Facilities Authority?
Um, the agency director or
ticket. Casillas is here with us
for just a few more days before
she retires. Her successor, Iris
Romero, is on my right here and
I'm also joined by Simon from
the phase. Well, uh, public
school facilities authority is
agency. 940 should be in
Tabb, nine of your packet, just
a few points for the committee's
understanding. PSF A is not a
general fund agency. Its
operations are paid fully from
the public school capital Outlay
Fun, which is also the same fun
news for school facility
replacements and projects.
Capital projects.
Both the recommendations do
transfer some of the personnel
that PSF a has to the office of
Broadband for their work on the
state Education network. The L.
C recommendation is $238,000
higher than the executive, Um
most, but both requests do
support additional spending on
personnel, and we have reached
consensus on targets. Oh, go
ahead and hand over to Simon
from our comments.
Thanks, Mr Chair. Members of the
committee. Um, like Sonny said,
Uh, both recommendations move
for ft. Over from PSF pay to do
it, Uh and and that's already
happening. Mid year, uh, between
the two departments, the big
difference between the two
recommendations is the LFC then
adds.
Um
For
Moves the four additional F T or
four moves before FTE to do it
and then adds for new FTE to
serve as project managers at PSF
a. Where is the executive
recommendation just adds one
additional, uh, project manager
position, So with that I will
turn it over to director
Casillas. Thank you.
Um, Mr Chair members. Thank you
for having us here today. We
have a presentation for you.
That is also in your packet.
That's in front of you, but very
quickly. Yes, ma'am.
Um, Mr Chair representatives on
Page two. You'll see our
request and you'll see what we
asked for last year. Total
request is 7.8 million, with a
small, slight increase of
$761,000.
Over last year.
Page three. Mr Chair members. I
just want you to see the kind of
work that we do. We do standard
space projects System spaced
broadband pre K facilities
Facility. Master plans Lease
assistance Teacher housing as
well as other legislative
initiatives.
Page four.
The number of active projects we
have, which is a total of 641
projects, and each type of
project is listed there.
Page five.
Are the applications we've
received for new projects. Um 20
Standards based 29 Systems based
eight for teacher housing.
Three for pre K facilities.
For a total of 60 projects.
Applications.
Page six is just showing you
some of the construction
projects that are underway.
You'll see in Hobbs, Southern
Heights Elementary.
In Gallup. It's Red Rock Rocky
View Elementary School.
We have grants Bluewater
Elementary School as well.
As well as the another project
in Gallup, which is the row
elementary school.
The following page has more
projects that are funded by the
PSC O. C.
And Los Alamos, Berlin, Aztec
and again a ribbon cutting and
gallop.
Based on those number of
projects and applications coming
in is why we are asking for the
additional staffing and or to
keep the four with oh, by moving
elsewhere.
And with that said, Mr Chair, Mr
Romero and I stand for any
questions that you might have.
Thank you very much, Mrs
Casillas. Congratulations. Thank
you for all of your work, and,
um, yeah, we'll go straight to
questions. We're gonna go first
to represent Luhan, please.
Thank you. Mr Chair, where the
two projects, Mr. Chair, Um, for
the teacher Housing.
Um
Ah!
Mr Chair, representative Luhan.
I will reach our staff is
listening and I'll wait for them
to send us a text to say where
they're at. And if you don't
know where they are, What is the
cost right now for those two
housing projects?
Okay, You get this to me, this
friend.
Mr. Chair, Representative Luhan.
If you give us a moment, we'll
have those answers. Ask you
another question. My other
question is how many projects
are active. Um, do you have
actively going for
Um news schools in gout,
McKinley
It's true. Currently, Mr Chair
representative Luhan. There are
17 active projects in Gallup,
McKinley County. And how me Mr
Chair are those new, um,
buildings sites.
Mr Chair, representative Luhan.
The majority of them are new
buildings. Um
Right now to school is is being
constructed by the majority are
replacement schools for existing
facilities.
Mr Check. Can we get more exact
information on that? And I'm
That seems a little
disproportionate to the rest of
the state. And those numbers. Is
that fair to say or not?
Um, Mr Chair, Representative,
Luhan Gallup has the majority
currently has the majority of
active projects in comparison to
the other schools.
Thank you, Mr Chair and how much
money from the budget is going
to all those 17 projects, Mr
Chair?
Um, Mr Chair, Representative,
Luhan. Um, Mr Ramiro. Do you
know that?
Mr Chair.
Get that information. Appreciate
that, And I'm patient for that,
And I just would like to know
that and I appreciate your time.
Thank you, Mr Chair. Thank you
very much. Representative Han.
Next we're gonna go to represent
Garrett, please. Thanks, Mr
Chair. Thank you. I just sent
both of you and email. And here
you are. That's like instant
response. So thank you.
I have one question on the
transfer of the P s a people on
broadband to the office of
broadband accessibility and
expansion.
It's buried in Senate Bill 45
with Senator Padilla. I'm a
little concerned because that
Bill is so complex. I wish we
would have taken it out. But are
you supporting that?
Um
Mr. Chair, Representative
Garrett. Yes, we are. We're
supporting moving the staff over
to the office of Broadband
expansion.
Great. Thank you. Mr Chairman.
Thank you very much. I think it
will be good and I just hope we
can get the bill through.
So thank you for all that you
do.
Thank you very much.
Representative Garrett
represented friend. Um, please.
Thank you, Mr Chair. And Madam
Presenter. I just I looking at
page. I think this is four of
your funded projects, and it
says Broadband category one and
two there 74 projects. So how
many schools now don't have
broadband.
After these not considering
these 74.
Mr. Chair, Representative
Herndon. I don't have that
answer with me today. Okay, but
I can get that to the committee.
Thank you And Mr Chair, and
Madam Presenter. Is there a
strategic strategic plan and
deadline for making sure that
those schools that don't have
broadband do get that broadband
assistance. Mr. Chair,
Representative Herndon. I
There is a strategic plan, and
it's called the statewide
education Network and the, um
the lead on that is a video of
Eureka and I believe the goal is
to have it complete in three
years.
But Mr Chair Rep. Representative
Herndon
Um Mr B. Eureka has been working
with the office of Broadband
expansion, so I don't have that
data with me, but I can
certainly reach out to him and
bring that here too. Who, to the
committee?
That would be just great. Thank
you, Mr Chair and Madam
presenter. And if I could just
circle back to the your project
on teacher housing, are we
providing housing new housing to
teachers on
Where I mean on native lands and
that you don't have to tell me
where because you said you
couldn't Mr. Chair Mr. Chair,
Representative Herndon. There's
a
There's two types of teacher
housing. There's a pilot program
that is only for teacher housing
in rural locations and the other
teacher housing comes with a
standards based award. For
example, Zuni is getting a new
campus pre case through 12th
grade, plus teacher housing. So
that's teacher housing, plus a
school.
The other is the standalone
pilot program. And those there's
our, um
World locations around the
state. So and Mr Chair and Madam
Presenter are these single
family homes or is this a unit
like an apartment unit that
you're calling a housing Mr.
Chair, Representative Herndon.
They are. Some of them are
studios. Some of them are single
bedroom and center. Some are two
bedrooms.
And then finally, Mr Chair and
Madam presenter who owns the
house is Mr Chair representative
Herndon. It would be the school
district. Thank you, Mr Chair.
Thank you very much. Rep.
Stanford in, um I don't see any
other questions Briefly. Oh, I
apologize for present. Montoya,
please. Thank you. Um
Mr Chair. Um,
when these new buildings
secretary or
when he's in buildings are going
To, um, operation.
The old buildings.
Get turned over.
Two g s D two or not get turned
over, but they they usually go
up for sale.
And
During that time while they're
up for sale, or if they can't be
repurposed within the school
district.
Um, the buildings have to be
maintained.
Um
So as to not become obliged or
to become a dangerous. Uh
Uh,
Place for vagrants or for
others. My correct in this Mr
Chair, representative Montoya
when the school districts comes
up to the COC for an award,
there's typically part of the
award is for demolition of the
existing and or to turn it over
to a public entity.
So that has to happen in a
certain time frame. And until
that happens, the school
district is responsible for the
maintenance, but more often than
not its demolition.
Okay. Thank you for that. So, Mr
Chair just just for the
committee to know, Uh
We've dealt with this in
Farmington with some buildings
that have
Not been demolished. They maybe
went into use for a period of
time and then
Either got too old for use and
Um Hmm.
Opportunities coming to buy up
other properties to replace
them.
The difficulty in selling those
when they hope when they're not
demolished.
Becomes an expensive prospect
for the school district.
Um and I just at some point just
for this committee to understand
this a bit of a problem getting
rid of those buildings because
Um
The
Or to finance
Has to sell them act right out.
Um
The appraised value.
Which is a problem. Most people
you buy a home or you buy a
business.
Um, you know, the lenders
generally will not lend
Oh,
They won't go above appraised
value. It's admirable. Oh, and
most of the buildings go in, as
is condition so
People are trying to buy them
can't ask for repairs like they
would if they were buying
another building across town
from regular seller. So this is
a this is a small issue.
But in communities and in some
of the smaller communities
Rather than than it being a
something that the school
district can earn money from and
repurpose.
I would imagine in Gallup. That
would be an example of a place
where
Demolition has to go into the
costs, especially even if
they're not building on the same
site.
For as you and I if I had a home
and I was going to buy another
home
I would like to be able to sell
my other home.
Recouped the money and use it
back in the school district.
Because of our onerous
Guidelines on resale of public
buildings that it has to be at
Appraisal value.
Makes it very, very hard to sell
them.
If we could come up with some
Framework for that Mr Chair.
That is a that is less onerous.
There could be money that we
recoup.
That go back into the school
districts for for facilities.
And I think that's something we
need to discuss. I've only
recently become aware of that
because I am a realtor.
And we've sold a couple of these
school buildings and it is very
difficult the way we're doing it
if we if we can fix that.
It would allow us to maybe
infuse more money back into the
schools.
Without having to go through the
process of demolition, and
that's a cost as well. So thank
you, Mr Chair. Thank you very
much for some Montoya.
I don't see any other question.
Oh, yes, please, Mr Chair
members. We do have some
responses to representative
Luhansk Questions, Mr. Chair,
Representative Luhan regarding
the teacher housing there are
currently in Cuba and Central
Consolidated. Excellent. Thank
thank you for for that follow up
and things also for
prioritizing.
The continued work with project
management. Ah and around
because of the challenges with
some of the public the costs of
facilities. It's great to see
that prioritizing the management
side of that.
Okay. I don't see anything else.
We'll go ahead and go to Vice
chair Dixon for the LSC motion.
Thank you. Mr Chair. I moved the
committee adopts the LFC
recommendation to move by vice
Chair Dixon, seconded by
representative Chatfield. Is
there any opposition to adopting
that motion, saying none.
Adopted and again
congratulations because he has
Thank you very much. Okay,
members. I think that sets a
record. Uh, sorry. We're gonna
do a few things first, Um,
members before you leave today,
Amanda, what is going to bring
out proposed bar language as
well as section seven, which,
um,
A lot of the I T and other
things. She's going to bring
that out for you to review with
you later this evening or
whenever you choose to do so.
Secondly, I want to go out to
ask. Is there any public comment
here today?
I don't see any any online.
Okay, There's no public comment
online, so hang out for a little
bit. We'll have materials for
you to review which will be
going over tomorrow regarding
the bar budget adjustment route
request language, proposed
language, and, um
Section seven work, which is a
lot of I, T and other pieces.
also members just a flag
continuing from yesterday.
Keep an eye out for the
subcommittee, the workgroups
that you're part of those,
including this one will be
meeting here soon.
Uh, represent Montoya. Then
we're safe. Garrett, Mr. Chair.
they proposed language Who's
proposing this language?
Uh, documentary. We're gonna see
proposed language from the
executive and then
recommendations from the LFC.
Yes, we absolutely will make
sure and re upped the sub that
Yes, we absolutely will make
sure and re upped the sub
workgroups and subcommittees
that folks are on Thank you.
Alright. Numbers. Thank you very
much. Thanks everybody for being
