Representative Armstrong.
Thank you madam chair I
Representative Gail Armstrong
from support I live in Magdalena
New Mexico I representative us
to coral Valencia and catching
County and I have
Representative Brown here with
me we're sharing a computer
she's having computer issues if
you don't mind madam chair
absolutely that's Representative
Brown introduce yourself please.
Thank you madam chair hi
Catherine brown citing Carlsbad
and I represent the eastern half
of Eddy County that's house
district fifty five.
Thank you Representative Eli.
Thank you madam chair Ryan lane
a representative house district
three which is the asked second
one filled in eastern portion of
San Juan County.
And we're going to go next to
Representative stand here on it
looks like Representative
Trujillo and representative
Allison are all in the same room
is that due to computer issues
or because you want to be in a
group thank today.
Photo thank you all of the
above.
All right can we have each of
you introduce yourself please.
Tell us by Representative
district for that's the
northwest quadrant of San Juan
County.
In Christine Trujillo house
district twenty five in
Albuquerque.
And every seventy on house
district twenty one in
Albuquerque.
Thank you very much
Representative Crowder.
Thank you madam chair
Representative Randal Crowder a
live in Clovis Representative
district sixty four in curry
county of the northern two
thirds of curry county thank you
madam chair Representative
Garcia.
Thank you madam chair my name is
Jerry Garcia live grants to
Mexico Representative parts of
San Juan McKinley Cibola burn
what incentive or Collins thank
you madam chair.
Thank you Representative day
Hochman Vigil please.
You very much madam chair I
realize I'm showing up as Joel
Myers today that is not me I'm
trying to I'm not trying to fool
anybody that's my assistant but
I'm I'm to happen Vigil
Representative district fifteen
and Bernalillo county I
Albuquerque and it's looks like
a party over there with
Representative Allison at all so
I might go join thanks.
Representative Ezzell.
Madam chair thank you very much
I'm candy Spence Ezzell live on
a ranch western brawls will I
represent district fifty eight
which includes.
Basically the southern part of
Rossell midway dexter Hagaman
and all the outlying areas thank
you all righty Representative
Dixon.
Thank you madam chair my name's
Meredith Dixon I represent house
district twenty which is
southeast corner of Albuquerque
New the northern part of colonel
well thanks thank you
Representative Chatfield.
Thank you madam chair
Representative Jack Chatfield
the district sixty seven the
northeastern part of New Mexico.
Thank you Representative Lara.
Thank you madam chair my name is
out right not I represent house
district thirty four in seven
Dona Ana County.
Representative small.
Thank you very much madam chair
my name is Nathan small I'm very
proud to represent house
district thirty six locus
located all in Dona ana county
thank you madam chair thank you
very much Representative
Castellano.
Some of the customer
representative district seventy
which is San Miguel and Torrance
County madam chair.
Already thank you and I
Representative Patty Lundstrom I
serve as the chair for the house
appropriations and finance
committee Representative house
district nine which currently is
Gallup McKinley county in a
small portion of San Juan County
all with redistricting that has
changed what grade with most of
our districts for this next year
I also would like to ask are HSC
staff to introduce themselves to
start with our our chief of
staff bill Valdez.
Your bid is bill.
You're you're muted there you
go.
My name is bill was this that
you the staff of the
Appropriations Committee
I'm not sure what your reserves
right I think
might blow again this is here.
I don't know if Richard and a
daughter four year knocked on
the zoom we have our secretaries
in the office and I don't know I
just can't see everybody on
their manager I'm sorry already
with the people that I stay our
martyr Rodriguez Jennifer
Rodriguez I state from policy
track and that I think wraps up
our HFC chairman if I missed
anyone please shut out wave wave
that then we'll make sure to get
you introduced.
Are all one item on the agenda
today is house bill one and we
have our majority floor leader
here this afternoon to talk
about this bill and want to give
you a heads up we may have an
amendment for you so if you
would please Sir.
Thank you madam chair thank you
members of the House
Appropriations finance committee
it's great to see you again a
month later with another feed
bill before you is house bill
one.
and Mister global data from
council service will be
available to answer any
questions you may have house
bill one appropriates five
million nine hundred and sixteen
thousand eight hundred dollars
for expenses during the twenty
twenty to legislative session.
The amount is broken up as
follows.
Two million three hundred ninety
two thousand two hundred dollars
for the Senate.
Eight thousand eight hundred
dollars for the Legislative
Council Service for its session
expenses and for running the
joint bill room the mail room
and the Legislative switchboard.
The bill also includes annual
appropriations for the permanent
legislative committees and the
expense of our legislative
department not provided for in
section one of the bill.
and that breakdown is as follows
for the upgrade COVID slated
processing system one million
five hundred thousand dollars
per Legislative Council Service
appropriations for fiscal year
twenty three seven million four
hundred fifty thousand nine
hundred dollars.
For internet stated expenses one
million dollars for next year
sessions preparation four
hundred fifty thousand dollars.
For a statewide legislative
internship program there's an
appropriation of fifty thousand
dollars.
For dues and fees of national
organizations which the
legislature is a member four
hundred and eighteen thousand
dollars.
For the legislative information
system one million seven hundred
twenty three thousand four
hundred dollars for audio visual
committee room and webcasting
upgrades two hundred and fifty
thousand dollars for the capitol
buildings Planning Commission
one hundred fifty thousand
dollars.
And to the Senate rules
committee thirty five thousand
dollars.
The bill also appropriates to
the legislative finance
committee four million eight
hundred forty three thousand
nine hundred dollars for its
operations.
Legislative education study
committee one million four
hundred thirty seven thousand
eight hundred dollars for its
operations to the house chief
clerks office and house
leadership staff offices one
million eight hundred three
thousand one hundred dollars to
the Senate chief clerks office
and Senate leadership staff
offices one million eight
hundred seventy five thousand
seven hundred dollars.
And for the legislative
departments share a continued
ongoing development and
partnership work with the New
Mexico compilation commission
into self publication of New
Mexico statutes annotated
nineteen seventy eight.
Four hundred thousand dollars
madam chair with that Mr which
again I stand for questions.
Thank you Representative
Martinez I think we do have the
chief clerk also with us I say
her name so should be available
also to answer any questions
that we might have we're going
to go to questions first from
the committee and then I got
some questions myself and I'm
gonna go to represent a small
part of them let's start with
Representative Crowder.
Thank you madam chair just
a couple of really quick
questions it looks like there's
about a three million dollar
difference between this request
in the last thirty day request
but almost all seems to be
contained within the Legislative
Council Service increased and
the new legislative processing
system so madam chair I'm not
sure what the legislature
processing system is
I I I just don't understand what
it is I'd like to know that and
why the the large increase in
Legislative Council Service so
if they could explain that I
would appreciate it Madam.
We're ready with that be Mr
Burciaga explained that
Representative Martinez already
Representative yes.
Could you please explain that.
Thank you madam chair and good
afternoon members of the
committee.
The and I'll start off by saying
as I usually do that I'm here to
explain the technical components
the bill not to
in Dorset
or or I'll be against it so yes
there are significant increases
in the
Legislative Council Service
amounts the increases from from
last year number one let me
start with the R. one point five
million dollars for the
legislative processing system.
I have been speaking with the
talking with speaker in the pro
tempore about a year now on the
need to upgrade and have a state
of the art fully integrated our
document management based system
that takes our bill request from
the initial intake.
Through drafting discussion
drafts proving word processing
preparation for of the
legislator introduction
committee process chamber
process enrolling in engrossing
and then turning that over to
the governor for signature and
if passed getting that
information to not only the
secretary state but to New
Mexico compilation commission
for our chapter ring and for
publication it's a long process
and this is seed money and and
this is not the only money
that's already been appropriated
for this during the special
session one million dollars was
appropriated for our the
For the legislative processing
system and so the one point five
now and the one million that was
already appropriated in in the
special is two point five I will
tell you right now that that is
approximately twenty five
percent of what would be needed
to enhance our process and
basically you buy a new system
of for the New Mexico
legislature it's easily three
and a half to for your project.
this is twenty five percent of
it to get us started this was
based on discussions I had with
of the the speaker pro tem as
well as the Majority Leader who
introduces house bill one R.
that amount two point five now
and possibly in the neighborhood
of ten million dollars total
over the next four years is in
keeping is in line with what
other states have done
in in not enhancing their
systems
there is no off the shelf bill
drafting committee and chamber
process that you can purchase
that would work because every
single our legislature in fact
even within legislature's house
and Senate process he's very.
So that is what that one point
five million dollars as for now
the other increases in the
Legislative Council Service.
Our increases in salaries and
benefits as well as in contracts
again in talking with the
speaker in the pro tem I advise
them that because of the
basically just because of the
increased workload and and the
number of Intrum committees that
we staff the bills etcetera the
demand on I. T. I requested
additional funding R. for
approximately eight staff.
And that would include a bill
drafters.
Are you included I T. staff.
Researchers.
Cameron I don't have my.
All my notes in front of me I
apologize for that.
In any case I'm looking at about
eight positions that's in the
salaries and benefits and that
that's the increase there in
contracts
it just as of the last twenty
four hours.
Another four hundred thousand
dollars was added because of
requests that came and for
additional assistance staffing
resources for the Intrum
committees and in speaking with
the in talking with the speaker
pro tem and leader Martinez this
morning
I advise you would put that
additional money in contracts.
To see what we do in the long
term within from committees and
how that should be funded
but this these are kinds of
requests that we've gotten from
at least a couple of our in from
committee chairs.
And so that is where the
increase in in funding for
Council services.
And I would mention if I may
that
over the past three years I
think in twenty.
Nineteen there was about a fifty
five percent increase for house
leadership staff.
In both chambers and twenty
twenty one a year ago there was
another twenty twenty two
percent increase for leadership
staff and are this year in the.
R. I think was in the feet bill
for the special session there
was an additional three hundred
fifty thousand dollars for
leadership staff in the house
and the Senate which probably
comes then someone about twelve
to fifteen percent increase
for leadership staff so
I just want to point that out
because in terms of comparing
those increases fifty five
twenty two percent and somehow
they were about twelve percent
against the council service
increases which is in the
neighborhood of about seventeen
percent.
R. madam chair and
representative correct hope that
addresses your question.
That was a very thorough answer
Mr Burciaga but I'm sure I
appreciate that very much I I do
have one follow up quick
question and then one comment.
On the eight new person that
you've added into the your upper
budget are there any pay
increases built into this budget
for your person okay I'm seeing
you shake your head no Mr
chair I didn't know and and so
I'll stop there Mr Burciaga is
your staff eligible for the
proposed seven percent pay raise
three percent last quarter
twenty
two and then the going forward
in twenty through the additional
percent your staff eligible for
those pay raises.
Madam chair representative
Crowder yes my understanding is
that all legislative staff would
be eligible for that all right
thanks very much and then my my
only comment is I heard you
mention who are you to talk to
and work with to go through this
process I would respectfully
request that you consider
allowing the minority leader
into that discussion so that he
can raise his members in it we
can
Understand kind of what's going
on up here a little better I
would just ask that you consider
that thank you madam chair.
All right thank you very much
just go next year Representative
Dixon and then we'll go
Representative Lane.
Thank you madam chair and thank
you leader Martinez for this
presentation I have Mike well my
question relates to increases in
budget between the twenty twenty
actuals and the twenty twenty
two request both for the Senate
and house session and then again
for the
interim for the chief clerks
office and so I'd like to start
with understanding.
The
Senate for the session appears
to have.
Requested an increase of six
hundred and sixty thousand from
what they spent in twenty twenty
compared to the house which is
requested approximately five
hundred thousand if I'm reading
that correctly and that's
between the request in the
twenty twenty actual and so I'm
curious about why the Senate is
higher given that they have
forty two members as opposed to
the house which has seventy so
that's my first question thank
you madam chair.
Mr Burciaga.
Thank you madam chair Mr leader
and Representative Dixon
I.
I'm not sure I can answer that
question I may differ to lease
up on the increase are some of
that in terms of actual and how
much Lord is is and you talk
you're looking at the in terms
that correct Representative.
I'm madam chair Mr Burciaga
actually for this question I'm
looking at the session.
and then I'll follow up with
that by talking about the
interim okay so in the session
on the Senate side they're going
up by a doctor
Five hundred thousand in the
Senate and another five thousand
dollars for the houses or those
ones you're talking about.
Madam chair Mr Burciaga correct
actually six hundred and sixty
thousand increase in the Senate
and four hundred ninety six
thousand increase in the house
okay.
Madam chair I and and
Representative Dixon I would
defer to the house chief clerk
Lisa McCutchen on that increase
and unfortunate the the Senate
chief clerk is not here we put
these budgets together after we
get the budget amounts from the
chief clerks who present these
are in fact the presented this
morning our house before the
house printing and supplies
committee and the Senate
presented this before the Senate
committees committee are I can
try to look at the Senate while
if possible miss Ortiz McCutchen
might be able to address the
house increases right could you
go ahead
madam clerk.
Madam chair representative Dixon
I just for clarification are you
just talking specifically about
salaries or the entire budget
from the last thirty day
session.
Madam chair ms Ortiz just was
sort of what makes up the five
hundred thousand dollar
increase.
Expenses.
Madam chair representative Dixon
I can tell you that the majority
of that increase from the last
year is going to be the increase
in the salary grant
for the members not for the
members for the
for the staff that support you
and support this your mission to
get legislation and that's where
the greatest part of it is also
there's on another increase
slight increase on the supplies
that we need to maintain a COVID
safe environment which means
increased on masks wipes
the disinfectants all all that
kind of stuff that goes into it
and and also as we all have
experience due to comment
drugs are harder to get and
there's been an increase in the
cost so that's that's that's the
major but I would say salaries
is is probably the biggest part.
I'm thank you madam chair and ms
Ortiz I want to follow up madam
chair with.
Sort of the next part of my
question which relates to the
increases in the interim up for
the two chief clerks office and
really what I'm noticing is that
House chief clerk has an
increase of about five hundred
thousand the Senate chief clerks
office is nearly doubling.
and that's a nine hundred
thousand dollar increase and
what I would be interested in
knowing is what the Senate is
spending nearly a million
dollars on with their forty two
members in the interim as
compared to but the house is
much more modest increase of
five hundred thousand with
seventy members thank you madam
chair.
And Representative Dixon I don't
you know maybe we should have
the the Senate should click here
to explain their part of the
budget in my meetings with our
chief clerk and with Mr Burciaga
over the course of last week or
so I can tell you on the house
clerk side.
clerk Ortiz attention does a
really good job of doing a lot
with with very little sometimes
and I appreciate your your.
You're cutting out
Representative a little bit
Okay not sure why then madam
chair in the capitol building so
hopefully better without a mask
on it is that it you begin
increased ram a couple of times
okay I apologize for that if it
happens again let me know and
I'll turn up my video okay but
as I was saying madam chair and
Representative Dixon.
Clear which is my question does
a really good job of doing a lot
with very little I think if we
can get the Senate clerk here in
the next few minutes maybe she
can give you a rundown of how
exactly the Senate spending
their their appropriation or how
they plan to to give you the
details of that you know may not
be so this handouts.
And madam chair and leader
Martinez and ms Ortiz to be
clear I have been very impressed
with the work done by the house
chief clerks office during the
interim and I am not questioning
in anyway the need for an
increase of five hundred
thousand and and primarily
curious as to why the Senate is
so much higher and if we need to
come back to that that is fine
thank you madam chair.
All right thank you
Representative let's go to
Representative lane please.
Thank you madam chair my
question has to do with the
explanation that role given
again for the one point five
million on the legislative
process and system and madam
chair I I like the sound of the
system and I have a problem with
the system and on from the
preparation I'm just years if I
can get some understanding to
help.
Understand the rationale for why
this is an I also want to set up
house bill two because I know
how to one has emergency clause
but my assumption is that this
one point five million is going
to be enough to develop this
kind of software so that we can
implement it right away and so
it's going to come down the road
anyway so why why is this image
we want to sort of HB to.
I'm.
Madam chair and representative
lane in discussions with the
Majority Leader and others it
was suggested that this money be
put into a house bill one two
partly because of if there is a
emergency clause on it and we
get started for example I
immediately after session with
stop putting together an R. F.
P.
we have been putting a lot more
into the feed bill that is
specific to the year round
activities including if you will
special appropriations like this
one in the P. Neville so that
it's all in one place R. for
better easier reference we have
in the past put
Some of these appropriations and
house bill two under special
appropriations there's a very
limited information in there
about what what you're
describing and so sometimes it's
easier to put it in a bill like
that the bill where we can
expand a little bit more about
what the of the listen
processing system is in this
case it is the
design and
Development output development
basically the beginning stages
if you will of that process
again in my discussions with
LFC and leader Martinez it is
assumed to make more sense to
put this in the P. Neville
front.
Thank you madam chair I I I
guess the need to get started
are the.
That rational next seems to be
part of the heartburn.
In the special was
trying to get away from the
practice of loading the fuel
bill and so that I think that's
for my concern I again I think
this is an appropriate
appropriation I just question
whether it belongs to HB one
thank you.
All right let's go now to
Representative Lara.
Thank you madam chair and thank
you all of the major to Martinez
I have a question on the on it's
section cap on page seven for
audiovisual agrees to committee
was virtual hybrid webcasting
hardware and software two
hundred fifty thousand dollars
so I guess in Mr Burciaga madam
chair do are these upgrades are
they gonna be permanent or the
just temporary for for for the
session.
Madam chair and representative
via our two hundred fifty
thousand dollars for those
upgrades is a one time cost or
is and they will be permanent.
I mean they'll department as
permanent as KeyCorp and is
these days.
What we have in place is
probably been around for twenty
thirty years and I think it's
you know we'll get some much
shelf life off of the new
upgraded
virtual hybrid in webcasting
system.
Thank thank you Mr chairman
we're sorry madam chair I know
well when we met with a when you
to see Matt on Monday we were
having a lot of issues with with
those with that technology
internal madam chair was equally
concerned with that so I'm
wondering if I do once again run
madam chair Mr Stewart zero one
of two hundred fifty thousand
dollars is enough for all the
committee refers to to upgrade
with this equipment.
Madam chair and Representative
Lara.
This two hundred fifty thousand
dollars is actually going to
supplement some of funding
actually some equipment that we
had already purchased but that
we haven't received yet because
we're still dealing with supply
chain issues are we've got some
webcasting equipment that is
either waiting on
microprocessors or possibly on a
shipping dock and Long Beach
all we know is our suppliers of
Thomas yes it's ordered yes
you'll get it but I do have an
email from our I. team manager
where he's gotten several bits
of information from suppliers
and vendors that things are out
still are from this point out
anywhere from three to nine
months.
Thank you for Mr Burciaga and
and chair so so if things are
being delayed so much you know
what it is is this going to
affect us this this is not going
to affect us for this thirty day
session so we're looking at
maybe perhaps of sixty day or
maybe the interim Mr Burciaga
manager.
Madam chair and representative I
have my fingers crossed that the
both of some of what we need we
will be getting with those
things that we've already
ordered that we will get be
getting them by about to lie to
start upgrading that now for
this and from and have been in
place for the sixty day session
anything beyond that that we can
get will I'll have to report
back on how we're doing but.
In in the P. Neville helps
because once it's passing
chapter I can get IT to begin
ordering that equipment.
Thank you Mr Serra and I
appreciate the responses and up
thank you Madam for allowing me
to ask questions.
Thank you very much
Representative I've got a couple
questions are like us don't see
any any other
members requesting
To ask questions the first
question I have Representative
Martinez four rolled Siaka what
your cash balance.
Now for Legislative Council.
Madam chair and Representative
Martinez I think right now cash
balances is approximately three
point two or three point three
million dollars.
So we have three three point two
three point three million
available in Legislative Council
cash balances.
Question I have is in regards to
Issues around salaries I have
the same question that I heard
earlier with one of the members
with the salaries for
Legislative Council staff and
and so forth with the permanent
staff are their salaries have
been increased at all.
The the salary increases that we
have provided to staff have been
those that the legislature gives
across the board like one point
five percent last year if and
when we have vacancy savings for
example somebody retires at a
much higher rate and we hire
somebody at a lower rate if
we've got some vacancy savings
it allows us to use some of that
for a promotion
so simple if if I got a staff
attorney who we might be able to
you know who's been here and has
is doing the job and and are
doing well and deserves a
promotion then we use that money
for
for promotions and.
For for that kind of thing so
those are the kinds of increases
we give.
And for equity you know.
All right let me ask our chief
clerk as a bit any salary
increases with your permanent
staff.
madam chair the only increases
that we've had I have been the
ones that have been given relief
when they're included in the
budget and of course if there's
any like rules that if there's
any
agencies are savings will you
know all accordingly increase
individuals in this office but
over all to the entire staff
budget in this office on the
west gate provided in our house
bill two okay so I'm just
curious on on this so when we do
have a vacancy it allows for
some flexibility at particularly
if we do it we're looking at
trying to retain our people is
that correct.
Madam chair that's correct the
Legislative Council Service
okay.
The same for you
our clerk chief clerk.
yes ma'am it is okay.
Well I can tell you that I am
again over the top and I this
isn't to blame anybody about
anything that this whole virtual
business for this committee.
Yes is almost unacceptable.
You know we're dealing this
committee is dealing with an
eight point five billion dollar
budget and we don't have
telecommunications capability.
I have one member who just
texted me here is that what is
what is going to be.
Our house bill one the problem
is is that yes No audio today.
You can hear us but we can't
talk.
We have to have three people in
one office just to be able to
participate in today's hearing.
because there's not
telecommunications capability I
just I just feel that that is
absolutely unacceptable.
It's unacceptable for this
committee not to be able to have
zoom meeting where we can
actually hear the presenter.
Where we can't come into our own
room in actually need we just
simply don't have the
capability.
So it is incredibly important to
me that we do something about it
and we do it as quickly as we
can.
I'm looking on page seven of the
bill line twelve.
This is an issue that was raised
by one of the other members for
audio visual upgrades to
committee rooms virtual hybrid
webcasting hardware software two
hundred fifty thousand dollars.
I believe that that needs to
come out provided cash balances
because I want it done now.
I can tell you that if we were
going to meet why what we're
actually going to have virtual
input I have the staff go down
the bios and get it set up.
I haven't go down into some
computer store thank you get the
screen set up and get us hooked
up and ready to roll.
It is embarrassing to me both
personally and professionally
not to be able to have that
capability.
See my members having to you
know crowd around one computer
screen just so they can actually
participate.
So I'm gonna call Representative
small because I'd like to ask
the committee to consider an
amendment so Representative
small are you ready for that I
am.
Okay let's hear it thank you
madam chair I would propose
amendment to house bill one on
page six line twelve after the
word fund insert the words or
other stores As indicated.
And then on page seven line
fourteen right before the
semicolon insert the words from
provided cash balances.
All right we've all heard the
amendment committee members do
you have any questions about
that.
All right is that a motion for
this ammendment Representative
small I move approval of
amendment one to house bill one
do I have the second for the
second again okay it we've got
Representative Crowder is a
second is there any opposition
to this amendment from the
committee.
Representative Martinez do you
have any comment before taking
final vote on it.
I'm sure that is a friendly
amendment.
Yeah already so we have that too
is there any opposition to the
amendment saying we've just
included the amendment.
I don't know what it's going to
take I know that all the staff
is stressed here what I can tell
you again that it is just
completely unacceptable for the
finance committee dealing with
an eight point five billion
dollar budget now we don't even
have telecommunications
capability for all work.
In a ring loud and clear for
both Legislative Council our
chief clerk and everybody else.
So let's go back to the bill
that you had your hand up
representative Garcia did you
have a question on the bill.
Yes fund chair I would look at
the whole few flirt so Peter
Schiff Office.
I'm not twenty twenty pool it
went up to all.
Went down twenty twenty one from
five sixty one I will I my
question is that one dollar
fifty seven thousand and I'm
contractual services it went up
a hundred forty six thousand
could somebody explain that to
me.
Right.
Where do you want to.
Madam chair of this Garcia I
will do my best to answer that
the.
If people if you guys are not
aware the child's chief clerks
offices is holes the budget for
the operations of this office
itself but also poll the funds
for the leadership staff that go
to the three eight leadership
offices the minority the
majority of the speaker's office
so we even though we're not
together in one pot we're still
separate so leadership offices
have the opportunity which
whatever portion of the pie that
they have if they have X. amount
of dollars in salaries and X.
mountain contracts they have the
ability to move salary money
into contracts and also the
other way around from contracts
and the salary so that might
explain the fluctuation of why
one went down and the other one
went up I hope that is
satisfactory to you
Madam chair representative
Garcia.
Thank you thank you madam
chair and do so it just had
offered a one when found fifty
seven of one hundred forty two
just question thank you madam
chair.
I'd like to request from our
chief clerk is I'd like to have
a listing.
Of the employees that are tied
to the leadership budget portion
here I want to know how many
people involved in both the.
Democrat and Republican
leadership offices we have
there's running through the
chief clerk because it appears
that it's part of the chief
clerks budget when in reality it
is only because it's running
through here but it really isn't
her employees is that correct.
So it becomes a little becomes
very confusing them because it
appears as though it's our our
chief clerks employees when in
fact that is not the case.
Correct I'm sorry.
So we want to list research on
that and we'll get that to HFC
members already I think that's
it unless there's any other
questions from the committee
would like to discuss.
Other hands with the
representative of small for the
motion madam chair I move
approval of house bill one as
amended.
Need a second all seven of
adventure okay we have a motion
and a second were approval of
house bill one as amended is
there any opposition to that.
Seeing none thank you everybody
and we do have a due pass
Representative Martinez your job
thank you thank you madam chair
thank you members will see you
later already thank you.
