And in charges that division
with holding the mission and
vision for the state and drawing
all of these disparate efforts
in line to focus on reaching the
unserved and the underserved in
New Mexico the spaces where we
don't have a connection or where
connection is completely
unreliable.
Sh is charged with providing
support to these areas to
develop broadband grant project
proposals and then helping them
implement them and manage them
for four to one or hires loans
number one create a division
within code so we can track the
money number two it creates a
bond so that this so that
broadband funds can go into it
and be disbursed in a way where
projects are vetted and aligned
and prioritized to make sure
that they're reaching the areas
that are unserved and under
served and then creates a
council and that is where you
see the substantial difference
in the committees the council is
beefed up specify and who will
be on it this will be the
decision making body that will
look and grant project proposals
and make sure they're aligned
with the state's strategic plan
to make sure they need our state
goals
Where those funds.
So that in a nutshell is.
House committee some of
committees
In a Leicestershire I believe is
on here or available to you Mr
chair if you have specific
questions in the current budget
that you all did there is a
thirty million for broadband you
can go into detail about where
all of that states that thank
you very much Representative
Figueroa for summarizing
quickly.
The house appropriations and
finance committee substitute
and now let's go ahead is there
anyone in the audience who
wishes to speak for or against
house bill the house
appropriations and finance
committee substitute for House
Bill ten.
Okay you see that.
We're getting a number of folks
we're gonna ask our
Committee are incredible
committee staff in attendance to
go ahead and go to public
comment first in support.
please so if you wish to speak
and support please keep your
hand up and we're we're gonna
limit at.
Two one minute that asked people
to do less if at all possible
right now we're already at
seventeen hands which is great
appreciate folks taken time to
come in.
So we're gonna Mr Malik and if
you can start us off
and and let us know who will be
speaking and then keep them to
one minute Mr Mr vice chair Paul
Starr with the we're gonna go
out for medical order folks so
we're gonna start with triple
more sent from the RP.
Grades are.
You'll need a new.
Thank you Mr.
The numbers my name is bill
Morrison.
I am a volunteer advocate for
our P. New Mexico Representative
are more than two hundred forty
eight thousand members of the
New Mexico not all school lowers
we stand in strong support of H.
B..
We believe that broadband is an
essential service for owner back
Mexicans particularly those
people over age fifty.
Good bye.
Thank in rural areas.
To date we connect health care
professionals for telehealth
telehealth this is the only way
we see I am looking.
We don't live with in order.
Roche freeze and other medical
supplies by Wu of the internet
in today's market.
Where you stand in supported PM
for this bill thank you for your
consideration.
Thank you very much Mr Morrison
next please.
And remember it's one minute
members public attendees go
ahead and next okay Mister
Richter go ahead yes Mr chairman
and and members my name is Bob
and you're on.
Face was representative eighteen
faith nonprofit in schools are
for several thousand New Mexico
residents.
Us us have seen the widening
digital divide schools where
that that she's from schools
have a difficult time with one
student loan families with two
three or four kids but it's also
important for telehealth it's
also important for the economy
broadband.
Research I proved reserves
appear research institute found
that there were six common
factors for states that were
successful in expanding
broadband from border to border.
House Bill ten.
Incorporates these essential
components for success and with
that over here face asked that
you have a two passed vote for
house bill two.
Thank you very much chairman and
members thank you Mr editor next
let's go to miss Betsy Bailey.
Bailey.
What thank you thank you all I
am incoming president for the U.
N. A. USA Albuquerque chapter
and we represent in the United
States over a hundred nine
ninety chapters
that are fully looking to
support broadband for all in
particular we are here to ensure
that the sustainable development
goals serves the growing needs
of health care public safety and
education and we stand firmly
that broadband access for all
will help us achieve those goals
thank you very much.
Thank you very much miss Bailey
next let's go to carry beam from
Cuba New Mexico.
Okay go ahead.
Good afternoon committee.
Hello.
We can hear you please go ahead
and start your comments very
good thank you Mr chairman and
members of the committee I am a
resident of the village of Cuba
the most beautiful place on
earth I do have a business here
I am a certified educator
teaching at Cuba public schools
I also worked with Sandoval
economic alliance on some
economic development initiatives
as an americorps Vista volunteer
I do know that Cuba struggles as
a rural community in New Mexico
with access to broadband we do
know that students are being
left out of educational
opportunities because internet
service is often either not
available or too costly for
families living in rural areas.
We also know that the state
at lunch at economic development
initiative regarding the outdoor
recreation.
Economy and sadly we will not be
able to promote our wonderful
outdoor recreation opportunities
here in Cuba without that
broadband connection.
We also know that are Public
health services at Presbyterian
medical clinic does receive
funding of four telehealth are
using internet and sadly we have
a many residents that cannot
access that we're wholehearted
support thank you very much.
Thank you let's go ahead now to
Mr Dennis Conner G. and remember
it's one minute for public
comment.
Okay go ahead Mr property.
Okay I don't Mr Conaty.
We we don't see them up on the
attendee list the let's now go
to Jude make model Jude make
Malham for one minute public
input on house bill ten and
support.
Hi I get afternoon Mister
chairman and members of the
committee my name is Jude might
want I live in Albuquerque and
I'm a retired telecommunications
worker with years of experience
including the sales and the
trying to get broadband percent
of the population I want to
thank the sponsors for their
thoughtful work behind the
filing of this major.
And I can't help but notice that
the five primary sponsors are
all women way to go.
Yeah that.
We look out for our families
nobody does that better than
women.
New Mexico New Mexicans want and
need to see an expansion of
broadband in New Mexico.
We have too many rural areas
that have no access or inferior
access to our internet plus we
have a significant number of
urban neighborhoods with
interior service.
H. B. ten is an important first
step in making sure New Mexico
wisely plans for the future of
hundreds of millions of public
dollars.
The.
We're running out of time thank
you very much Mr for your
comments.
Let's go now and I apologize for
the short clock but deeply
appreciate everyone's taking
extra time.
Thank you Mr mom let's go to now
miss my gonna go.
Okay go ahead.
I'm sorry all the quick I'm
gonna go registered lobbyists
for economic form of Albuquerque
membership strongly supports
this legislation as it provides
a holistic statewide approach to
critical and since.
The state will brought brand
infrastructure and access.
Also includes the opportunity
for innovation while
simultaneously providing guard
rails this is Daniel can
actually.
We encourage your support thank
you.
Thank you very much miss more
Madonna go now let's go to Penn
Baker please.
Go ahead and.
Good afternoon thank you chair
all my name is Ben Baker United
States navy submarine veteran.
And I'm representing both in New
Mexico democratic that all
Cherry family talkers.
And the baton chapter of the
American veterans for equal
rights for which I'm the
president.
This bill is the expansion of
internet access throughout New
Mexico there are many reasons to
support this bill if you are
providing veterans access to
telemedicine.
Access to the D. O. H. vaccine
registration application which I
hope will not have to be used
again.
Access to these proceedings and
remote learning again we support
this bill thank you for your
time and consideration.
Thank you very much Mr Baker for
your time and for your service
well let's go to
Mexico court room.
Go ahead Sir yes this is Peter
Carone former Salt Lake County
mayor and the regional
representative for the rocky
mountain region of the United
Nations association of the U. S.
speaking in favor of your bill
we can use this legislative
session have a fifty million
dollar initiative for rural
broadband and.
We'd love to see it all of our
boats rise together so we love
to support economic development
and and in the west and we
appreciate what you're doing in
favor of broadband development
thank you.
Thank you very much Mr Karun
next go to miss re on and
stimulus please.
Thank you so much Mr chair for
the opportunity to speak to this
committee and allow everyone to
have a chance to give a COVID
senses that the house
appropriations and finance
committee throughout some
numbers for you the overall cost
to fully implement broadband
across the state according to
the department of information
and technology.
Between two to five billion
dollars of state has spent three
hundred million dollars with our
federal delegation bringing and
multiple millions as well but
school lacks is a centralized
entity to coordinate all these
efforts and make sure that all
the communities who need
broadband are getting it the
economy New Mexico stands in
strong support of this bill
house bill ten thank you.
Thank you very much miss Samuel
now let's go to Mr Jason
Espinoza.
Chairman and members of the
committee Jason Espinoza
registered lobbyists with both
the New Mexico technology
council as well as the
associated general contractors
New Mexico we stand in support
of the legislation you know and
really strongly support
investments in coordination that
will significantly improve
connectivity throughout the
state for broadband
infrastructure thank you.
Thank you very much Mr house
said next let's go to Mr Scott
Scanlon.
Thank you Mr chairman Scott
Scanlon registered lobbyists for
the.
Southwest cable association we
support house bill ten we
support the substitute we
appreciate very much the Sanchez
reaching out to us you know the
table there about eight or ten
table
companies throughout New Mexico
we find about seventy five to
eighty percent of all of the
broadband services in New Mexico
currently.
The.
Reshape Representative Chandler
and all the rest I'm reaching
out to us to get our input this
bill thank you Mr chairman thank
you very much Mr Scanlon now
let's go to who then had a I
think that.
And a reminder just to go on New
if we're not speaking and I
would.
Yes please good afternoon my
name is who then had I. activity
C. W. A. in support of HB tent I
would like to thank the sponsors
for drafting a bill that also
takes into consideration the
shoes of affordability digital
inclusion and equity.
Having said that I have to a
small recommendations and that
amendment to establish and
enforce appropriate oversight
and regulation of broadband and
voice over IP I also recommend
section twelve bees be be
amended to include broadband in
the definition of communications
connection eligible to
contribute to the fund and
lastly I hope committee members
consider creating a point system
that gives pre friends too high
with employers in distributing
broadband funds this would
include safety training and
certification record New Mexico
workforce requirement that
supports job pipeline for
traditionally marginalized
communities and and no reason
violations of labor thank you
thank you Mr had a this
perfect timing now let's go to
it comes up on our screen as the
event though.
Good afternoon chair members of
the committee thank you for this
opportunity to speak lines be
compatible with us and your food
center in done in a county where
in strong traditional ten
because the specially in rural
areas lack internet access has
always been a problem and has
contributed education it's a
very long before the pandemic
did talk with some of the
educational opportunities COVID
nineteen vaccine registration
and so many other resources only
available online needs more
urgent than ever nothing has
moved all of our use programs
and family cooking programs
online for the safety of our
community and staff but we know
that that still leaves out
families without reliable and
affordable broadband I've been
investment is an essential
investment for our families so
we are asking for the committee
support today HB ten for the
well being of our children
elders and for the future of New
Mexico thank you.
Thank you very much Mr velo next
we'll go to lily.
And let me can you tell us your
full name please sure I'm so
sorry Mr chair committee members
my name is lily Irvin Vitela and
I'm the president and executive
director of New Mexico first
we're in strong favor of house
bill ten as I was reviewing the
last decade of New Mexico first
town halls the importance of
reliable band broadband has come
through again and again as a
recurrent theme in need in our
most recent town hall on health
body mind and spirit folks
really brought to life through
community conversations and our
town hall just how critical
access to broadband is for
strong health outcomes and so we
really appreciate the.
Sanchez commitment to equity and
and the importance of having a
more coherent approach to
broadband so we have better
outcomes across New Mexico thank
you.
Thank you very much Mr Vitela
next let's go to Mr JD
Bullington.
Thank you Mr chairman JD
Bullington speaking on behalf of
the greater Albuquerque chamber
of commerce this critical
groundwork for getting our
state's gonna activity where it
needs to be in the chamber
especially appreciates that the
bill will facilitate the
enhancements through the
broadband development division
through new leadership guidance
and the Goshen ation assistance
it provides for localities we
are support for this bill and we
look forward to seeing it become
law and making a difference in
our communities.
Thank you very much Mr
Burlington last in less we have
anybody else who hops on we'll
go to Mr add Rougemont Mr
Rougemont.
Thank you Mr chairman and
members of the committee and
Roose mall with it will electric
cooperative association
sponsored through bringing this
broadband bill forward as we all
all rural areas are in dire need
of broadband infrastructure.
Motor areas in New Mexico.
Also want to thank the sponsor
for expressing high interest in
working with right entities such
as the rural electric
cooperatives in the plan and
execute broadband projects
throughout rural New Mexico
along with local entities.
Those who stand in support of
house built in.
It look forward to working with
the sponsors and ensuring rural
communities part of the
broadband expansion plan since
rural electric cooperative so
sure over eighty percent of the
Latin mass in New Mexico thank
you.
Thank you very much Mr Rougemont
now we see we have we'll go now
to Dennis Conner T. Mr Conaty.
Mr Connor T. Dennis Conner TE
with RMC.
Let's try one more time it.
Dennis Conner T. from R. M. C.
Mr moe again can you see if we
can try one last time to get Mr
Connor to use public comment.
I'm still trying can you hear me
this time are we got you yes Sir
thank you.
Follow.
Then my name is Dennis caller G.
I am a retired
telecommunications worker with
orders over forty five years of
experience but obviously knows
computer microphones I am also
president of the alliance for
retired Americans in New Mexico
speaking on behalf of the
schools that she didn't tell co
workers in New Mexico in
thousands of retired New
Mexicans I offer the following
support of House Bill Ted we
want to see broadband expanded
appreciate that the legislature
and governor all committed to
suspension for thousands of
concerned underserved New
Mexicans the bill was good
direction blueprint to start
getting New Mexicans better and
more reliable service.
We would like to offer though we
think oversight would help
ensure the quality
accountability and safety all
part of the job undertaking when
spending public dollars I do
thank you very much and again I
do apologize for the technical
glitches.
Not not at all thank you very
much Mr Connor Connor the
perfect timing see we have
another hand this is Ricky
Massey Mr Massey do you wish to
speak in support of house bill
sent.
Yes I.
Okay perfect go ahead Sir.
good afternoon madam chair and
members of the committee my name
tricking us armories a recently
retired live in Los crucis and
the region three of us president
of communication workers of
America local seven seventy six.
State public employees and I'm
speaking in favor House Bill
ten.
I work for the department of
health for fourteen years
traveling full energy state
making sure the people in the
standard of living facilities
were cared for properly.
And employees who provide vital
health safety and quality of
life services to New Mexicans
know how poor internet services
is in our state.
And the current COVID nineteen
crisis is highlighted the
failures of communication
systems throughout New Mexico.
We need expanded broadband
access but it needs to be of the
highest quality possible for
every neighborhood and distant
village in our beautiful state.
Mexico.
Are to pay millions and millions
of dollars for broadband service
expansions and built from the
citizens deserve reliable
protections assurances that the
services will work when needed
thank you very much Mr Massey
thank you very much for your
testimony and for your time
sorry we were trying to get
through a full schedule today
Are there any other attendees
who wish to speak in support of
house bill ten.
Seeing none let's go are there
is there any are there any
attendees today who wish to
speak in opposition to house
bill ten.
Mr Bradley.
Mr chairman members of the
committee it.
Walker Bradley representing very
farmers of America and we have a
lot of communities and houses
and residences and
Representative many of our
businesses obviously dairies are
outside of the rules of the
metropolitan areas and are dead
zones all over the state of New
Mexico anybody that's driven
home can see him so very
important American would like
stand up and in the blog the
sponsors of this bill and if you
are support thank you Mr
chairman.
Thank thank you very much Mr
Bradley we will mark that down
in the support column.
it is that all of the supporters
for House Bill ten.
Okay now let's go and will pass
it a little bit of time no we're
all getting used to this
technical piece is there anyone
who wishes to speak in
opposition to house bill ten.
Gonna keep an eye to see if any
of the hands go up here in the
attend the room.
Okay.
Okay I I don't see any hands
wishing to speak in opposition.
We appreciate everybody's time.
It.
We we see Mr Riley spoke before.
Don't see any other hands let's
now go to committee discussion
and recall Committee that this
is on the house appropriations
and finance committee substitute
we do have as Mr Valdez noted
miss Fisher from LESC who is our
broadband analyst here who can
help answer any technical
questions committee members may
have first let's go to
Representative Dixon.
Thank you Mr chair and thank you
Representative Figueroa and your
co sponsors I'm I actually do
not have a question I simply
wanted to commend you for taking
the time to work on this
important issue I know that time
your group has been hi has spent
months working on this and you
know I really feel that you've
taken the time to.
Well together an excellent bill
and so just wanted to let you
know that I appreciate that
thank you.
Thank you very much
Representative Dixon next on the
list we have Representative he's
out Representative Ezzell please
Mr chair thank you very much
and I don't know which one I
should call on to answer the
questions I have a minute
Representative Figueroa I've.
Read over as best as I could all
the FIR is the analysis and
everything and I think the thing
that stands out I do know that
anytime there rural electric
cooperatives are building any
sort of line item or whatever
they have to work with the state
land office and DOT has that
been taken into consideration.
Thank you Mr chair and thank you
Representative an excellent
question yes it is one of the
charges of this division to work
with DOT and work with the
office of land management and
the Stream Commission and tribal
entities federal entities lab
introduce they all have their
own rights away systems process
sees their own permitting and
licensing process sees is one of
the reasons why these projects
aren't getting done because that
is so complex and expensive it
ends up being more expensive so
the office is charged with
helping to facilitate it to try
and through memorandum of
understanding or any other way
possible built some uniformity
in that process so that it can
be more smooth and get done.
Okay Mr chairman that's all the
questions I had I just want to
make sure that there was
coordination at this is if this
project is going to go forward
that's what it's got to take
thank you Mr chairman.
Thank you very much
Representative Ezzell next we
have Representative Allison
Representative Allison.
Thank you Mr chair.
First of All I Want to thank
sponsors for bringing this to
light and the only comment I
have is that can we ensure that
all the areas get attendance let
there be no boundaries Mr Reno
reservation lines no county
lines let's get all the areas
that tended to thank you very
much Mr chair.
Thank you very much
Representative Allison next we
have Representative Castellano.
Representative Castellano
please.
Okay we will avoid the easy
jokes Representative Castellano.
Okay we we can go back to
Representative Castellano next
week on the list we have
Representative Trujillo.
Yes I just question I also
standard strip part of this bill
I think have done are you mangas
the importance of trying to get
all the information together and
getting the the very sometimes
conflicting entities to agree on
the same bill that was shocking
to me you have C. W. A. and you
have the business community you
have it's fascinating I don't
know I'm gonna talk to guys
further about how you did that
but this is a terrific bill and
I plan to support it.
Excellent thank you very much
Representative Trujillo
We okay I don't see any other
hands on the list let me ask
really quick.
Let's go Representative Crowder
and then we'll see if
Representative Castellano is on
Representative Crowder please
thank you Mr chairman just one
quick question for LFC analysts
Mr chair is the language in
house bill two
facilitate this bill.
Mr Chairman
Mr chair.
Representative Crowder more in
the LFC recommendations remember
had ten million dollars and
special appropriations in the
original hospital to reduced
version of that was take no need
to see and I believe the plan
going forward is to include that
appropriations supplemental
appropriations act that would
include both money for districts
itself as well as first year
funding for the Division it do
it.
It Mr chairman Mr chair thank
you but I'm more curious about
the language tied to the funding
in the bill is it specifically
accommodate this bill.
I see Mr chair representative
Crowder yes the language will be
contingent on passage of this
bill or a similar bill in the
Senate setting up the division
all right thank you very much
thank you Mr chair.
Thank you very much
Representative Crowder and thank
you Mr Fisher okay it let's go
you know we have a big agenda
mess
Representative Castellano before
we ask for a motion.
I don't see that we have
Representative Castellano on.
Do now pass on mute.
Representative Castellano.
We're having a little bit of a
problem there Mr chair I move a
do pasts.
Thanks for one second I I want
to just get.
Thank we will go to that
Representative Trujillo in just
one second.
Okay.
Okay.
Okay now let's go ahead two of
Representative Trujillo for a
motion please.
Mr chairman and hi happily.
This bill and I forgot the
number because I don't have it
in front of me okay that would
be a motion for a do pass on the
house appropriations and finance
committee substitute for our
Get the bills ten for House Bill
tension.
There's.
He is also appropriation
substitute for the house
transportation.
Wirth and capital improvements
committee substitute for House
Bill ten we are in competition
for the longest title bills
okay.
That we didn't have the motion
made by Representative Trujillo
it's been seconded by
Representative at at a thank you
to the sponsors for making sure
that we have all the verbiage
correct.
Is there opposition to that
motion.
Okay seeing no opposition House
Appropriations and finance
committee substitute for House
transportation and public works
committee substitute for House
Bill ten.
At the receives a do pass from
has appropriation of finance
thank you all very much for your
time today.
Next committee we're gonna go to
house bill thirteen.
At the request of the Sanchez
requested that this bill will be
tabled is there a motion to
table house bill thirteen so if.
Okay it's been moved by
Representative is out seconded
by Representative side Indiana
to table house bill thirteen is
there any opposition to that
motion.
Saying no opposition house bill
thirteen has been tabled.
Now let's go to the committee
substitute for the house
agricultural water Committee
substitute for house bill thirty
three.
Is there a presenter here for
that.
Kate let's go ahead I'm gonna go
ahead and promote Representative
data out to a panelists.
Representative Dow we are on the
committee house agriculture
water committee substitute for
house bill thirty three.
Please give us a brief summary
if you would Representative Dow
and then we'll go to attendees
and go from there Representative
doubt please.
Thank you members of the
committee this bill and acts
reinstate New Mexico install
option under the authority of
the New Mexico livestock board
also creates some directs from
the producer to the consumer it
does not have G. R. T. that'll
stand for questions.
Thank you very much
Representative doubt now
attended let's go over to our
attendees.
For those who wish to speak in
support of house bill thirty
three if you could raise your
hands.
See if you hands coming up let's
go ahead and start with Mr well
what will cert will will
conclude with that ministration
was secretary let's go ahead and
can we go ahead and start with
Mr Lauren Patterson please and
remember it's.
One minute for public comment
please Mr Paterson whenever
you're ready to kick us off.
Thank you vice chair small
members of the committee Lauren
Patterson on behalf of New
Mexico cattle growers
association our membership
strongly supports this
legislation are so ciation of
ranchers reside in every county
in the state that are proud of
the wholesome products we
produce this legislation would
allow the local consumers to
source a great protein from
local producers and businesses
traditionally New Mexico's
animal agriculture has to be
shipped beyond our borders for
processing Mexico cattle growers
supports efforts to improve
regulatory environment that
would be more conducive to the
construction of new meat
processing facilities across the
state New Mexico cattle growers
also support the inspections
Services house within the
umbrella of livestock board
tracking animals disease and
ownership responsibility is key
in the overall success of this
program we appreciate the
opportunity to work with the
Sanchez in order to the
committee to support legislation
as well thank you thank you very
much Mr Paterson next let's go
to Mr Bradley Walter Bradley
please.
Thank you Mr chairman members of
the committee Walter Bradley
representing very farmers of
American we strongly support.
This bill and we we needed in
New Mexico it's a job for.
Provider and I will bring some
of our of we're not sure why we
lost them in the past but will
bring some of our processors
back now that this will happen
so we fully support the house
bill thirty three and I look
forward to its passage thank you
Mr chairman.
Thank you very much Mr Bradley
next let's go to miss lily Irvin
Vitela with New Mexico first.
Thank you Mr chair committee
members my name is lily Irvin
Vitela economic with New Mexico
first number president and
Executive Director house bill
thirty three is one of those
ideas that additional cross
partisan and at so many of the
groups that we work with and
community on a whole range of
issues practice for so from our
group that was looking at health
and local food systems to our
New Mexico Food hunger Water Act
policy workgroup to our
longstanding and resilience
work.
Local process local meat
inspection has come up again and
again is so critically important
to having healthcare value
chains so we struck stand in
strong support of house bill
thirty three thank you for your
time and consideration.
Thank you Mr Irvin Vitela next
we're gonna go to Mr Jason
Espinoza.
Mr chairman members of the
committee Jason Espinoza state
director with the national
federation of independent
business and we stand in support
of the legislation really do
believe the bill would provide
additional opportunities in
markets for New Mexico producers
strengthen our local food
systems and create additional
economic opportunities for
matter many rural communities
thank you.
Thank you very much Mr Espinoza
now let's go to miss Beverly is
doing that or is it the singer I
apologize Senator.
Know your get thank you Mr chair
members of the committee it's
but really it's and go with
Jerry producers of New Mexico we
stand in support of house bill
thirty three and view it as a
tool to increase value added
agriculture enhanced New
Mexico's economy while also
creating jobs we are encouraging
you to support it as well and
thank the sponsor for bringing
it forward thank you.
Thank you very much now let's go
to miss caring callin please.
Miss Caroline.
I will come back to miss callin
we know you're on the list
let's go now to miss Tiffany
Rivera.
Thank you vice chairman Smalling
Committee members my name is
Tiffany Rivera and I'm the
registered lobbyists for New
Mexico farm and livestock bureau
we stand in strong support of
house bill thirty three this
legislation would allow New
Mexico producers better access
to retail and wholesale their
meat cuts we are extremely
excited to see the separate star
last year with Representative
small in his funding for NMDA
according to that study ninety
nine percent of New Mexicos
cattle are sent out of state for
processing and estate me
inspection program is just what
we need to create additional
economic opportunities for many
of our communities including our
rural ones this program will
strengthen our local food
systems and we'll build strong
relationships between producers
and consumers but linking them
to the protein enjoy
Representative surely happy to
be here to support
Representative Dow and her
bipartisan co sponsors on this
effort and asked that you guys
support house bill thirty three
thank you.
Thank you very much Mr.
Next let's go we'll try to go
back to miss coun Karen Kallen.
Recurring payment the number
now.
It's a little thing but we can
hear you yes ma'am okay.
As a member of the protect
Americans now Mexico federal
land found over and the great
outdoors.
we're membership of these
organisations standard from
support of the C. thirty three
we want to thank you and all of
the sponsors and co sponsors
that have been so integral and
getting bills for this point
this is a win win for economic
development and consumer
protection in New Mexico you
know being able to provide local
meat will hopefully keeping up
what we saw happen with the
prices over the last year thank
you for your time.
Thank you very much.
Now let's go to miss Michelle
frost Maynard.
Good afternoon.
Vice chairman and members of the
committee Michelle frost made on
behalf of New Mexico workforce
we stand in support of house
bill thirty three this bill
would give New Mexico producers
the opportunity to sell their
products in the state reducing
the percentage of New Mexico
products that are exported.
COVID nineteen has greatly
amplified the ongoing delay in
scheduling a meat processing as
New Mexico only houses for USDA
food safety inspection service
processing plants at this time
house bill thirty three which
strengthen the community of our
state by creating jobs providing
locally sourced proteins to
citizens and supporting the
economic prosperity of our rural
communities for these reasons
and reasons previously stated we
stand in support of house bill
thirty three.
Thank you Mr frost Maynard next
let's go to be garland.
Thank you Mr vice chair my name
is Belinda garland I'm the
executive director for the New
Mexico livestock or of course I
stand in support of the of house
bill thirty three but I mainly
on on here to answer any
questions anybody have about the
funding or the setting up of the
in state meat inspection program
New Mexico livestock board does
feel that this will have
economic development
Prospects for the state of New
Mexico thank you.
Thank you very much miss garland
next we're going to go to miss
Sonntag Carla Sonntag's please.
Good afternoon Mister chairman
and members of the committee on
Kerr less on tech president of
the New Mexico business
coalition nor focus throughout
the state is to make this state
a better place to do business
and create jobs so that people
can provide for their families
this bill provides that
opportunity we think it's great
for rural communities it's
actually safer to have this done
in state than what we're
currently doing and for all
those reasons and all the many
reasons are already heard we
support this bill very strongly
and hope that you will as well
thank you.
Thank you very much miss Sonntag
finally will conclude the
supporters with agar department
of agriculture secretary Jeff
Whitty Mr witty please.
Good afternoon can you hear me
yes Sir all right thank you Mr
chairman members of the
committee we stand in support of
this bill as you've heard from
many this afternoon there
there's a lot of energy behind
this bill but it's not only
important for for the industry
and citizens it's important for
the administration the the
administration's one hundred
percent behind this bill as well
just the mere introduction in
the discussion that you all of
the legislature had over the
last year and a half to two
years in talking about this
concept and and bring in the
destruction back has because a
lot of excitement in the
industry about bringing back new
new businesses to New Mexico so
we look forward to building out
that beef industry from.
All the way from the rents to
the plate thank you.
Thank you very much Secretary
ready
now let's just go ahead is there
any one bank any attendee who
wishes to speak in opposition to
house bill thirty three.
Okay I don't see any hands that
are going up there.
okay let's come back to the
committee we have a couple of
questions from committee members
first let's go to Representative
he's out Representative Ezzell
please.
Mr chairman thank you very much
of the I have a couple of
questions.
and not I know that there
several sponsors of this bill so
anybody can take the range if
they want to my first question
is right now there I I greatness
right there's twenty seven of
the state to have met act meat
inspections I know in the past
that New Mexico did what
happened to deferred those
inspections here in our state.
Representative Dow and we'll
member we were focusing on the
fiscal implications not
necessary the policy but thank
you for the question
Representative Dow do you have a
response.
Thank thank you Mr chairman I
just wanna let you guys know
that I'm I'm going in and out
and I'm being kicked in and out
I'm in my office but it says my
grand look this low so I'm gonna
let Secretary witty answer that
and and by the way I've multiple
co sponsors on this committee so
it runs.
Thank you at.
Secretary witty can we have you
answer that question we're.
So this is going to Carolina
dealt with us secretary when he
left or got kicked out I can
probably answer that doing so
one year with that room remind
everybody who here west please
and executive director for the
New Mexico livestock board thank
you yes Sir thank you thank you
Representative Ezzell members of
the committee in answer to that
of some of the points that were
cited in the report given by the
USDA as to the discontinuation
of the in state maybe inspection
there was a lack of funding lack
of oversight and lack of
training or the other reasons
cited.
Okay thank you very much for
that Mr chairman this does have
to do with the money aspect of
it of it it it is saying in one
of the analysis I'm reading that
The New Mexico livestock board
will incur a proximity million
dollars.
Just to re establish this
program.
Mr Chairman I guess my question
The New Mexico livestock board
is.
Why was I I'm kinda confused
over why the what is that called
state safety inspection services
Why they.
I know that the regulations have
to be met and everything that
I'm was also reading where is
the.
I think I've lost my notes now
but anyway the they were the
right.
For these processors to have
somebody there on on their.
Physical premises to inspect
this was withdrawn from the New
Mexico livestock board I just
want to make sure in miss
garland can probably answer this
very easily given this program
gets up and run in which I hope
it will because it will help
every rancher every livestock
producer in our state.
At what reassurance do we have
from the New Mexico livestock
board that you all will stay in
compliance with the FSIS.
Thank you for the question
Representative Ezzell Mr vice
chair members of the committee
so there are stringent
guidelines that any state to set
up a meet and culture inspection
or a C. I. S. program that they
have to meet that in order to
get approved for the fund and
for approved for the program and
then also approved for assistant
funding from the federal
government so we are committed
to setting up the rules that
will be the first step that will
have to do is set up all of our
rules to make sure that we are
compliant with all of the
federal laws and then we will
begin training which is another
big step in being compliant.
One of the big things that has
to be there of course is the
funding and we believe that it's
gonna take close to two million
dollars to set this program up
from the beginning to the end
and then we'll take about one
point six million to operate
each year so there will be
funding that's required from the
state once we get into a meat
poultry inspection program with
the federal government and
possibly into a CIO's then you
can ask for reimbursement from
the federal government and that
is all based off compliance okay
Mr chairman and miss garland I
certainly do appreciate that I
also would like to point out to
the committee that on page five
of the bill that the meat
inspector means an inspector who
is not certified as a peace
officer and that's a very
important piece of this
legislation that we're looking
at today Mr chairman that's all
the questions I have thank you
very much for the time thank you
very much Representative Ezzell
next we have Representative
Part of this area and we by our
him and he is the person who
keeps us up to the doctor the
thing going about staff in this
and all the process season thank
you.
The beef we've yes excellent
and.
Hoping that we.
Push this program further
because this is.
Great opportunity.
purchased in state.
Meet and know that it's safe.
The grant thank you very much
Representative Trujillo
now let's go ahead and go to
Representative Crowder please.
Thank you Mr chairman and thank
you sponsors for bringing this
forward
I'm curious the FIR for house
bill thirty three says that
there is going to be a recurring
costs somewhere between zero and
a million nine hundred and
seventy thousand dollars.
For FY twenty two a little bit
last for FY twenty three but
there is a recurring expense so
I guess my question
The group is everyone is the
funding in house bill two.
Or.
Bill.
Or as I look in volume three of
our three volume series or cash
balances livestock board
currently five million six
hundred seventy four thousand.
Is the life start board willing
to utilize their money to
establish this program that I
just want to understand the
financial component piece of
this and in whose ponying up to
make it happen.
Thank thank you Mr chan and
thank you Representative Crowder
I can address that I did concur
with can you guys hear me yes
Representative okay thanks I
think I did speak with the
secretary would be before he got
off and you guys appropriated
half a million dollars in the
house bill two there is further
commitment from the governor
although the amount is not known
at once the so there is enough
in the house bill two now to get
at least the full time person
needed to promulgate the rules
and to work with the livestock
were to promulgate the rules so
we get off the ground and
depending on what the governor
implements then then we can go
even further in your one once we
show and demonstrates the
federal government that we're
compliance they will that they
will match around fifty percent
of the cost and so I will let at
the Linda address your for the
question about reserve balances.
Thank you Representative down Mr
vice chair members of the
committee Representative Crowder
so The New Mexico livestock
board does not have the funding
to fund this new division this
would be an entirely new
division to the left New Mexico
livestock board so we it is not
attached in our budget this year
it was requested as a two
million dollar special
appropriations beginning
actually this fiscal year which
I understand that did not pass
so there would be special
appropriations based off the
passage of house bill thirty
three sure.
It Mr chairman gentle lady thank
you for that I I did notice
though that the livestock board
does have five million six
hundred seventy four thousand
dollars is that money and
convert or could that money be
utilized for this project.
So it actually thank you Mr vice
chair members of the committee
actually that funding has been
pretty much encumbered out to
the end of next fiscal year all
except for close to a million
dollars that we are keeping our
fund balance as a reserve for an
emergency disease outbreak.
Okay all right.
Thank you for your answers thank
you Mr chairman.
Thank you Representative Crowder
are there any other questions
from committee members.
They do pass sorry right we have
Representative Anderson who
wants to ask a question
Representative Anderson and then
I'll have a couple of quick
questions Representative
Anderson thank thank you Mr
chairman my questions thank you.
No.
Okay thank you Representative
Anderson so
that just for clarity's sake
Representative Dow and Sanchez
there is five hundred thousand
dollars included as a special
appropriation in house bill two
For the that is connected to
this program is that accurate.
Thank you Mr chairman that is
accurate okay.
But there is Representative
Representative down Sanchez.
At this point further recurring
expenses that is estimated to
be part of this part of the
fiscal impact report
those are not yet included in
recurring appropriations is that
correct.
Mr Chairman that is correct and
and we're very optimistic
because the budget is not
complete yet and the governor is
supporting this bill.
Thank you Representative out so
So we have really kind of
partial funding
as Representative Crowder
pointed out there are cash
balances with the livestock
board that could potentially be
used at least for this initial
here but I think just for for
all of our edification we should
make sure and and expect
committee members to see
additional appropriation
requests related to this piece
of legislation I I it is my
understanding of secretary with
the or perhaps director garland
can and no.
That passage of HB thirty three
would not create an unfunded
mandate in FY twenty two.
If.
If this program is adopted we
will need an additional year FY
twenty three and B. on there
will be additional funding
needed for miss garland will
this create an unfunded mandate
in FY twenty two.
The upcoming fiscal year for
your department.
So thank you Mr vice chair are
you asking about the five
hundred thousand just so I'm
clear.
That's right for the that the
money and and we understand that
H. B. two left the house with
five hundred thousand dollars
for this purpose currently in
the Senate
Which would be in that five
hundred thousand in your cash
balances
with this great an unfunded
would you be able to carry out
what you need to carry out in FY
twenty two for this and we also
see that madam chair Lundstrom
has some questions I just a
quick question with regards.
Thank you Mr vice chair no that
will not give us an unfunded
mandate however it will push
back Helsing that we completely
stand the program up but we can
begin operating on a small scale
with the five hundred thousand.
Thank you very much miss garland
next Madam chair Lundstrom has
her hand please madam chair.
Thank you very much I just
wanted to remind the committee
that there's a contingency in
house bill two for this in other
words the five hundred thousand
is available contingent on the
passage of the bill and also
like to remind all of the that
it's DFA that looks whether or
not something is going to be
recurring or nonrecurring so I
would imagine that this is going
to be booked as a reoccurring
expanse and that's all I have
thank you.
Thank you very much madam chair
okay thank you very much
committee will now accept the
motion.
With a do pass for I move it to
pass okay.
Right it's been moved by
Representative Trujillo seconded
by Representative Armstrong to
for it to pass for the house
agriculture water committee
substitute for house bill thirty
three is there any opposition to
this motion.
Seeing none house agriculture
water committee substitute for
house bill thirty three as a do
pass thank you very much
Representative Dow I believe we
go now to and we'll go back to
madam chair Lundstrom and we'll
go to house bill forty thank you
very much okay what I'm gonna
ask Mr chairman again give me an
update what happened with one of
two house bill one oh two thank
you madam chair we've tabled
house bill one oh two how about
the committee substitute for
House Bill ten.
That past due passed with no
opposition okay and house bill
thirteen.
The house bill thirteen was
table madam chair okay and so
we're basically on house bill
forty as amended yes madam chair
okay this is a private detention
facility moratorium act.
is there someone here to talk
about that Representative Rubio.
Madam I'm here going.
Thank you madam chair of the
committee Committee members
house bill forty it is B.
legislation that works towards
putting an end to the use of
private prisons here in the
state of New Mexico I've
introduced versions of this
legislation the last few years
this legislation over the course
of the last few weeks has had a
lot of evolution specifically
from feedback that we received
from legislators on both sides
around one the cost but also
needing more community input and
feedback and a phase in in
transition process and so be a
committee substitute that you
all had delivered to you all
over the weekend includes a task
force that would begin to look
at this issue the F. I. R. that
you currently have does not
apply to this committee
substitute so I can have I can
bring in my expert are in rural
school who can clarify on where
those changes are but we believe
that we significantly reduce the
costs with this new Committee
substitute and can certainly
answer any questions related to
that.
Okay Representative my for first
questions before before we get
into the the bill is that my
fiscal impact report is not
relating back to this committee
set up is that correct correct
okay.
So we don't have a sense of what
this is going to cost.
So madam chair Committee members
are in a rural school who's my
expert can gold through what the
changes alright that show that
reduction but that would show
reduction but as of today that
FIR doesn't the one that you
will have access to doesn't
reflect what we believe those
changes will be.
All right let's hear from the
experts.
But I'm sure where we're gonna
head.
We were supposed to get in FY
are at least twenty four hours
in advance.
of hearing it is that.
That's why I'm a little confused
myself of bill did we get an FIR
come out on this on this
committee so.
I can't hear you.
You might.
Madam chair.
We do not have the updated FIR
on the house Appropriations and
cut and Committee substitute for
the bill that was provided to us
over the weekend where no one
was here
at this point in time we just do
not have this up on the.
Okay that may have chart we're
gonna have trouble reviewing
this yes because we need to have
our FIR I'll let you talk about
it just briefly but we're going
to end up temporarily tabling
this bill Representative because
we need to have an FIR so let's
go ahead and your your expert
may want to say a few things go
ahead yes.
Thank you madam chair
Representative mistral school
should probably already be on as
a panelist.
Are you there Sir.
December our bill are Mike.
No I let Mike know earlier I
don't know if he's been promoted
yet.
Adult.
We.
excuse me.
Is it at is Mr.
Okay okay we're gonna allow you
some brief comments on this bill
Sir but we don't have an FIR.
Appropriations committee does
not take action on a bill
without some kind of sense of
what it's going to cost so I'll
give you a few minutes and then
I'm going to go to the committee
for a motion go ahead.
Thank you madam chair members of
the committee and I also project
my name is not showing up and
using my company's that's okay
we we can see a.
So we apologize if I reflect
previous version of HB forty as
mentioned all the impacts be the
same the committee substitute
has some.
Clear modifications that are not
included in the AC forty for
example there is a standard time
line for all contracts I should
run until June thirtieth twenty
twenty six which is five years
from the end of this fiscal year
for the planned phase out of
these are private contractors
are pre detention facilities in
the fifth in the FY are there is
taking into account that these
prisons would close in fiscal
year twenty four because the
previous version included
that not allowing extensions but
this version instead of trying
to deal with extensions within
the immediate term now allows
for five year period of time
this actually specifically
affects the Otero county
facility of which would be
impacted in fiscal year twenty
one which is the media cost of
this bill is so that no longer
will be
that that now the terror county
facility will be impacted by a
longer timeline so it doesn't so
there there's not to be a cost
analysis of closing it
immediately in fact now there's
a five year time line with these
costs can be assessed and so I
think the FY are I I totally
understand from you to a new FIR
of course now include and that's
an additional fiscal year to
spread out the costs and I think
that's really where this task
force can really support giving
given informations in FY are we
could really support the
committee and any future
potential legislation in
thinking about how we can phase
out of private contractors
operating detention facilities
as well.
All right
is that is there any other
experts Representative Rubio
Madam chair representative no
okay all right because we don't
have Act great FIR I'm gonna go
to Representative small for a
motion thank you madam chair I
would move to table house bill
forty as amended.
Second we have a motion and a
second is there any opposition
to that motion yes madam chair.
We have one in opposition
Representative Trujillo and
Sweetser well I just had a
question is that a temporary
table.
In the nearby are or is are we
table and.
Table for right now and if we
get an FIR in a timely manner we
may bring this up but for right
now we need to have a clear
understanding what this impact
is going to be to the state of
New Mexicos general fund.
All right so we have a motion
and a second we have one in
opposition Representative
Trujillo so let's see if we can
get something bill and just see
what that FIR states and if it
makes sense so we'll certainly
share it with Representative
Rubio and her experts so they
can look at that also for right
now the bill stands tabled thank
you.
All right let's go to the next
bill which is.
House bill one thirty three
college hunger reduction pilot
program thank you madam chair
the
Sanchez have asked that this
bill be tabled they're going to
include and you don't need the
language so I would move to
table house bill one thirty
three.
Second.
We have a motion and a second is
there any opposition to that
motion saying that what has been
table.
All right how about of the
committee substitute for house
bill one thirty five.
Representative Dow I see you on
the on camera is.
It.
Thank you madam chair members of
the committee I do want to make
an amendment to strike the
appropriation from the bill.
All righty and by tracking the
amendment to the of our of the
appropriation what does that do.
it just allows me to share with
you that would like PED to to
work on a to study an index in
the interim okay is there any
money to pay for that
Representative no ma'am.
Okay well that's.
Our issue is that an unfunded
mandate Representative to the
path.
Madam chair representative I
believe we ask them to do
studies and so I believe there
they are they're going to do
that the bill last for a third
party to create the formula and
this would be us PED then would
have to to look at a formula.
Okay well I don't know that this
is in the budget or is this
going to be a junior ask
representative from you or are
others.
Madam chair no.
This would be done with their
and their under their currently
funded obligations on behalf of
the state.
That doesn't work that way
though when we're passing
legislation we have to be able
to identify it funding source
for this
but we'll let you talk about it
for a few minutes and then I'm
going to go to representative of
small promotion going at thank
you thank you madam chair and
thank you members for the
opportunity present this really
comes from the results of the
the Martinez lawsuit in which
the court decision was
proclaimed and since then there
has been no mechanism
specifically complying with the
details of the order which is to
direct funding to students who
need it most so our current New
Mexico at risk factors use title
one English language learners
and the ability to create the
funding formula and the Yazzie
Martinez court identified
economic disadvantage English
language learners native
American children disabilities
well we're proposing opportunity
and equity index for at risk
factors to include economic
disadvantage English language
learners culturally restrict
sectors children disabilities
and and mobility and what we
believe this will accomplish is
a formula rather than you guys
constantly hearing a hundred
million dollar request a fifty
million dollar requested twenty
million dollar request to adjust
the the index that we use for
generating funding to actually
follow the at risk populations
divide by the lawsuit and it
would be paired with Senate bill
ninety six which we passed in
nineteen in which were replacing
the public for public school
audit system BMS with the new
system that will track dollars
to the school site rather than
them being right now there and
restricted once they hit the
district so we're believe I
believe and I think it would be
prudent of the Appropriations
Committee to say let's look at a
formula that identifies the
students in response to the LFC
Martinez lawsuit and we
equitably fund those students
renew formula.
Okay is there anybody is there
like is there anybody from head
in the audience.
Okay I don't I guess we don't
have anybody from the department
comment on excuse me I think we
do.
We do.
And madam chair is Johnson on
the policy director at at okay
hi John
So are you willing to do this.
Hi I haven't seen a committee
substitute madam chair.
Okay here's a Senate committee
substitute which is actually
what I have in front of me is
house Education Committee
substitute.
Our house bill one thirty five I
guess my general question is
Representative and John if the
rest Representative but for a
remorse Memorial us your
directing you to do this would
you do it.
madam chair with a little bit of
work in this you've you've
probably heard about our family
income index that's yes somewhat
related to this if there is a
memorial I can't say whether
whether we would do it or not we
try to do as many as we can but
obviously can't always get all
of them.
Yeah okay let us go to the
committee representative
Anderson.
Thank you madam chairman madam
chairman I'll be shortened
briefed us it did strike me to
sponsor of if.
You you you set out to do what
you set out to do India now.
You are presenting a committee
substitute us or not most
requiring good to would be a law
with money for PED to do this I
was sort of saying well if you
have a state law that says a
program and then you strip the
money out and then you changes
to PED it I was really back to
the question of it seems like a
memorial would do this.
your response representative
please.
I'm thank you Mr chairman and
thank you Representative and I
you're you're probably correct I
didn't want to miss the
opportunity to present to this
body this committee which is
responsible for the budget of
which over half is education
including higher ed the
opportunity to address the
Yazzie Martinez lawsuit in the
most strategic and targeted way.
Thank you Representative for
that and
I appreciate I really appreciate
your response and I'm not
pretending to be any they have
any knowledge on on on this
funding formula apple index or
or whatever so I I wish you the
best on your.
Re forward and I hope you're
able to get that PED to include
this in their ongoing work in
this area madam chairman thank
you.
Thank you everybody else from
the committee that would like
yes Representative question.
You know it the issue we have
Representative as you've heard
is there's no money in the
budget for but this is an
increase incredibly important
issue.
it is true that this at risk
index every time I've looked at
it it changes I mean it's like
now we are trying to redefine
and re define and redefine.
If you're a if you're willing
and you put this into a memorial
I'd like to ask if I could
cosign with you let's see if
the.
So I need a motion
Representative small.
Madam chair I move to table
house committee substitute for
house bill one thirty five.
Second all right we have a
second is there any opposition.
Saying that as a state
representative we get this
animal Memorial I sure would
like to have an opportunity to
bid to sign it with you thank
you very much thank you madam
chair thank you members.
Okay let's go to their house
bill one forty eight as amended.
Representative Chandler thank
you very much madam chair I
believe US secretary mccamley
and there is LFC staff available
if question if there are
questions about this bill this
bill is
intended to address what I guess
I would call a no win situation
there are no good solutions to
this problem the issue arises
from the fact that although we
once had a very healthy
unemployment insurance fund with
the pandemic and the many
unemployment claims that were
paid out in addition to enhance
budget that we're
Which were provided by the
federal government our fund is
now in a deficit in a sense in
of that deficit mode of
workforce solutions borrowed
about a hundred and trying to
they're at two hundred million
seventeen two hundred seventeen
million dollars in terms of
monies owed to the federal
government with regard to this
fund the state we in the
legislature did allocate fifty
million for the fund to help
with the situation at the end of
the year during our special
session of this fund this bill
appropriates three hundred
million which I understand madam
chair you have have put in your
budget and you and I have
discussed this issue the rest of
the bill provides a backstop
for attempting to address the
fact that the fund is not not
adequately funded and it would
increase the wage based to forty
thousand dollars a year
approximately and add a point to
percent surtax on employers.
That is for a one year period or
unless and until we received
some federal relief as I said
madam chair I do not regard this
as a goods you know happy
solution but it is really
intended to be a backstop
solution and with the hope that
the federal government will
either forgive the loans that
workforce solutions has with the
federal government or some other
federal grant program is offered
to us.
Do we have any of those
secretary mccamley on.
Mr secretary are you there.
I understood he was going to be
here madam chair.
Okay well we'll just say a few
things but let's go to the
committee for right now just go
to Representative what we have
the LFC staff with there are no
it's not a okay let's go
Representative Sweetser than
Crowder.
Thank you madam chair I guess my
question is if the federal
government forgives the loan is
there a way to stop the increase
on employers or if we enact this
piece of legislation is that
automatically going to happen
Madam chair representative.
Madam chair representative I
believe it's on page eighteen we
we provided that
the additional funding
mechanisms would take would
occur on January one twenty
twenty two until the earlier of
December thirty one twenty
twenty three or until federal
relief or if federal relief is
received so there is an interest
in having this mechanism health
should federal relief arrived
madam chair and representative.
Thank you for that
Madam chair representative so
just to get through my brain we
would have to get the full
amount for given by December for
this not to kick in on January
one on our employers is that
right.
I think that madam chair that is
a fair answer but I would defer
to Mr Thorez to supplement.
Thank you madam chair and
representative seats are no
actually the building yes I how
much relief needs to be received
so even partial relief would
would stop the increase right.
Thank you madam chair thank you
Representative Stansbury one.
Representative Crowder.
Thank you madam chair and and I
guess my comments are very
similar as I understand we put a
hundred twenty five million in
the budget for twenty one and
two hundred million for twenty
two.
In so there is a substantial
amount of relief headed that way
it seems to me that the bill is
somewhat premature in that we're
going to place on the backs of
this is about a.
Fifty three million dollar
burden
according to the FIR.
If you agree that additional
revenue would come into.
Workforce solutions it and that
would be a heavy burden on the
backs of of businesses that are
really hurting right now I I
think it would be a.
Be prudent of us to wait and see
if there would be forgiveness
and see how far the one twenty
five does or where the two
hundred million
I I just think we're very
premature.
With your bill I understand what
you're trying to do but I I just
I believe it's.
Not timely madam chair.
Representative Garcia.
Thank you madam chair of
Representative law Chandler my
question was kind of in like to
a representative Crowder just
yes on the two hundred million
dollars a defense gave us.
If they if they become the
grant.
What happens to that money.
Hello how do we're trying to
back fill I think money from
Google vented to of this with
this world what hope that
following my with a two hundred
million if they do for given.
Madam chair representative so I
might defer to Mister Torres on
how that would be handled.
Thank you madam chair and
representative of the
contingency language built into
the budget would prevent the
transfer from occurring or allow
the transfer to revert to the
general fund if the balance was
restored so you know that that
means that even if the loans
were forgiven and the balance
remains at zero or low in the
fund the transfer would still
occur.
The madam chair thank you for
that.
When will we know if that two
hundred million dollars going to
become a grant or what the time
line up repayment back we should
answer.
Madam chair representative thank
you for that question regarding
the low loan pay back and if I
could just Mr Torres to address
that because that is an issue
that I have not highlighted yet
and it could impact on your your
consideration as penalties begin
the cake and should repayment of
the loan not occur in a timely
fashion and madam chair
representative this is bill
mccamley I'm sorry I'm I'm on
now I can help answer this
question as well but I'll let Mr
Taurus go first is is that okay
I'm sorry be late.
Mr Taurus thank you madam chair
representative that's right so
the two hundred million dollars
in loans that is currently to
the federal government there was
discussions early on that there
would be a possibility that
there could be forgiven that the
loans could be forgiven I
doesn't appear in the latest
versions of the federal relief
you know discussion that wasn't
included in the bill that passed
the US house there doesn't seem
to be any relief for the loans
if the loan's are not forgiven
the state will of course have to
pay them back with interest.
The the loans will need to be
paid back by I believe next
September
it the pay back period needs to
begin or or some sort of
agreement needs to be reached
with workforce and the federal
government but until then
interest will accrue I believe
interest is currently for given
through March so we'll see if
the the new bill passed by the
federal government continues to
extend the interest relief but
if interest is and is not
extent they interest relief is
not extended the interest on
those loans will become a
liability to the general fund or
some other revenue source other
than the unemployment fund so
the legislature you know if the
loans are not repaid with any
source identified by the
legislature or by this bill in
the legislature will eventually
need to find appropriations to
pay the interest on those loans
I should also clarify I don't
think Representative Chandler
mention this in her introduction
that if the loans are not repaid
the federal government will
increase their portion of the
taxes without the state's
consent and it will be by more
than the amount indicating this
bill so if the loans are repaid
the federal government will come
in the next year increased their
portion of the tax rate five
point three percent and that
amount will continue to increase
year over year until the loans
are repaid so that's another
important consideration madam
chair Matt supplement what Mr
Taurus dissent recently go ahead
Representative go ahead thank
you thank you madam chair the
stores got most of that
absolutely spot on just a couple
things to add number one in the
bill that is being considered
now in Congress the only
released being proposed are
black grant style appropriations
kind of like what you saw on the
cares Act and we don't know how
much that's going to end up
being and frankly we don't know
they're gonna even allow it as
it comes through the Senate to
be used for unemployment as of
now we think it does but that is
up in the air until something
passes the second thing I'd like
to add for Mr Taurus is that if
we if we don't get any kind of
big monetary infusion to pay
off.
The loan and get the trust fund
back up we just keep borrowing
an absolute as he said the
federal just raise our taxes
affect California maybe part of
what their strategy was after
the Great Recession they decided
not to pay any other back and
starting I believe it was two
thousand twelve there it food or
what we call for the federal
unemployment taxes went up five
point two percent a year to get
to the point where they're
almost a cap so the money's
gonna get raised one way or the
other the taxes are going to get
raised or where the other E. if
we don't do it the federal
government will we had a working
group over the summer or excuse
me the fall that was as some
folks in the business community
rob black from New Mexico
chamber of commerce Jason
Espinoza some other folks and
their their preference was that
we did this internally within
the state and not let the
federal government and so thank
you madam chair.
Madam chair and one more
question are.
If we don't get more of federal
funds we're not going to be
using the tobacco are we.
We're not sure that questions.
And
madam chair I'm not sure I
understand the question but
perhaps the the one of the other
two
panelists might I'm sure I'll
take a crack at that so madam
chair Representative.
I don't know what you mean by
that I think the ministration
and and frankly everybody would
have to figure out what are the
permissions put on whatever
block grants gets put through
first of all we don't know if
anything's going to get through
Madam chair representative what
what's happening Congress to the
last year we we seen ups and
downs and yeses and nos and who
the heck knows what's going to
happen so we don't even know
what that is we have to see what
they allow and how much they're
giving us before I think we
could even make any plans to
spend that in whatever way
possible.
Thank you madam chair of the Mr
secretary of I guess the
question I was asking will be in
regards law the first cares Act
money nine hundred seventy
million dollars and we got we
were using it to back fill the
budget and I hope we don't get
into that situation will more
money to back fill what we were
spent because that's going to be
a big issue end of the day it's
going to come and it was one you
know okay one more last question
now what is the interest rate
that we had a feedback on these
loans.
Madam chair representative I
believe secretary mccamly
is well versed in that.
Yes.
Madam chair representative we
don't know yet they're going to
have to set that when we start
allowing for the interest again
and that would either be in you
know that the third week of
March when the current bill runs
out or if they extend that would
run through the end of all end
of August I would also point out
though we're hoping if they do
an extension then they'll
actually extended through
September so we would not owe
any interest payment this year
on anything we did if we didn't
get money to pay off the loan
but we just don't know they're
gonna have to set it based on
it's it's a very low interest
rates system at the.
Thank you madam chair thank you
secretary all right let's go
Representative Herrera.
Thank you madam chair thank you
Representative I guess my
question was gonna be what are
the consequences of not acting
this legislation and I I think
we've heard it we set aside
three hundred million in the
supplemental appropriations I
think to take care of a massive
problem that we're facing and
there doesn't seem to be any.
Quick answer inside it's it's
all up to the fifth set this
point and we're just trying to
protect ourself with that be on
the situation that you see
Representative Chandler
Madam chair representative yes
and I would underscore some
points made by the the other
panelists the federal government
will be repaid some way or
another and they will utilize
their abilities through their
own taxing system to increase
rates if they deem it necessary.
Thank you madam chair thank you
Representative a I'm certainly
going to support this a this
bill thank you.
Okay Representative Anderson.
Representative Anderson.
Thank you madam chairman I'm
sorry I was on mute madam chair
just a couple of quick questions
one was up.
I received a lot of comments in
opposition to this bill.
In its to the Representative
Crowder maybe that that that
good grief there couldn't be a
worse time to lay impose added
the fees and taxes on New Mexico
businesses which are reeling
my question to the is there such
a thing as a short answer that
to the representative madam
chairman.
If we start to a refill this
deficit.
Time do we have to because we we
had a very healthy Fund it was
rapidly depleted comment on the
rostrum we have ten years to
rebuild it do we have twelve
years our somebody have a
measure on how long we takes to
regain overcome this deficit
question madam chairman.
Madam chair representative thank
you for that question and it's
an excellent question if I might
defer to perhaps secretary
mccamley.
Thank you madam chair
representative Anderson so it's
kind of a tough question right
the the way that the current tax
system is set up was to.
Take into account that
recessions and and good times in
the economy kind of generally
going weights what we didn't
have a wave this time we had a
cliff where we went from you
know ninety six hundred people
on unemployment the week of
March nights to where we had
over a hundred fifty thousand in
June and and that's just on
present we never seen anything
like that before I would say
that.
The the result that you're
asking for is going to be a
combination of two things number
one how much money can be put
into the fund now pay off the
loan and build the fund balance
back up and then quicker the
second question is going to be
how quickly people get off the
unemployment rolls and get back
to work obviously the the second
thing is where we want to be at
some point when we get COVID
under control to a good about
that because that means people
are working so that business put
money in the fund and they're
not unemployment so I think the
answer your question is gonna be
very able but those are the two
things is probably gonna depend
on the box.
Thank you very much for that
I think it's it's it's an issue
that bears close monitoring
because when you fall off a
cliff you don't necessarily
climb up the cliff you you might
find a better Path and trail
this less steep than simply
climbing up the face of the
cliff we're trying to have your
employer stated that in the last
question madam chairman real
quick is up I I know that within
this employment
Fund lapse there has been fraud
how do I know that madam
chairman it's because I see that
as a national issue when we
recover.
Funds fraudulent funds paid to.
Ointment recipients in the
future where does that money go
question.
Madam chair representative I
might defer that question to
secretary mccamley family Madam
chair representative that money
goes back into the unemployment
fund.
Thank you and does this bill per
provided in the emphasis towards
pursuing unemployment fraud it
seems to me that it happened so
fast that there was fraudulent
opportunity from those who who
wanted to take advantage perhaps
you'll legally of.
Point meant
What what is the plan are we
going to accelerate our our what
we call an audit or or rude or
review of these claims paid out
question.
Madam chair representative this
bill does not specifically
address that issue but in terms
of the mechanics are
administrative issues I would
defer to secretary mccamley
madam chair.
Madam chair representative this
is a pretty complicated answer
I'd be happy to talk with you at
length about it this committee I
know that madam chair be going
for but if you want to give me a
call I think you have my cell
phone number I'd be happy to
talk to the processes okay thank
you very much because we are
short time this afternoon and I
appreciate that answer madam
chairman that concludes my
questions thank you Secretary
mccamley and Sanchez.
Just.
I'm sorry was there somebody
that had another question.
I'm gonna go to the audience
which I which I missed so I know
there's an audience somebody in
the audience so can we may bring
her in place.
Thank you madam chair if anyone
wants to speak in support please
raise your hand in the attendee
room and Mr mall again can
facilitate the public comment.
I don't see any.
Then sent it madam chair if I
might ask if there's anyone who
wishes is to speak in
opposition.
One one hand madam chair can we
go ahead go ahead.
Hi good done by yourself please
thank you madam chair this is JD
Bullington speaking on behalf of
the greater Albuquerque chamber
of commerce today the chamber
fully supports the appropriation
of three hundred million dollars
the.
Compensation fund.
It's a necessary infusion of
money however the chamber
doesn't feel it's necessary for
this bill to be passed for that
appropriation to be may it
simply be added directly into
the budget but the madam chair
the chamber opposes increasing
the unemployment insurance rates
on businesses and that's really
the sole reason why the
chamber's opposing this this
bill right now it feels it's a
little premature to pass this
legislation when Congress is
considering additional comment
relief to the states and our
legislature is going to be
meeting again later in the year
so the chamber just believes we
should wait to see what happens
in Congress and at federal
relief dollars to the fund when
they're available thank you.
Okay Carl did you have a
comment.
Yes ma'am thank you madam chair
members of the committee I'm car
less than tech with the New
Mexico business coalition.
You know this is a very
concerning issue for businesses
this fund was depleted not by
anything that we had control
over and our.
To come out of business right
now this kind of increase is
going to be very harmful.
We estimate in my agency that
our rate increase would be two
hundred and forty percent other
businesses have looked at over
three hundred percent increase
on their you why rates are you
have received over four thousand
emails from business owners and
employees that do not want to
see this rate increases go at
the employees don't want to see
it because they know it's going
to be harmful to them in their
business in our opportunity to
have a job and for their hours
and employers just don't have a
choice when it comes to this
many states have used their
cares Act money to shore up this
fund and we have not done that
but we do very much appreciate
the three hundred and twenty
five million that you have put
into the fund and we think that
would be very helpful we
understand the state's going to
get probably two billion ward
that's coming from the feds that
money could also be used but in
the meantime madam chair members
of the committee if we can just
get our New Mexico employers
back to work safely.
We will get people off
unemployment and get workers and
the employers putting money back
into the fund with that three
hundred and twenty I understand
the problem we ask you to please
don't do this.
Okay we have one more Allison
Smith thirty one place.
Thank you very much madam chair
members of the committee my name
is Allison Smith I'm the
registered lobbyist for The New
Mexico restaurant association
and I just just to not take up
more of the committee's time for
the reasons previously stated we
stand in opposition I'm
respectfully at this time.
Okay is there anybody else that
we have that has Mr.
And Mr and again madam chair
okay Jason Espinoza.
Madam chair members of the
committee Jason Espinoza
registered lobbyists with the
national federation of
independent business mechanical
contractors association the
sheet metal contractors
association and the associated
general contractors in New
Mexico and we just do you want
to share concerns about the
potential impact on on
businesses across the state with
the potential you why tax rate
increase that we just share many
of the same concerns that were
expressed by committee members
will take up any more of your
time thank you.
Okay is there anybody else
represent a small it's in the
wings we do have just have two
more Mr and again changer and
again and and Tiffany Rivera
okay this will be our last two
money and ladies.
Mr and again.
Okay I'm having okay now you can
hear me I think.
Madam chair members of the
committee changer and again with
New Mexico utility contractors
and we oppose this bill for
reasons that board and stated
but just want to say one thing
employers were forced to lay off
workers under government orders
and now this bill will force
them to essentially pay the bill
for comment and for The New
Mexico's employment fund
increasing costs will full force
more closures and layoffs due to
more demand on the businesses
expenses to open and operate so
respectively ask you to vote now
thank you.
We have one more go ahead.
Mister Vera please madam chair
members of the committee thank
you for the opportunity to
comment if you're Rivera
registered lobbyists of New
Mexico farm and livestock bureau
I'm again not to take up too
much time but increase
unemployment insurance taxes
will add an increased burden to
our state's agricultural
businesses which already
experiencing extraordinary
hardship and.
Even further thank you.
All righty
madam chair I'm not to interrupt
I believe Mr Taurus want to
supplement an answer if that
would be okay.
I know we're going to go to the
committee now so
I'm gonna go to Representative
small for the motion thank you
madam chair I would move to
table house bill one forty eight
as amended a second to madam
chair.
Okay we have a motion and a
second to table house bill one
forty eight and what my thinking
is on this is this may be one of
those interesting temporary
tables I'd like to see what we
put in actually ends up in the
U. Y..
You know we say we're going to
do a certain amount the Senate
hasn't concurred with that yet I
mean I think that well.
But it might be able it might be
good to see what our final
junior bill looks like that has
the unemployment insurance
Senate as was stated earlier
we've put funding into FY twenty
one and FY twenty two but that
doesn't mean that they may have
bump that up so let's so let's
go to the committee let's take
the role on this one.
Representative Allison.
Yes to table.
Representative Anderson.
Yes to table.
Representative Armstrong.
Yes to table.
Representative Brown yes to
table.
Representative Castellano.
Representative Chatfield.
Yes to table.
Representative Crowder yes to
table.
Representative Dixon.
Yes to table.
Representative Ezzell yes to
table.
Representative Garcia.
You should be able.
Representative had it up.
More no to table and I'd like to
explain my vote.
Representative Hochman.
Yes.
Representative Lane yes.
Representative Lara.
Yes.
Representative starting at no.
Representative Sweetser.
Yes.
Representative Trujillo.
to table.
Representative vice chair small
yes.
Madam chair yes.
We have our sixteen in the
affirmative and three in the
negative.
Okay we the table a motion has
has stood on this bill
Representative Chandler so as I
say it's it's one of those
things that we can certainly
bring it back off the table I
would like to see what happens
in the junior bill with the U.
Y. amounts and see if there's
been any changes
we're hoping for three three
twenty five I believe three
hundred twenty five million at
that time but we do want to
allow Representative Herrera
moment to talk about
vote.
Thank you madam chair I think I
think what we're looking forward
to is to somehow take that three
twenty five hold it hold and
then maybe maybe back out those
taxes and I think maybe that's
what we're looking to do and and
so I hope we go in that
direction I understand the need
for it and and then give us
maybe a year to see how the feds
are going to come in and and see
if we really do have to raise
those but so I just wanted to
add that thank you thank you
very much for your comments and
thank you presenters let's go
ahead move on to the next the
next step bill.
And that is house bill one
seventy.
Thank you madam chair that's
Representative Gail Armstrong
presenting this bill I would
like to do an amendment removes
the appropriation madam chair.
What I'd like to state about the
bill is that D. O. H. and PED
has a grant to facilitate
getting this program off the
ground.
We won't have the money to
actually do the by the food but
it is implementing the process
of creating a
Troops and vegetables just like
the schools have madam chair and
we've also implemented it and
senior centers and with that I
would stand for questions.
Okay do we have anybody from
those departments that will
verify that they're going to do
this work.
I'm no ma'am I can try to get
that.
Well we're gonna have to do them
with this bill Representative
we're gonna have to table this
bill until we know that this is
something that can be thank you
know that they're going to do
it.
Chair I need a motion
Representative small and moved
to temporarily table house bill
one seventy.
Okay remote motion is second any
opposition.
Saying that will well let's see
how that one goes in okay thank
you madam chair thank you next
bill.
Of house bill one ninety one.
My understanding is this one
still has an appropriation to it
and it's not in the budget.
That's right.
Okay is there anyone here to
talk about the.
Okay I'm gonna go to
Representative small for the
motion I move to table house
bill one ninety one is our
second second.
A motion and a second is there
any opposition.
Saying not just spend spend
table.
Okay let's go to the next bill.
house bill eighty four is there
anyone here to talk about that.
Madam chair representative Lente
is here so I have Representative
thank you madam Joan house bill
eighty four is referencing
program units for native
American education.
If I would please madam
chairwoman and and members of
the committee I work with the LS
L. test you to make this bill
very clear the purpose to it
purpose is to include native
American students and tried the
public school funding formula.
Why is it necessary the American
public education systems we're
not set up for indigenous
children our children were
forcibly integrated into public
schools back in the nineteen
thirties under the Johnson
o'malley federal policies that
even before indigenous peoples
have the right to vote Treiber
unable to participate in school
governance it took federal
intervention to require us to
being in school board elections
and when the LFC final review
the state of Indian education
affairs fifteen years ago it
felt almost no indigenous school
board members in a phone no
collaboration between schools
tribes and curricular relevant
to our students and I know this
is the the probation and I'm not
on top of policy but this is
important because if boards the
could the the conversation into
perhaps the interim and to
future years that's beautiful
this you're really this so let
me ask a question here this is
not to my knowledge this is not
in the budget is that correct.
Madam chairman it is not okay
and we're gonna deal with
budgetary issues and I know that
there's been a.
Any substitute what we have is
the FIR for the original bill
but looking at that FIR it
doesnt tied with the committee
substitutes are we're gonna have
to take the same action we did
on the previous bill we're gonna
have a FIR that actually ties to
what we're looking at and if
it's not in the budget it's it's
going to be tabled
representative but is there any
questions from the committee.
Anybody in the audience that
wants anything about this bill.
Okay I'm gonna go to
Representative small for the
motion thank you madam chair I
move to temporary table house
bill eighty Committee substitute
for House ability for.
All right we have a second.
Thank you.
We have a motion and a second to
table this if we can get to a
new FIR that makes sense and
ties to the committee substitute
will share that with you
representative and just see
where we're where we are at that
point so is there any opposition
to that motion.
Saying this bill is been
temporarily table thank you
Representative thank you madam
chair all right let's go to the
next one which is.
Our house bill two nineteen.
Representative Garrett you're up
I'm not thank you madam
chairwoman committee.
Well to nineteen creates a
working group of local language
literacy experts it's looking to
develop a by literacy and oral
language development with
special attention to oral
language we had amended to be a
two hundred twenty five thousand
dollars appropriation however we
demanded it to remove that
appropriation we do have a
commitment for two hundred
twenty five thousand dollars of
a junior money.
And.
Questions okay thank you
Representative I'm looking at
your your bill.
And so remind me bill census is
going to be junior money to pay
for it we need to move it out
but do we need to strike the
appropriation on page one line
thirteen this room we do.
Okay and that also section to
online on page five.
Contagious three.
I'm sorry which one you're
talking about two nineteen I'm
looking at yes section two on
page five.
Madam chair when I submitted
amendment doing those two items
you.
Well right in front of me so
let's have somebody move the
amendment.
Madam chair I would move the
amendment for House Bill to
nineteen to remove the
probation.
Discussion and that
Representative Dixon the second
that so just so I'm clear what
this ammendment does online
thirteen page one districts
making appropriation.
And then it strikes on page five
the that section but entirety of
section two is that correct
Madam chairwoman that is totally
perfectly correct all righty so
is there any opposition to this
amendment.
Saying the bill has been amended
the amendment has been adopted
let's go back to the bill
Representative small.
Madam chair I would move to do
pass house bill two twenty two
or excuse me house bill two
nineteen is twice amended.
Right is our second.
Carrera's second any opposition.
Seeing none you are out of here
Representative Garrett thank you
madam chair woman Committee
thank you.
Okay let's go to representative
Thompson house bill two to two.
Thank you madam chair members of
the committee I do have a
committee set up and there were
some just some cleanup and then
also to strip the appropriation
and you should have backed chair
if you want me to I can go over
what the it but essentially it's
just a couple of minor little
things about adding clear
definitions and then as I said
district the appropriation and
madam chair what this bill is
create a special program under
the developmental disabilities
planning council I bet everyone
on this committee has heard a
horror story about special ed
and so madam chair what this
program is is a place for
families to go if they their
kids are not getting what they
what they need from the school
district I'm working at what
this is a governor's bail
and not it will also help to
address that some of the
concerns in the Yazzie Martinez.
Okay and this is going to be
funded through during your money
correct madam chair all right
let's go to the committee
Representative Sweetser thank
you madam chair and I would like
to see this movie but I am not
seeing a committee set up in our
it's in my packet is House
Appropriations of finance
committees for House Bill to to
to I got it from me okay I'll
keep looking and thank okay.
Okay anybody else.
For anybody that wants to talk
about this is waiting in the
wings.
Madam chair Mister Jackson okay
Mister.
Okay Mister Jackson.
Then.
Mr Jackson can you we're just
one minute for public comment
can you begin please.
Okay madam chair will go back to
here we actually have Vickie
Bannerman okay Vicky Bannerman.
He was.
Okay is she able to get in.
This was worker couldn't before
madam chair let's go then to we
have secretary Alice Liu McQuay.
What I'd like to do the why
don't we at least get a show of
hands for those that are if you
would Representative small last
that please sounds good madam
chair at their can everybody
raised their hand in the
attendee room with supports
the house bill two twenty two
committee staff to do.
Okay we're gonna counties hands.
Madam chair we have seventeen
hands that have been raised and
support okay anybody opposed to
it.
Okay now if all supporters can
put down their hands anyone in
opposition to house bill two
twenty two.
There are no hands madam chair
no well you know we are getting
crunched a little bit on time
here are there some things that
we need to do before we go on
the floor so it sounds like
you've got great support for
this trip representative
Thompson is there anybody that
you're just dying to have so few
words madam chair I I know how
this committee runs so what I
will I will get about that time
all righty
okay let's go to the committee
do we have any questions this is
got funding.
Do passed away I'm sorry I
can't.
The questions Representative
Crowder.
Thank you madam chair during the
FY are where the original bill
it says that it requires an
annual report be prepared by the
office but it doesn't specify
where that report is given so if
they're going to do a financial
report.
Or report it is a go to do the
substitute Committee substrate
fix that.
Madam chair and now
Representative Crowder I don't
believe it did but I do have the
executive director of the
development disabilities
planning council on she's in the
the attendee list if you if you
want to promote her allow her to
answer that.
Madam chair I that's not
necessary I would just like to
know who's the route is a report
to be sent to the LFC.
Madam chair representative I
would expect the LFC the L. E.
S. C. P. E. D.
To a variety of people involved
with education and those kinds
of things.
Okay and hopefully you can get
that in on the floor or
somewhere cleared up thank you
madam chair.
Okay we have a motion for do
passed by Representative
Trujillo do we have a second.
Second.
A motion and a second for a day
pass of us appropriation of
finance committee substitute for
House Bill to to to is there any
opposition saying line you have
a do pass thank you very much
thank you madam chair members.
Okay let's go to.
House bill two fifty six
Representative Chatfield.
And Lente.
Thank you madam chair madam
chair I have Hellstrom commerce
and economic development
committee substitute for house
bill two fifty six what the
substitute does is strip the
appropriation of the secretary
of aging and long term services
has proposed to fund this
through this kicking some major
senior dignity Fund and with
that I would like to.
Defer to my co sponsor
representative Lente the if he
as soon something to say.
Madam chair the interest of time
I have nothing else to add thank
you.
Do we have any anybody here from
the department that will verify
they're going to pay for it
through the KQ civic Fund.
Is there anybody here from the
department our.
Madam chairman I do believe that
there is a Rebecca Baca the
attendees list okay let's bring
her in she's an agency Baca.
Good afternoon madam chair
members of the committee yes I
am the director for the office
of Indian elder cares with aging
a long term Services Department
we will be managing this
initiative and the secretary
Katrina hope from Lopez has
committed
of funding to provide support
for a three year project
regarding this initiative the
first year would be for asset
mapping again one five minutes
and finished.
To did you would be able to
accomplish this with that with
the CTE funds that we have did
not see above.
Okay.
Mr chair it is let's go to the
committee on now stand might
well it my only concern about it
is it is not coming to any
legislative committee as I'm
looking at the bill as does the
task force our board its
findings to the secretary of
aging.
Let's go to committee
Representative Crowder.
Thank you madam chair I'm just
curious if there's a commitment
from the aging long term
services do we need the bill or
is there junior money to pay the
impact just curious about how
it's going to be financed.
Well as we just heard from
Rebecca Baca they're going to
pay for it out of their
department but my I have a
similar question miss Barca if I
got the money to do it why don't
you just do it or do you need
this language.
I think the key purpose of
having the languages to lend
credence to the support for it
because we're asking and number
of task for members force
members to participate as well
as educational institutions
that's the key reason for that
it's it's not absolutely
necessary it simply tell and
strength and support to the
initiative to support our elder
workforce in rural and tribal
communities okay let's go to the
rest of the committee is there
any other questions.
Saying that Representative
small.
I move that do pass on house
economic and commerce Committee
substitute for house bill two
fifty six okay.
Second.
We need a second okay a second.
Second for Representative
Sarinana is there any opposition
to that motion saying unable to
do the past will be looking
forward a copy of that report
thank you okay let's go to.
House Bill to sixty seven.
Representative Dixon and
Sweetser.
Thank you madam chair of this
bill can be tabled.
Okay then let's make a motion to
table.
So moved.
We have a motion and a second to
be Dixon and Ezzell is there any
opposition to that motion.
Well it's been tabled okay we
need to remove from the table
one eighty eight bill tells me
we need to go ahead and move
that language along so I need
somebody to take that off the
table make it the next order of
business madam chair I move that
we were the one eighty eight
from the table and make it the
next order of business.
Okay
sure okay we have a motion and a
second and
that is representative Syriana's
bill I believe.
And you want to remind us just
quick again what this is I know
you needed to language to move
ahead yes thank you madam chair
it's just that created a
computer science the kid there
licensure for teachers.
Okay we went through this pretty
carefully
and there is funding that's
going to go into that but we
need to go ahead made the
language so let's have a due
pass motion please.
Right the pastor.
As a matter of you need to amend
the bill to take the
Appropration out I do just as
amended okay we is we will take
the do we will take the
Appropration out I don't have
that right in front of me so
what line bill.
Madam chair stage one lines
twelve and thirteen strict
making appropriation okay and on
page three line sixteen to
twenty one straight section to
in its entirety okay.
I understand what that amendment
is and we have Representative
small move the amendment
Representative Hochman Vigil
seconded that.
So let's go back to the to the
motion we've accepted the
amendment go back to the motion.
Yes.
We have a motion for do passed
as amended for house bill one
eighty eight by Representative
Anderson seconded by small is
there any opposition to that.
State line you have a due pass
so that one will be located
along thank you
I don't have anything else on
the agenda of the bill what else
we have for today madam chair
that's it okay so we will be
taking up bills again tomorrow
hopefully
and then I wouldn't be surprised
if we're not going to start
seeing a few Senate bills coming
our way.
But let's so be ready for and I
appreciate your good work today
thank you everybody thank you Mr
thank you.
