All righty.
I almost said like Avengers.
or whatever.
Um,
See.
All right, I know that um
Representative Pettigrew is
presenting a bill, uh,
Representative Brown, uh, should
be joining us shortly. Whoops.
Why don't we go ahead and get
started.
Of course. Thank you. Um, so
we're group members, we are
mostly going to be operating off
of this very first sheet that
should be before you that says
economic development work group.
I'll give you a second to get
there. Yes, economic
development.
You do have some high levels in
front of you, but those are
mostly informational. Um, it's
not like what you just saw where
there's uh an HAFC column, so
we're gonna wait to update those
and just work off of this sheet
for right now.
Um, so your first one is a
proposal for economic
development department
recurring. This was one of the
first agencies you all heard, so
it's a long, long time ago, um,
but we said that we'd look at it
again, and the proposal here is
to do an additional $1 million
of recurring funding into
personnel for economic
development. The reason for that
is, as you've seen in your
specials and supplementals,
there's a ton of um new
responsibility and special
appropriation.
Going to the economic
development department. So this
will enable them to have a
little more capacity, um, and,
and help get some of those
legislative funds out.
Great, I'll go ahead and move on
to your next, uh, your next
staff proposal here is for
cultural affairs. Uh, this is a
recurring increase for $500,000
in the museum's program, uh, the
department is very tight on
funding in this program in
particular. This gets us a
little less than halfway to
their request, but again, as the
tier is noted, uh, we're pretty
tight on recurring funding. So
this is a a good start to get
them in less of a
place
And I will move on to the 2nd 1.
Your next one here is for the
secretary of state, similarly,
this was a, um, thank you,
Melissa.
This was an intense hearing you
recall, um, but there was some
differences in the
recommendations for personnel,
um, what the agency thought they
needed. There was a bar that was
done that was changing some of
the actuals. So this increase of
500,000 into personnel helps
bump that a little bit so you
all can come back again next
year, um, and reassess how that
funding is being spent and how
it should be realigned.
The next one here is for the
Department of Finance and
Administration. This is 458,000
recurring for personnel in two
different key codes which I can
get you those specific de codes
here in a minute. Um, and this
is pretty similar to the
economic development department
where we're doing a lot to DFA.
So DFA might have new funds
coming in. DFA is gonna be doing
um more with the infrastructure
division with their local
government division because of
legislation, as well as other
special
appropriations. So this helps
build that capacity for them in
local government as well as
addresses some personnel
shortfall they um they feel they
have.
very similar big thing here is
for the public regulation
commission. This is 200,000
additional in staff money for
the PRC, uh, again, you heard
the PRC quite a few weeks ago at
this point. Um, they have
readjusted their budget request
since what you all saw, what you
all saw, the main concern was
around uh a hearing room,
leasing space, uh, analysts
believe that there's a lot of
empty.
space, a lot of potential
hearing rooms in Santa Fe. So
we're gonna hold off on doing
recurring money for that leasing
space, but make sure that they
can increase their personnel or
new responsibilities of the PRC
is getting.
Thank you John. John has those
pea codes if you all are
interested.
I have a question on PRC, um,
and then I think Representative
Adu as well.
something. Um, so the initial
But that we adopted for the PRC,
did that have an increase for
them in personnel as well, or
was that flat?
Madam Vice Chair of the UFC
adopted the LFC recommendation
for the PRC.
And that recommendation included
an increase in the general one
of 329,000 for additional FTE
for the agency as well as um
Um
Personnel slash vacancy
adjustments.
500, 200,000 would be excellent.
Thank you. Yeah, I know that
there are a lot of uh proposals
that are gonna
required them to do additional
work and uh speed up their time
frames, so I appreciate that.
literature, and thank you.
I guess I, I've got two simple
questions, really, I know that
um
Chairwoman mentioned about the
PRC's first stop.
For these other departments, is
it to, is it for new stuff, or
is it to adjust the payments to
make as far as um
To make sure that we have
competitive salaries for that.
Uh, yeah, Madam my chair
Representative Baca and Charles
Angelis can help me out here,
uh, for economic development, it
would be new staff, um, for PRC
would be new staff, I believe
cultural affairs is helping
adjust vacancies, is that right?
Yes, correct, uh, I registered
representative. So EDP new
staff, PRC new staff, and then
DCA, um, they, they've been
struggling with personnel, so
that's just giving them an
additional increase so they
could.
Reduce their vacancy rates.
But essentially new staff.
Being able to pay for that.
And, and thank you and thank
you, Charles for that, I guess.
You know, for my
My, uh, my question really is,
do they still fit within our
framework as far as growth of
the agency versus outpacing our
revenue input or intake, so I
think that we, we kind of have
said to this committee, we set a
certain goal.
Uh, does this do these
recommendations fit within that
goal of, of agency requests.
Yes. Yeah, and I'll just add to
that, um.
In, in the past, if you remember
last year or the year before,
um, you would be considering
recurring increases much larger
than this probably. These are
really pretty modest recurring
amounts, and the reason for that
is so that it fits into, um,
into that framework. You know,
we haven't heard every working
group yet, so this is not final,
which is why you weren't voting
on this, um, but we believe that
this is an amount that we can
fit into uh the framework, but
obviously big pieces like public
school and stuff are still
moving. So this is a very
modest amount, but it should fit
into the framework.
Thank you and I did that for me.
I mean, based upon your
recommendation if that's what
we've kind of said, and it's
something that we can handle
with the reoccurring.
with
Thank you.
Thank you, thank you, um, and,
uh, I, I, I'm gonna work uh on a
question for the PRC as well,
and it is through our
discussions and and the
workaround uh their new, um,
their budget was done during the
LFC hearings as request of the
chair at the time, um.
And in so.
Just to clarify, the 200,000 is
for new staff and
That doesn't get them very far.
I just want to say Madam Chair,
this is a place where we're
looking for growth. So if you
could tell me.
This is, I'm glad we're able to
do some and I and I know it's
modest, but what is the, what is
our expected growth for this,
this particular agency, Madam
Chair.
I'll go first and then turn it
over to Julissa.
Uh, that the 200 is on top of
the 300 that you already
increased it. Thank you. And
they've also got a shot in the
Senate which will have capacity
as well.
So do you have an overall
increase for BRC general fund.
So the overall increase is 536.
If the full committee takes this
um scenario into adopts it on
Monday.
Thank you.
And
Let's see.
Yeah, these are modest
increases. So is it, is it
meeting some of the demand that
they asked for in the DFA, um,
budget request that we're
adding, you know, 400, almost
500,000 for their.
Uh, increase FTE that they
requested and, and if so, where
were those FTAs and what
departments? Yes, so, um, Madam
Vice Chair Representative Lu
Han, this does meet uh the full
request that uh Ms. Mass and I
talked about yesterday, um, this
is one of the agencies that we
actually were able to meet their
full request. Um, I know part of
it goes to local government and
Emily can help me with the rest
of it. Uh, the rest will be
going into the fiscal management
and oversight program.
which deals with general fund
and paying out state employees
and all the funding sources.
Wonderful. OK, that's great. I
mean, I, I, I understand this,
and I, I'm in full agreement
with this Madam Chair, I think
that I only wish we could do
more, and these two agencies as
As, um,
The the growth of our state and
technology and and and economic
development is on the horizon, I
hope. Um.
I think that's.
Same thing with EDD. That's all
new staff, and does that meet
their, their FTE request.
And Madam I chair, did you want
to say something, um.
Yeah, I think that if this is
above and beyond.
This is, um, given the, you
know, there are several um bills
that are making their way
through, that would, yeah.
Right. So they would these would
all be new, and you said that I
wrote that thank you.
Madam Vice may I add something,
um, just regarding PRC. So the
question was general fund
increase for the PRC. I do want
to clarify that overall the LFC
recommendation increased
personnel for the PRC by 646,
um, that's the difference
between 300 roughly from general
fund and the rest is from this
pipeline safety fund. Um, so
this 200 would increase that to
846.
So just to clarify, yes, sorry,
my apologies.
Um,
I don't want to overlook the
Secretary of State because
economic development and
Department of Finance
Administration, enormous
responsibilities are coming
their way if the bill's pass.
Um, and DFE like, um, for
intimate face stuff, some of
their money, they can't get the
bond money for operations. They
draw money from the Department
of Finance and Administration.
So I feel like the economic
development and DFA both need
that, but I don't want to
overlook. Can we review
Secretary of State?
Uh, yes, Vier Dixon,
Representative Garrett, we can
take another look at this. Um, I
can have Emily speak to it if
you'd like. We think this is a
pretty adequate amount for their
needs, um, but if you'd like
more research, we can do that as
well.
No, I, if, if it seems adequate,
I'm gonna trust that. I just
don't want to overlook it. We'll
get you more info. Thank you so
much. And uh perhaps if Emily
could add to it, that'd be
great.
Uh, yes, this increase should be
adequate for the Secretary of
State to accommodate their
raises for salary that they
already have, and so this
wouldn't increase capacity for
new staff, but it would be to,
uh allow continuous budget
alignment with their new races
that they gave out to staff.
Thank you.
All right. Um,
Any other questions on this
sheet, OK, do we have any other
sheets to look at?
No, this is it for economic
development and general
government, um, we're sending
out the text for the next work
group to come in now, so, uh,
thank you all so much. We'll
keep it moving.
So.
Uh, the next work group for
those um in the audience, uh, is
early childhood and child
well-being, and that includes
Dixon Hernandez, Silva, Duncan,
and Dow.
Um, and we may.
maybe an opportunity if we need
to.
Um,
There's some people.
uh, sitting in.
5 minutes, 10 minutes, what's
the we sent a text, um, so 5
minutes as soon as folks can get
over here. Sounds good. Thank
you.
Good morning members. I
apologize for the tiny type.
Um, so we're mostly gonna be
focusing on lines 38 through 66.
Um, if you remember, the
committee accepted the Elsie
recommendation, and there was
Uh, lots of conversations around
the family of a toddler
childcare and pre-kindergarten,
so um this is some of those
changes regarding what the
committee focused on. You can
see overall,
The difference in the early
childhood trust fund on line 66,
the LFC recommendation was for
289.9 million.
And the HAFC recommendation
scenario brings that up to 400
million.
So the difference is that 101.1.
And the main differences you can
see on that far right column if
there is a number in that far
right column, that's where
funding was added to reach that
400 level. So an additional 56
million for childcare.
An additional 1.5 for IT.
An additional 5 million for um
fit Medicaid State Matching.
10 million for home visiting.
1 million for CACFP
reimbursements.
2.5 million for educator
incentives and 25 million for
pre-kindergarten, and I will
note that that 25 million also
includes
Previously recommended 10
million online 67 from the
permanent fund, so that would be
a total of 35 million for pre-K,
which is slightly over what or
is very close to what the
executive had recommended, so we
met what we think is the
priority for those services and
with that, um,
I would also turn your attention
to the very bottom of this chart
in orange. It says, um, add
technical adjustment for fit
money. We're just moving that
into a category for the agency's
request. It's still going to
fit. It's just a technical
correction, and then we're
adding language.
That says childcare assistance
increases are to be prioritized
for infants and toddler care,
which is a large conversation in
that committee and with that, I
will stand for questions.
Thank you, Madam Chair and thank
you, Kelly, for that. I, I
really need to break down this.
So 52 million is for
Childcare assistant block grant
or childcare assistant
reimbursement rates.
Mr. Chairman's, it's not for
reimbursement rates, it's for um
slots.
It could be if the agency did do
another cost model. We don't
control the rates at the
legislative level, they're
controlled at the regulatory
level through the cost model. We
do have language saying how this
money needs to be prioritized
for infants and toddlers,
because that's where we see the
greatest need for services.
Madam Chair and Kelly, I, I
heard that as well. Our greatest
need is for slots. How do you
add a, how do you add more slots
in the secretaries here. How do
you add more slots if you're
reducing ratio?
And group size. How, how can
there be more slots, Madam
Schumer's, that is not an LFC
recommendation. That is an
executive rec uh.
Regulatory and this agency can
respond to that, but uh we don't
put that in the budget. I'm,
but.
But do you, do you, I do. I need
to understand what they're going
to do with how they're gonna
place more slots when they're
each classroom will have a lower
ratio.
If this committee prefers and
I'm sure we can um add some
recommended language around
reducing group sizes, which I
think is the representatives
core issue, um, because reducing
group sizes, while also reducing
um ratios could, as the
secretary testified the previous
hearing could reduce capacity.
And so if that's something this
committee wants to add
additional framework language
on, that's something we can do
for the committee. Madam Chair
Kelly, how do I ask for that
language. It's we already know
that we have an infant toddler
crisis.
And I am not OK with compounding
the issue.
And I'm thinking about the
programs in rural New Mexico,
from Chatfield's district. I'm
looking at other people who've
called me and asked for help
with increasing their capacity.
The existing childcare providers
have no more.
Land
To add more classrooms.
On their current campus.
So it's not as easy as saying
like, you know, a $10 million
revolving fund is going to cover
a change that happens to all 33
counties in every
community-based provider in the
state. When you reduce those
class size, and you, when you
cap the group size and reduce
the ratios.
All these programs I visited and
you visited too. Where are you
expecting to add the classroom?
Madam Chair, Representative um
Dow, the, um, as you know, in 4
and 5 star centers are already
at the group size and ratio, the
department is recommending. So
this is for our 1 and 2, and 3
star centers, so it is not
across the board reducing
capacity. It's focused on
improving the quality, which at
4 and 5 star is already at the
group size and ratio, the
department's recommending across
the board.
at the 4 star level, so it's
not, not at the five star level.
It's at the 4 star level, so I
will get you the numbers of the
centers that actually would be
impacted, and it is not as
significant as you're
describing.
Um, Madam Chair and Kelly or
Madam Chair. How do we ask for
language that just specifies
that the funding includes
sufficient funding for the
existing.
For the existing regulations for
infant and toddler, how do we
add that language?
Adam Turer's committee, uh, LFC
staff is happy to draft
something for this subcommittee
to look at and go before you and
we can do that in the HFC
overall. I'm happy to drop that.
Thank you, Madam Chair and thank
you, Kelly. I also have
questions about the 25 million
pre-K for 3 and 4 year olds. Um,
I've looked at the saturation
chart. Some communities are at
250% saturation. Then I went and
looked since the last meeting, I
went and looked at the um the
current RFP that
Out and how they're determining
who gets funded and the language
has changed dramatically. So in
the last just one year ago.
If you had to map out what was
what existed. Correct me if I'm
wrong, Secretary, get a map out
the existing providers because
we have a commitment in the
state not to supplant existing 3
and 4 year old providers.
I've seen some of the Senate
bills that are floating around
that take away that commitment.
And so I'm concerned that
there's an assumption being made
that all 3 and 4 year olds are
going to move to a public
facility, and that will make up
the difference for infant
toddler. No one's convinced me
otherwise, but I also noticed in
the RFP.
That, um, there's this category,
if 80% or more are this than 80%
or more are this than 80%. It
allows in your score sheet takes
away the 50/50% split that the
body's committed to and has
reauthorized multiple times.
And it creates a way to, to, to
fully fund until the dollars are
gone, regardless of saturation
levels.
So I'm, I'm concerned that even
though this year is very
generous that we're asking for
even more next year.
OK, well, Madam Chair, I was
there a question? I'm sorry I
didn't we're oversaturating
pre-K programming.
And it concerns me.
Madam Chair Representative Doo
for um 3 year olds, we are not
oversaturating pre-K in any
community, um, but and the
geographic description in the
pre-K application is about a
school district boundary, but
not as in it goes to school
districts and school-based
programs, so just to be clear
that the, the boundary is
related to ensuring that we
reach universal access for
threes and fours within all of
our school district geographic
boundaries. Madam Chair and
secretary.
in the current RFP, is there a
possibility based on the scoring
criteria that you would exceed
universal access of 80% in any
community. School district
community.
Um, uh, Madam Chair,
Representative Doo, I can get
you the breakdown of where we
are right now because we're at
84% across the state, so there
will be school districts that
would be over 80%, um, but there
are also school districts that
are only still at 60, I think
in, in some districts are only
at 10% of 3 year olds being
served, so, uh, but I can get
that information to the
committee. Madam Chair and
secretary, but the proposed the
current RFP is not for 3 year
olds, it's for 3 and
4-year-olds.
Madam Chair and secretary, and
um, also did the private pre-K
providers who were awarded last
year have to reapplied this year
as well.
Madam Chair, Representative Dow,
no, um, only if they want to, if
they want to expand, they could,
but they have 3 year grant
agreements with the department.
OK, Madam Chair and secretary,
so anybody who wanted to apply
for expansion can apply for
expansion.
Madam Chair, Representative Doo,
correct. Our priority are 3 year
olds. Madam Chair and secretary,
but you're fully expanding the
funding of the last couple of
years.
So based on the scoring
criteria, once you prioritize
the underserved, then you'll
continue to find the way I read
the RFP even if oversaturation
occurs.
Madam Chair Representative Doo,
we are we we do not fund
oversaturation of new
applications if, um, so let me
get more details to the
committee. I think that would be
more helpful than me, um, just
actually get you the data we
have per district by
community-based and
school-based,
um you
youian Secretary. And are you
including star 4 and star 5
programs that choose not to
participate in New Mexico pre-K
as in children served.
Madam Chair, Representative Doo,
we, we do not count them in the
denominator, um, of the level of
saturation because those
programs you have to be eligible
for through different criteria,
work, allowable activities you
have to maybe pay if you're
overcome, so we consider.
Pre-K programs that are free. So
that's Head Start tribally run
programs and, um, New Mexico
pre-K as the denominator. Madam
Chair and secretary, when did
you make that change? Because
they, when we passed the early
Childhood Act, they were
included.
Madam Chair Representative Doo,
when you passed the Early
Childhood Act, they were
included in the saturation level
for pre-K?
The children who Madam Chair,
secretary, children who were
served.
In non pre-K sites by a 4 or 5
star level.
were considered served.
Because their parents were
choosing.
To use the childcare development
block grant or a SAR 5 program,
and that was before we had 400%
of poverty.
Uh, representative uh Madam
Chair Representative Doo, um,
again, I would say that New
Mexico pre-K is a voluntary free
program where you just have to
be age eligible. So it's a
different criteria for
determining whether that is
available to all families in New
Mexico who want it. I got you, I
got you. Thank you, Madam Chair
and thank you Secretary. It's
the pre-K Act is where it was,
not the early Childhood Act. OK.
And that was probably rolled in.
OK.
All right. Well, I'm very
concerned.
About us driving up the cost of
care.
the regulation process.
I'm very, very concerned about
us creating a, a infant toddler
desert. So I really would like
that language in there. Thank
you. Thank you, Ma. Thank you,
um, and, um,
Kelly, if there's follow up, um,
that you wanna do with work
group members. Just a reminder,
you know, that our focus, um,
for the working group, um, are
the specific items that are
ident that were identified in
the main, um, committee hearing
for adjustments, um, but I
think, uh, Kelly, if you can
just circle back with us on.
How to accomplish some of the
other things. Thanks.
Any other questions?
Madam Chair, I've got uh
two, well, a couple of
questions. Um,
Kelly, is there any way that we
can get this printed bigger?
I mean, 2 pages maybe that we
can take a look at it without.
You know, my old eyes just
aren't what they used to be and,
you know, my scope is really,
really good, but I don't want to
bring my scope here with me, so,
um, um, and Madam Chair, so the
the list of identified items
that we were concerned with at
our last meeting, Kelly, where
can we find those on this, uh,
the two charts that you gave us
today.
So Madam Tremors me the things
that we're mostly highlighted
during the hearing was um
Infant and toddler care, which
is um the increase you see on
line 42 and the language seen in
that kind of orangeish bar at
the bottom, um, there was also
discussion about the family
infant toddler program and
making sure that they were fully
whole in FY 26, and you can see
that online, um,
55, there was 5 million added
there.
Um, and then the pre-K
expansion, which we just
discussed with uh Representative
Dao, which can be seen at line
64.
And then we also discussed
making sure we had workforce
supports which can be seen
online 61, that 2.5 for educator
incentives.
Thank you, Kelly. I appreciate
that. I'm not even capable of,
of holding this and writing
notes at the same time, so I, to
hold my paper. Um, Madam Chair,
I will, I will highlight one
thing and one thing only, and
that's a line 42.
When
LFC's recommending to 112.
And executive is 965.
That is a huge jump.
Tell me where the guard rails
are on this, and, and where are,
where is this money going and,
and can we get an idea of how
it's being spent.
Yes, we track that on a regular
basis, we can see.
Which providers are claiming the
the funding for which age group.
What level of quality that the
department has raided, uh, we
can get.
Whether it's school age kids
versus infant and toddler, I
think the suggestion is that we
prioritize uh using this extra
funding for expanding care for
infant and toddlers where it's
very difficult for people to
find care. Uh, all of this would
be contingent.
On legislation increasing the
distribution from the early
childhood trust fund, the LFC
recommendation lived within the
current formula, so that's uh
you know, $100 million that
would be contingent on that
legislation, increasing the
distribution. Thank you for
that, uh, Madam Chair Charles. I
appreciate that.
So we're in a state that has a
declining population as far as
births, and, and we're gonna
grow this much in one year.
So, Mister Chair, remembers or
chair, um, yes, we are in a
declining birth population, but
we're only serving about
20% of infants and toddlers in
childcare assistance right now
and so the
Point of this is, yes, there is
room for expansion for infant
and toddler cares, um,
especially given that that's,
you know, one of the most
expensive for families. And so
the LFC recommendation is not to
go all the way to the executive
recommendation to go part the
way and to focus that money for
infant and toddlers.
Thank you,
Chair of the napkin. It would
provide care to more than 3000.
Over 3000. So, Madam Chair and,
and Charls.
We're gonna, we're gonna up this
56 million and we're going to
take care of 3000 kids, or, uh,
basically that would be at the,
at the infant level.
We're spending upwards of close
to $20,000.
Madam Chair, my children have
put some of their kids, like,
some of my grandkids in, in
great private schools that did
not cost them this much.
Quality level that the
department, um, has structured
its rate payment system on so
that.
My cost estimate is at the
highest end on a per child cost.
Um, for that particular.
Madam Chair, thank you. Um, I'm
gonna, I'm gonna dig myself a
big hole here. I'm gonna pull
my, my backhoe out and get after
it, I guess. So, uh, Madam
Chair, Charles, tell me, if I've
got 5 kids and I've got triplets
that are all 3 and under.
And I've got a 4 year old and a
5-year-old besides being a mess,
having that many kids that, that
young at one time.
And I um fall under the, the,
uh whatever rate it is.
To get uh free childcare. Every
one of those kids are getting
free childcare. Is that correct?
That would be correct.
I had triplets said to be
60,000. What's, what are my
other three and my other 4 year
old, what, what's that value?
Yeah, Mr. Chair, there's, it
depends on the level that
they're in, but um if it was a 3
and 4 year old, hopefully they'd
be receiving pre-K, um, and
that's about I think 13,000.
And as you grow older, it
becomes cheaper. The most
expensive are infants and
toddlers, and that's because of
the teacher to student ratio. As
soon as you get an older ages,
it becomes not as expensive.
So for the 3 and 4 year olds.
We would
Assume that you would choose to
put them in the public pre-K
program, that's the 35 million.
And that's at a cost of about
13,000.
OK. Thank you, Madam Chair. So
60,000 for my triplets, 26,000
for the other, that's $86,000 a
year. Why would I not pay that
mother then to stay home and and
teach her own children for
50,000.
That's not been a, a policy
conversation the state has had
in terms of the tradeoffs of.
Subsidizing out of home care
versus um.
Paying for people to stay home
and raise their and it, it
really stems from frankly,
Welfare reform.
The whole
background to why this program
even exists is this.
The federal government public
policy was.
If the public was going to be
paying for cash assistance
payments.
And people needed to go.
to work.
And if they were going to go
work, then they would need a
place for their kids to stay in
a high quality place for their
kids to stay as they were
working, so.
As a matter of public policy
going back to.
Frankly, the
1960s, it's been to prioritize.
Low income individuals moving
out of their home and working,
and then having the state.
Thank you, Madam Chair, and
thanks, Charles for that.
Um, Madam Chair, in a previous
life I was a county
commissioner.
And we had to go through the
jails twice a year and, and make
sure that we take care of those
folks who were staying in our
hotel.
Um, at one point in time, I
asked um our director of the,
the jail to linear juveniles up.
And I went down and I asked
everyone of them boys and girls.
Tell me where your dad is.
1 out of 20 could tell me where
their dad was.
Only one in in his life.
Uh, I ask them what their mom
did. Worked all day, came home,
got him dinner, and went to the
2nd job.
I submit to this committee.
And I submitted to my county
commission at the same time
years ago if we paid Mom to stay
home and take care of our kids,
we wouldn't build as many
facilities that we call jails
and prisons.
And I submit that to this
committee today, Madam Chair.
We've got this backwards.
We've got people raising our
kids that may not have my same
values raising our kids.
And we've got it backwards.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Thank
you for the questions.
Uh, Representative Duncan, I
think that's something that we
could look at in the interim.
I
Yeah
Any other questions on this? Oh.
Representative Silva and um uh
I'm gonna head back to energy
and.
Representative Garrett will be
on hand.
Excellent. Thank you, Madam
Chair. Um, are we looking at
specials and supplementals
today, just to clarifying
question. Thank you, chair.
Uh, Representative Silva
members, we are not looking at
specials and supplementals
today. Uh, we are looking at
just the high level that's in
front of you, um, if there are
additional concerns about
specials and supplementals, you
can flag those. Um, I know LFC
knows more, but several of the
big, uh big ticket items, LFC
has existing grow programs for,
so we're happy to dig deeper
there, but today's just on, on
the high level for you. OK,
excellent. Thank you.
Thank you, Madam Chair and thank
you. I'm, I still, I still need
someone to explain to me that if
we're taking existing providers.
Of infant toddler care who were
star 12, and 3, and we're gonna
provide them with an incentive
to move to 4 and 5.
They are going to reduce the
number of infants in their room,
and we are going to cap their
group size, how this money goes
to adding slots. I, I don't,
that would reduce slots, not add
slots. I need someone to explain
this to me. I'm not, I'm just
not processing it.
I'm sorry,
secretary Representative Doo,
um, you can do both because
you're increasing access to um
infants and toddler, um, so
you're, you've got your $10
million that's at NMFA to build
supply and the 1.8 that's there
from this fiscal year. So we're
building supply and we're
improving quality.
Ratio and group size is a key
indicator of quality. So we have
the worst in the nation, and we
have the
A very, um, aligned legislature
and executive on ensuring that
children are getting the best
quality care.
So if very few we have a
performance measure around
getting more infants and
toddlers served in our 4 and 5
star centers, which were not
making this, right? We're just a
little bit under where our
performance measure is, so our
goal is to have children in
those centers that are lower
group size and ratio, but we
also want to bring up the floor
so that in those license two
star centers.
Rather than 1 to 6.
How do you have 1 to 1
interaction with 6 infants, 6
weeks old, on-demand sleeping,
on-demand feeding, and have that
delivered in a quality way, so
we want it to be a 1 to 5.
So you're right. So you would
lose one slot, um, in that
classroom, you'd lose 2 slots,
sorry, 2, but we also have this
funding to build more supply and
we have performance measures to
move more infants and toddlers
into higher quality care. So
it's all connected, um, and all
of it has to happen. So we do
need to bring up the floor so
that we're not the worst in the
nation in terms of group size
and ratio because we know that
that is where the interactions
and the brain synap.
and the relationships between
that educator and caregiver, and
that baby and that toddler
matter most, Madam, Madam Chair
and secretary, thank you. You're
telling me we're the only state
with a 1 to 6 ratio at 1.
Madam Chair, Representative Doo,
the state of Georgia and us, and
that's it. OK, yes, Madam Chair
and secretary, so the.
It's if the classroom right now
has 15 infants with 3 teachers.
They're at a 1 to 5 ratio.
I understood, and there may be a
star for. I understood you to
say that the classroom size
would be 10. So that room would
lose 5 children.
Madam Chair Representative Doo,
the um group size would is right
now 12. OK, so that is the way
and we want to move that to 10.
OK. Thank you, Madam Chair and
thank you Secretary. In $10
million for the revolving loan
fund might build two classrooms,
maybe let's just be generous and
say they're going to build it at
100.
Do a square foot. I don't think
that's possible. But do you
think that that's enough in the
res resulting in the revolving
loan fund, Madam Chair
Representative Doo with the 13
million that we received from
the federal relief we built over
2500 and 800 of those were
infant and toddler slots.
All right. Thank you, Madam
Chair.
Mm thank you.
Does anybody else on the
committee have questions?
Does anybody in front of me want
to say anything before we close
this work group.
Uh, no, Cheer Garrett, I think
we're all set. Thank you all for
the discussion. We've been
taking notes, um, and we'll go
ahead and move on to CYFD if uh
Doctor, Doctor Rachel wants to
come up here. I wanted to say
Miss Rachel, but that's the.
The cartoon lady, um, so for
CYFD Rachel's gonna walk you all
through the non-recurring
appropriations only if you all
remember the chair's direction
was to take a close look at
those, um, and where the
executive and LFC
recommendations might be in
different places. So, um, if we
could keep discussion to
non-recurring only. If you have
other flags, uh, send them my
way, but today we're gonna focus
on that non-recurring stuff.
Thank you.
Right. Um, good morning, members
of the committee, um, I'm gonna
walk you through the high level,
um, for CYFD, the non-recurring
is uh included at the bottom to
allow you to compare to the
recurring. I will note, uh, you
should also have from your CYFD
packets the, the bigger version
if that's helpful. Um, if you
recall during CYFD's budget
hearing, I mentioned that, um,
the LFC recommendation was
primarily to make investments on
the non-recurring side.
instead of making uh increases,
hold on, uh, yes, Representative
Duncan, I see you looking at me.
Madam Chair, uh, where's the
bigger version you said? I, I
apologize. It should be from
what your packets from the COFT
presentation the other day.
Uh, 690.
Under top 6.
And,
OK, so back to what I was
saying, uh, you all recall the
LFC recommendation primarily
made investments on the
non-recurring side instead of
recurring. Um, during, uh, the
budget hearing in front of you
all I mentioned when you take
into account non-recurring the
LFC recommendation would provide
a little over $11 million
available to CYFD next year is
the net increase um on the
operating budget side, the
executive would have provided
about a $9 million increase, um,
and, and also did back.
selling in federal funds.
Um, the agency during the
hearing requested about
additional 38 million, um, that
was not included in the
executive. So what I'm gonna do
is I'm gonna walk you through
what is in the non-recurring at
the bottom of your high level or
on that those bigger
spreadsheets from the hearing.
Uh, so the first item on that
list is 1.47 million for an
increase to liability, uh,
insurance premiums. The agency
is experiencing as a result of,
um, significant litigation and
payouts.
Um, the LFC has that in
non-recurring.
Uh, the second item on the list,
uh, is an investment in, in
workforce development and
training, so that's 5.4 million
in general fund over 3 years in
the grow matched with an
estimated 1.9 million in federal
funds, and that is to support
the creation, implementation and
evaluation of the of a child
welfare workforce training
program in partnership with a
with a school of social work,
uh, CYFD is partnering right now
with NMH2.
Uh, below that is a significant
investment in workforce to
address case loads, um, that are
uh high and uh we're finding in
the arbitration, the Kevin has
arbitration, so that's 24
million in general fund.
matched with an estimated $6
million in federal funds over 3
years, and that should allow the
agency to hire about 101
additional case workers. Last
fall, that is what they
estimated needing uh in addition
to meet caseload standards.
Um, below that are a variety of
investments to try to address
systemic challenges, the agency
is facing. So the first one is
$100,000 for a foster care or
TFC rate study, um, I'll note
for you all, when we've looked
at rates in other areas of
government things like Medicaid,
etc. We've typically done a rate
study first to help us identify
how do we compare um
geographically and what should
rates be before.
remake big investments and
actually increasing rates, so we
have a sense of where our rates
should be. So that's what that
study would be for.
Uh, the next item on the list,
uh, is, uh,
$100,000 to contract with um an
external organization to do an
employee health and engagement
survey and better understand
retention, what's driving
challenges in turnover and how
the agency might target
strategies.
And then going down the list,
there are a couple of fund
transfers into the Children's
Trust Fund in NextGen fund. And
then the next two items, 80 and
81 are connected to the
challenges you all heard related
to CYFD's federal funding. So
last year you all made an
appropriation of $200,000 for
technical assistance to help
them one get a uh family first
prevention Services Act plan
approved as well as to make sure
they're maximizing drawdown of
funds.
They didn't use that
appropriation cause they got
some support um through
philanthropy. LFC is
recommending reauthorizing that
and providing an additional
$200,000. Um, that's the item
below it to seek deeper
technical assistance to really
get into the detail of claiming
um related to Title 40, um, in
lieu of rushing to backfill
federal funds. Um, so those are
some of the big investments and
then you'll see uh below that on
the list, the LFC recommendation
did.
not include appropriations, um,
for a supplement, big
supplemental or deficiency, um,
because of that recommendation
to better understand federal
funds first, um, but does have
the little uh deficiency
appropriation to correct the
negative in the fax account.
Um, so those are sort of the big
um items on the table when it
comes to non-recurring at CYFD.
Now stand for your questions.
Oh
Representative Silva.
Thank you, Chair. um, thank you
for the, uh, overview. I'm
wondering if um LFC is
considering adding an additional
performance measure on um
management and uh like exit
interviews and um other connect
organizational culture
performance measures. Thank you,
Chair.
Sure, uh, representative Silva,
um, neither recommendation, uh,
the LFC nor the executive added
new performance measures, um, to
see why those certainly that's
an action you all could take in
in HAFC. There are a few
measures we look at um within
the agency that are related to
workforce, primarily turnover,
um, and things like case loads,
but we do not currently have um
a measure that's specifically
tied to a kind of organizational
health primarily focused on um.
Child outcomes instead.
What you got, Charles, I would
say coming out of the, the
session is the time when we
enter negotiations and
discussions with the agency
about updates to what they're
performance measures are and
will be certain to bring that up
that we need a suite of metrics,
uh, to assess that and see if we
can work with the department as
well as with DFA to get that
built into their
accountabilities.
That would be excellent. Thank
you, Chair.
Representative Duncan.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Uh, just
11 comment here. Um,
We're uh we're
Ma, I'm sure we're, we're giving
or we're going to expend
$100,000 on an external contract
to find out why employees are
leaving and what we can do to
attract them, is that correct?
I'm sure.
um
The contract is to help the
department figure out.
Had a better claim federal
funding for its workers.
Uh, for some reason, the amount
of federal funding that they're
claiming has dropped over the
last two fiscal years, we think
there's an opportunity.
To go back and resubmit claims
to the federal government to
draw down what is appropriately
due to the state, um, for caring
for foster kids.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Thank
you, Charles, for that. Um, I'd
like
I mean, I, I would certainly uh
I think this is a great idea. I
think it'd be a great idea to
add another 100,000 to figure
out how we could dismantle this
uh department and make it more
manageable and put some
guidelines in place that people
will actually want to show up to
work at a department that's not
being um castigated in the
papers in the newspapers and the
TV all the time.
Um, and I would certainly, um,
second that motion. Thank you,
Representative Dell.
Thank you, Madam Chair and thank
you, Rachel Kelly, and, and
Charles, thank you.
LFC to me has really dug in
here, really been thoughtful
about what we need to do, um,
205 has real solutions, I feel
like, and I, I really appreciate
what you guys are doing. Um,
when we moved
EC ECD out of CYFD, it seemed
pretty intentional. Do you see
the family services division as
being duplicative or I mean, I,
I, I'm curious cause I wasn't
here for the framework.
I'm just curious about your
thoughts on the family's
creating a new division.
The division
Essentially was pulling.
Staff and functions that already
existed in other aspects of the
department.
Into a new management structure.
Um, frankly, we've been
concerned about does that create
additional overhead.
And
How is the line of
The service continu I'm going to
operate at the most local level.
If you've got
Somebody reported to Santa Fe
for family services, which has
really got to be part of the
continuum before people get
deeper within child protective
services.
And so that's why we haven't
been recommending the last 2
years.
That reorganization in the
budget, but they've moved
forward.
Nonetheless, and, and done that
reorganization and we've seen,
frankly a proliferation of, of
Administrative staff in order to
thank you, Madam Chair and thank
you for that, Charles, and I'm,
I'm wondering about, I see that
we have the social work compact,
and that's gonna give the
potential to recruit out of
state or someone moves in the
state, you know, some
reciprocity. But when I, what is
the pay scale look like for
social workers between CYFD then
ECECD, then home visiting, then
early childhood, then pre-K,
then DOH HHS, like how many
categories, how many pay scales?
Are there in, in, and are we
just supplanting and just
shifting people around, like,
how are you going to solve that?
So that has been a problem.
Under the current classification
system because CYFD is.
Moved ahead of other
Uh, similarly positioned staff.
They're not necessarily hiring
licensed social workers for
these caseworker positions. I
think they've testified that
they've got very few within the
system.
Um, but when we've done targeted
pay increases that the
legislatures.
Has passed in.
And other areas of government
come in and say, well, now we're
losing all of our workers over
here and so the, the work of
this last year under a contract
with Deloitte is to move the
state to a a single uh
Classification system.
To try to ameliorate those
issues where we've got people in
this one bucket asking for like
pay increases versus somebody
doing similar work in this other
area. So hopefully with that new
system, it'll alleviate some of
those particular issues, but
whether CYFD wants to prioritize
hiring.
Licensed social workers or not.
Uh, is a different.
is a different pattern.
Thank you, Madam Chair and thank
you, Charles May. I was not
involved in this framework and
I'm coming in and, and it looks
very thoughtful to me. Um, I
just hope that
You know, I don't, I don't want
to take a social worker out of
home visiting or they're one of
the 2% that are still doing case
management and move them into a
care navigator or see Casa, you
know, bring them in when it's
already been substantiated and
they're already in CYFD custody,
and it, and we could have funded
on the prevention side, and I
think we're building the
prevention side.
But there's not equitable.
It doesn't seem like there's
equitable pay. So anyways, thank
you, Madam Chair. It's been a, a
major challenge for this system
is when Medicaid created
Um
Required care coordinators. They
required to have licensed social
workers, licensed nurses, and
overnight about 10 years ago,
there were like 1500 positions
that were well paid and managed
care companies that were
created. It had a, a significant
negative effect on CYFD's
ability to compete for those
workers, and it chose to stop
hiring licensed social workers
and there was a period of time
where they prioritize people
with backgrounds that wouldn't
really prepare them for that
kind of work.
and then they got into a
situation where they were
turning people over, because
it's a very challenging, um,
work environment, uh, and they
are currently in in need of
rebuilding those pipelines with
the schools of social work, and
there's money in here, uh, to
continue expanding that and
frankly, the federal government
will pay for 75% of the cost of
of educating those social
workers to then go and work in
CYFD.
Yeah, thank, thank you, Madam
Chan. Thank you, Charles, and
we're all, if 60% of abuse is
before the age of 5 and we've
got home visiting, we've got all
these different programs. We're
really lucky to have a $9
billion early childhood fund.
That's growing, they, I think 11
billion that we could really
invest in the prevention side
with the fit and the home
visiting and the caseworkers, so
we're kind of blessed in that
sense. Thank you, Madam Chair.
Um, I just have one question on
the group, we're in year 2 of
the Grow program for the
childhood training it in a
misuse, is that correct? Um,
Madam Chair Representative, this
would be the first time that
money was added. CAD got quite a
bit of growth funding last year,
including things for workforce,
for example, money to
incentivize master's level
social work, but the partnership
at NMIQ, I believe they have
started. This would be the first
appropriation to support that
partnership, though, as Charles
has mentioned, um, there is
money within federal.
Title 40 actually that has
dropped over time, um, that also
supports um and do we know how
many people will participate in
that program.
The Ny program, Madam Chair
Representative, I don't have
that data. It would likely be a
question for the department. OK,
thank you.
I don't see any more, uh,
Representative Duncan,
just have one quick question.
Um,
But I'm sure, can you tell me
how much, how much money we have
in there for, was it $24 million
to hire the 101 positions, Madam
Chair, Representative Duncan,
it's 24 million in the general
fund and that we estimate could
be matched for about $6 million
in federal funds. That's in the
grow, so it's over 3 years,
essentially $8 million a year in
the general fund.
Thank you for that, Madam Chair.
What's the vacancy rate right
now?
Um, Madam Chair, Representative
Duncan, I believe, uh, CFD
testified that the vacancy rate
is over 20%. I will note that um
CYFD does have a variety of
unfunded vacancies and so we
looked at their PSA and did not
particularly within protective
services, CYD is now running
pretty tight, um, and does not
have the budget to hire many
more additional positions,
however, this grow money would
allow them to do that. We
estimated 101 positions.
Thank you, Madam Chair, and I
hope they hire every one of
them.
We desperately need, we have no
more questions on this topic,
uh, Amanda, do we have more that
this committee is going to look
at, or are we done? That is it
for um child well-being in early
childhood, so we'll send a text
for our next work group. Thank
you guys so much.
And our next group is IT. I know
many of you in the audience are
reading this.
The IT work group will not start
at 11:33. We're waiting for uh
members of the work group to
return from another committee.
Hopefully sooner than later.
Okey dokey, I think we're gonna
um get ourselves situated.
OK, uh, if we're ready, uh, tell
us what papers were supposed to
be looking at as well.
All right, so welcome back,
members. You should have a paper
that looks like our typical work
group paper and we're gonna
start here and then you'll also
have this big long one that
Emily's holding up for C to
appropriations.
So I'm gonna give us a little
lay of the land, and then I will
go into uh Emily and Nicole to
go through C2 appropriations.
Yes, but I believe it's changed,
so we'll make sure you have an
updated one. Marty, can you get
Representative Garrett an
updated one of the, I don't
think I have one either. We
didn't get.
Jackie has it and she's bringing
it. They came yesterday. OK, so
we'll start with my paper while
Jackie gets your paper. I'm glad
we asked.
So we're gonna start with this
one.
And then we're gonna go into the
long one, which Jackie is
bringing you. Yes, that's right.
Representative Pettigrew, uh,
look for the one that says
information technology at the
top cause they're, you know,
have been others that are
similarly designed.
OK, members, so while we're
getting those other C2 papers
out, um, I'm just going to cover
a little bit of what you'll be
doing in this work group. It's
not a ton, um, so hopefully it
goes up pretty fast, uh, Emily
and Nicole are going to review a
couple of changes or proposed
changes to the C2
appropriations. Um, some of
those are listed here that
includes an increase for a DPS
appropriation, um, a increased
slash change to an early
childhood education
appropriation and
uh chess, which is the higher ed
one, so they're gonna go through
that, um, as far as broader
cybersecurity, you all adopted
some changes to the
cybersecurity appropriations on
Thursday, however long ago that
was, including an additional $5
million for a cybersecurity. So
we upped that appropriation from
$15 million to $20 million so
that's already done, which is
why it's not in front of you
today. Um
I think there's still some
conversation about the language
over there which director Seli
can speak more too.
And on the language, the amount
that would be available.
Um
For supporting higher
institutions only needs to be
7.5 million rather than 10
million, so that will be a
language change you'll see on
Monday.
And then in your Rio package,
There are some stranded money
that hasn't been spent. It's
about $5 million that we're
recommending for reauthorization
to be spending so, you know, 25
million um for cybersecurity.
Great, thank you, Director Sli.
Um, OK, I'll go ahead and turn
it over to uh Ms. Massas and
Miss Hea and they'll go through
everything and flag just uh the
changes increases, and some of
those reauthorizations for
consideration. And again, you're
not adopting anything today.
There's not enough of you to
adopt anything anyway, so this
will come before the full.
Committee with your feedback.
Chair members I'll start us off
with this packet that you were
just passed out for section 7
recommendations looking at the
reauthorizations, these are all
the same that you had last week.
However, there's a column with
encumbrances now and so the
total expended is the actual
expenditures with the
encumbrances and the percent is
based off of the encumbrance and
expenditures, um, the HAFC
scenario for reauthorizations
adopts the LFC recommendation,
however, for some changes for
adoption on Monday considering
adding 3 reauthorization.
for the healthcare authorities,
child support enforcement
replacement projects, um, with
that, those are the only changes
for reauthorizations before we
get into new funding does
representative Pettigrew have a
question? Thank you, Madam
co-chair or chair and thank you.
Presenters for this. I need the
backstep.
To Cyber.
Can you give me a little more
depth.
I know you got the number to 20,
but if I understand it, that's
half and half of what cyber
asked for and what higher ed
asked for. Am I correct?
Mr. Chairman, that's an excess
of what the executive asked for
for cyber at 20.
Um
There's an additional
$5 million that's being
reauthorized, that would be
available.
On top of that,
That wasn't in either
recommendation because it
wasn't.
Part of the request. So that's a
new $5 million so that's $25
million in uh one time funding
for cybersecurity.
And just to add, there is
another reauthorization for $5.5
million and so that's around
30.5 million in total for
cybersecurity across new funding
and reauthorizations.
I'm sure, um, analyst.
Thank you, LLC and DFA for for
what you're doing.
I'm really, really confident for
fiscal year 26.
The cyber got $20 million on top
of the reauthorizations, they
could spend it all within a year
or what their requirements and
their capacities, needs are, and
that does not include the
request for higher education.
That includes 7.5 million for
working with higher education
institutions.
And I'm sure Charles, I would
ask that.
Yeah, because we're not voting
on this today.
I would ask for you to have a
separate conversation with
Cyber.
To make sure that we can come to
an agreement.
On what they need.
And, and, and I'm sure I think
you'll agree. I don't fight for
money very often.
This
is new, but I do, uh, I do
support what we're trying to do,
and I do need all of our
departments coming to our cyber
division, not trying to do it on
their own and create bigger
government.
Thank you.
Thanks. I'm sure um staff can
circle back.
OK, uh, chair members with that,
um, were there any questions
about the reauthorizations.
Again, those are those, those 3
notes to add for action on
Monday or those 3
reauthorizations for the
healthcare authorities child
support replacement.
Projects, um,
With that, if there are no
questions about the
reauthorizations, I will jump
into the HEFC scenario with new
funding and mark you those
changes starting on page 11.
I'm sorry, can you identify the
three reauthorizations. Of
course, that is going to be on.
Blind 10 on page 3 for that
reauthorization. It'll be online
11 on page 4 and on page 5 line
13.
And that's a total of $16
million in balances that you
would be reauthorized
reauthorizing for that project,
um, and are those all for
healthcare authority? Those are
all for the healthcare
authority, yes. Thank you. Thank
you.
Great.
So then chair members moving on
to the new funding changes
starting on page 11, that's
going to be line 12 as you can
see in the HAFC scenario,
there's no longer general fund
for the early childhood
education and care department
that is now going to be $1
million in other state funds
coming from the agency's program
fund.
The next change that you will
see in the HAFC scenario, it is
going to be on page 13 line 26.
That is an additional 2 million
for the Department of Public
Safety. Go ahead.
Sorry, on mine, it looks like
line 11 on page.
Uh, 11 is also it it's
highlighted, so does that mean
it's for a technical change, OSC
asked for just a slight language
change and so, um, aside from 3
projects for ECECD, DPS, and for
chess, um, those highlighted
changes are language changes.
Thank you. Sorry, I should have
clar clarified that earlier.
Um
But going to page 1326, that is
an additional 2 million for a
total of $4 million for phase
two of the intelligence-led
policing projects and then the
last change in terms of money is
um going to be on page 14, line
31 for the collaborative for
higher education, shared
services. This is an additional
4 million, so a total of 6
million in the HAFC scenario.
With that, those are all the
changes that I wanted to know,
and I will turn over to Nicole
if there's
Just anything that she would
like to touch on.
Thank you, Madam Chair, um.
I will stand by for any
additional questions. Thank you.
Representative Pettigrew, did
you have your hand up?
OK, yeah, we might need just a
minute. Thank you, Madam Chair,
um.
Going back to a higher ed on
online 31, Emily, is that uh
chess?
Yes.
So we have
6 million in there and they ask
for how much Madam?
The initial ask chair
Representative Duncan, it was
around 20 million. They said
that they need 10 million this
year, um, which additional
funding could come from the
Senate.
Madam Chair, I think that's a
great idea. Let's take it from
their pot of money.
Let's do it.
Either have it on when I
shouldn't or I don't have it on.
Um, this was for GIS going to do
it.
And I'm not sure where it is.
Representative Garrett, that is
not in the HAFC scenario.
OK, thank you.
Madam Chair, uh,
With respect to the
reauthorizations, do we have
anything older than 2 years old
that you're asking us to review.
Yes, uh, Representative
Pettigrew, that was partly tied
to those 3.
Uh, for the healthcare
authorities, child support
enforcement projects, um, as you
can see online 10 page 3 that
initial appropriation was from
2019.
Madam Chair and uh.
Presenter, uh, why haven't we
spent it?
I'm sorry, I couldn't why has
that not been spent yet. I'm
sorry. IT project.
It's a failed IT project and we
want to refund it.
The proposal here is to see if
they can pivot.
And
something maybe off the shelf.
That other states have
implemented and they've got 16
million of unused.
Madam Chair, I suggest that we
have $16 million we can play
with the budget with.
Madam Chair and presenters do we
have anything older than 2 years
other than that.
Uh, yes. Um, as going far back
as 2021, um, there are a couple
of reauthorization items. Um,
I'll point you to a couple.
Um, Madam Chair, uh,
Representative Pettigrew, while
Emily's trying to find those
little items. I'll give you some
background, um, for that
particular reauthorization for
HCA. So for that particular line
item on line 10, you'll see the
original appropriations is about
$5.2 million. They have
currently spent $4.9 million.
And so there's a remaining
balance of about $326,000.
Currently, um,
That is till the end of the
fiscal year. We did reach out to
the agency they expect to
encumber that $326,000 to the
end of the fiscal year, um,
invoices have been submitted by
the Project Management office
vendor and their pending
approval and a payment. So,
Um, currently they have, sorry,
apologies, um, currently right
now this project is reauthed up
to the end of fiscal year 2025.
Thank you very much for, for
clarifying, help me clarify a
little bit more. My line 10
shows I have $80,000 left.
Let him sure and Charles, I, I
feel like you told me we had 16
million left. That was the.
That's the total chair
representative Pettigrew of
those different reauthorizations
and so lines 10.
Lines 11 and 13, all of those
totals equals 16 million.
For that IT project.
And so there's different
appropriations that you will be
seeing requesting
reauthorization for the same
project but from different
years. Madam Chair.
Presenters, we have 5 million
from one.
83 8.3 million from another, so
we're 13.3 and then we're 14
million, so 27.
Almost 28 million total.
So for a project that we can't
seem to wrap our heads around.
Chair Representative to just
clarify online item 10, that is
$80,000. So, I'm sorry. The, uh,
a balance is $80,000 on line 10,
not um.
That million number, um, so
across lines 1011, and 13 with
the balances that should be um
over 16 million since online 13
that balance is 14.2 million
online.
Number 10, that is 80,000 and
then online number 11, that is
1.9 million. However, chair
representative.
Uh, you can turn to your volume
one to look at the OliC report
card for this specific IT
project for uh further breakdown
of the project status.
It started in 2013 and is now
expected to end in 2029, um.
With those reconsiderations for
action on Monday, the
reauthorization could just see
where the project is at next
year before taking action for
new funding or just seeing where
the project stands after
reauthorizing those balances.
Madam Chair and and uh analysts,
um, I
Charles
When we went through
reauthorizations a week or 1
week and a half ago. I was very
clear.
That I wanted to see the
definitions inside.
The work that was done, where a
new money was being requested
from, I wanted to be able to
tick tie and verify from
original authorization all the
way to where we're going to
budget.
26.
It's still not in this document.
that staff did was to
Uh, make sure that we understood
how much money had been
encumbered, which would indicate
that something was improper.
A little bit unclear on the
church. And um I just wanna
clarify on reauthorizations
because I wanna make sure that
we all understand.
If we
Do not, if we choose to not.
Reauthorize something.
does that or does that not mean
that additional money.
For the budget this year.
Madam Chair
There's
An opportunity to not
reauthorize it for the.
Initial purpose.
And to reauthorize it for a
different purpose.
But um how you do it or if you
don't do the reauthorization and
the money reverts. Right. So,
OK, so we're not, we're not
getting more money to play with,
uh, by not reauthorizing. So I
think that's very important for
folks to understand. Um, and,
you know, I think to
Representative Pettigrew's
point, what we might want to do
in the interim is
Figure out what additional
information might be helpful.
Um, you know, I think staff is
particularly constrained right
now, uh, with additional
information that they're able to
pull because we are working on
the entire budget, um, so I just
wanted to clarify those two
things.
Yes, um, Madam Chair
Representative, I understand the
complexity, so if we can go
through the table and kind of
figure out how the information
would just, you know, you read a
little bit more clear, I would
be willing to work with you to
provide that information, so.
Madam Chair and um committee
presenters.
But all we have is an exact
recommendation that doesn't
define beyond the very
simplistic term of
implementation of child support
enforcement replacement project.
Madam Chair and
and presenters with respect to
that. I understand that LSC is
doing everything they can. I
understand the DFA is doing
everything they can.
This was the healthcare
authority's problem, not yours.
I chair and, and, and presenters
with respect to that.
Health care authority should be
sitting here right now saying,
this is what we did since 2021.
This is what we're doing, and
this is how we're gonna be
successful in by 2026, and
that's what I asked for a week
and a half ago.
Uh, just from HCA but from
everybody that wanted
reauthorizations. I understand
I'm 1 of 18.
At the end of the day, um.
This is these, these little
bitty things for the reason why
I can't ever vote for a budget.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Thank
you.
Um, and just to uh see.
Who
Wonderful. Uh, we have a
representative from the
Healthcare Authority here, uh.
If you wanted to elaborate.
should include the fact that
The agency changed midstream.
I can see if it's afternoon. It
is afternoon, so good afternoon,
uh, representative at a group.
So we do acknowledge the project
has been going on for quite some
time. There is a lot of work
that's actually been done with
the child support system.
Um, we did refactor and move it
into the cloud to get off the
mainframe in 20022 that went
live. We have implemented things
like electronic content
management into the system that
would light in 2024.
It is integrated into the um
yes, New Mexico or
portal and that went live in
2023. So there is a substantial
amount of work that has gone
into building out the child
support system.
The reauthorizations that we're
requesting are for 2020 and I
believe 2022, the authorization
for 2019 that you referred to
earlier, we believe that will be
spent this fiscal year, so.
Um, we will
Have that particular one
expended the next phase.
Or
The child support system is to
Built out the user interface, so
we're going through an
incremental process. We've been
working really closely over the
last 12 to 18 months with our
federal partners on a direction
forward, and we do believe we've
got a feasibility study and
requirements ready to move
forward, um.
With building out that work, um,
and I just wanna, um,
Um,
that this is this year, uh,
during this budget process, our
chair, our budget director, and,
um, staff both from LFC and DFA.
We have had more hearings
earlier. We have been more in
depth.
Um, and we have had more
opportunities to make changes,
and I think ever before. And
there are certainly things that
can be requested of staff moving
forward. Um, but I just want to
Thank you all for the incredible
work that you have done, um,
because it has made our jobs a
lot easier and we are uh much
more on top of this, and so
thank you, thank you to the
chair, uh.
For this opportunity. Thank you.
OK, I found the number I want to
ask about. Um, this is from the
February 6th, um, version line
7, Department of Information
Technology to establish a
statewide network of geographic
information system data, the GIS
was an executive request of
485,000, uh, in speaking to both
do it and obey office of
broadband access and expansion
in the Department of Information
Technology.
It seems like this is a vital
foundation, and I wondered if we
could have someone from do it
talk about that. It's not on the
new sheet, it was on the old
sheet, but from hearings over
the last several years. It just
seems an essential item.
Uh, thank you, Chair and members
of the committee. Thank you,
Representative for the question.
Yes, uh, this, um, creation of
this function, uh, working
inside do it. It's not creating
up a new office or anything.
It's just a business function
within um Department of
Information Technology to better
coordinate the GIS efforts
across state. Um, multiple
agencies have GIS efforts within
their own organization for.
For example, TRE obey, um, and
other functions. We don't have a
Yeah, unified approach to um
buying software are buying the
necessary licenses or buying uh
having a data governance
understanding of how to leverage
the state's existing investment
or emergency purposes for to be
used with Department of Homeland
Security, things of that nature.
So, if this will be a vital
effort to be that facilitator
and be that coordinator
gathering all that information
and make it available.
For any single agency within the
state IT ecosystem.
That's
I just wonder why it's not in
our final.
Budget recommendation.
A chair Representative Garrett,
we can make a note with this and
LFC staff can work with HAFC
staff about the specific
appropriation. It was not
included in the LOC initial
recommendation due to the LFC
not recommending uh an expansion
for do it for GIS and also too
there was just concerns about
possiblesibility of duplication
with GIS and so that was a
concern, um, but, uh, we will
work with HAFC staff about this
specific line item.
Thank you very much.
Are there other questions that
folks have?
OK.
Thank you very much. Thank you
All right. Do we have our, we'll
get our natural resources
working group in place.
OK.
Great. I think, uh, let's go
ahead and we'll get started.
All right, thank you, Mister
Chair and members. So we're in
the final stretch of our day.
Thank you for all your hard
work. We're gonna be starting
with this paper that says
natural resources and has your
name on it. Um and I'll go ahead
and get us started and then
Austin is here to answer uh any
of the real questions. So, um,
you also should have under that
paper a couple high levels.
Again, these high levels are
informational. They don't have
new scenarios on them because
the new scenarios are gonna be
on your first page.
So this is for you to look at
and then when we move things on
Monday, these high levels will
be updated.
So if we're working off of the
natural resources sheet, the
first item you're gonna see is
to the New Mexico Environment
Department operating budget. Uh,
if you all recall the New Mexico
divider and goodness, long, long
Saturday. OK, the New Mexico
Environment Department uh
requested a flat budget with a
significant amount of specials
and supplementals. Uh, there was
a difference in the LFC in the
executive, the LFC
recommendation had a small
reduction
because of some reorganization
that the department was doing
this just brings that up to the
executive recommendation, which
again was flat with last year.
All right.
I'll keep it moving. Uh, your
next one is gonna be for state
parks. Uh, this is an increase
of 300,000 for some personnel in
the state parks division. This
is again for some of that
increased capacity, and it was
one of the issues flagged during
the hearing, so this adds a
little money there.
Keeping it moving again, uh,
your third item is again for
personnel for the office of the
state engineer, again, this is
recurring. This is 1.5 million.
This was the agency's highest
priority with some of this
personnel money, so this gets
them a little more than halfway
to what they requested, but we
believe it's a really good
start, especially given the uh
recurring pressures you all are
under.
And then last, not least, there
is a one-time proposal, so
again, you all adopted quite a
bit of new money for water
special appropriations on
Thursday, um, we can go over
those if you'd like, um, but
this would be in addition to
that. So this is a one-time
proposal to increase uh soil and
water conservation district
Appropriation from 3 million to
9 million. So that's an
additional $6 million and that
would just be to fully fund
that.
for 3 years, similar to a grow
appropriation, this would
probably still live uh in
specials, not in grow because of
some of those auditing
requirements maybe don't
necessarily make sense for this
program, but it's sort of in the
same vein to upfront that
funding, uh, and examine how
that goes, so you all can
consider it in 3 years.
So that's it, um, I'll stop
talking and we can go to
questions that mostly Austin
will answer.
Thank you, Director Bryan. We're
gonna go to represent Pedigrew
then represented.
Thank you, chair, and, and thank
you, Amanda, so.
The squirt from the bottom up,
on the 6 million for the one
time.
What was the language that was
in the conversation on Thursday
because I was in and out on
Thursday.
Uh, Mr. Chair and representative
Pettigrew, I can probably pull
it up. Um, it was in your
specials, so if you give me a
moment, I will pull that up for
you.
I believe uh Representative
Vincent, he's on the work group,
yeah, very last one, the one
pager on the one time
appropriation. If we could just,
I'm, I'm just curious, chair,
if, if this deals with the water
trusts boards, uh, money that,
that the soil and Conservation
districts can get through that
or.
Where, what's that 6 million
does, Mr. Chair, members of the
committee, I think, uh,
specifically the 6 million is
going to be going the soil and
water conservation districts for
operating expenses,
so the money is going to be
going to them, they're, you
know, independent political
entities, so the money is going
to go first to the New Mexico
Department of Agriculture, and
then it goes to these entities
to be used.
Thank you very much for that,
Chairman and thank you for that.
Um,
The OSC's request, the proposed
amount of 1500. What line item
would that relate to on
The general fund high level.
So Mr. Chair Representative, so
that the 1.5 million that is in
the HAFC scenario for increasing
the office of the state
engineer, it can be spread out
between a variety of these
different staff-wide salary
adjustments. So that's gonna be
first on line 4. It's gonna be
that 1.7 million that's in the
executive rack, and there's
going to be one on line 16, and
then another on line 29, and
then another online 41, and so
that's how it's broken up in the
high level and then that 1
point.
5 million within the HFC
scenario can be spread out as
you see fit to each of these,
so.
Cherry, you're saying that we
can sit there and go, OK, I have
the 15 uh or the 1.5 million.
We want to apply.
X amount to line 16 salary-wide
adjustments or um
wherever we want, Mr. Chair, we
would recommend we can spread
the operating.
OK.
All right, um.
So, is it safe to assume that
300,000.
And state parks in the 670.8.
Well, the 670.8 would just fill
the gaps.
All the way down because that's
the bottom line change between
them, but the 300 is shy by by
by.
14 million or 1.4.
I apologize, Mr. Chair. Um, I
think the 300 that is
highlighted in the HFC scenario
would correspond with that
vacancy rate reduction line,
you're seeing in the high level,
and so that was one of the line
items that the agency was
highlighting if they wanted to
have increased staff retention
to implement the increased state
park fee revenue that they're
going to be seeing in the.
corresponding years.
The Chairman
Mm
We're gonna increase overhead.
To take care of an additional
$300,000.
On a system that we already have
in place.
Mr. Chair Representative, I
apologize if I confused you.
What I was trying to iterate is
that the agency highlighted they
needed increased personnel
funding for staff retention,
because they're going to have
increased park revenues, so they
want to implement those park
revenues. OK. Um.
Thank you. Thank you very much
from Pettigrew Representative
Herrera, then Representative
Brown.
Uh, thank you, Mr. Chair. Thank
you, panel. Uh.
I just want to compliment you on
the increased funding for soil
and water conservation districts
for those of us who have gone
through huge uh fires or the
changing course of a river, the
soil and water conservation
districts are the only state
agency that can go on to private
land.
And and help people, uh, fix
those remedy those situations,
so
In times of climate change,
this, this money is really
important, so I just appreciate
everybody's effort in doing
that, Mr. Chair, because, uh,
it's not going to stop anytime
soon.
Thank you very much,
Representative Brown.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I um
also stand in strong support of
the
One-time appropriations for soil
and water conservation
districts.
Um, it's my understanding, Mr.
Chair, and panel that
In my area of the state, uh, I
know I put some money into the
council of governments to do
grant writing so that
Various
quasi-governmental groups or
government can actually get some
more uh funding in, but I was
told what they really needed was
not grant writing assistance,
but this type of direct funding
for operating costs, so I, I
think this is a really good uh
move for us.
Um, the question I have, I have
two questions. One, Mr. Chair,
Can we break this down into the
estimated amount per district.
Do we know?
Mr. Chair Representative, I can
certainly follow up and get that
uh breakdown for you,
absolutely. Thank you. And then
I wanted to know through which
state agency, um, I don't
remember exactly where soil and
water uh belongs in the budget.
If you could tell me, uh, who's,
which state agency is gonna
funnel the funds. It's
representative, great question.
It's technically the New Mexico
Department of Agriculture, which
is under uh New Mexico.
I did not know that. Thank you.
And I also want to speak, Mr.
Chairman, in favor of uh some
additional personnel for the
state parks. I feel like during
the COVID um period, we, we lost
a lot of ground with the
condition of our state parks.
And there were many of them
heading into pretty severe
disrepair and so I, I hope
having additional personnel will
help bring things back. Thank
you. Thank you very much,
Representative Brown.
Uh, any other questions?
Representative Wil Hunt, please.
Um, Mr.
Um, just game of fish wouldn't
be under this, this, uh,
subsection, would it? OK.
Thank you. Um,
I'm, but I'm just looking at
these increases and and.
I'm just I I
I prove I like
you.
Thank you.
Awesome. OK. Uh, I don't see any
other questions. Thank you very
much, uh, Doctor Celly, Mr.
Davidson, and director of
writing for your work on this.
Um, this is great and, and I
think we thank you uh to our
work group. We really appreciate
it and I think we're moving in
the right direction.
Real quick, just real quick for
well on the office of the state
engineer recruit recurring
budget at 1.5. What is that in
addition to the, the percentage
addition that we've already
approved, Mr. Chair boost the
engineer up to almost 8%
increase in general.
In addition to what, what's the
current, uh, percentage
of the initial LFC increase was
3.4%, 1.5% is going to take them
to the,
that's also the section A
compensation package. It's a
further a million, it'll take
that to a 10.8% general fund. I
saw that, yeah, through our
special, um, um, catchup that
was very significant, um, and I
just want to say.
Been listening to those needs
of, um, I don't know that it's
a, it's not always going to be
100%, but this is, this is
pretty, um, this is a
significant raise.
did you want to say anything
else? All right, thank you.
Great. OK. I think that
concludes us for today, uh,
staff, thank you so much. Let's
give the staff a big hand.
Uh.
And, uh, a great reminder from
Representative Vincent, want to
give a big thank you to Vice
Chair Dickson for the lunch that
was provided. She did that and
get her.
OK, I think that concludes us
for the day. Thank you, members.
