Three incredibly important
agencies to here today so
presenters obviously I want you
to go fully through what you
want to present but to also be
brief will work to be very
thorough at the same time very
concise with our questions is
the committee and we know
especially when there are some
significant differences that
there will be additional areas
for follow up today is
preliminary action only and so
there will be additional
opportunities as we go through
this budgeting process.
With that will just go ahead
we're going to start with Mr
Abbey as we go members will turn
the agency code five oh five in
our binders this is the cultural
affairs department we're as we
do we're very force that Mr
Abbey there we'll go with our
LFC analysts will introduce the
counterparts including from the
executive the department of
finance administration and then
our incredible secretaries.
Estimate okay let's let's go
ahead and start with Mister
money.
Thank you to address good
afternoon Mister chairman and
members of the committee I'm
Andrew Miner I am the deputy
state budget director and also
the executive analyst for the
department of cultural affairs I
will be guiding you through the
presentation today and with
occasional comment from director
Avid as he sees fit so we can go
and start on pages two and three
of your
of your packet here this is the
the overall agency a difference
she to see here.
So in terms of revenue for the
department of cultural affairs
the LFC recommends the general
fund increase of about one point
one million or three percent
compared with the FY twenty
three operating budget and the
executive recommends a general
fund increase of two point two
million or six percent over
fiscal year twenty twenty three
in base expenditures the base
recommendations are fairly
similar both LFC and exec
recommend modest increases for
personal services and other
costs the majority of the
difference between the two
recommendations is in the
expansion request and the
expansion request is for
janitors at very state museums
and historic sites the executive
recommendation supports a twenty
one of the agencies requested
thirty janitors and the chief
level for cleaning standards at
museums and historic sites the
O. C. recommendation includes
five hundred thousand and eight
FTE for the same purpose for
more phase transition from
contractors to FTP terms of
performance measures analysts
have reached consensus on the
measures and targets.
There was a comment before I go
to the programs.
Yes reminder Mr chairman members
of the committee and backing up
our analyst and Amanda Dick
Peddie who's who's ill and
In this budget the high level
goes a long way to saying what's
going on in line forty nine of
page one you can see that one
point one five seven million
difference almost all of it is
the cleaning issue for the
museums and want to so that's
the big issue just a couple
other things point out before we
get into the programs in the LFC
documented volume three a lot of
flak for you museum attendance
data.
What they can look at the
pandemic was really tough for
the museums there looks like
they were pretty steady over
seven hundred thousand attendees
and then fell to one hundred and
seventeen thousand in the
pandemic here and they were
covered a lot but it's it's been
a challenge on the next page we
also show of funding.
Kind of combined statement for
the museums including the role
of the foundations and if I'm
not mistaken the foundation Feds
foundation revenues are not
included in through in the
they're not included but they're
generating significant revenue
if you look at the bottom of
page fifty eight they're
generating about eight.
FY twenty three twelve million
dollars in addition to the to
the department's general fund
budget.
thirty nine million so that's a
significant supplement many of
them are here and you know I
know the state appreciates their
efforts so with that Mr chairman
back to into for the purpose I
thank you Director Abbey Mr
chair members the committee next
we go to page four of your hand
out and that's for P. five
thirty six museums and historic
sites this is by far the largest
program in the agency it
contains the budgets for all
eight state museum and a
district sites as well as the
museum resources division.
Revenue here the LFC and
Executive recommendations are
nearly identical in the face
general fund increase and the
difference in revenue this is
the big difference in revenues
is a tribute to the expansion
request where the executive is
about nine hundred and forty
four thousand dollars higher in
basics managers the LFC
recommendation includes one
hundred thousand dollars to
provide a ten percent targeted
pay increase for museum
directors and one hundred
thousand for other staff pay
increases for compaction issues
and that's due to the agency
having struggles of turnover
among museum directors who might
be able to provide better pays
directors elsewhere other
museums the LFC recommendation
includes a hundred fifty
thousand for miscellaneous
museum costs mainly due to
inflation things like utility
costs things like that the
executive recommendation
includes about three hundred and
twenty nine thousand for this
purpose and the executive
recommendation also reduces
General Fund janitorial
contracts by twenty nine
thousand and that's due to the
expansion request which I'll
talk about next.
Again we've talked about this a
little bit before but the agency
requests two million dollars in
general fund and thirty FTE in
general the janitorial staff to
raise the cleaning standards of
state museums and historic sites
currently the department only
has eight janitorial employers
for all sixteen facilities seven
which are in Albuquerque and one
in Santa Fe so the other
outlying facilities have no
dedicated janitorial staff.
The executive recommendation
includes one million four
hundred forty four thousand in
general fund revenue to support
twenty one new general Torio FTE
basically spread out all around
the state and that would be
sufficient to raise the cleaning
standard state museums and
historic sites from the little I
cleaning standards level four
the LFC recommendation includes
five hundred thousand for
approximately eight additional
permit janitorial staff for more
phased transition to in house
janitorial staff.
profanity just real briefly.
The LFC recommendation again you
consume Alliance formed six of
the high level have two hundred
thousand for targeted increases
for staff including the leaders
of the museum's.
this would be approximately ten
thousand more per director these
are some of the most highly
educated people working for
state government these are PH
dis and I know from personal
experience some others
outstanding leaders of our
museums like Dr Fran Levine of
going to other states and more
than double their pay to provide
those services so we we need to
retain the leadership we have
also on to your attention since
we're talking about the need to
employ more people on the PS
California State that on page
twelve and the department has a
funded vacancy rate of
approximately ten percent so
they do have the where with all
to address these needs in part
with the funding they have thank
you Mr chairman.
I thank you director Mr chair
and members the next three P.
codes the differences are pretty
small so we can go over them
fairly quickly starting with
page six of the preservation
program the LFC the Executive
recommendations are actually
identical in this program so
both recommendations include
just a small general fund
revenue increased to meet
federal match requirements.
So since those are the same we
can go on to page seven P. five
thirty nine library services
including the state library.
At both LFC and exec recommend
increasing other transfers by
six hundred and forty nine point
five thousand and that is our
rural library endowment fund
revenue that's being brought
into the operating budget for
grants in terms of general fund
the executive recommendation
includes an increase of eighty
point five thousand or two
percent compared with the fiscal
year twenty twenty three and the
F. B. LFC recommendation
increases general fund revenue
by a hundred and thirty thousand
providing more funding for
library supplies dramatist
cartilage official okay great
we'll do a relatively minor
right okay so I'll go ahead go
to Mr chair committee members
will go to page eight for P.
five fourty program support for
revenue here the LFC
recommendation includes a
general fund revenue increase of
seventy five thousand one point
six percent the executive
recommended the general fund
increase of two hundred nine
thousand or four point five
percent and other revenues are
the same.
For bass expenditures the LFC
and exec recommendations both
increase personal services
employee benefits category to
allow the agency to hire more
people and then the executive
recommendation includes seventy
thousand more in general fund
revenue in the other category
for tribal and educational
outreach.
Turning to page nine that brings
us to the last few code P. seven
six one with New Mexico arts
program.
Revenue the LFC recommendation
increases general fund by sixty
two point seven thousand or
three point eight percent and
the executive recommends an
increase of one hundred and
eighty two point seven thousand
or eleven percent over FY twenty
three.
In the base the LFC
recommendation increases funding
for a person and slightly
increases contractual and
miscellaneous costs funding.
The executive recommendation the
largest component of the general
fund increases ninety thousand
dollars increase funding for the
music Commission and that
includes fifty thousand dollars
for contracts at twenty five
thousand dollars to convert one
part time FD to full time and
then the executive
recommendation also includes
fifty thousand dollar increase
for our services contracts for
performing and creative arts
organizations that concludes the
operating budget Mr chair if I
like to just briefly point out
on the last page of your handout
you can see page thirteen you
can see the item nonrecurring
appropriation recommendations
for other cultural affairs
department and I just like to
clarify one thing really quickly
The executive fully funded the
first line there were you see
eight million dollars for the
executive and five million
dollars for the LFC the
executive fully funded the
agency's request which was a
little broader than the language
you see here was actually for to
improve visitor amenities at
museums and historic sites was
not just for exhibit development
which the LFC recommended and
you can see a few others there
including the recommendations
both concurring to fifteen
million dollar injection into
the rural libraries endowment
fund that includes my
presentation Mr chair director
Avid of any other comments.
Thank you very much the.
This is of the committee thank
you for having me here today I
want to acknowledge a few folks
that are with me W. secretary
Michele Gallagher Roberts great
collect Geisinger CFO You Like
It name who is chair of
education and engagement Patrick
Moore who is chair of history
and heritage along with several
other division directors and
department leadership I also
have to acknowledge that Mr
Carlos Medina who is chair of
the New Mexico music commission
is with us and behind me you see
a number of our friends and
supporters from our boards are
valuable foundation our friends
group and partner organizations
in keeping with the chairs
request I will move quickly
through page two which is just
an overview of what the New
Mexico department of cultural
affairs does we provide services
and programs in every county and
tribal communities across the
state we are known primarily for
museums and historic sites which
offer exhibits performances
lectures and more we care for
hundreds of historic objects art
objects documents photographs
and more we make these available
to researchers the fellows and
students but we also actively
participate in our own research
and scholarship and a variety of
areas and care for variety of
contemporary and historic
facilities we also operates a
book mobiles Fund arts events
statewide guide historic
preservation activities around
the state undertake
archaeological monitoring and
survey work we present a robust
series of education programs
many of them presented cooperate
with collaborative Lee across
the department.
We also publish help lawsuit
which is the country's oldest
museum magazine and we have
operate the award winning museum
in New Mexico press.
Moving on to page three you can
read a little bit about our
mission statement and our vision
that guide our work our goals
are for access and inclusion
collective impact stewardship in
partnership in rural and tribal
communities and regardless of
the division Geographic Area or
focus of the of the division
every division is responsible
for contributing programs and
services that move these
departmental goals together and
help us realize our mission and
our vision.
I'm moving on to page four you
see some of our performance
measures shipments over the
previous fiscal year you will
notice that we served over three
hundred and fifty thousand
children statewide we have over
four hundred and twenty five
thousand people participate in
education programs we reached
over one point three million in
audience members through our
friends and we have a ninety
eight percent completion rate of
reviewing historic
preservation request within
thirty days and these are just a
few of the key highlights of the
many ways we impact communities
across the state activating our
mission improving the life of
all New Mexicans and educating
especially the children of our
state.
On page five of the high level
comparison
the LFC verses the executive I
think the analyst and director
of you have done a great job
going over it so I'm just going
to skip over to page six which
is really the departments
priorities in terms of the key
gaps between LFC in the
executive you've heard a lot
about janitorial FTEs and I will
go a little bit further in the
next slide also you heard about
the operating cost particularly
in museum and historic sites we
are very grateful that our
departmental budget has grown
steadily over the past ten years
but the majority of that growth
has been in person and budget in
fact our operating costs have
often gone down so we're
operating the museums with fewer
and fewer resources for basic
things like do it services and
utilities and so the request is
is exceptionally important to us
I also want to draw attention to
the New Mexico museum I'm sorry
New Mexico music commission
which is an administratively
attached agency that for decades
plus was unfunded
last year you generously
provided funding which I believe
Mr Medina and his commission
have proven that they can
effectively use to support.
Eliminating.
The service enough.
Exactly they really effectively
use this to help musicians
particularly in rural
communities they proved to be a
an incredible partner with the
department we are working with
them to present some business
classes for artist professional
development around the state and
so I'd really like to encourage
some re thinking about signing
their request for M. and
marketing and operating the cost
which total sixty five thousand.
Moving on to page seven.
I sincerely appreciate that it
is very odd that the secretary
for the New Mexico department of
cultural affairs is standing up
here talking about janitors.
Please take that as a sign of
how important and critical this
issue is.
I'm
we do not operator own just is
not operator facilities we
operate our own facilities as
you saw on the previous slide
into performance measures we
have over a million people who
come through our doors through
various programs services.
We're open most of our
facilities are open six or seven
days a week we host class visits
in these facilities we have free
Wednesdays for senior citizens.
This is a critical issue and so
I just want to walk through a
few of the points we maintain a
million square feet of publicly
accessible buildings state space
statewide.
As you heard we currently have
eight janitorial FTEs they're
located seven in Albuquerque and
one in element for the but if
you want to look at it just a
square footage per FTE that's a
hundred and twenty thousand
square feet than FTP has to
clean in an eight hour work day.
We only have two facilities that
have funds to contract out their
janitorial services that's the
Mexico farm and ranch in element
for the of both the natural
history museum in the NH C. C.
who do have janitorial staff
will occasionally use other
state fund revenue to hire
janitorial staff to clean up
after rentals but in Santa Fe
and then all of our historic
sites security guards Rangers
instructional coordinators are
cleaning toilets and moving
trash we do not contract out
janitorial.
So what is reasonable for one F.
T. E. to come clean you heard
and you talk about levels of
cleaning which are industry
standards but I thought some
real life comparisons would be
better.
According to the building south
of the state capitol the state
capitol has one F. T. E. for
fourteen thousand seven hundred
square feet that is full time
year round they bring in
additional staff during the
session.
GSD has one F. T. for forty
three thousand square feet so
not nearly enough to be at a
level three but they have level
four so DCA needs at least
twenty three FTEs to be
comparable to DST's calculation
or forty three thousand square
feet crafty.
LFC is recommendation has eight
we are grateful for those eight
but quite frankly it is
insufficient a total of fifteen
of to use are needed again these
are heavily is facilities we we
use very limited contractual
support the lack of janitors and
low level supposedly this affect
employee morale.
Unclean facilities make it more
difficult for foundation
partners true I talked that
twelve million dollars in
funding that is brought to the
state through private donations.
Janitorial staff is critical in
identifying maintenance issues
early on they're the people that
are in restaurants notice of the
toilet is leaking they're the
people that are in back rooms to
notice there's a water leak
developing or the a light keeps
going on and there may be
something wrong with elector.
And contractor also Tyler
services are not necessarily
more efficient down apartment
rents heather reed the director
pays a hundred and thirty seven
dollars a year thousand dollars
a year hundred thirty seven
thousand dollars a year for
contractual janitorial support.
You could hire two and a half
janitors for that same amount so
I thank you for listening to me
talk about janitors I usually
talk about fun things like that
that education but this really
is a critical issue.
So moving on to page eight I
respectfully ask the committee
consider adding three hundred
and thirty seven thousand to
adequately fund janitorial
staff.
I ask that you reconsider a
hundred and seventy nine
thousand to cover basic
operating cost in museums and
historic sites in that you give
serious consideration to sixty
five thousand dollars to
consistency of the
reestablishment of the New
Mexico arts commission as an
administratively attached agency
under the leadership of the
commission.
Moving on to page nine
We talked briefly about specials
I don't need to go into that too
deeply
the fifteen million dollars to
the rural librarians element
will bring that balance up to
two hundred twenty eight million
dollars
that will generate a sufficient
return that we can start paying
out I think the constituency
around that bill would
ultimately like to see that
endowment sitting at somewhere
near fifty million so investment
of fifteen million quite a ways
thank you for that also as was
noted there's a little confusion
between the eight million dollar
agency requests for visitor
amenities exhibits and other
things and the LFC out for
exhibit development I have five
million
while exhibit Development is
normally funded through the
efforts of our private
foundation partners and operates
on a three to five year time
line we are certain we can put
this money to effective valuable
use and we truly appreciate the
consideration about special and
with that
I conclude my presentation thank
you for your time and attention
I want to thank our analyst
including Amanda Dick Peddie is
not here today and director of
the first step in and and I'm
happy to stand for questions
thank you very much Secretary
Garcia Griego you gonna go thank
you to your team thank you to so
many who are here today
including from the friends
groups your commitment is really
on display here today we're
gonna go straight to questions
will go ahead and start with
Representative Baca I thank you
Mr chairman thank you madam
secretary for your presentation
I don't have a question but I
just want to highlight how this
is impacted my community so I
want to just kind of highlight
that the the part the a
partnership between the universe
of the
New Mexico natural history
museum and also the schools is
allowing every fifth grader in
Valencia County to attend a
field trip this is funded in
part with the the support of
meta so I want to thank you for
this.
You know I think that our
students have.
Such an opportunity to have the
experience of science the
technology I think that New
Mexico the rich culture and for
our families our students and
does a visit New Mexico I think
this is a great opportunity to
help to showcase and highlight
it so I want to thank you for
your partnerships I hope that we
have more partnerships going
around the the state I was
honored to attend your event and
I just want to thank you for the
work that you guys do thank you
Mr chairman.
Thank you very much
Representative Baca
Representative Sweetser please
secretary of state thanks for
the work you do almost percent
us that's my backyard and
Says a lot of potential I look
for to see how you guys are
gonna do in the future that
thank you.
Thank you very much
Representative Sweetser next
we're gonna go to representative
Garcia than representatives.
Thank you Mr chairman madam
secretary thanks for the
presentation you know I that
honor of visiting a couple of
the sites one of the zero to
mobiles and for some.
And you know the only thing that
caught my eye for some there was
a little lack
What do you call it.
Putting it out there these
facilities are there you know
because I never knew what you're
onto a winner knowledgeable
Representative knows very
educational you know.
The best part of this Mr
chairman madam secretary what
our kids in the.
You know because nowadays you
know our kids are forgettable
veterans are forgetting the
culture for the grew up in and
we got a reserves are for our
young children the end of the
day if you pass from zero I
don't know that's not a good
deal with the issue of COVID
thank what you're doing you do
not have a great job for state
thank you Mr thank you
representative Garcia
Representative Cruz.
Thank you Mr chairman.
So.
Back to genders of.
You know as someone who had to
worry about
facilities and the cleanliness
of them I can appreciate your
concern and and
need but I'd like for you to
explain a little bit of how you
arrive at the the the square
footage per facility they're all
a little different how do you
kind of get to a middle ground
with with your personal needs
Rajender Torio.
Mr chair representative members
of the committee so I have
looked at industries centers
around various levels of
cleanliness based on how many
square feet a well equipped
janitor can clean in an eight
hour shift and so in looking
around the state I mean
obviously there are facilities
without any janitors
so at least one F. T. E. which
the LFC recommendation would
provide that at eight facilities
one janitor but the square
footage per person it's just not
feasible for that one FTE to
claim a very large facility
sufficiently as a stop gap as I
mentioned our security guards
for instance here in Santa Fe
the security guards come on to
the staff to come on they come
around seven seven thirty they
do a sweep of cleaning and then
move on to their very important
role as security guards and then
when the museum is closed they
do another round but if there's
a school group that comes
through if there's a large tour
groups that come through there's
nobody to go and and even re
stop the restroom clean the
toilets so it's based on on
industry calculations per square
foot and then I did sort of
proof of concept by calling
again the capitol building as
well as GST to find out where
they are it does you know range
I probably is you see the
capitol has significantly more
people than GSD but the
building's function in different
ways right there's a lot of
folks who come through here in a
day to day basis and GSD
facility on office space maybe
not ours are public facilities
we do have as you see you know
we're getting back to six
hundred thousand seven hundred
thousand people here coming
through plus all the educational
groups and so we we do need to
meet at least the forty three
thousand so I do have a chart
that takes the square footage of
each facility divide that by the
different levels of cleaning and
identifies how.
Many of TV's would be necessary
there are few of the historic
sites that are very small and
so.
Part time F. T. E. is that
correct calculation but by the
time somebody goes to work at
fort Sumner you're not going to
find somebody in fort Sumner
number one who who can survive
on part time work and number two
you're still than essentially
operating at three and a half
days without janitorial staff
with part time FTE in a facility
that's open six or seven days a
week I hope that answers your
question it does thank you Mr
chairman too often I think
there's a confusion when we talk
about public facilities we have
a facility like this like the
wrong house we have government
buildings for our employees are
bureaucratic staff have to
function and typically they are
were the public for the most
part has to visit or or has
occasion to visit on the other
hand I would I don't speak for
any of this body here today but
I would suspect that most of us
would agree that our museums are
treasures for the state.
And not only are the treasures
for the state but they're the
treasures that the taxpayer has
paid for and whether they are or
where they are native New
Mexicans or the our visitors
from out of state.
When you visit one these
facilities you you can't help
but notice.
Not only the amenities and the
specificity of what that
facility has.
But as to the cause us of this
facility we all notice that and
to often we I think don't give
the attention to that aspect
until it becomes a problem and
it's very visible to the public
and so while it may not be
glamorous necessarily to provide
janitorial support and
janitorial staff I think it's an
essential part of what what this
agency has to do and deal with
on a daily basis thank you Mr
chairman.
Thank you very much
Representative Cruz listening
Representative brown and
Representative Garrett.
Thank you madam chair thank you
madam secretary for your
presentation I enjoyed the part
about janitors quite frankly Mr
chair to me that's the nuts and
bolts of state government it's a
side we don't usually see or
talk about but this is very
important in my opinion so Mr
chairman my.
Family does a lot of visiting of
museums and historic sites it's
it's what we did raising our
children spend a lot of time
seeing some really neat places.
so this is our reputation with
visitors is that how our
facilities look and Mister
chairman and secretary I know
when I go to a restaurant high
grade in part by have the
restrooms are.
Whether that's good or not that
is part of what I look at so I
think it's really important that
our resident visitors and
visitors from out of state
Have a a sense of awe about
these facilities and a lot of
that has to do is are there dust
bunnies in the corners is their
toilet paper in the bathrooms
things like that is there a
leaky sink and so I think these
FTEs are needed I think they are
essential I especially
appreciate your point madam
secretary Mr chairman about
identifying maintenance issues
early that makes perfect sense
to me as well but I just want to
see us have pride and and our
offerings so I fully support
this and Mr chairman I I really
hope we'll do everything we can
to give those FTEs thank you.
Thank you very much
Representative Brown thanks for
going to Representative Garrett
then representative Garcia
briefly for a second time thank
you Mr chair thank you madam
secretary just a note on that
sparkle factor it would seem
that if you have permanent staff
they can address as I go around
the state told me V. Ms there's
priceless things that somebody
that you just contract can't be
trained to do but when you have
is it accurate to say that when
you have your own custodial
staff they can have a higher
standard of of cleaning those
exhibits the dust and stuff
could you just comment on that
yes Mr chair representative
members of the committee you're
absolutely correct obviously
conservation of an object will
go to a qualified
conservationists for cleaning
but there are
Delicate aspect of taking care
of exhibits even as simple as
how you clean plexi so that
you're not scratching the train
and keep it clear and crystal
for visitors how you go in and
clean and interactive yes that
is a level of specialized
training that is much easier to
train up to when their in house
than when they're contractual
stuff thank you very much for
that clarification thank you
Representative Garrett
representative Garcia for second
time thank you Mr real brief you
know my concern is that one
million one hundred thousand
dollar difference between one
another and as a committee I
hope we can close that gap a
little bit because you know
these things are very important
I thank you madam thank you very
much representative Garcia next
we have we're gonna go to
Representative Pettigrew and
advised her to.
I think chairman and thank you
madam secretary for the
presentation
I get the the skill set that
goes with playing with certain
things there are things in our
house of my want for me to.
I get that.
I get that
Chairman and madam secretary.
You you made a brief comment
toward.
Station with respect to
operation costs going down
personnel costs going up but
then we also see a miss ballots
with respect to the amount FTEs
the unit can you expand on that
just a little bit thank you to.
Representative I'm sorry Mr
chair representative members of
the committee yes so our
personal cost of essentially
gone up we are grateful that
that you all have funded those
increased costs but I'm sorry to
be brief in my presentation I
didn't put the chart and
essentially over time our budget
for operating cost has remained
level or in fact gone down while
as we all know costs for things
like utilities and basic
services have continued to grow
up go up and I have said in in
several committee meetings over
the past few years that I'm
gonna continue to bring this
issue up
that we need more money for
contract in operating support I
appreciate that maybe it can all
be done in one session but we
need to work on closing that gap
personnel costs have gone up
I I will say we have had in
terms of filling positions we
had a record here for filling
positions is here we filled a
hundred and seventy nine
positions
The the it's it's but we have
had twenty six percent internal
promotion right so I am pleased
to promote people from within
but it does make it very hard to
actually lower your vacancy rate
when you're moving people from
one position to another
So I hope that answers your
question.
Thank you chairman thank you
madam secretary for that if yes
that helps into twenty two
thousand twenty two.
Chairman we we were reverted.
Almost one point four million
out of salaries and benefits
under the other category point
talk a little bit about what we
did with that one point four
thank you chairman.
Mr Chairman representative
members of the committee I'm
yeah that is that transfer out
of person was an exceptional
instance in DCA normally when
you see those transfers out of
the two hundred they're actually
going to another cat program
category two hundred or another
two hundred category in this
case we were very fortunate to
receive Senator shuttered venue
operator requests they were part
of the federal pandemic relief
program and so we utilize about
funding to pay for personal and
use the transfer money out of
the two hundred state cover some
of those operating costs that I
was talking about along with
contract support so I think that
one point I can't remember the
exact number that you saw is
actually a blessing and a
surprise we were using federal
dollars wisely and is rare in my
agency to see that kind of
person transfer.
Thank you chairman and madam
secretary for that
chairman my last one for the
comment the question on your
back to you as I think of made a
pretty clear that I'm not a fan
of growing government
I think I'm gonna have to make
an exception today with respect
to what we're talking about I
really really appreciate the
fact that we drill down to the
maintenance issue because that
level of staff
Well if you if you let me walk
into what watch me walk around
my business I'm together picks
up the trash.
So you know I appreciate the
fact that we're doing that and
we're not looking at growing we
offer you're correct side of
this we're looking at at the
helping working men and women as
well we're putting those
together in the yeah I
understand the may not all be
full time positions but at the
end of the day still an
opportunity and I appreciate
that thank you chairman.
Thank you very much
Representative Pettigrew let's
go to Representative
Let's go to Representative brown
for a second time briefly then
we're gonna go to vice chair
Dixon and then I'll have a
couple of quick questions just
to interject please thank you Mr
chairman I did have a question I
meant to ask earlier if we have
secretary I believe I heard that
there are currently eight
janitorial FTEs most of them
based in Albuquerque so I the
question I have is what kind of
drive time are we paying for
when they go from Albuquerque to
is a site museum something
outside of Albuquerque I think
that's part of the equation Mr
chair.
Mr chair representative members
of the committee they would we
actually don't pay drive time
because the seven of FTEs at
natural history in in H. C. C.
you have more than enough work
out those facilities to keep
them busy both of those are our
two largest facilities they also
if you look at volume three
you'll see there among our most
visited and natural history in
particular tends to attract a
lot of children so those FTEs
are based at those facilities so
for instance when Coronado needs
the restrooms clean it is our
Rangers or are instructional
coordinators were cleaning those
again and their off hours or
when you know visitation
visitors are there at slow.
You Mr chair thank you
Representative Brown vice chair
Dixon.
Thank you for the presentation I
want to.
Go back to the funded vacancy
rate which we frequently talk
about but.
When we're talking about
expanding positions and that's
what you're asking for correct
sorry Mr chair
director yes okay Mister chair
vice chair Rep members of the
committee yes we are asking for
new positions.
And Mr chair
And director.
The funded vacancy rate though
overall is above ten percent
which is three point six million
dollars and so.
What is the what is preventing
the department from utilizing
those funds that have already
been appropriated.
To fund some of the positions
that you're requesting.
Mr chair by madam vice chair
members of the committee those
vacant positions is funded
vacancy rates are positions that
we need and the museum we in
addition to frontline positions
like cashiers janitors security
guards those sorts of things we
also have highly specialized
positions which can be extended
recruitments for instance are
head of our conservation I think
it took us nearly eighteen
months to recruit for that
position because these are very
specialized or not a lot of
people who have them but we need
those positions we need those
things filled
so I think a lot of wear and you
look at vacancies across the
department you'll see that there
the specialized skill sets that
do require protracted
recruitments you'll also see
that a lot of if you go on this
bill website you'll see a lot of
those are continuous
recruitments because we find
ourselves having to go through
multiple
recruitments I would say about
the business operations director
in the office of archaeological
studies is another instance of
an incredibly difficult position
that's probably been vacant for
any number of years at this
point because you need somebody
is both an archaeologist and
knows how to run a business
so I I hope that answers your
question I'm happy to take
another pass at if not thank you
Mr chair and thank you it does
to some extent
if for the looking though it
almost fifty and and I recognize
Director Abbey the numbers that
we get on our calculation sheet
are from September is that
correct and so it's possible
that some of the positions may
have been filled in the meantime
but based on the data that we
have Mr chair
we're looking at approximately
fifty positions and I do
understand that a number of
those are probably very
specialized.
I'm what I'm getting at is the
LFC recommendation is a more
phased in approach to expanding
positions which.
Allows for some expansion but
also is potentially asking for a
re evaluation of some of your
current funded vacancies to see
if there's funding that could be
moved around thank you Mr chair
thank you Mr Nixon
Representative house.
Thank you Mr chair madam
secretary I just want to comment
on your museum at the Bosque
Redondo.
I want to say.
Thank you for teaching me part
of my history that I did not
learn in school history books so
thank you for that the for that
reason the madam secretary I
support your initiatives thank
you Mr chair the representative
Allison we're gonna go to
represent a cruise for a second
time and then on some questions
thank you Mr chairman just a
very brief question this may be
meant for Mr Abbey do the
various departments have the
latitude to use either salary
savings or vacancy savings.
To fill positions because I
don't know that that's a sort of
the case both the full of the
to table the other categories in
person thank.
That they moved in fact one
point four million of funding
from person other parts of the
budget in terms of latitude to
take vacancy savings and use
them for out of cycle rate
adjustments in general they have
the latitude what they require
some approvals to the personnel
office which is probably a
little slow and cumbersome and
it can be achieved but it
probably would you couldn't call
a full flexibility I wanted to
establish Mr chairman only
because sometimes you see the
ball is in the for necessarily
available thank you Sir thank
you Mr thank you very much
Representative doctors thank you
madam secretary I think you see
we see with our committee
incredible belief and commitment
to the history and heritage
within your department madam
secretary I want to follow up on
some of the questions from vice
chair Dixon
you talk about three positions
three or four very highly
skilled positions were shown
just within museums and
historical sites a funded
vacancy FTE number of forty
positions and so that's I think
perhaps there is additional
offline information that we can
go through it is not compare of
all yes also it madam secretary
you you've taken advantage of
the.
The different mechanisms
available to transfer money
within your department over
during your tenure is that
right.
Mr chair thank you madam
secretary and so thank I would
joining Representative a cruise
in encouraging you to explore
that option again that you've
taken advantage madam secretary
we see here that FY twenty two
reversions were almost two
hundred thousand a hundred
ninety four of one eighty and
madam secretary that would have
filled do we know how many
janitorial positions that would
fill.
Mr chair that would be about
eight I believe okay thank a few
few few three three four for
that thank you madam secretary
so as we look at sort of the two
recommendations
the expansion recommendation
from the LFC perhaps combined
with some inner to more mental
transfers and again madam
secretary analogy and may have
changed in some cases we've seen
the funded vacancies and the
money go up perhaps it may have
gone down
the the sort of the the latter
part of last year the amount
that we're showing is three
point six million dollars that
were allocated to PSE the but
unspent between that reversions
and the expansion there's madam
secretary you made a very
important case here today but it
seems like substantial capacity
to bring the LFC expansion
recommendation closer to sort of
where your vision which isn't
very exciting vision is leading
us
and so madam secretary I think
if there's anything you want to
add please do so
Mr chair point taken on a on a
few of those I do want to
clarify if that on the
reversions ninety seven thousand
about was for specials that the
year there was identified
purpose for the reversion
percentage in P. five three six
which is where I am asking for
the janitorial staff is point
zero zero four percent.
Thank you thank you madam
secretary that super very
helpful information and I think
we acknowledging Mr Abbey
acknowledged in response to
Representative Dow cruises
question that we have other
challenges within the state's
specifically within the state
person office to help make some
of these inner workings easier
for effective effective and and
visionary folks
up I think madam secretary we're
we're gonna now ask for the LFC
recommendation I think I'd like
to ask them to look a little
more closely you gave us some
very good data on the low
reversions in the area where
you're wanting funding we also
see a very high P. unspent
vacancy savings opportunity
perhaps that can bring the two
recommendations a little bit
closer and thank you so much for
your presentation today thank
you to the friends who are here
we see this as a department
that's moving forward in
exciting ways and the LFC
expansion recommendation is
looking to meet that thank you
madam secretary thank you Mr.
They would move the LFC
recommendation.
Okay it's been moved by vice
chair Dixon within a request for
staff to look more closely
specifically at the janitorial
vacancies second by
Representative daylight Cruz is
there opposition to that motion.
Please show Representative
Montoya in opposition to the
motion thank you madam secretary
thank you to the friends.
Very funny.
Okay well ask folks to clear.
Clear the room as quickly as we
can simply because we have two
other large agencies.
Yeah.
Yeah you just get it back.
We're
gonna have somebody.
This.
Okay.
This and then I'll put that.
They got what we're we're.
Thank you we're close the night
at the museum of where it is.
We're we're very fortunate.
Committee members and we're
gonna ask folks to.
Committee we're gonna now move
to HSD code six thirty this is
with our Human Services
Department
acting secretary it's great to
see you we're gonna turn it over
to the incredible miss ruby on
us about to start walking
through committee members these
next two agencies of course deal
directly with the health of New
Mexicans so we want to spend
some good time going into this
today is asking about can you
start us with agency code six
thirty yes thank you Mr chairman
and members were going from
night at the museum tonight in
the emergency room.
But I will try and make it less
painful again that Mr chairman
members of the committee my name
is ruby and SQL I'm with the
legislative finance committee
and we have with that acting
secretary Kerry army col and we
also have with us for M. D. F.
A. budget meant MaryBeth didn't
more and we also have with us
the CFO for the Human Services
Department miss Carol Lee Graham
so with that I'm Mr chairman I
think we'll go through the
packet first kids this is the
Human Services department and as
you know this is the Medicaid
agency we have a lot to data
here free so let me just tell
you really quickly what's in
your packet and then we'll just
dive in of course first of all
you have your high level this is
a big one
but when you really start going
through it it's not maybe as
daunting as it being so high
level and then we have for you
the special appropriation she so
this would have the special
appropriations that were either
recommended by LFC or the
executive there were twenty
seven special appropriations
request from the department they
are not all on here these are
just the recommended one so
there's your special
appropriation sheet then of
course we have all the different
sheets which will go through and
then we have that performance
measures and there's like about
six seven pages of performance
measures we've come to consensus
on all of that so no need to
worry about that and then we
have a little more data than
you're used to seeing you were
just talking about the PF help
that we've got that and we have
five different divisions here
thank that are on your PS calc
and then Mr chairman we have a
little bit more information for
you we actually put together
different cheaper provider rate
Because that's one of the big
funding issues before the that
the committee to review today
that we have a different sheet
on provider rate.
And the component they're in and
then we also have a different
sheet on tobacco settlement
program fund because that's one
of the big program sources the
more we have some differences
and finally Mr chairman we have
a two cider page here on Canada
so this so through all the
tenant components all of the
supplemental nutrition
assistance program snap all of
those refugees just all of those
components so this we will not
go through in detail but I just
wanted you to know that this is
in your packet and if you get
questions or have questions from
constituents all right very good
thank you Mr chairman for your
discretion on that all right.
Mr Chairman I'm gonna start on
page seventy director to simply
to page
Let's just go to page.
Your packet with the narrative
for page five it will look at
the numbers here on page five.
So Mister chairman this is the
roll up for the Human Services
Department you'll see here under
the recommendation not the
expansion part
that there's a difference
between the LESC and the
executive of forty six million
in general fund so this might
sound like a big number but will
walk you through it it's we're
really pretty amazingly close it
between these two
recommendations this year so the
LFC is lower by forty six
million and that's pretty much
is all Medicaid for the most
part so why am I think we're
pretty close because when you
look at the next set of numbers
the other transfers basically
we're offsetting it there and we
have net differences that are
netting out but so it's only
showing LFC sixteen point nine
million higher in other
transfers but we're going to
walk you through a little bit
more the components of that when
we get a little more into the
details so
so and then you see a difference
of of fifty four million in
federal revenue basically that
again tied to Medicaid Medicaid
behavioral health we tie those
numbers commensurate and we can
adjust those so that's really
not.
At such a big deal so I I mean I
know it's out it's a lot of
money but we make the
adjustments as needed so with
that Mr Chairman
I just wanted to highlight for
you on the high level.
we have differences a general
fund but in other transfers the
LFC recommendation and I'm going
now on page six in other
transfers revenues I indicated
the LFC is recommending an
additional eighty one point
three million for Medicaid and
other those other transfers and
that includes thirty five point
five million for the health care
facility fund thirty four point
three million from the health
care affordability fund and
eleven point five million from
the early childhood education
and care program funds and in
addition the executive is
recommending an additional at
twenty four point five million
from the tobacco settlement
program fund balance for
Medicaid so you see we have
these offset here
so when I talked about federal
funds so just a little bit to
highlight your attention in the
base Mr chairman on page six
Getting to the important
provider rate.
So basically we're we're both
recommendations are almost the
same in effect so the LFC is
recommending seventy seven
million and the executive is
recommending seventy nine point
four million for both provider
and facility rate increases
where the differences Mr
chairman and members of the
committee is LFC is recommending
targeted increases up to a
hundred twenty percent for
maternal and child health what
we say and the H. behavioral
health or B. eight and primary
care the executive is
recommending targeted increases
for those same items at a
hundred and ten percent slightly
lower so we're we're differing
is LFC is not recommending non
medical costs so that's where
the savings is we're a little
higher on the targeted
percentage rate increase for LFC
the executive is just slightly
lower but they they are
including and of non medical
costs like tax rates and stuff
so they're almost the same that
Mr chairman and other big item
of note Mr Chairman is in the
LFC recommendation in federal
TANF funds in the income support
division the LFC is recommending
ten million in federal tanta
funds to increase the tenant
maximum benefit up to fifteen
percent and then the LFC is also
recommending twenty million in
federal tenant fund transfers to
the public education department
a small amount for the grads
program the higher education
department and amount for AB
adult basic education and then
some for that children youth and
families department for multiple
things.
And then we want to point out
additionally Mr chairman the
executive is recommending three
point six million and general
fund support at three million a
fed funds for the income support
division to help with their
administrative costs and this
amount was shifted from one of
those special appropriations I
talked about into the base
recurring budget one last item
in the base Mr chairman in the
child support enforcement
division the executive is
recommending moving from the
base a recommending moving to
base a recurring one point four
million in general fund in two
point five million in federal
funds four three at four special
appropriations re appropriations
request they're asking for so
that shift that we've seen a
multiple agencies between
special and the base so and we
we have it written out for you
by division okay Mr chairman on
language
basically to summarize the LFC
is recommending language that is
more specific around the
provider rate and the facility
rate increases so there is
language in there specifying
that nursing homes need to meet
performance measurement
requirement as stipulated it by
the department in their value
based purchasing agreement on
the hospital rates there's also
saying that they have to be tied
through the upper payment limit
and through directed payments
and all those a little more
detail in the LFC language for
these increases we also in the
LFC have additional tennis
language and yeah so that's
basically it no different we the
performance we've dealt with
that so that's okay and Mr
chairman overall in expansion
the executive is recommending an
additional at two million two
point oh eight million in
general fund supports over LFC
for.
expansion items in the behavior
health services division and I
think we'll leave it at that and
then I think with what program
support okay thanks RubyAnn good
afternoon Mister chair members
of the committee it's lovely to
be here I MaryBeth done for the
executive analyst for HSD I'm
gonna go through programs
support with you it is piece but
to to I apologize I don't have
page numbers so
hopefully that is adequate so
Revenue so for program support
the LFC recommends the requested
level of revenues for general
but except for general fund
support and that is where they
recommend one point one million
less than the executive.
The executive recommends an
additional three million in
other transfers revenue coming
from the early childhood
education and care department to
support HSD call center.
The executive also recommends an
additional one million in
federal matching administrative
difference in the base the
executive recommendation
includes additional general
general fund support from a few
nonrecurring items that we
worked into the base so there's
four of them so I will go over
all of the totals but there were
there is funding to support adi
Office of an inspector general
there is funding to support
Reading it but inefficient
office of human resources are
there some funding for IT
contracts and finally a little
bit just under five hundred
thousand general fund for
program operations.
And regarding performance
measures we are in consensus and
we are both recommendations
recommended
the expansion item it was an I.
T. item to cover inflation for
contract staff hardware and
software
with Mr children about to review
for the next program.
And then on to Medicaid do you
want to Medicaid.
Okay Mister chair what plan.
I'll take you through the Mexico
child support enforcement of P.
five to three.
So in this program the LFC
recommended the requested FY
twenty four base recurring
funding levels the executive
recommended the base recurring
funding levels and in addition
moved about one point four
million in general fund support
and two and a half million in
corresponding federal funds for
three of the four items
requested a special
appropriation.
In the base the LFC and exec
both recommended the requested
level of requests I'm recurring
base funding.
And in for the executive in this
program again there is some
funding that came over from
nonrecurring rolled into the
base and again I will go.
Through all these items are
numbers specifically but it's
basically I support operations
of the child support enforcement
division.
Replacing fees that are charged
to child support customers.
And also covering credit and
debit card fees for child
support payments.
And again performance measures
we have reached consensus on and
now with that I will turn
internet and over Medicaid thank
you Mr chair.
I'm sorry Mr chairman we're now
on page.
Of your packet.
Page
and get my second.
Page eleven yeah ten eleven
eleven thank you.
Thank you so much.
So I wanted to direct your
attention members of the
committee and Mr chairman two
year high level here for in some
ways this is almost easier to
look at then the difference you
can then what does that back to
those so.
Basically what you have on your
high level Mr Chairman in the
first column here.
We've updated this for the
latest January projection for
Medicaid so unlike the other
agency that come before you and
have that sort of static request
for Medicaid it's not static
we're we're updating it every
three months and the numbers
change because we're getting a
new claim we're getting new
changes in federal rules for
that public health emergency
there's a lot of moving pieces
so we've updated this here for
you when you see here to January
projection and if you look
Mr chairman and members of the
committee if you look at your
high level two line thirty seven
down here row thirty seven
you'll see here cell numbers
overall anything that that
January projection is looking
for a two hundred and sixty five
point five million dollar
increase then it has the
executive number of two hundred
ninety four point five and then
it has the LFC number of two
fifty seven point five and then
these are all the component
pieces others changes in revenue
of course and then changes in
all the different expenditure
pieces.
So Mr chairman I wanted to
direct your attention to that
because we had a shift basically
from what was requested that
then this general fund need has
gone down somewhat why we're
looking at slightly different
enrollment numbers and also
we're looking at additional
quarters that came through in
the consolidated appropriations
act that that the Feds just
passed they're stepping down the
additional federal matching
assistance percentage we call
that the aftermath the federal
matching funds they're stepping
it down so we're going to get
some extra quarters of that
funding so I've reduced our
general fund needs them so I
thought that was important to
point out to you and I want to
make one other large COVID
basically you heard us talk
about the other transfers all
that other revenue and then the
general fund piece when you
combine when you add and
subtract all of that the two.
Recommendations are basically
only part like by twelve to
fifteen million dollars so it's
really not that much difference
so wanted to give you that
overall high level okay thank
you Mr chairman so to go through
these she
basically on the revenue we
We here I I think I told you Mr
chairman the component pieces
here but I'll just highlighted
again just real briefly the we
have the two recommendations
then for the provider facility
right at basically seventy seven
and seventy nine million
targeting either a hundred and
ten percent of federal Medicare
rates or hundred twenty percent.
we've got to.
The difference in
the other all the different
components of the other transfer
revenues which I highlighted for
you Mr chairman and we course
have the difference on the
federal fund that commensurate
Pete.
And then.
Mr Chairman if I don't know that
I need to go over really the
basic pieces I describe that in
the language pieces as well so I
I think Mr chairman at a really
high level and we can questions
that really summarizes the
differences in Medicaid.
All right and.
Thanks RubyAnn Mr child over
income support division next
with you all it's P. five to
five.
So in in this program the LFC
recommends the requested level
of general fund support and also
in additional federal TANF funds
to increase the tenant benefit
and for transfer to other
agencies I believe RubyAnn
mentioned a little bit earlier.
The executive recommends the
requested level of funding for
federal TANF funds and also move
three point six million in
general fund support and three
million in matching federal
funds from a special
appropriation request again
rolled into the base budget.
The LFC recommends a net six
point four million more in
federal funds in the other
category against supported
increase in the tentative budget
as well as transfers to it other
state agencies.
The executive recommends three
point six million in general
fund support and again three
million in federal matching
funds for contractual services
for the income support divisions
administrative costs and some of
these things include ensuring
compliance with federal
regulations to avoid penalties
which can be quite costly
up to I believe three million
dollars a month if they're not
in compliance providing
translation services for clients
and customers and enhancing
public safety efforts at five
high traffic field offices.
This funding again we shifted
from a special appropriation
requests to the base recurring
budget.
So the LFC recommends ten
million in federal TANF funds
against increased the scanner
maximum benefit up to fifteen
percent and also maintains the
FY twenty three funding level
for the New Mexico works program
that's a reduction of one point
five million from the executive.
Specifically for tenant
transfers the executive
recommends the agencies
requested amounts the executive
in LFC recommend the requests
thirty one point five million
intent of funds for transfer to
the early childhood education
and care department for child
care.
The LFC recommends five hundred
thousand intent of funding for
the graduation reality and dual
role skills program abbreviated
to grads at the public education
department to expand services
including mentoring for teenage
fathers additionally the
recommendation includesd
attentive transfer to the higher
education department of two
million and this is the fund
adult basic education and one
million for integrated education
and training programs including
the integrated basic education
and skills training programs.
Finally LFC also recommends
sixteen point eight million
intent of funds for transfer to
children youth and families
department for several things
including supportive housing
adoption you thousand and
protective prevention and
behavioral health services.
hi ed they're not going to go
through all the languages a lot
of language differences feel
free to read at your leisure but
they just your what's in each
recommendation again performance
measures we have come to
consensus and I will turn it
back to you RubyAnn for the
behavioral health portion of
Medicaid thank you Mr chairman I
might add a little tiny bit more
on income support basically what
you're saying and overall in the
LFC recommendation is the use of
these the other revenue so there
early childhood education care
program funds you're saying that
you some in Medicaid to support
youth residential treatment
centers and some of those
provider rate you're seeing it
to support
use the
behavioral health analysis ABA
we forget what A. B. A. stance
were.
Applied behavioral analysis
thank you may that so you're
saying it there and it's the
same thing here in income
support you're seeing not only
the youth of the tech that ten
million intended to our increase
that tenet benefit we have have
an updated that for awhile but
you're also seeing
use of those funds not only for
grads program an adult basic
education and higher at the for
this piece I just want to stress
that in the children youth and
families you know for four
children again for adoption in
youth housing for printed
protective prevention and
behavioral health services that
you're seeing a repeat theme
throughout the recommendations
so just wanted to stress that
and that use of other other
transfer revenue thank you Mr
chairman for that and we'll move
on now to Medicaid behavioral
health and Mr chairman of that
you'll see a difference with the
LFC being six point six million
higher in general fund and of
four ninety eight point two
million higher in other
transfers and then the offset
for federal revenue and that.
Totally tied to the provider
rate increases basically the
executive just just did the
provider rate increase all in
the medical assistance program
and the LFC broke out part of
the legislative rating increased
to them Medicaid behavioral
health care and basically the
two programs are somewhat
fungible they have authority to
move the the the fund so it's
really not an issue and that
four hundred ninety eight point
two thousand other transfers
that suggests that money for
that applied behavioral analysis
transferred to right.
The only difference is with that
Mr chairman thank you and you
want to tell you be fifty did
you do next or do you want to go
first.
yes Mr chair we are on to the
last program HSD behavioral
health services the P. code is
seven six seven.
So in this program the base
funding the LFC recommends
thirty one point nine thousand
more general fund support and
does the executive as you know
that is not a very big
difference for anything in this
agency in the face of the
executive recommends five
hundred forty two point seven
thousand more than does the LFC
and this is for personal
services employee benefits the
LFC recommends a four point two
percent increase over FY twenty
three in a personal services
employee benefits costs.
And eight fifty eight point six
percent increase over the
expenditures from FY twenty two
on the executive side
the executive recommends eight
fifteen point six percent
increase in person over FY
twenty three and a seventy six
percent increase over FY twenty
two actual so some pretty large
increases from both parties in
this program.
In the base contractual services
the LFC recommends five seventy
four point six thousand more
than does the executive and this
is with the LFC recommending an
additional one million for the
linkages housing program and the
executive recommendation an
additional four twenty five
point four thousand up for
services in the program.
there is a little bit of
language LFC I I won't read that
for you and I okay performance
we're consensus again not just
talk about the expansions with
you for a moment because that's
probably one of the.
Most significant differences
even though it's not terribly
significant in terms of cost but
the LFC and exec both recommend
one point two million in general
fund expansion funding for
provider rate increases for non
Medicaid eligible behavioral
health services.
And this is probably one of the
other minor differences Mr chair
the executive recommends the
agency requests amount of five
point two million well LFC
recommends three point eight
million and this is for
statewide nine eight eight
crisis now
mobile crisis response unit.
In the special appropriation the
LFC recommends that difference
of one point four million which
gets on the LFC recommendation
to the five point two whereas
the executive recommends the
requested one point four for
total amount of six point six
million for that purpose.
Finally the executive recommends
five hundred fifty seven point
five an expansion funding this
is to act I F. T. E. to
implement a certified community
behavioral health clinics and
also an additional one hundred
thousand dollars to assist the
local behavioral health
collaborative this and with that
I will turn it over to unless we
do and if you have anything else
that I think we're going to turn
thank you analyst for incredible
deep dive acting secretary me ho
it's great to see we've seen you
here many times and it's great
to see you here today.
Thank you Mr chair and members
of the committee
good afternoon it's it's been a
busy couple of weeks of it I
really appreciate your recent
patients today
I'm carrier B. ho acting
secretary of the Human Services
department I've been in this
role for almost a week.
And you know but I do I have
been with the Human Services
Department for half my life and
actually been with HSD for
twenty three years the last
three years have been spent as
W. secretary but before that I
spent about twenty years with
the Medicaid program at one time
even shared an office with that.
So back we are children.
So it's great to be here at the
table with RubyAnn today
I want to thank you for the
opportunity to present the HSD
is the executive FY twenty four
budget request and I want to
thank director Avid and RubyAnn
for their partnership
communication and transparency
with the budget process we are
very close and we're very
pleased with where we are but
today I'll be focusing on just a
few key areas of difference and
why we think those may require
some additional consideration by
the committee I do want to just
quickly acknowledge you know the
departure the retirement of us
secretary Scrase who we who we
miss very much
I want to reassure you primarily
that he was training us and
getting us ready for this moment
when he would retire and so we
are ready and I just I want you
all to know what an incredible
team of leaders we have at the
Human Services Department true
public servants who are really
dedicated to the work we do
and if there's a couple of
people just new faces that we
want to make sure introduce we
are taking up like three rows
here so.
The team I would love to do that
but I would like to introduce
agency Alex Caceres Smith she's
currently into acting deputy
secretary role has really
stepped up to you help in the
past several weeks and then I'd
also like to introduce our call
your attention to Laura like
Helen she's are acting Medicaid
director with the departure of
Nicole Comeaux so those are a
couple of people you'll see you
actually we're we're all over
the place that these days so
you'll see all of us but I just
wanted to call your attention to
those two and then is Kerley
Graham who's introduced earlier
is our acting CEO chief
financial officer.
Okay so before we start on slide
two of our presentation I just
we always want to humble
knowledge that we are on the
unceded ancestral lands of the
original peoples of the Apache
today and pueblo past present
and future with gratitude repair
respects to the lands the people
and the communities that
contribute to what is today
known as the state of New Mexico
and every day I feel privileged
to live in a place with such
natural and cultural beauty and
diversity and I'm actually from
New Mexico many of New Mexican
born and raised here in Santa
Fe.
we also just want to make sure
that you all we we center
ourselves around
what we're really anchored to
which is agencies mission and
goals we our mission is always
to transform lives working with
our partners we design and
deliver innovative high quality
health and Human Services that
improve their security and
promote independence for New
Mexicans in their communities
and the work we do is always
connected to advancing the four
primary goals that you have laid
out in front of you we are
primarily here to help people
get the services they need to
live on the food the health care
the child support those kinds of
services that support them to
lead better lives we are also
here to take advanced but our
communication to be transparent
with all of you and our
stakeholders we are and in
really try to advance
information technology and data
there I data driven decision
making at the agency and lastly
we're here to support each other
and support our agency employees
and help them advance and reach
their professional goals.
Moving on to slide for it's like
to pause for just one minute and
think Secretary sprees because
with energy intelligence imagine
a imagination integrity and love
HSD service fifty one percent of
your constituents and I just
want to acknowledge that he
really taught us to bring these
values to work with us every day
and to inform the actions we
take as policy makers so you
have before you a group of
public servant leaders who bring
compassion and creativity to
their work every day you can see
that New Mexico art sorry Human
Services department is currently
serving one million seventy six
thousand seven hundred and forty
six customers in the graph there
on your slide in a month late
for
you can see that we are are
enrollment is almost at an all
time high the peaks there that
you see those are one time
payments that we need for
pandemic EBT payments at you
know mostly I think there were
two children
who needed meals during the
pandemic so those were one time
payments made but you can see
that the trend line of HSD
customers continues to grow
the other thing I want to call
your attention to is that in the
past year we serve more than
half a billion meals to New
Mexico families and right now
nine hundred thirty thousand
people are on Medicaid out of
New Mexicos two point one
million population there are
four counties in New Mexico with
more than two thirds of their
population on Medicaid and ten
counties that have more than
half of Medicaid so we are the
largest payer in many New Mexico
counties annual we'll talk about
why that's important with the
rate increases.
so moving on to slide five
the HSD executive recommendation
is ten point six billion that's
fifteen points seven percent of
that comes from the general fund
just a reminder that for every
one dollar you invest in
Medicaid here in New Mexico
right now we pull down our
leverage four dollars and
seventy three cents that is the
enhanced rate that we pull down
on the we've been pulling down
for the past three years due to
the COVID pandemic that amount
is going to change it's going to
go down to three dollars and
sixty four cents per dollar once
those enhanced federal funds go
away but still a very high
return on investment here in New
Mexico for Medicaid
the eighty nine percent of the
budgeted growth is attributed to
recurring Medicaid general fund
that is really to find things
that you all have asked us to do
over the past several years
rates so we have been working on
increasing provider payment
rates continuing to work that do
that work we've also expanded
benefits including behavioral
health benefits
and we've expanded eligibility
so we are now covering post
partum pregnant women for a full
year so that all of that is
reflected in that growth number
on the other thing I want to
call your attention to is that
HSD is currently operating at a
one percent administrative
budget right so we have a ten
point six billion dollar budget
and we are are administrative
costs are one percent so I
really think that's not
sustainable for the agency at
you all are asking us to
administer ten point six billion
dollars we really require the
investment to administer those
funds.
living on slide six they just
this sort of that two hundred
and ninety four million dollar
amounts in the Medicaid and
Medicare behavioral health
that's really that the big
driver here and so that is
really the growth is in Medicaid
and that is reflected partially
that number is growing because
of those enhance federal funds
going away.
So now I'm gonna go to slide
seven and we'll just go briefly
to the differences by key code
we laid out our slides the way
that we think about things that
the Human Services department
which is to really look at how
many New Mexicans will be
affected by the budget
differences and what the impacts
of those funding differences
will be on New Mexico a New
Mexicans in their lives so what
I really want to call you attend
your attention to here on this
slide is the differences in
Medicaid so you know that we
have the loss of enhance funding
but I think the key thing here
is that there are if there's
less funding
in the LFC recommendation then
in the executive that means that
we may end up having to put some
Medicaid initiatives on hold and
some of the things that I want
to call your attention to our
continuous eligibility for
children age zero to six
behavioral health expansions
including expanded access to
supportive housing for the
homeless meals for pregnant
women who have I. Justice
decisional diabetes services for
people transitioning out of
prison or jail and additional
supports for rural hospitals all
of those things will ultimately
reduce costs to New Mexico in
the long run I also wanted to
call out that New Mexico that
Human Services I was trying to
ask her practice services to our
benefit package the reason I'm
here is because this is another
initiative that could
potentially be at risk if we're
not fully funded and we did
receive a request for many
legislators to reconsider this
over the years since I've been
working with a group of
chiropractors to try to get this
into our benefit package and we
have propose that we bring that
live on January first of twenty
twenty four but you know I think
the funding is potentially at
risk for that.
Slide eight I'd like to we'll
talk a little bit about the
difference between the right
recommendations the executive as
as ruby and talked about
were recommending a hundred
percent of Medicare for me but
many providers right out hundred
percent of Medicare that is
right now providers are paid
generally between seventy five
and ninety percent of Medicare
that's up from where we started
about three years ago
but we're also proposing going
to a hundred and ten percent for
maternal and child health
primary care and behavioral
health Medicaid covers a
disproportionate share and has
an obligation to do more to
support writers in these areas
we cover about eighty percent of
all births in New Mexico right
now so I'll call your attention
to the next slide which is slide
nine
and I think the big concern here
is that the primary difference
between the LFC recommendation
the executive recommendation is
that the LFC recommendation does
not include federally required
components anything pretty and
reference this at a premium tax
primarily and well you
underwriting gain for lack of a
better term and so we would have
to you know in the graph on the
Requirements that just
fortunately lowers what that
recommendation actually will
amount to for example the LFC
recommendation for thirty six
point three million for
physician rates would really be
more like twenty six point six
million in implementation and
that would actually fall below
that targeted a benchmark of
Medicare so we just want you to
be aware of that also you know
the LFC recommendation includes
targeted rate increases the
Human Services department is
really trying to move away from
targeted rate increases and have
a national a sort of basis for
how we do rates and so we have
done extensive range studies
over the past year to really
identify where we think our
provider should be and focus on
fairness there so just a few
concerns about maybe pulling out
certain providers types and
targeting them and then I think
if that language is too specific
regarding the rate increases
that we are concerned that we
won't have sufficient general
ever those.
Moving on to child support on
slide ten the goal of the
executive recommendation is
really to improve performance
for child support so we can get
more money to kids so they can
just be kids and not have to
worry about money or that their
parents don't have to worry so
much about money and I'd like to
speak on the legislature for the
one point seven million dollar
investment that you all made in
fiscal year twenty three we are
using that one point seven
million dollar investment to
drive down an additional eight
million for New Mexico's kids
and I think you'll see our
performance on child support
really improve as a result of
those changes we do have some
concerns there are differences
in the budget recommendations
around how we support and funds
the courts so that's really
where I want to call your
attention to we pay the courts
to help us establish child
support cases so if we are under
funded there will be backlogs
and we will have hampered child
support performance we have
considered whether we will need
to close an Albuquerque office
in order to make sure that the
Concorde's are adequately
funded.
And so we're very concerned
about that and we want to make
sure that we don't do anything
to delay the establishment of
child support cases here in New
Mexico and then as agency does
more reference we have proposed
in the executive budget
additional coverage of fees to
low income are very low income a
child support customers we want
to remove all barriers that make
it difficult for people to pay
their child support so we want
to eliminate fees that make it
more expensive for them to do
that and we really want to pass
the money on to kids and so
that's really why you see that
in our recommendation.
I'm moving on to slide eleven
with the income support division
I just want to call out this is
this is one of our most critical
parts of the department
they really help us meet the
goal the primary goal of the
agency which is to make sure
that New Mexicans get their
budget so income support does
all of our eligibility work
so there are some differences in
terms of the capacity of our
field office workforce and mass
mail communications just talk a
little bit about that the income
support division they have about
three years of work to do in
twelve months because we will be
unwinding the Medicaid
enrollments and having to renew
everybody and recertify those
cases three months of backlog we
have twenty three years a
backlog we have twelve months to
do it compliance penalties if we
fall out of compliance will be
three million dollars a month so
we are asking for a three point
six million dollar annual
investment that keeps those
penalties at today for the state
we have a huge campaign around
communications renew New Mexico
of the closing with that today
but we've got major
communications going out to our
customers letting them know
about the end of emergency
allotment funding for their snap
benefits the upcoming Medicaid
renewal effort and then we've
got turquoise envelopes all that
costs money so that we can make
sure people know about what's
about to happen
and then lastly on this slide I
just like to call your attention
to a sixty six point seven
percent increase in safety
incidents at HSD offices from
twenty one twenty two thousand
twenty one to twenty twenty two
I just want to say that employee
and customer safety is my top
priority and I think you can see
some data on incidents here but
I want to tell you about real
examples things that have
actually happened in our office
not too far in the recent past
we've had a suicide we've had
sexual assault we've had several
instances of intoxication and
drug use and even multiple drug
overdoses in our lobbies we had
one recent incidents where we
have to offer counseling support
to our staff who showed up at
work and found a dead body
someone had overdosed on
agencies process overnight
and we have regular threats
against our employees including
active shooter incidents that is
really the regular world in
which we're living in and so we
do need to up the security for
offices and I feel really
strongly about that we've even
had workers who had to move to
interior offices because their
offices the windows had bullet
holes so.
Just please ask think about that
if you look at the budget
request.
moving on to slide twelve
I really just want to call your
attention to
federal and state regulations
for interpretive in translation
services we we did have to cover
those through a transfer from
our staffing line item last year
you know we don't want to have
to do that again and so we are
asking for adequate funding so
that we can meet those
requirements.
Okay I'm almost I promise you
done talking soon
so in terms of behavioral health
and I'm on slide thirteen there
it there are some big
differences between the LFC and
executive recommendation
there is a four point four
percent reduction in mental
health and substance use
disorder services funding we are
very concerned about what that
means in terms of reduced access
to behavioral health services
right now does not seem like the
time to under funded behavioral
health and we also are
asking for additional funding
increases now expansion so that
counties will have access to
mobile crisis teams and crisis
triage centers and we are
concerns that underfunding would
stall expansion of increases
funding in native American
communities to serve native
American communities.
And again I just like to remind
I know there was a staffing
requests here but I'd like to
reminds that you know we can't
expansiveness is without
adequate staff so we are at that
one percent administrative right
I just like to remind you all of
that.
Okay on slide fourteen we are
again asking for additional
funds to support staff we have
we want to.
you all ask us you I will
present to preemptively are are
you can see right you will
probably FY that so high we have
fourteen staff in our office of
human resources today so when we
hear about concerns about
vacancies just know that we have
about a one which are person to
about a hundred staff and they
don't all need recruitment and
retention they also have to deal
with a lot of the other things
that happened in the day to day
lives of our human resources
person and training and on
boarding and all of those things
so just want to make you aware
that we we really don't feel
like we have adequate staff to
meet our hiring and retention
goals.
Okay
so on that note on slide fifteen
you'll see that HSC has a
thirteen point six percent
vacancy rate we have been
working very hard to bring that
they can see right down you can
see that the trend line is
coming down we've been doing
rapid hire event just as often
as possible we've been doing
rapid hire event for information
technology positions case
workers and
now we're on an every other
month schedule for income
support division to get this As
staff on board it as quickly as
possible we've also increased
frontline workers salaries so
that we can improve retention we
have pretty high attrition with
those front line workers who do
such hard work every day and
that we've implemented a lot of
other initiatives to try to make
it to see a really attractive
place to work and I I think it
is a state for twenty three
years but you know it's a it's
it's a lot it's a lot it's we're
trying to really keep and retain
talent.
One flight sixteen just call
your attention to that primary
at the Medicaid shortfall
drivers that primary driver is
really what it was said earlier
around the
Change in federal funding so
you'll you know that's really
it's a dollar nine dollar and
nine cents that we're losing as
a result of that federal
enhanced federal funding going
away.
On slide seventeen I think
probably many of you are
familiar with this graph which
we show pretty often I think
this the what I call your
attention to here is the box in
the bottom right corner which
really shows that those federal
funds are going the way and our
general fund need goes up you'll
also see that we do see some
projected enrollment declines
that are reflected here where
once we start that and winding
efforts.
Okay I'm almost done I promise
slide eighteen
we have there is a federal
omnibus bill that bill and for
the snap emergency allotment
budget February so this month is
going to be the last month of
federal snap emergency
allotments which is additional
funding that was paid out during
the emergency the public health
emergency to help people pay for
food sat budget the base budget
are not going away but almost a
hundred percent a snap cases are
going to see an average monthly
benefit reduction of thirty
three percent and on slide
nineteen I'll just call your
attention to a real life
scenario so you have a family
that was getting seven hundred
forty dollars and assistance
with emergency allotments for
snap after March first so just
in a few weeks that amount is
going to go down to three
hundred thirty five dollars so a
four hundred and five dollar
difference for a family of three
that will experience increased
food costs we did we have we
actually did a survey recently
of all or snap customers to see
how they're preparing for the
loss of that emergency food
budget and what it revealed to
us is that our us snap can see
the snap populations very
worried about and the ability
their ability to pay for food.
We are doing a lot of our reach
about that and if we ask for
your help if you want to do our
each tier of constituents
so I think it talks about the
EDD one winding already playing
and so just to be aware that the
number you should be watching
here is that wind that
maintenance of effort that
Medicaid requirement goes away
about eighty seven thousand two
hundred and ten thousand New
Mexicans are likely going to
lose coverage starting in may
there will be we are
prioritizing the people who
based on our data do not appear
to be eligible anymore because
their income has gone up so
we'll be focusing on that
population first
and we talked about the
penalties.
So in closing I'm just gonna
close with a call to action
actually it's time to renew New
Mexico this is our our new
website and what I really want
to do is partner with all of you
to help get the word out about
what our customers can do we
want them to update their
contact information and we've
made it really easy for them to
do that they don't have to sit
on the phone all they have to do
is go to our test New Mexico
website we implemented a chat
bot that will they can just
enter their new contact
information there and it will
automatically update their
contact information
we are going to be we have a big
campaign that centered around
turquoise envelopes so that
people know watch for their
turquoise envelope that is their
renewal packet and they will
need to watch for that so that
they can renew their budget and
we will see more you will see
probably be ad nauseam of our
turquoise it'll.
We are getting ready to launch
billboards commercials newspaper
and radio ads just to get the
word out but we would love to
partner with all of you we have
a social media tool kit and I
will be happy to share that with
you also with that Mr chair and
members of the committee I will
stand for questions thank you
very much acting secretary army
ho thank you to your team as
well also briefly members and
and public and folks in the
public we will have public
comment following the this the
the today's hearing again it'll
be on the three agencies we want
to keep that concise and focused
but we will have public comment
we're gonna go straight to
questions first we're gonna go
to Representative Montoya then
we're gonna go to Representative
Pettigrew Representative Montoya
please thank you Mr chairman.
acting secretary our mail
I have
questions about the increased to
payments to providers but the
for that an additional just at
the end of your presentation you
were talking about snap.
And
we were at seven under forty
dollars of that was federal
those are federal dollars.
How many years prior.
Was that that that seven forty
I'm glad I know it was a seven
forty going into March but and
it's going down how long was at
seven forty Mr chair
Representative Montoya
those emergency a lot and have
been going out during the
pandemic they were tied to the
federal public health emergency
orders so they've been going out
for about three years I believe.
Thank April twenty so.
Thank you acting secretary if
there's fallout please go
through no you're you're good
just we appreciate good
information just make sure we go
through perfect thank you
Representative thank you
Mr chairman so prior to.
The pandemic what was the dollar
amount prior to it going up to
seven forty Mr chair
representative monthly at the
amount would have been closer to
that three hundred thirty five
dollars that that would have
been that pre pandemic dollar
amount for food okay so now that
people are able to get back to
normal life a little bit more
and I know I just and I know the
job market out there it is very
good right now there's a lot of
there's a lot of businesses just
can't get people to come to work
at I'm I'm not sure if that
federal amount going way might
help.
With with that there's a lot of
there's a lot of work out there
and people are having a hard
time hiring so okay thank you Mr
chairman
on the the the majority of my
questions since we're talking
about.
Medicaid
over the last several years
providers have.
Have
Most have stopped taking new
Medicaid patients
just because they're kind of
upside down on on their end but
reimbursement rates and I know
Mr chairman in two thousand and
nineteen we.
There is actually an increase to
provide a range but.
that the legislature passed
but
Many of the providers if not
most of them didn't see the
increase
so the discussion and I've had
this with former secretary
Scrase about
Getting more money to the
providers when we do that how do
we make sure that what happened
in two thousand nineteen doesn't
happen again which
the majority of that increase
ended up stopping at the NCOs
Mr chairman at is there.
Is there some suggested
languages or something that we
need to do to to ensure that the
majority these increases
actually get to the where the
legislature is intending for
those dollars to go.
Mr chair representative Montoya
yes
you we have some contract
changes that are that are
occurring now to make sure that
the managed care companies are
required to pay that minimum
amount that we use that as the
floor and that they cannot go
below that floor I think you
know rates have kind of
typically you know I've often
been negotiated between
providers and NCOs and so that
may have been the problem there
wasn't that clear contractual
requirement that stated
you know that that is the floor
and that's the expectation is
that those rates get passed on
to providers so that is that is
no contract language thank you
Mr chairman and and Act acting
secretary that is my concern I
think it's probably the concern
this is where we're looking at a
a fairly dramatic increase my
look at the
This document about the fifth
page from the end it shows that
there stream the executive
recommendation LFC for provider
for increased to provider rate.
And it's the LFC
request is.
Quite a bit higher in percentage
to providers I'm just I'm I'm
wanting to make sure that
regardless of what happened the
last time because I I do know
all those individuals
I doctors had had contracts in
place within those and so when
the extra money came in really
all we did was give a increased
NCOs so if we can protect all
providers with that language
where would I find that language
in the contract I is that being
negotiated right now yes Mr
chair
Representative that is going to
be new contract language for
calendar year twenty four okay
so Mister chairman I I don't
know if if this is the
appropriate or not but I I I'd
like to see what that contract
language may be creating it.
in some way I I don't know that
we can do that but.
So I'll talk to offline.
thank you Secretary but I'm I'm
just concerned that we ensure
that this time that that that we
get we are what I don't want as
we are increasing and as we try
to reach out and and and keep
the the the
Medicaid recipients
Having doctors to be able to go
to we we need to make sure that
those providers are not
rejecting them just because they
can't afford to bring them on
and and and I've been told from
somebody providers that they
they really are are reluctant to
even take anymore Medicaid
patients just costing you money
so thank you Mr chairman thank
you very much of Madam next
we're gonna go to representative
please.
Thank you Mr chair thank you
acting secretary
Representative auto dealt with
my questions regarding snap and.
No my understanding.
Chairman was the the increase
that came from the federal
government with respect to that
was offset some some
Potential loss because of
federal.
Order basically the you can go
to work.
And so putting that together I
actually think it's a good thing
the.
Chairman and.
Acting secretary the that
number's going back down and
literally the Representative
Montoya this point you can't go
anywhere without health help
wanted sign.
right I still find it humorous
so we have places that are
advertises open twenty four
hours a day the only are open
for ten.
And so this is not like there's
not an opportunity to replace
that three hundred thirty five
dollars or whatever it is and
so.
Chair and acting secretary.
You made a statement on.
One of the flights and the slide
probably is a relative but.
The statement along the lines of
under funded if we're
underfunded or this is the
specific thing is a funded we
may have to close an office in
Albuquerque and it'll also
increase backlog.
And to me I guess my basic
question that to to go with that
would be how many New.
Initiatives start up this year.
And health and Human Services.
And.
In lieu of that just say that
funding didn't happen just say
we didn't grow government in
lieu of those new initiatives
could that money not be
associated with emissions
initiative The already exists.
Chairman about that acting
secretary it just concerns me
that if we already have thing
that if my my new ask an
increase staff is a paid for
then I'm not gonna be able to do
this but I want to start this
project.
There's not a team member of the
office of would be allowed.
Senator.
And so that concerns me and I I
think sometimes in government we
we we think that we can just
keep adding money to the problem
and sometimes that's probably
not the best solution when we're
not dealing with the problem
over here thank solving it
forgetting that the point is
running without increased
efforts.
before we start something else
and so that's a concern of mine.
Mr chair and.
Secretary
Another statement that we went
through was that we're going to
remove fees for court fees and
other fees
the governor of the.
with respect to payments on
child
Child protection or whatever so.
When we remove those faced
chairman my question is to those
fees still exist and that the
then just go to the forty four
percent of New Mexico the do pay
taxes.
The.
Russian.
You care Representative
Pettigrew I think both of those
items that you're referencing
are specific to child support so
all of.
Just I'll discuss that in the in
that context we have contracts
with the courts courts and those
contract costs have increased
that is a priority for the Human
Services Department because
without the courts we can't
establish child support cases
and so I think you know what I
what I was trying to say is that
we don't actually have a lot of
new initiatives specific to
child support that there's not a
lot of program expansions aside
from the fees which I'll get to
in just a minute but I think
for us because the priority is
our child support performance
and making sure that we have.
Adequate funding to make sure
that the courts can establish
those cases we would have to
should look at shifting dollars
from being an office open and
potentially consolidating so
that we could fund.
That's really our priority it's
not so much tied to an expansion
as you know the court fees have
or the court salaries have
increased they have cost of
living adjustments built in and
they've asked for that I'm gonna
have to really accommodates you
know those salary adjustments
and so that's really why we're
looking at having to make some
other decisions in child support
with the priority being on
establishment of cases so that
we don't fall behind on our
performance or do anything to
put those dollars at risk to
families regarding your second
question which is around
removing fees for child support
customers
these are tax payers these are
the people who are on child
support or really just needing
healthy they typically are
people who have you know just
not had a you know the
relationships work out they need
our help to help establish and
enforce the child support order
so but we consider our customers
to be both the custodial parent
who has custody of the child
that could also just be a fifty
fifty arrangement so you know
noncustodial parent just might
not have the same amount of
custody is the custodial parent
but by no means does that mean
they're not an involved parent
and so what we're trying to do
since most of our child support
customers are low income is
really remove any barrier to
their ability to make a child
support payment and that means
that.
The cost the pretty small
amounts there that we would be
Sort of not charging to those
families would be encouraged by
the agency and we would sort of
cover those costs for them in
order to make it easier for them
to make their payments.
Thank you chairman thank you
acting secretary for that so yes
it is I understand that yes we
we incur the costs of that
probably increases somewhere in
the revenue asked to us and so
this.
Thank I guess I point and that
is at the end of the day the
bill still has to be paid.
And and so it is still comes
from somewhere it's it the it's
not an absorbed costs and absorb
costs actually is in in the
business side is reduced
reduction in profit.
So
so that survey I do appreciate
chairman and and acting
secretary your answer with
respect to looking at different
ways maybe we have to close this
office so we can continue to do
that and I think that that is
critical that we're always
looking at that to make sure
that we're not growing to a
point yes we have to offset
those costs right now we're in a
booming economy we we and we
have the success but
with with it is going on there
will become a time when when
when.
That bill has to be paid that is
very similar what we're looking
at right now is very similar to
what we just discussed chairman
on.
Yep we were up here now.
Here.
And we're in this boom economy
here but we're doing everything
we can to take away from three
of the five counties that are
revenue positive in the state
and generating revenues so at
some point in time that the has
to be paid as well this is a
perfect example would New
Mexico's going to experience
snap is a perfect example with
the state's gonna experience
sometime in the twenty thirty.
So that concerns me.
My other question.
My last question excuse me just
a second Representative
Pettigrew well let's make sure
and all the phones phones our
phones thank you all
Representative.
Karen my last question and I'll
turn it back over and I
appreciate the your patience
with us.
On page six of.
The spreadsheets and and all the
explanations underneath and
services business unit sixty
three six thirty first we have
eleven point five million from
early childhood education and
care program I.
First question chairman make
maybe may require an answer
directly from Director Abbey but
when that fund was originally
set up was it ever intended to
be used as payment to.
Human Services.
Was it defined that way in the
original at.
Chairman.
Mr Abbott.
Mr Chairman.
Representative.
The.
The funds.
For five years now is that it
is.
I have about four billion the
LFC has the bill expands the use
of.
Two of children all.
It that this is is calculated
from the LFC the last all of
this is change the distribution
that we have money available.
And because she care including.
Now the money transfers.
And to participate thank you
thank you very much thank you Mr
thanks so perfect and I
appreciate that chair and and
and with that point I guess
makes the the the point and
where we're at and for those of
you the one references online or
in the audience.
And.
Volume three on page ninety
three it talks about where we're
at in our early childhood fund.
And what.
To specifically to it director
Avid talked about we thought we
would get to hear and that look
of where we're at and so Mike.
By argument last year within the
constitutional limit came up
we're pulling.
We this that constitutional
amendment added and social one
one of one of quarter percent
that would be taken out of the
permanent fund and there was
nothing in the data that proves
that we should have ever done
that.
And it's concerning to me and
chairman and director Avid and I
have had this conversation on a
couple different occasions at
that point in time which is
somewhere in the mid to late.
thirties where the permanent
fund will actually start
decreasing because of the
access.
And it's it's hugely concerning
and so that when we start doing
this and we're increasing the
distributions all of that just
kind of together it's it's like
a it's like a shell game and it
concerns me thank you chairman
thank you director thank you
regular.
Thank.
Thank you so much for your
presentation one of the the
things that I have been very
concerned about is the increase
in reimbursement rates for care
givers
and any kind of medical staff
and so I see often your
presentation acting secretary me
home page thirty.
But the difference between the
executive recommendation the LFC
recommendation.
But I'm curious is there a list
anywhere.
That shows.
Are we are creating are we
increasing reimbursement across
the board are we increasing
reimbursement to some and not
others for more more to some and
less to others.
Madam chair and I had and Mr
chair sorry
Representative Armstrong we do
have information for you at a
higher level on page
Thirty and thirty one Hey your
packet but it Mr chairman it
Representative Armstrong made a
little more detail we can
definitely provide more propane
out of the south thank you thank
you madam chair thank you would
be a Mr chair excuse me an
overview of I I would be
interested in that because
specifically I know
transportation hasn't been
increased since two thousand and
nine or something I know I've
been told it's in there but I
would really Mr Chairman like to
see a list because on those
different sheets it showing you
know behave I believe it's that
sounds for behavioral health
provider rate increase at a
higher rate than.
just provider rate increase and
so I'm I'm just curious how all
that is all going to work and
just want to fight for the
providers.
As much as I possibly can Mr
chair representative I'm a real
quickly I know you want to see a
full list but I just wanted to
let you know there are
transportation lines in the
right study that was done those
are included in both
recommendations there's and non
emergency medical transportation
and also emergency medical
transportation those are both
separate lines a do have
increased rates associated with
them so thank you so much thank
you Mr chairman I all offline I
would love to get that list
thank you Mr chair and three
Representative Armstrong there
is a list in the appendix P. as
eight forty nine and fifty I
will serve lay out some of that
information would be happy to
get you more if you have
additional questions after
looking at that within your
appendix thank you Mr chairman
thank you ma'am thank you very
much for you member Armstrong we
have so little on next we're go
back to her we're going to go
now to Representative part of
the.
Thank you Mr chair I need to
make a statement and I want to
make sure that I am completely
transparent and fully disclose
that I started and own a
business the largest private
employer is a core County.
I no longer represent the
company in any dealings with the
state or federal government and
I sought an advisory opinion
from the state ethics commission
to ensure that I go above and
beyond in complying with all
ethics rules and expectations I
am confident that there is no
conflict of interest and the
state ethics commission has
advised me of the same but I am
happy to answer any questions
that may come forward.
With that being said Mr chair
and madam secretary I do have a
question I understand that the
executive is not recommending
using the health care
affordability fund for recurring
costs can you explain HSD is
position on that.
Mr chair and representative
Hermio I may differ to others on
this but
you know our position we're
pretty we're pretty agnostic in
terms of the funding source we
need the funds rate that we can
match those I think there is
some debate about whether that
is an appropriate use of the
affordability fund and I would
defer to others at the table if
there are other comments to
make.
I mean I think I mean Mr
chairman Representative how to
me of so the LFC is recommending
similar to last year to use
those funds and those funds we
have language that's included in
the LFC recommendations that
those are for use for the
expansion population which is in
keeping with them we feel with
the the statute for that health
care affordability fund.
Thank you.
Thank you very much
Representative how to me next
we're gonna go to Representative
Garrett.
Thank you Mr chair thank you
acting secretary me hope for
your long term dedication and
for infusing energy intelligence
imagination integrity love and
two budget yes we all appreciate
that I have Mister chairman I
first have to just
Representative Trujillo had to
leave and so gonna read which
her comment was in for response
she said
I'm concerned that if we don't
support the executive budget
that the department will have to
cut services even more they'll
end up in the courts again
because they won't be able to
provide services so just do you
have any response to that and
I've two short questions.
Mr chair representative here it
I think we agree I think we
agree with that statement and
you know our concerns are the
same.
Mr chairman F. I might just add
images directly committee really
quickly here first page the high
level again.
I didn't go into detail on the
family just direct you get three
lines.
First of all if you look at line
number eight.
And you look at the first volume
call and Mr chairman member
indicated we we update your
projecting here for the January
the latest projection you'll see
more on row eight and then for
managed care preventative method
talk of of twenty eight point
nine million twenty nine million
if you look across at the
executive and the LESC of the
that the numbers there are forty
five million and that's because
we were facing the numbers
before on the old projection
the right here let me the
savings of fifteen million
dollars that that will want to
take into account as we move
forward secondly if you look at
line item number sixteen here
for other revenue sources this
is from like UNM hospital
inter governmental transfers
Indian health services that
federal you'll see in the new
projection as savings here for
the general fund and saving them
out of twenty four million
you'll see in both the executive
and the LFC we only have a
savings there are nine million
that was based on the earlier
projection and well and lastly
Mr chairman if you look at line
item twenty nine on the first
page there's an amount there are
fourteen point one million that
would be transferred for
Medicaid behavior health that
amount been injected for all of
the new and map that we talked
about down from the nineteen
point ninety twenty million but
that both the LFC and exec had
so when you add up all of those
pieces that are changing for
that new production right there
alone that thirty five million
so that mining as a response
thank you Mr chairman thank you
very much thank you Mr chairman
on the issue of hybrid Intel of
working how many employees do
you have and you have a
percentage of how many have been
working hybrid and how many have
been working full time
teleworking it's a hot topic
today.
Mr chair representative
Garrett's we have for the team.
If you a number of TV on the
Public.
For for Mr I think it's point
four two hundred K. fourteen at
we have about fourteen hundred
FTE representative
I don't know the exact
teleworking at percentage a
large number of HSD staff have
been working working remote or
hybrid schedules I during the
pandemic you know with the
exception of our customer facing
staff which have been we have
staff field offices on does have
been opened however you know
everybody's back at work as of
today actually us so we are all
in the office as of today's
thank you I think we can follow
up and get you that percentage
of employees that have been on a
hyper hybrid or full toward
thank you very much and then my
last a quick point Mr chairman
and madam secretary if you
talked about getting out the
information on renew New Mexico
and I would just ask that if you
could send that to every
legislature maybe a packet so
that it's in front of our faces
in the email so that we can
upload that information because
I think we all have social media
outlets and we have more people
thank you very much for
everything you're doing all of
you thank you very much
Representative Garrett
Representative Lujan.
Thank you Mr chair.
Thank you for HSD for being here
today going over this of this
process with us it's.
It's been a lot of work that
we've been doing
I just wanted to reference back
to page fourteen in your
presentation program support.
And.
We're talking here in in the
school the reduction in vacancy
rate to support her twenty
percent growth in HSD customers
and your he also Representative
referencing here Mister chair
then ability to optimize federal
matching funds for programs so.
You have an amount here we're
we're looking we're LFC doesn't
have anything funded there.
Where would you be specifically
what programs would you be
specifically looking out for the
benefit of that matching funds
Mr chair.
Mr chair representative Lujan
there it's across the agency if
there are a lot of leveraging
opportunities we're doing that
right now with the schools were
expanding services in the
schools to cover you know we've
traditionally covered for
example the children out in
special education and their
health care and flurry Services
at school were expanding that to
kids who are not in special
education and we use the school
the general fund that is go out
to the schools as the match for
that so that's one example but
that does require staff we can't
do programs like that that are
really smart leveraging
opportunities really to optimize
federal funding there's there's
things we can do with the
hospitals for example we have a
lot of I revenue optimization in
place with the University of New
Mexico and some of our other
women owned facilities all of
that just takes people and work
and there's a lot of federal
requirements to make sure that
we do it correctly and so you
know we just have to make sure
that we have here and so we do
actually get a lot of requests
for revenue optimization yeah
there was a recent requests from
the city's and county
governments to look at how we
could raise ambulance
reimbursements we have not had
the band with to do that because
we just don't have the people
and so you know we really want
to support those efforts and it
is smart for us to do that as a
state but we can't do it without
that investment in staff thank
you Mr I do believe that that is
a two statement that it is a
smart move into be looking to
build for resiliency so to speak
in these these programs we know
that we need these these kick
outcomes on us there how many of
those positions.
Would be able to work from home.
chair Mister chair
representative Lujan as of right
now we are not would be able to
work from home we are a hundred
percent back in the office as of
today thank you respective that
response how many would if of
the flexibility we're optional
would be able to be working from
home Mr chair Mr chair
representative Lujan it's based
we've made decisions around
telework based on our customers
exclusively in our customers and
so if the needs of our customers
can be met by the employees
working from home and we can
allow that and I think that's
how we were operating during the
pandemic with a lot of frontline
workers in office really you
know had our offices open
serving customers during the
pandemic but the vast majority
of you know you just you
workforce really working either
partially or fully from home
because they were able to do
that.
Thank you Mr how do you think
that's going to be issue for
recruitment if we're not
allowing or ask yes having that
flexibility for workforce as we
see through all of our other
presentations we know that the
work force and the depletion of
it of not having enough people
coming to work for us is a huge
issue and then we have.
We are having the requests from
all over agencies for more money
to be put forward so where do we
meet in the middle of it if you
can comment on that Mr chair
thank you Mr chair
representative it is a
recruitment issue in a retention
issue it that's that's true and
you know it's as Representative
challenges me I think you did
during the pandemic we were
hiring outside of Santa Fe and
Albuquerque and we were able to
you know kind of open the doors
to you know additional staff and
Silvercity and you know Los
crucis and places that they
wouldn't traditionally be able
to get those jobs because
they're located physically and
Santa Fe for the most part and
so we do we have concerns about
recruitment and retention I am
particularly concerned to have a
very high vacancy rate in my I.
T. staff and I think that's
about twenty eight percent right
now we've lost a lot of folks
due to that issue now thank you
Mr chair I appreciate those
those honest answers I think
this is a this is a conversation
that needs to be brought up in
and be addressed because it was
a big is big of an agencies you
have with the types of different
of
departments to have doing
different types of work not
everybody's in face to face type
of position and I understand the
value of of having a hybrid
having people coming out no this
was things I just wanted to
address that because I'm trying
to fight over trying to figure
out that we what is what is the
best kind of fit this is no
judgment this is this is nothing
and that effect I just wanted to
draw attention to that because.
There's a huge need and your
dried out that need right here
and you're asking for these
these this funding but if we're
not we're not meeting.
sort of the the structural
models in a way where we need to
we're not addressing them in I
think we need to.
Again no judgment on anybody I
think we just have a
conversation I appreciate you
mentioned a lot of things on
this page I'd like to talk to
offsite about what thank you
again for The presentation thank
you for the time subject.
Off of the.
Thank you Mr chairman thank you
Secretary my questions will be
to the point and brief that's
kind of the holy operator my
questions really center around
of the the current changes in
the health care I understand
that there's more recent been a
of R. P. as we kind of put out
to address some of these changes
so of madam secretary Mr chair
can you please briefly outline
the intent or the of the changes
that are occurring that's first
question the second question is
where are we in the process are
we do we currently have an
active RFP for water the
timelines for the R. E. P. E. R.
F. P..
Mr Chairman.
Mr chair representative Bachus I
needed a little bit of
clarification on the further
question but I can answer the
second question that the
procurement for the managed care
of the contract has been
terminated
and those contracts remain in
place they are a effective
through the end of twenty twenty
three those contracts are
actually down from the
procurement code and so we have
some of the forty two extent
however at this point I haven't
received any direction we
haven't really discussed whether
or whether those would be
extended a I don't have
information about whether we
would do that at this point so
that the agency does intend to
re prepare those services you
know I think there's an
evaluation occurring about the
agency's leadership in making
sure that they have the ability
to design that chairman.
Thank you Mr if you could just
briefly this for the R. P. what
what kinds of things it will
this are the the addressing in
relation to the health care
system Mr Chairman.
Mr chair representative Baca
that the are terminated was for
the managed care organization
that will deliver services to
through the for the Medicaid
Beneficiaries here in New Mexico
thank you Mr chairman and thank
you madam secretary.
Thank you very much for some
Baca next Representative heard
in the rooms of the house.
At the.
Thank you Mr chair and and thank
you madam
Secretary and all of your team
so my first question centers
around the funding that used
talked about early on with
respect to money that was
transferred from early childhood
to the call center and so when I
look at when I look at that
number and I would not get that
amount and then also look at the
fact that we are now looking at
a reduction in amount of money
that's going to be available to
individuals for their snap
benefits we do also have
transferred or can you still
have the ability to transfer
money to people to cut to narrow
that gap between what's
happening now and what will
happen on March first twenty
twenty three because they are
also rising of the the rise in
the cost of food but we're going
to be reduce that money that
that concerns me.
It's.
Mr chair representative all to
start real quick and then I will
turn over the acting secretary
just wanted to clarify for you
so that money coming from the
early childhood education and
care department that's federal
money that is you know being
used to help support the call
center operations I this is
where I wanted to for my
understanding is not that that
could money would be able to go
out to individual people that
it's just supposed to support
both the work that each if the
does that does benefit ECECD
have threats as well but as to
the second part of your question
on I'm gonna turn it over to
secretary thank you Mr chairman.
Mr chair Representative Herndon
all answer I'll give you what I
think the answer is but if it's
okay with the chair all differ
also took control of our tennis
who is our director of our
income support division to make
sure that you know should be
correct need to correct me but I
the amount of funding that it
would take to sustain those are
emergency allotment is around
thirty three million I believe
it's really high and then I
don't think that there's a
sufficient funding for us to be
able to do that there are other
programs there's a couple of
bills that are going under the
under way that might smooth the
edges a little bit there's the
tax rebate bill for example and
not include the provision for
folks for non filers which we
support that made to help with
some of that you know
income insecurity that's that
people may experience with the
growth in cost and and I also do
want to remind folks that for
every one dollar that we spend
on the snap benefits it
generates two dollars for New
Mexico's economy so you know
this is also a loss for New
Mexico generally and it will be.
This Martinez this is if you
want to add anything Mr chair
representative.
Yes so the food stamp program is
a one hundred percent federally
funded program application
because it with the fifty fifty
average match so right now any
benefit that we get from food
stamps is whatever comes from
the federal government if you
wanted to have any type of
deficit or increase about that
would be state general funds to
fill that gap there are other
programs that you can receive in
terms of concurrent with the
different commodities programs
emergency food banks prop
programs as well as local food
banks but it's just going to
shift where we're sending those
persons to get resources and
potentially find a bargain on
other agencies or community
action group something to be
aware of and we are working
actively on with those
communities.
And the last thing we would be
grocery stores and grocers
association actually do their
ordering based off of that
buying power of those food stamp
participants which means they're
going to have to decrease that
they're gonna have to adjust
their inventory and maybe even
their staffing they don't need
as many stalkers to accommodate
for that extra money powers
where well so it does have and
economic impact to the state of
New Mexico around thank you.
Thank you Representative Lujan.
I apologize miss Cisco please
thank you Mr chairman I'll just
a a little more data on that
question Mr Chairman
representative internet and
thirty page thirty four of your
different sheet there is data
showing that now if the if the
the actual amount with that one
point eight billion dollars then
decreasing across the road here
down to approximately did side
one one one billion so you did
decrease their it is the right
about there the commodities that
director Martinez a reference in
addition Mr chairman I wanted to
add in the department of finance
and administration and you know
as we look at the totality of
all the recommendations and and
for both the executive and LFC
there is an amount and for
eighteen million I believe to
help with them food banks as
part of the food and food
initiative so that amount of
being considered as well by the
committee as they look at the
overall numbers it's not
replacing the full amount that
there is a portion of the
building considered thank you Mr
chairman.
Thank you very much thank you Mr
chair thank you very much my my
next question was is regarding
the paternal of care that you
all provide to families so we
just had CYFD appear before us
talk about the maternal care
that they provide for families
how do you all work together.
Mr chair.
Mr chair representative we work
very closely with the children
youth and families department in
fact they administer and support
our home visiting program for
new moms and stuff in Medicaid
covered benefits but they they
really sort of help us oversee
that and are engaged very much
and sort of how we can support
new moms
and then as you know we talked
about this but the Human
Services department has been
very focused on maternal health
we implemented an eligibility
change to make sure that moms a
new mothers have twelve months
of eligibility post partum so
that they can get all of their
services Matt and that also was
done you know kind of as a
partnership with across the
health and Human Services
agencies so definitely not the
Human Services Department acting
alone but really in partnership
with our HHS sister agencies.
Thank you Mr chair of madam
secretary panel might might my
question I guess been involved
around the budget that is
utilized for this program which
is absolutely needed so is there
one big budget in the you all
share it equally so could you
please answer that Mr chair.
Mr chair and representative
hundred for maternal health I
don't believe there is one big
budget it is divided by the
agencies.
We.
Thank thank you very much for
seven hundred.
So Mr chair madam secretary it's
hard for me to understand how
you are allocating the funds to
make sure that every single
families taking care of because
of the if you both are looking
at early from before birth to.
to birth and but there's no big
budget that you're looking at in
that Senate so this is just this
confusing to me we can talk
about that offline is that how
you all assume that cost Mr
chairman
Representative Kernan just to
clarify actually most of us CYFD
is
you know then you set these are
are on Medicaid that's you know
generally anyone who's in foster
care or adoption placement
through CYFD is automatically
covered in Medicaid and so most
of the budget actually is at the
Human Services department for
the services themselves
And so you know I just wanted to
clarify that.
Suggested to more questions Mr
Chairman let's thank you
Representative heard and we're
gonna try to wrap up by about
four four thirty five is for
this because we do a department
of health would there will be
further follow but please
Representative her.
Thank you so it might last two
questions one of the one of the
items that
we talked about and you was with
respect to behavioral health
care and it was for non Medicare
rate of patients could
anticipate this briefly tell us.
Who are these patients that we
are paying for that in that
Medicare pays.
Thank you thank you Mr chairman
and I think what the
Representative is referencing in
that in both the LFC in the
executive there was one point
two million that was included
for non Medicaid eligible
behavioral health services I
believe okay so Mr chair.
In New Mexico and in both of
those are recommending that and
what this could be is
Like the price is now mobile
response unit or certain a
certain type of but the big
services that may not be
eligible like Mr chairman it for
as inmates in county jails that
might help them to get them
their not Medicaid eligible
thank you Mr chairman the last
thank you very much my last
question of focuses on the the
the lack of doctors within our
state and so one of the things
that has come out in the and
listen to our presentations is
that right now before we start
removing people from Medicaid
they're about sixty seven
percent of the population is on
Medicaid right now and that's
going to be reduced but what I'm
concerned about is as as health
and Human Services put together
it puts together a strategic
plan on a yearly basis as part
of that plan determining how you
gonna get more doctors to come
to the state so I I just say
that in the end I I just so wrap
this up as I look at page forty
nine we look at the question
that was raised by
Representative Armstrong we have
there a list of of of the
estimated impact for rate
increases on on medical
providers that here so at some
point in time I would like to
for you to share with me and
members of this committee how
you came up with those numbers
when each one of the spaces I
mean representative Armstrong as
for
what they were and the so now
I'm just you how was it actually
devised in terms of these and
that and the right which people
are seeking services and those
of my questions Mr chair thank
you very absolutely thank you
very much for percent part in
next we're gonna go
Representative else.
Thank you thank you Mr chair of
my questions very very simple
of.
We know that New Mexico is a
very diverse state.
How are you addressing language
equity.
It seems that it seems to some
people that it only takes
angle is to access some of the
state programs and sometimes it
is hard.
Order to my constituents
sometimes it is hard to get
interpreters at hospitals and to
access health care.
Mr.
Mr chair representative Allison
this is actually a big
initiative at the.
It's very important to us I'm
you'll see on slide twelve there
is funding in the executive
recommendation for oral and
written interpretive and
translation services for our
budget that there are federal
and state requirements that are
in place for that but we you
know we want to do more on this
and make sure that our all of
our
access to our budget is very
culturally diverse and
communicative with all New
Mexicans and so that really is
reflected in this request
This call your attention to that
okay thank you madam secretary
thank you Mr chair thank you
very much of Cevallos investor
Dixon please.
Thank you Mr chair I have
Essentially to questions thank
you Secretary or army ho for
being here today in the
presentation
In our volume one
the your.
We have the performance metrics
and one of my concerns is what's
being done to improve the
performance metrics for well
child visits of people one
get a client's on Medicaid and
along those lines it looks like
we don't have the data for
twenty twenty two and so I just
wanted to check in on that but
if there's if there efforts that
are being undertaken I'd
appreciate that.
Mr chair at Representative Dixon
there is a lag in some of the
data so it is important to call
that out the HSD you know the
performance always kind of shows
that lag but I would like to you
know at the chair and Mr TIRS
discretion on miss Kellogg I
just talk about what we're what
we may be doing to improve well
child visits performance please
Misco.
Thank you Mr Chairman
representative so we are working
with our NCOs you do get
quarterly performance metrics as
that madam secretary army help
mentioned
we do have a bit of a lag and we
do have performance requirements
for managed care organizations
if they do not meet those
requirements they are subject to
a financial penalty though we do
have a process in place for
those
as you can imagine it with the
provider issues and the access
issues we do have to continue to
work with them in order to
really make sure that we're
meeting those pictures.
Thank you Mr chair and secretary
and is Kellogg I appreciate that
I do think that in our state.
For me that's a big point of
concern that our metrics are.
In the red you know in our
rating system and I think that
you know that's we just know the
importance of it child being
healthy you know and and the
impact that that can have on.
School outcomes all sorts of
things so I just want to flag
that but you did mention Ms
seo's which leads to my second
question
and that is what's the percent
of Medicaid in New Mexico that's
managed by the NCOs.
So.
Please enter.
Mr chair
Representative Dixon it's the
vast majority so it's about
total Medicaid is about nine
hundred thirty one thousand and
eighty eight eight hundred
thirty five thousand are in
managed care plan the the ones
that are not in managed care are
native Americans who have the
discretion if they want to opt
in or opt out they can do that
at any time and then we have a
lot of personal benefit
categories like family planning
that's a it's a very limited
budget that's outside of managed
care and some assistance with
like Medicare premiums and those
kind of things those are outside
of that and so really but the
most the vast majority of our
full benefit customers are in
managed care thank you Mr chair
and madam secretary and with
these eight hundred thousand
clients
Is that the RFP process that was
being undertaken to decide which
MCO would manage those eight
hundred thousand.
Mr chair Representative Dixon
yes that that is for not just
one of the but multiple okay
and so can is it possible
To understand why the R. F. P.
was canceled.
Mr chair representative Dixon
The RFP was canceled to allow
the new leadership to assess the
design of the procurement.
Thank you Mr chair and secretary
and so we expect the R. F. P. to
be reestablished or.
Yes Representative Mr chair
representative I do think yes
the intention is to prepare here
are to issue a new procurement
that has been the design of
which is informed by the new
leadership the HSD.
Thank you Mr chair thank you
Secretary.
Thank thank you thank you at
king secretary
Number of different issues to
the analyst points and thank you
and recognizing secretary props
good to see you here today your
out of a combined ten and a half
billion dollar budget when you
include federal funds with miss
us about where were fifty
million dollars part it is
fairly extraordinary to be that
close right now that said acting
secretary I think a number of
very important points have been
brought up you focus a lot on
the income support division
there are very legitimate and
and and widely held.
Issues of interest with
turquoise Care and with what
follows that because you know
our state is putting an
incredible amount of emphasis
led by the voters with a
constitutional amendment that is
manage basically by NCOs because
who does home visiting the M.
sicos when it comes to early
childhood so
While we're very close together
from a dollar amount thanks to
incredible work over the summer
there are a number of issues
that we still need to work
through so we will
We'll go ahead and ask for the
LFC recommendation we know
there's some areas particularly
in income support division where
there needs to be continued sort
of collaboration and we're gonna
ask a few members which
announced after the vote to to
look into that a little bit more
with that we'll go to vice chair
Dixon.
Thank you Mr chair I move the
LFC recommendation great there
second okay it's been moved by
vice chair Dixon second by
Representative Sarinana is their
opposition to adopting the LFC
recommendation.
Okay please show Representative
Pettigrew in opposition.
And we're gonna ask vice chair
Dixon Representative Herndon
Representative Armstrong
Representative Brown and
we're gonna go ahead and ask
I can't read my own writing
here.
we're gonna ask Representative
Trujillo to take a little bit of
a closer look
on things okay thank you very
much madam acting secretary of
my.
Okay
I don't.
We're gonna invite
Secretary designate Alan.
Members we're gonna try to
finish.
By by roughly five or five
fifteen prev slightly sooner.
Very excuse me slightly later.
What I.
Santa Fe teachers
Okay we're gonna clear the room.
We definitely need to keep going
here.
That's what we'll get that
taken.
It was sent we just.
I was passing through that
thing.
Forty but is yes sorry are you
please go over with money
towards great okay members we're
going to try to keep going here
because we know we have a tight
time line as we've announced we
are going to do public comment.
The state realize we're on Kelly
it's great to see thank you if
you could please start us off
and one more.
We want to make sure the state.
Focused thank you Mr chair Kilic
let legislative finance
committee or on HSD code six six
five the department of health
this budget is also relatively
close to one another there's
only three major differences in
all trying to go through them
quickly instead of spending too
much time on small differences.
You'll notice on your general
fund hi I'm level which is page
one in your packet the shows the
executive recommendation and the
LESC recommendation for general
fund side by side with the
differences.
On the right column so major
differences you can see
it looks like there's a chip big
differences school based health
centers the executive did a four
point five four point four
increase the LFC does include
funding for school based health
centers is just not on general
fund this is the general fund
summary sheet so there's three
million from the early childhood
Trust Fund transferring for
school based health centers on
top of the one point five
million dollar nonrecurring
general fund appropriation to
buy mobile schools bus units
You'll notice that the LFC has a
higher increase in medication
assisted treatments online
eight.
And I'm sorry I have cold
full recommendations increase
for the I'll call for the
creation of an alcohol misuse
program with the executive being
slightly higher.
those are kind of really the
only major differences in
general fund outside of on the
back from page two and program
support the executive put a
little bit more money into a
marketing campaign and into a
drug importation program subject
finalized we're pretty close
across the whole agency there
are some federal revenues in
other transfers revenues that
make up the rest of the
difference in the budget and
those are going to be seen in
the facilities program and the
epidemiology response program.
So on page three of your packet
this is just your summary of non
recurring section five and
section six differences between
the two recommendations as you
know you're not acting on
section five and section six
we're just including these for
your information so you can see
the differences in nonrecurring
recommendations that you'll have
a hearing on later.
So with that will turn to the
different sheets and rebirth.
thanks Kelly at Mr chair
hi again everybody I'm sorry but
that's more the executive
analyst for deal age before I do
the administration just real
quick I just want to clarify the
amount that the executive has in
for school based health centers
actually five point eight
million not four point four four
point five but for the for
personal.
Clarifying
nothing and actually said on
administration it's P. zero zero
one very few differences in here
executive is a little bit higher
about seven hundred and fifty
eight thousand higher most of
this is the difference in
marketing funding with the
executive supported about five
hundred thousand dollars for
marketing
and then
also that was a drug importation
program I believe
and also small miscellaneous
adjustments as well and with
rates you'll see that throughout
this agency the the rates were
adjusted and not typically a bit
of a small difference but
nothing to spend a lot of time
on
And I know just note in any
expansion section so the HSD had
requested about nine hundred
thousand dollars for additional
administrative support
specifically in areas like
procurement but both
recommendations to support that
the executive cap to be
recommended amount expansion
which is that was requested well
the LFC has ruled that amount
into the face so you'll see a
difference there but it is the
same amount in not both
recommendations so with that I
will turn it back to Kelly for
public health thank you may
benefit.
So we're on P. zero zero one
called administration also known
as programs support to some of
you so a pretty small difference
here just seven hundred and
eighty two thousand and general
fund forty of the major that
this difference can be found in
person and in the contractual
services the executive increase
personal slightly above the LCMS
for rates that was not requested
by the agency so they'll see it
didn't have time to consider
that that's the difference there
and about nearly five hundred
thousand dollars difference in
the contractual services amounts
for that marketing difference
that we talked about so pretty
similar recommendations outside
of personal rates and a
marketing campaign those are the
real only differences between
the recommendations and program
support.
Back to MaryBeth thank you hello
Mr chair on school or public
health with you ask for all of
the deal which is programs there
are eight P. codes this is
probably the one that has the
most differences
To focus on and even that it's
it's not in my opinion it's it's
not that drastic
but the in this P. could the LFC
general I'm sorry P. zero zero
two the LFC general fund
recommendation without seven
point four million below the
executive and part of this is
because the LFC recommendation
has three million dollars in
other transfers revenue coming
from not early childhood trust
fund which Kelly explained a
little while ago about the the
bill that LFC is running
in the base the majority of the
difference in person do to the
executive recommendation again
for rate adjustments and also
increase for the school based
health center oversight FTE
which is that difference that
Kelly mentioned
The total amount in there for
the executive so what
recommendations do increased
funding for school based health
centers the executive is two
point four million above the LFC
and recurring revenue in the
country contractual service
category.
And LFC recommendation included
an increase of three million
recurring and also Kelly is
three million in non recurring
so this is just one point five
and and one point five so so the
difference there should the LFC
put a little bit of a school
based health center funding as a
special whereas the executive
has the entire amount in the
base.
The executive recommendation
also included contractual
service funding for pediatric
street screening and not results
in the remaining difference in
contracts in the other category
the executive is about five
hundred thousand over the LFC
and that's again it right
related additional miscellaneous
personal contact us.
and then in expansions both
recommendation did include
funding for an additional
uninsured oversight FTE
where I'd once again as I
mentioned before this is what
happened a few times there were
requests expansions the
executive supported these
requests in the expansion
whereas when LFC supported they
rolled into the base so again
just a difference in how the
recommendations were put
together
but that's that's really about
it thing for public health Kelly
if you wanna right away you're
welcome
so in the epidemiology in
response program on your next
page zero zero three eight.
This is where you're going to
start to see some of those non
general fund differences between
the two recommendations so
you'll notice that the executive
reduce federal revenues by six
point five million below the
agency request well the LFC or
supported the agency requests in
those federal revenues
and then the LFC have slightly
more general fund about four
hundred and thirty eight
thousand above the executive so
what does that mean and
differences so that large
reduction federal revenues
basically was taken out of the
person category so funding for
FTE so that's where you see that
you're a large difference in
person the two hundred category
between the two recommendations
directly tied to that reduction
in federal revenues.
And then you'll see that there
is a a million dollars million
half difference between the
other categories in the other
financing uses categories so the
LFC I mean the executive has
slightly more for trauma
hospital grant funds and then
that one point five million
dollar transfer is the transfer
to the Human Services Department
that the executive recommended
that wasn't included in the
request and so LFC didn't have
the opportunity to evaluate or
recommend that so it's not that
it was a non recommendation it
just didn't come through that
same process.
anything awful not being found
okay so I'll turn it back over
to MaryBeth for laboratory
services thanks again Kelly Mr
chair this one's really easy the
executive is thirty one thousand
above the LFC and it was for
adjusted rates so with that I'll
turn it back to Kelly for
facilities.
We're going to move into the
other large program real see non
general fund differences
facilities management which is
P. zero zero six.
And so what it comes the general
fund we were darn close to one
another we were twenty one
thousand dollars well that's
that's pretty close to four
hundred and seventy five million
dollars so when it comes to
other revenues so this is the
main difference so remember that
these are health care facilities
and long term care facilities
which are run by these programs
when you talk about the
behavioral health is to in Las
Vegas for the Roswell clinic all
of those under this program the
veterans home right if you have
people who want to these
facilities and they receive the
services and then they built
their health care provider so a
lot of them are on Medicaid or
might have private pay.
Now we've talked about this a
lot in the interim but just as a
reminder that the facility is
early in about fifty percent
capacity so what happens when
you have the same amount of
overhead staff at TI because
it's not a private hospital you
can just reduce staff these are
state employees so you have that
same overhead costs and you're
not having the same people in
the budget to bill for the
services so you have the same
spending less money coming into
your fake right and so we've
seen a agency balance of those
funding this program for years
policy has noted over several
years that the other revenues
which is the third party billing
is been way above what the
department has brought actually
in for years and it's something
we've talked openly with the FAM
Department out and DFA decided
to make a recommendation to
reduce that billing to right
size what their budget is and
look kind of more realistically
about what the revenues that
they brought it LFC didn't do
that
we supported agency requests for
a couple of reasons when we were
thinking about it the last
several years three or four
we've been COVID so facilities
have been down a role meant for
a lot of those reasons
and and there was another big
problem with the lowest paid
employees which are called Sliq
tax or CNA's which were included
in a lot of the targeted
compensation in the past few
years that we've seen now LFC
and DFA and the executive work
together with the interim and
recognized we need to do a out
of cycle payback for these
employees so that we can get
them in and we can get more
schools staffed beds to increase
capacity of those facilities.
Both recommendations have money
to the HSD is already done it
using their current operating
budget recommendations have non
recurring money to kind of back
fill that so they have the money
to do it.
My those are the nation has
reoccurring money to pay for
those races going forward so
hopefully what that'll do is
allow us to bring census up in
the future if this is something
that this committee and LESC
really need to pay attention to
over the next two years all of
these facilities are necessary
there delivering services to
people in their communities
where there might not be other
hospitals and so we really need
to raise up the ability for
people to be in those facilities
and reasoning Services so I know
there's a long explanation about
a revenue source but it's
important to realize why that
revenue source was change so
with that thirty million dollar
reduction the executive
recommendation had to reduce
spending by that same thirteen
million dollars so you'll see
that they reduce person by six
million.
Contractual services by three
million and other costs by four
million balancing out that
thirteen million dollar
difference and with that I'll
turn it over to me about this
and I would want to stay the
issue has a comment on that.
Kelly Mister chair I just have
one quick comment Kelly
mentioned the sci tech increases
and it LFC have that one point
four million I believe in the
base the executive does on that
it is a special though so it is
in the overall executive
recommendation just not in the
base funding so both
recommendations to support the
state tax increases going
forward but with that I'll take
you to R. P. there there are
seven developmental disabilities
support and this one will be
really quick there are no
differences at all in this
program so I'll turn it back to
Kelly for another yes easy one
this is an easy what if I could
if Mr chair can I go back to I
know the smaller differences
Large rate increases for DD
providers built into it and so I
want to make sure that we don't
loss over that as being clued in
both recommendations that's
really important it's also
important for you to remember
that as we're clearing the
superdelegate shin waiting list
that bill is going to come do
right out we don't need general
fund
Appropriations for that yes but
next fiscal year former back
here here for now.
we will be asking for those
large scale of increases to keep
that waiting lists from ever
existing again or keeping those
people in the services so not a
problem for today but something
to think about it you're going
into your inner.
and then we'll move on to DH I
also known as the health
certification licensing
oversight program this is
another quick one since there
are no differences both
recommendations supported
increase person.
To help with that a super I'll
occasion planned oversight with
that I'll turn it over to me.
Thanks again calling Mr chair
last program if you H. is P.
seven eight seven it's the
medical cannabis program again
there were no differences into
recommendations for this program
I do just want to point out
quickly there is no general fund
associated with this program
highly funded with transfers to
come over from regulation and
licensing that comes from the
revenue that they collect that
for all of the cannabis related
activities Kelly if you don't
have anything else I think that
was going to do it for ten
minutes right here turn it over
to the US secretary for you Mr
chair thank you thank you very
thank you both very much
Mr secretary thank you that your
small members of the committee
Patrick Allen and the secretary
designate of the department of
health thanks for the
opportunity to be here I will of
work to be also extremely brief
and as you heard that should be
fairly easy because there are
not a lot a lot of differences I
do want to just introduce myself
a little bit to the committee
and I've had a chance to meet
with some of you individually
but not everyone I've now as of
today I've been on the job for
the whole month I came from
Oregon where I have run a couple
of different agencies that are
involved in health and health
regulations over over about a
dozen years running those two
agencies I've done everything
from being in charge of health
insurance regulation to running
the state high risk pool
managing the health insurance
exchange for the state Medicaid
behavioral health public health
health policy and regulation
delivery of employee benefits
for state employees and
educators as well as a running a
to come to campus seven hundred
bed psychiatric hospital so
while I'm drinking from a
firehose it's maybe turned back
just a little bit because a lot
of what I have done before in my
career is really familiar to me
in terms of the responsibilities
that I have here I obviously
need to need to learn how to do
them and how things work and how
communities work in New Mexico
and that's a big piece of the
fire hose right now for me
I'm not going to go through a
presentation particularly we've
passed.
Out to you a document that
highlights some of the I think
the differences between the two
between the recommendations that
are maybe the most worthy of
talking about I'm not gonna read
those aloud to you or anything
like there are a couple of
issues I do want to quickly try
to try to anticipate in terms of
things that I know you're you're
curious about we have at the
agency high vacancy rate it runs
at about thirty percent right
now that's one of the first
things coming to the agency that
kind of you know jump off the
page at me that I have started
to dig into their really I think
three main factors that are
driving that vacancy rate
right now a piece of it is it it
appears that we're in simple
terms overstating our vacancy
rate because we have positions
on the books that we have not
filled in a very long time there
often sponsored positions where
the funding has gone to where
the sponsorship isn't there any
longer so we're initiating a
process right now to see if we
can clean those off the books
and really get ourselves to
where the vacancy rate that we
have is our real vacancy rate so
we're operating from the from
good accurate accurate data
secondly we're having the same
problem that everybody in every
other industry in every other
state is having just in terms of
being able to recruit people and
you know that there are all
kinds of factors that that play
into that in any individual
position but you know right now
I think there just aren't enough
human beings really in terms of
the oil how we're trying to
recruit and the people that are
available to do this do those
jobs the last thing is a little
bit specific to us and it has to
do with salary increases that a
very generously been provided
and and passed in previous in
previous budgets those fall
differently on agencies that
have a high degree of non state
general fund funding those
positions and so that leaves us
effectively with large numbers.
And it varies from program to
program but large numbers of of
positions that we can't fund
because we don't have the the
the the matching side of the
state general fund to go with
those salary increases and
that's not unique to us though
it's a particular problem some
of those your role at up and
that gets us to the to the
thirty percent vacancy rate I
hope the next time I'm able to
talk about these topics with you
were able to give you up a much
more direct an accurate number
but that we've also made
progress and some of those.
Issues second thing I want to
talk about quickly or reversions
we have about a hundred and five
million dollars in reversions
the overwhelmingly large share
of that comes in
in our developmental disability
services program and and for
lack of a better phrase as I
understand it those are sort of
planned reversions they come
from from the the higher rate of
of federal medical assistance
program match that's been going
on during the current during the
pandemic those are not permanent
dollars in fact now that we have
a date certain for the ending of
the federal public health
emergency we know those enhanced
match dollars will go away
it might be arguably have been
possible for us to have budgeted
to receive those since we've
been getting them for three
years but that would put you on
the position when the emergency
ended to go back and and
reallocate a bunch of general
Fund to get the general fund
spending back up to the level
necessary to deliver the purpose
of my understanding is the
agreement has been we would it
keep the base budget where it is
we would see those of those
federal funds coming in and that
would be that would be swept at
the end of the process and then
we would know when the problem
when the.
When the public health emergency
administration where we stand.
Last thing I want to talk about
it's not it's not dealt with on
the document that I gave you in
terms of differences between
between the two the two budgets
but it does have to do with
school based health centers
really really appreciative of
the creativity that went into
getting us a number very very
similar to what the with the
executive budget included
you had a discussion earlier in
the in the HSD budget having to
do with the early childhood
Trust Fund we got the same old
kind of a dynamic here where
there's a of a piece of the
solution that involves money
from the early childhood Trust
Fund I thank the governor has
expressed her concern if not
outright opposition to pulling
money from from the fund for
these kinds of purposes there's
a room where this is all gonna
get hashed out I'm pretty sure I
will be in that room I'm pretty
sure some of you will be in that
room my concern is that when
that gas gets hashed out what
I'm really worried about is that
that early childhood fund money
will go away and will be left
with with a much smaller amount
of money that's a one time only
money and that will be markedly
change our ability to deliver
the expansion that I think we're
all looking for and school based
health centers with that I I I
promised that I would try to be
roof and I'd be happy to answer
any easy questions you have I
have staff here who will help me
with hard questions.
secretary Alan thank you very
much thank you to you and to
your team we're very glad that
you're here and deeply
appreciative we're gonna go
first to representative Garcia.
Thank you madam chair my mic Mr
chair chair.
good to see you again Sir Mr
secretary one quick question
hose at veterans home in two
years to do it.
Thanks for the question Mr chair
representative Garcia and a good
to see you again you were the
very first legislator I met in
in New Mexico when we went down
to visit the the veterans home I
think in my first week my first
week in the on the job
you know I think I I think
things are considerably better
than they have been at the
veterans home we have cleared
the findings that CMS identified
in terms of the operation of the
of the facility we are on on
target on time for the expansion
of the facility at the at this
at the small homes cottages we
expect those to be able to be
opened in September in and so
and so on balance I think we
still got work to do is look at
staffing issues particularly in
yeah as was mentioned by this
plant in terms of of occupancy
of our facilities I think we've
got more veterans that we can
service the facility if we can
deal with some staff admit other
administrative issues but I
would say on balance we're
certainly heading the right
direction at the facility Mr
chairman of the budget hearing
the reason about the veterans
home up is because if we ask the
vacancy rate.
At that home is not been a big
Woods nonchalant would but you
know that facilities been a sham
for years and we're trying to
get back on track and this
gentleman hopefully six wrong we
can officials issued a but I
just want to committee and all
you know because a lot of times.
Vacancy rates wipe off budget
important because they don't get
the phone in the the public need
to fund these of projects so.
Mr chairman madam chair Mr
secretary thank you for that I
look forward to working with you
thank you Representative thank
you representative Garcia and
thank you for your incredible
work over the last several years
in that area
we're gonna go down to
Representative Lujan.
Thank you Mr chair thank you for
the presentation and welcome
welcome and
Have your work cut out for you
we appreciate you being here and
Mr chair as you know start job
this is.
This is a huge agency and and
there's a lot to it I have a
couple questions Mr chair
Representative is going
Just because you're a your
presentation is very brief and I
understand that completely but
funding for tobacco
Prevention and education are you
looking to to up the in Europe
in the budget where you.
So I can help me on that I'm I'm
kind of like trying to find it.
Where's the funding on that
through we had on that.
To the.
Mr chair
that's what I don't have a.
I see what you're saying.
Mr chair Representative alright
so are you referring to the
funding comes from the tobacco
settlement revenue that that
goes to certain programs there
was no increase there was no
requested increase the levels
involved recommendations are
flat to what they typically get
which is about six and a half
million dollars
all right I'm just saying that
because it's it used to be at
ten service when and where it
was right after that create that
and then I just quickly with our
I think we did a couple of other
things I want to go.
We have
we have a lot to do and I look
forward to the work and and and
just a few of these other issues
on here I'm just.
The little little light here but
I understand why thank you thank
you Mr.
Thank thank you very much for
some of the Lujan.
A I don't see necessarily any
other questions from committee
members Mr secretary.
They were were very excited to
partner appreciate the analysts
in this sort of being pretty
close very close and I think
that's a sort of a reflection of
work that's been done and it's
your voice to help take to the
next level I would just
Representative Lujan to just
you know get a little bit closer
learn a little bit a young
lenient which and we deeply
appreciate with that we're going
to go ahead and go to vice chair
Dixon so we asked for the LFC
recommendation.
Thank you Mr chair I would move
the LFC recommendations.
Great it's been moved I by your
Dixon second by Representative
Trujillo is there any opposition
to dotting LC recommendation
saying then we've adopted that.
Okay thank you members we are
going to go as we transition
from Ellis we do have public
comment
we're going to as we've done
each day.
Where to a lot twenty minutes.
I will.
Yeah so.
What are what.
With the.
What
we.
Really funded.
No matter County.
Okay.
We we we're gonna go now to
public comment thank you all
very much for lining up we're
gonna have a lot twenty minutes
for this we're going to I'm
gonna have a timer at two
minutes would would very much
encourage of folks can stay
under two minutes that's a great
I'm gonna start the the timer
when each member if you would
come up to the microphone please
take a seat and then
again these will be on the three
items agency I I HSD six thirty
Human Services or agency six six
five department of health with
that please feel free to
introduce yourself and give us
your comments.
Good afternoon my name is Noreen
Kelly and I am from Chertoff New
Mexico Gallup one of the rural
areas most rural areas of.
New Mexico.
Chair members of the committee.
I am here.
To us.
And I am on health care leader
with New Mexico together for
health care on this day before
we celebrate American Indian
did the wrong house.
We are reminded of the treaties
of it to ensure it is amended
since health care.
The health care affordability
from months pass by you are
legislators in twenty twenty one
to expand health care coverage
to uninsured families and
workers in New Mexico.
It may only be used to make
health care.
Plans more affordable for small
businesses and residents using
the health care exchange.
And to plan and implement health
care coverage for uninsured New
Mexicans.
As a.
A person that is familiar with
Substance use disorders we have
family members community
members.
That are working.
I can't find
affordable health care.
They.
Go without.
The.
Drug state need to enhance their
recovery so that's one of the
area and also small businesses
that have families as well as in
employees and they do not have
to insurance to cover their
workers as well as.
Thank you for that thank you
very much Misco if you want to
finish the thought and then
we'll go to the next yes I'm
sorry.
We are all deserving of health
care please fully fund the
oyster ice requests from the
health care affordability Fund
so I can get done.
What it was intended to do thank
thank you thank you for your
time thank you very much miss
Kelly.
Mr chair of thank you for
allowing for public comment my
name is land Senate policy
director for the center Pacific
policy three generations of my
family have been locked out of
affordable quality health care
when hi my grandpa and my father
each face our respective cancer
diagnoses each of us have
experienced different outcomes
where my father gained access to
his here I'm on permanent
chemotherapy until I relapse
because I couldn't afford my
care and my grandpa died because
he couldn't access health care
coverage due to his green card
status this is what thousands of
New Mexicans are facing as they
lose coverage can't afford
coverage or can't access
coverage every New Mexicans
deserves access to affordable
health care coverage using the
health care affordability fund
as designed and as written in
the law we can expand access to
coverage to the many New
Mexicans who fall through the
cracks in our current systems we
can insure every resident
contributing to our state the
chance to purchase the same
affordable health care coverage
as every other New Mexico
residents.
Please follow the executive
request to use the health care
affordability fund and not the
recurring Medicaid cost my
doctor has sought to save my
life in the thirteen years I've
been battling cancer.
But I know that it is this body
and policy makers that have the
power to save thousands if not
millions with the mark of the
pen thank you for your time
thank you very much.
Good evening Mr chair members of
the committee I don't know if I
was that good evening or good
afternoon bye have everybody's
ready for the evening.
My name is Christina James I'm
from total guy and that's part
of the McKinley County right the
borderline I am a mother of
three and a health care leader
with New Mexico together for
health care my son he was born
with a heart condition that
requires doctors appointments
and medicines for the rest of
his life because of C. I. B.
certificate India plan
requirements he may not have
access to the care he will need
in the future.
Tomorrow is American Indian day
and as officials and members of
our community visit and greet
you we ask you to remember
health care needs of native
Americans and deny the request
to take thirty four million from
our health care fund thank you
thank you very much.
Mr chair members of the
committee thank you so much for
providing public comment my name
is T. Gonzalez I work at the New
Mexico Center on Law and Poverty
many of our partners and leaders
were here earlier to provide
comment but had to leave
we stand in full support of the
executive budget request in
particular we support the
executive request for the
temporary assistance for needy
families program or tennis on
this program is not been
modernized since nineteen ninety
six the difference between the
LFC request and the executive
request is seventy million
dollars and that's for
increasing the kind of benefit
levels the tenant benefit levels
for in this is an essential
benefit and it's time limited
families can only receive it for
sixty months it provides a small
monthly cash benefit to
extremely low income families
that are experiencing crisis
events for example experiencing
homelessness a recent permanent
disability or welcoming a
newborn baby and therefore the
mom's not able to work for a
period of time since the cash
benefit levels have not been
increased since nineteen ninety
six meaningfully increase since
nineteen ninety six of average
family that's to children and
adults live on just four hundred
forty seven dollars a month both
the LFC and exec request does
move to increase those benefit
levels but the executives would
do so by twenty one percent.
Twenty thousand New Mexican
children about fifty percent of
whom are under age I live in
extreme poverty and rely on
these kind of benefits that
means these children live at
just twenty three percent of the
federal poverty level and
finally there's a greater return
on investment to provide
extremely low income income
children with a small income
boost research research shows
that every ten percent increase
in welfare benefits results in
an eight percent reduction in
child welfare placements because
when they have more income
there's less neglect in the
household in New Mexico poverty
can be a factor that counts of
neglect in a CYFD determination
to simply increasing the benefit
levels by twenty percent you
would see a sixteen percent
reduction in child welfare
placements thank you Mr chair
members of the committee in
please go with the executive
request thank you very much.
Chair members of the committee
my name is Kenneth Chavis I am a
native from Mexico City and
simply be pueblo and health care
leader with the New Mexico
together for health care two
hundred and fourteen thousand
Mexican residents are uninsured
including native Americans I
just is not health insurance
this month thanks to the health
care affordability fund the
offices the pertinent of
Insurance is really not a
program to provide their premium
plans for native Americans up to
three times the property line
this is the positive impact of
your work to pass the health
care affordability fund right
now there is a request to take
thirty four million away from
the portable Fund this would
jeopardize the future ability of
this program to make strong
lasting impact on our native
American communities access to
health care I have five children
and thankful for children's
Medicaid at the moment
gratefully I have guidance from
my mother and how to get
Medicaid many of our native
community members do not or do
not understand the language my
partners Mexican in our two
youngest do not meet but quantum
for tribal recognition so I
worry for their eighteenth
birthday currently my partner to
just over our bill over his own
health care.
And I was two years ago with
cumbersome formula before his
health I have million friends in
rural communities or
reservations and are limited
services because of geographic
issues a lack of information
emergency Medicaid does not
cover preventive health care
anything from the patient.
We are are deserving of health
care I ask that you deny the
request to take thirty four
million from the health care
affordable right thank you for
your time thank you very much.
Gooding Mr chair members of the
committee my name is Alex
Williams and I'm hearing are
appearing on behalf of the
Mexico Center online poverty we
Senator believe that everyone
deserves health care and their
communities only healthy is only
healthy when everyone has access
to the care that they need for
this reason we ask you to
support the executive request
with regards to how it uses
money from the health care
affordability fund this
legislature passed the health
care affordability fund with the
specific purpose of lowering
costs for hard working New
Mexicans who can't afford or
cannot access coverage of
current coverage options at all
by law the the health care for
Lee fund was meant to pay for
reducing healthcare costs not
for a couple of Medicaid
existing costs which should come
out of the executive sorry out
of the general fund the river
the executive request a doesn't
ask for this money to be spent
on Medicaid and we ask that you
support the executive request in
the original intent of the
legislature thank you for all
your hard work on the budget and
ensuring that every New Mexican
has access to affordable quality
healthcare we urge you to please
follow the executive request for
use of the health care
affordability fund thank you so
much thank you very much.
Madam chair and members of the
committee good afternoon I am
only this on different public
sense we'd be.
With four together action health
care affordability fund five
years ago I personally went
through some health issues found
breast of both a lump in my
breast
I never thought that it would
happen to me as a single working
mother I was denied for Medicaid
Which made it hard and very
stressful to find providers and
get the help that I needed.
With the procedures and help
from Indian health services
which ended up costly.
Ring a single mother for twenty
twenty two I was finally able to
get the help that I needed to
get but this operation that I
needed
And I know that I'm not the only
one in my community going
through this issue
as others are we're all
deserving of health care of us
they ask you on of the trees
that ensure health care for
native Americans and denied a
request to take the thirty four
million from our fund so that it
can be resource and used as you
voted for it to be used.
Thank you for your time thank
you very much.
K. shaped madam chair hi.
Mr chair and committee members
my name is sherry bassin I am
from the only pueblo which is in
McKinley county today I am here
as a community advocate for with
forty other action for New
Mexico health care together we
are here to support the
affordable health Care Act
currently my children and I are
utilizing Medicaid for
behavioral health management
services we are utilizing
private service counseling
services in a municipal area
instead of our site I just
children and families in my
Pueblo are in need of quality
and affordable counseling
services we have been asked what
do have to communities look like
how the communities are faces of
our children and our elders in
strong emotional and mental
capacity when we are emotionally
and mentally well we can move
mountains please continue to
support families and children
through affordable health care I
voting on behalf of this bill
you up a providing thirty four
million dollars to usher
uninsured Pepose and native
communities thrive with this I
ask please on our treaty rights
as native peoples we please also
include uninsured peoples who
are locked out of basic health
care rights.
I would like to state that as
native people we can also be
locked out if we are not
recognized members of federally
recognized tribes so at this
time I thank you don't don't go
to so not connected more good
they turn into a good night
thank you chair and committee
members for hearing me today
thank you very much.
Mr chairman members of the
committee my name is David Roddy
and I'm the health policy
director The New Mexico primary
care association the primary
care clinics of the supported by
the department of health serve
three hundred seventy thousand
New Mexicans in every county in
the state we are very grateful
to the committee and for the
legislative finance committee
for the recommendation to add
one million dollars for Medicaid
rate increases this will provide
about four point five million
dollars to the collective
organizations we are facing two
very great challenges this year
the first being workforce and
general inflation that is
because health care costs to
skyrocket
inflation I got a an eight
percent increase muscle security
last month but I have not seen
any health plans raising their
rates by to to help with
inflation so the four point five
million it is wonderful but in
addition we are facing Medicaid
on winding and we serve a
hundred forty thousand Medicaid
patients and conservatively we
expect that we will lose
probably eight to ten million in
revenues annually when that
plays out so we worked with the
department with a retiring
secretary Scrase and and former
director call monitoring the
interim and as of December we
thought we were including their
rate increase that one not so
it's it's very good but we are
hoping that we can work with the
committee and with the executive
to raise that amount of of the
increase we have two hundred
sites in the state a hundred
fifty provide medical services
ninety provide behavioral health
and sixty provide dental and in
in many of these communities
that the only services so we we
ask for your help and we thank
you so so much for all you do
thank you very much.
Thank you Mr chairman members of
the committee I'll be brief my
name is Leah Sanchez and I'm the
co executive director of the New
Mexico Public Health Association
I'm here on behalf of our over
three hundred fifty members who
work in every region of the
state to urge you all to support
the executive request to fill
the original intent of the
health care affordability fund
and lower costs and expand
coverage for uninsured folks in
New Mexico thank you thank you
very much.
Hello chairman and chairman
members my name is talking again
I am from towards the guy New
Mexico I am a mom and a health
care leader with New Mexico
together for health care twelve
hundred thousand New Mexicans
are uninsured due to the
unaffordability options are
eligibility requirements.
My family is biracial and my
daughter rose is half Navajo and
white we get harassed the
anxious for basic checkups an
emergency visit we get told she
needs the C. I. P. when she
doesn't qualify because she
doesn't have enough in the in
but.
We.
Care you fully fund size
requests for families locked out
of care and denied to take the
thirty four million from our
health care for the movie thank
you for your time thank you very
much their final comment for
today Sir nothing close in the.
No good afternoon my name is
leroy so and I'm from to look at
a small community north of go
about eight miles.
the state before we celebrate
American Indian day at the
roundhouse we are reminded of
the treaties make to ensure
native American.
More Americans have access to
healthcare.
I have been working with New
Mexico together for health care
since twenty seventeen.
And twenty twenty one and twenty
twenty one with your votes we
passed a health care
affordability phone that brings
in over three million
reoccurring dollars to New
Mexico.
About half of that is directed
to a health care affordability
fund.
And may only be used to make
health plans more affordable for
small businesses and residents
use and Health Care exchange and
to build a plan to cover.
Uninsured New Mexicans.
This is the work myself my
family my New Mexico together
for health care team has been
working toward.
This is not the time to short
change our health care
opportunities.
We ask you to.
Fully fund the oversize request
to.
Over uninsured New Mexicans.
And denied the right to a to
take thirty four mins from our
fund thank you very much for
your time.
Thank you very much
thank you to all of the members
thank you to our committee you
see why this is an incredibly
hardworking Committee thank you
so much the public members who
have been here at all throughout
the day thank you particularly
for the folks have been able to
offer COVID with that that's
going to conclude I do I don't
know I know the number of our
members who are.
Listening very intently
including representative Garcia
our our
even wanting to give feedback
because of the public testimony
there here in today I know if
Representative Garcia wants to
add anything yes please
Representative nodded.
Thank you Mr chairman madam
chair for give me an opportunity
to speak as you all know all my
district is about sixty five
percent native American.
You know I go up there I've been
out there of my whole life and
these people are not asking for
donations for asked for work to
do with them and one I wanted a
little girl sitting right there.
Why should the little role for
through issue with no insurance.
In on the these are big issues
and I know that the we're gonna
recommend the lowest what we
should really think about what
we're doing.
These people don't have
insurance if you go on the
reservation.
It's tough it's really tough and
Representative Lara meal can
vote for that because she helped
me open not a more.
With one court because they're
the people that went nowhere to
turn and you know going to big
issues that we need to address
and we is budget we really need
to look and see what happened
with the people don't have
health care.
With that thank you very much Mr
chairman Madam absolutely thank
you representative Garcia okay
Committee I I think let's try to
wrap it up for today we really
appreciate folks gone the extra
mile committee members thank you
I'm so grateful for you as
committee members we've had an
incredible hearing today this is
you know almost.
You know twenty five plus
percent of our state budget but
as we've seen here today it
affects every single New Mexico
now has care and we'll see
everybody back here tomorrow
