Your.
Here.
Yeah.
Here.
Here.
Here.
More.
Here.
We do have a quorum today like
to welcome all of you to of the
house appropriations and finance
committee as I mentioned we have
one item on the agenda today and
our presenter today is madam
majority floor leader
Representative Stapleton
Williams Stapleton the would go
ahead and turn it over to you
and you should have house bill
one in front of you everyone
should have a copy of the bill.
You should each have a copy of
the FIR that actually breaks
down exactly what this bill does
but that will turn it over to
Representative and let her talk
about her bill.
Thank you.
The word of the day is mute
though on mute.
You madam chair.
Again I say good afternoon to
everyone.
And thank you for having me
before the house appropriation
committee to present to you
house bill one.
House bill one which
appropriates eight million four
hundred and eight thousand
dollars what one hundred dollars
for the expenses of the twenty
twenty one legislative session.
That amount includes the
following.
Three million eight hundred and
fifty nine thousand six hundred
dollars for the Senate.
Three million one hundred and
fifty four thousand for the
house of representatives and one
million three hundred and ninety
four thousand five hundred
dollars for the Legislative
Council Service for its session
expenses and for running the
joint drill rural mail rural and
Legislative switchboard.
Additionally madam chair the
bill includes I'm appropriations
for the permanent legislative
committees and the expense of
the legislative department for
fiscal year twenty twenty two as
follows.
For the Legislative Council
Service operations six million
two hundred dollars.
For the legislative expenses one
million dollars.
Sorry madam chair for the
Legislative Council Service a
perforation it is six million
two hundred thousand nine
hundred dollars.
For the next session preparation
four hundred twenty five
thousand dollars.
For the statewide legislative
internship program forty seven
thousand five hundred dollars so
do fees of national
organizations of which the
legislature is a member four
hundred nineteen thousand five
hundred dollars.
For the legislative information
system.
Twenty twenty one and twenty
twenty two one million six
hundred seventeen thousand one
hundred dollars.
For the Senate rules committee.
Thirty five thousand dollars and
for a rural infrastructure study
one hundred fifty thousand
dollars the bill also
appropriates to the legislative
finance committee.
Four million four hundred thirty
two thousand eight hundred
dollars for its operation.
To the legislative education
study committee one million
three hundred thirty six
thousand for its operation.
For the house chief clerks
office and the house leadership
staff office one million seven
hundred five seven hundred
thousand five hundred dollars.
For the Senate chief clerks
office and the Senate leadership
staff office one million seven
hundred sixty six thousand
dollars eight hundred dollars
for the legislative department
chair of the continued ongoing
development and the expanded
partnership role with the New
Mexico compilation commission in
this publication of the New
Mexico statues I'm updated
nineteen seventy eight four
hundred thousand dollars.
To the department of public
safety for the security of the
state capitol during the session
one million four hundred eighty
four thousand dollars.
To the department of military
affairs for the security of the
state capitol June the session.
Six hundred seventy four
thousand four hundred dollars.
To the administrative office of
the courts increased litigation
costs due to the COVID nineteen
pandemic two hundred thousand
dollars madam chair and members
of the committee I now stand for
questions.
About Oscar expert witness would
like to make Madam.
Mr Burciaga.
yes we can.
All righty well thank you
presenters and we're asking that
you bear with us also this is
the interesting times for the
committee certainly and and how
we conduct our hearings but for
the benefit of the committee I'd
like to let you know this this
is an appropriations bill
is is it yet appropriates money
to all three branches of
government so when you look on
the live with page nine.
You'll see additional
appropriation as well as
executive appropriation on page
nine.
So it's more than just you know
what we've generally seen in the
past that goes to our branch of
government so if there's a.
There's of the other two
branches that are included in
the US this is the bill that
pays for are are wrong
legislative session expenses as
well as the statutorily
created committees the LFC an
alley LC those are year round
committees and other created in
statute and then of course we're
Legislative Council services
work and and their needs
throughout the year.
I did have one question before
turn it over to the committee Mr
Burciaga.
I in on Monday we had our
Legislative Council committee
meeting and I had made a motion
the from cash balances of
Legislative Council we would use
a hundred fifty thousand
dollars.
For assessment of of rural
infrastructure needs I'd like to
know why that's in this bill.
And I thought once we've made
the decision that the the
council has that authority.
Is it just cleaner is a just
cleaner to do it this way.
Okay.
Wirth project manager because
this is coming on cash balances
it has to be appropriate.
Cash balances cannot just be
expended by the council.
So this will be the way it's
done okay that's the committee
did vote for this it was not an
there was no opposition for the.
So let's go to the committee and
if you would is as vice chair
has asked if you have a
question.
You raise your hand in the
chatter raise your hand and will
call on you.
We also have a new summary sheet
the staff was just passed out.
Of the white paper to give you
all the breakdown.
For for Legislative Council
Service provided internet
internet spent work and so forth
Yellowpages the house of
representatives.
Blue is the Senate face.
Legislative Council Service the
more orange shower here no for
water want to know.
We're.
Research.
Thank you madam chair
why is she just received this
program ask questions from of
this house from the twenty
twenty appropriated a very top
line.
There's about.
Five hundred thousand dollar
increase on the set of similar
around well but I'm getting on
the house.
Our goal is that increase right
related directly to the COVID
nineteen pandemic is that what
is that what's driving that
increase.
Chair.
That.
Chair and members here yes okay
you just heard I the increases
in the house and Senate are
inside the house and Senate.
This.
Working off of what you to the
top.
If.
Okay.
So so.
The.
The increase is
are you.
Twenty nineteen to twenty
twenty.
Looking at twenty twenty IST
returning your job back to
twenty nineteen so the increase
would potentially be about a
million dollar increase yeah
that's because.
A
That was the last sixty days yes
Sir.
So that you have to compare that
to last sixty day session
compared to twenty twenty that
is a lot less because it was a
thirty day session yes my
question is the the million
dollar increase if you look at
the Senate two point eight eight
five million versus three point
eight five nine million.
Request is is that's a million
dollar increase is that.
Driven by the COVID nineteen
pandemic.
Madam chair and Representative
Crowder that is that is part of
it it also includes staffing and
a lot of stuff that we have to
get ready and we will be doing
the session.
Okay so madam chair my question
then becomes whether any
reversion are.
COVID nineteen dollars it
actually paying this expenses
coming out of our normal general
fund or is this increasing rate
from the COVID nineteen dollars.
Madam chair representative the
legislature did not receive any
federal COVID nineteen dollars
this is all general fund okay.
All right thank you madam chair
all continue to research this.
Already we're.
One question.
All is your.
What.
Hers costs.
Hello.
I'm.
Shares back though it would have
show the money.
Apply to provided comment costs
so to follow up to
Representative travelers
question is.
Just a.
Additional lancer work perfect
cation and if we don't qualify
for cures funding that may work
for
it is not used in New Mexico I'd
rather use that money for COVID
cost for the legislative branch
rather than send it back in use
general fund dollars instead
that's what question.
And those in addition to that
question I wanted to ask Davis.
Technically speaking if we had
issues general fund.
I. T. upgrade in this building.
That everybody is not just
legislature and executive
offices in the judiciary all
these committees these other
outside groups.
Why wouldn't those kind of
expenses be
allowed under the care money.
Would be allowed madam chair.
One thing to think about that
someone different from a month
ago the new on the bus act
passed in December use of the
cures money into server.
The server of this calendar
year.
It was previously thought that
has to be used for last December
thirty first so that there was a
minor for what's expansion so
there is the opportunity with
the state farms to seek
reimbursement later for.
Four point and by the committee
rates that
Because that's exactly what we
should be doing this building is
not exclusive to provided you
finding there's a number of
different appointed committees
and the.
Okay the unitarians and
executive related.
So we will be looking at trying
to do that.
These upgrades are to be paid
for that purpose.
The committee members we have
very Representative Garcia.
I have Sir.
Madam chair we were speaking
it's really echoing and I'm
having a hard time understanding
I think a Representative was
having the same problem.
Yeah I could I can understand
the question last.
I'm happy to repeat that.
Question clips question that I
ask is is functions.
Question
number two.
A number to the number
date of
this bill is not just about your
age I mean it gosh I
is what I think.
On legislative weeks on.
It.
That.
What.
I understand the madam chair
shark legislation I should've
known better which of.
That's all I have sure thank you
thank you madam chair.
Rep Costello.
Madam chair.
There is some.
Sure there are we going to pay a
lot of this budget that we're.
The state police.
Madam chair and representative
this is the amounts that are
based on what I'm seeing our
finance ministration I'm working
with the state police on that
says that you go to the
our state of our.
All come from.
What is what
me say it is.
Law enforcement.
So there may be some of that
kind of working.
Each.
I'm sure that.
Yes.
In order.
A legislature says a question.
The committee.
Always.
I.
That makes it ideal.
Right well that's.
