Reresentative Hernandez.
Representative Herndon,
Representative Herrera.
Representative Little.
Representative Lujan.
Representative Pettigrew.
Representative Sanchez.
Representative Saana here.
Representative Silva.
Representative Vincent.
Vice Chair Dixon.
Thank you. Please go ahead.
Thank you, Madam Vice Chair.
Good afternoon, Mr. Chair,
members of the committee, Kelly
Klundt with the Legislative
Finance Committee with me today
is Doctor Sarah Dinis with the
Legislative Finance Committee
and Doctor Rachel Garcia with
the Legislative Finance
Committee as well. We're gonna
be starting today with two
presentations, first about the
early childhood system and then
with the child protectives and
juvenile justice system
following with Rachel Garcia.
And then following those
presentations, we'll get into
both the early childhood
department budget and the CYFD
budget.
So before I get on the
PowerPoint, I just want to
direct everybody to your volume
1 and volume 3 pages, because if
you're gonna flip through some
of these, it might give you some
extra context while we're having
conversations about this.
So in volume one, the child
wellbeing page starts on page
23, and that's a combination
policy chapter on both.
Early childhood and child
protective service and juvenile
justice issues, so it's a good
policy document combining these
issues there.
And then in your spiral bound,
um, volume, which is volume 3.
Beginning on page 83.
There are many charts that
regard early childhood finances,
so if you want to know what's
going on with home visiting
finances, contracts, how we're
spending childcare assistance by
age, um, revenue source, all of
those can be found in your
volume 3 starting on page 82.
8282.
OK, and with that, I will begin
the PowerPoint presentation you
all have in front of you, but is
on the screen above.
There's going to be 2
PowerPoints in front of you that
look very similar. We're looking
at the early childhood one.
It looks like.
So this first slide, slide 2,
this is a visualization of the
early childhood system in New
Mexico.
And how you read this is you
look at that pinkish purple
arrow at the top of the page,
and that's an age range of
children in the system. So you
see it starts prenatally and it
goes to 5 years and older
because childcare assistances up
to the age of 13. Some of these
programs go beyond what is
typically thought of early
childhood, but you'll notice
that the bars correspond to the
age range of services that they
serve. So for instance,
childcare assistance can begin
after the first few weeks of
life and go on until 8.
13, Home visiting starts
prenatally and depending on the
model, can go to age 4. It's
just a good visualization to see
all of these services, the age
ranges that they serve and kind
of think about them as a system
of service, right?
Many children in New Mexico will
receive multiples of these
services, so you might be a
child who's born, your mother,
uh, may enroll in home visiting
prenatally, she may receive home
visiting and then you might
receive childcare assistance,
possibly pre-kindergarten and
extended school year. And so
they might receive multiples of
these services, and some of them
might only receive one or two
services, but it's good to know
with the menu options are.
I'd like to remind you when
we're talking about these
programs, you have to think of
them also as a menu of outcomes,
not every single one of these
programs has the same type of
outcome. So for instance,
childcare assistance is very
effective at economic support,
so it allows people to go to
work, go to school and have a
safe place to put their child
while they're participating
economically, and it covers the
cost of childcare, so it's a,
it's a pretty good economic
support.
But what we don't see out of
childcare assistance is long
term educational gains. So we
see a fade out at 3rd grade of
childcare assistance.
But if that same child receives
pre-K, we are seeing longer term
educational outcomes. So in New
Mexico in pre-kindergarten,
we're seeing things that are
pre-K such as lower special
education designation, um,
higher graduation rates, higher
math and uh literacy proficiency
and even even higher uh college
graduation or college attendance
rates. And so when you're
looking at funding these types
of programs, you have to look at
about the outcomes that you're
looking.
to fund. So if in your local
community, you're really looking
at improving math and literacy,
you would want to put your money
in pre-kindergarten. If you were
looking at some workforce
supports you would target
childcare assistance, and when
you're thinking about funding
this system, you as a body need
to think of each of these
programs as their independent
outcomes that they achieve, but
also as a system of services.
So this is the visualization of
that, and I know there's a lot
to say, but I'm about to go
through each program
independently to give some more
in-depth.
Conversation about it.
OK, so this next slide shows uh
births in New Mexico, um, since
2010, and you're going to notice
a trend here.
So we have declining births in
New Mexico. What does that mean?
Why is that important?
When we're building this system,
we have to build the right size
system. You can't build a
pre-kindergarten system that
serves 26,000 kids per cohort,
we don't have 266,000 children
per cohort. We're closer to
21,000. And so as we're thinking
about this, we have to think
about the money, both
strategically and program
outcome and making sure that
it's right size for the
community of New Mexico today
that we're serving the right
amount of slots in the community
that we're not oversaturating
certain programs or
Unsaturating certain programs in
different communities. So the
detail of this is really
important as we build this
system and continue to build it.
This slide shows you a history
of early childhood funding, um,
and you're gonna see the
opposite trend that what I just
showed you on the previous
slide. So this is a spending
trend for all of those programs
that I showed you in the first
slide, so pre-kindergarten, home
visiting, childcare assistance,
all those programs, this is
their funding stacked on each
other in millions since FY 12.
Now I've been your analyst here
at LFC working on early
childhood since FY 14. I know, I
have great skin.
Um.
Tell that joke every time it
hits every time.
And so what I want to know is
like, we were spending, you
know, a little under $200
million when I started this job
forever ago. And now if you look
at that, we're spending over
$700 million. That is immense
growth that this body has
approved over the years and why?
Because we have seen that this
is kind of the state's
cornerstone, um.
program to prevention. Rachel is
going to talk to you a little
bit about intervention.
Following me, but this is mostly
how do we help families
stabilize early so they don't
reach a point of crisis. How did
we teach them what they need to
know and help them so that they
can connect to other services,
their families can be screened
and most importantly, how do we
leverage federal funds early on
in their lives as well.
So that's a big history of early
childhood funding.
And if you want to know.
How these bars, these stacking
bars break out by revenue
source. I actually have that in
volume 3.
On page.
So starting on page 85.
Each one of these programs is
broken out by revenue source and
spending in this history too. So
you can see going all the way
back to FY 12, how much we were
spending on childcare assistance
by general fund, by federal
revenue, by TANF, and it goes
for each one of these programs.
So if you want the detail on how
that revenue has broken out over
the years.
That's there on page 85 for you.
OK, and with that, I'm gonna
turn it over to Doctor Desis.
Thanks, Kelly.
Uh, so now we're going to talk a
little bit about some of the
more recent evaluations that
we've done uh in the early
childhood policy arena since
2020, we've had three different
evaluation reports that are
focused on home visiting, the
overall early childhood
landscape in our early childhood
accountability reports which are
which are done every 2 years and
pre-kindergarten.
Uh, and our evaluations are on
our LFC website, if you just go
to the program you uh evaluation
unit reports, and that's what
that QR code leads you to. Uh,
the first one I want to talk
about is pre-kindergarten. Uh,
we did a pre-kindergarten
evaluation in 2020, which showed
that uh we're seeing strong
impacts of pre-kindergarten on
uh child's, uh, uh, children's
educational outcomes, including
uh positive high school
graduation and uh we also saw
that there were different
standards between the
pre-kindergarten that was
administered by.
by the public education system
versus the pre-kindergarten that
was administered in our
community settings or childcare
settings and uh so one of the
key recommendations from this
report was that we need to make
sure that our standards and our
quality is the same between the
public education system and our
community providers. The next
report that I want to talk a
little bit about is our home
visiting report.
And this report found that
generally home visiting has
positive outcomes for families,
but that what we're seeing is
that families are not
necessarily staying in the
program the whole time and we
should be monitoring how the
programs are implemented to make
sure they're implemented the way
they're supposed to be.
And so the reason why uh making
sure family stay in the program
the whole time, uh, is
important, is it similar to if
you're getting a dosage of
antibiotics. If you take your
antibiotics for maybe the 1st 2
days, but you're supposed to
take it for 12. Maybe you'll be
fine, but maybe you won't be.
Maybe you'll need a second
round. Maybe you'll need
something more intense.
Uh, additionally, we wanted to
point out here that home
visiting serves only a small
proportion of children from
birth to 5.
And that the state needs to
address this low recruitment,
especially when we're thinking
about Medicaid home visiting and
they've made some uh strides in
that, but there's still more
room to go.
The last report we want to
highlight is the Early Childhood
Accountability report, and the
main piece here that I want to
point out to you all is that our
capacity for infant and child
infant and toddler childcare,
uh, is below our need, most
likely, and so we need to look
at the system holistically and
figure out how do we increase
our capacity for these uh
infants and toddlers, as well as
how ECCD can partner with other
state agencies to monitor both
program implementation and
adjust programming to meet what
families need.
Uh, with that, I'll turn the
presentation back over to.
I will note that basically any
given time throughout the year,
we have at least one early
childhood evaluation going on
because it's a huge financial
investment for the state, $700
million is a lot of money, and
so it's a very important um pro
program for us to constantly be
evaluated, making sure we're
getting the return on investment
that you all expect because the
investment of this dollars is
what's going to make people's
lives better if we do it right.
This is kind of our opportunity,
right? We all know that this is
Where the money is right now,
and we're trying to set us up
for the out years to kind of
improve these outcomes. So the
next slides, I'm gonna go a
little bit more in depth into
each program, and you're gonna
notice this is a very similar
setup for each slide. It'll show
you the title of the program, a
definition of the program.
And operating budget in
millions, how many people were
serving and some additional
information. So you're gonna see
that same format for every slide
for each of one of these
programs. So we're going to
start with childcare assistance.
It's the largest financial
program in the early childhood
system over $300 million is
being spent. It's serving around
31,000 kids every single month.
Now, I will note that that
31,000 ages all the way up to 13
years old, and
We are not serving infants and
toddlers to capacity of what we
need. We have pretty broad
coverage when it comes to 3 year
olds and 4 year olds.
And to older children of older
ages because 3 and 4 year olds
also have pre-kindergarten and
school age kids have after
school care. They have longer
years, they have summer
programmings, and so, um, I
would know that what we
policy-wise trying to focus on
in childcare assistance right
now, Sarah just noted was how do
we get service levels for
infants and toddlers up.
Why is that?
Well, for a lot of reasons.
It's important because that's
one of the most expensive points
when people are trying to uh
support their child and
childcare systems. It can be
over 13 $1400 a month to pay for
an infant and childcare. That's
a big chunk of money when you
possibly are at your lowest
earning capacity cause you're
early on in life.
Also, that's the highest risk
time for neglect because these
children cannot speak for
themselves at this point. They
can't report neglect at this
point. And most importantly,
it's the time when we have the
greatest brain developments in
our lifetime. And so for all of
those reasons, focusing on
supports for the youngest
children and allowing those
other programs like
pre-kindergarten and after
school care to suck up kind of
capacity so we can focus dollars
on the youngest years is a.
goal that we've been trying to
work for the last few years, we
have not, we've made some gains,
but we're still vastly
underserving infants and
toddlers in particular. The last
LFC research that we did shows
that we were only serving about
Of all of this 31,000, so only
31,000 kids about.
25% of those 31,000s are infant
and toddler age, so the rest,
75% are older than that age
range being served by the
program.
So as I noted before, what have
we seen in our evaluations from
childcare assistance, we've seen
it's increased family income.
It's increased well child
visits. It's increased dental
visits.
Um, we have seen really big mass
investments in rates, the
department has now built rates
off of a cost model. We used to
use a different type of
reimbursement, and that's
increased rates significantly,
which leads me to our next
slide. So these are some slides
on childcare assistance
enrollment and spending over
that same time period.
So you're gonna see
3:15, around.
We were serving around 20,000
kids, any given month. And that
dip is COVID, so that, that was
the pandemic, and then you're
going to see where we shot up to
about 30,000 kids and that large
increase is when the department
made a policy decision to
increase the um income
eligibility for families
eligible for childcare
assistance, up to 400% of the
federal poverty level. It used
to be $250 to 300. They
increased that income
eligibility and a lot more.
families came into services
leading to that spike.
You can also see the next slide,
that middle slide shows how much
we're paying on average per
child annually. So we used to be
paying, you know, $6000 a kid
annually and now we're closer to
11,000 a kid. We're paying
annually. So not only do we have
more kids in service, we're
paying more for these children
in service.
And then this next slide shows
you what does ECECD's infant
toddler rate look like compared
to the state average for an
infant to rate and the national
average for an infant toddler
rate. And so what you can see
here is as you hit star level 3,
which is considered your heart
starting to hit higher quality
level in childcare, we're paying
a lot more than the state
average in the national average
for those higher rates, for
those higher quality star
levels.
This chart just shows you what
enrollment, it's a little bit
stale, so it's changed a little
bit since this fiscal year, but
it had remained pretty stable,
um, and this is not to say that
this is our exact breakout right
now, but it gives you a good
taste of what the system looked
like in childcare, that we
receive serving between 13 to
17% of infants in the state at
any given time. So that's a
pretty small percentage given
how many.
Um, system needs we have for
infant.
Wrong way.
OK, the next program is
pre-kindergarten, same setup as
the opening slide shows you a
little definition of it, the
operating budget and how many
were serving, I will note that
this is both 4 year olds and
3-year-olds in this slide.
What have we seen out of
pre-kindergarten in our
evaluations. I said that a
little bit earlier, but I'll say
it again. We've seen lower
special education designation
we've seen higher math and
reading literacy, um, we've seen
higher graduation rates and
higher college attendance rates,
and I can't understate to you
how important that is because
other states are not seeing that
type of outcome like New Mexico
is a lot of states are seeing
fade out, but the quality and
step implementation that we did
in the state allowed us to see
some of these higher quality
longer term.
ROI investments bearing out. I
will note we have a pre-K
evaluation open right now.
And we need to make sure that
pre-K, pre-COVID is pre-K post
COVID. You know, that changed a
lot in the system, and we need
to make sure that we're still
receiving these types of
outcomes, make sure that these
investments are still working.
So that evaluation will come out
in the spring.
Next slide is home visiting. Um,
and so think about home visiting
as an umbrella term for a type
of service, and it's, there's
lots of models, your communities
might look a little bit
different, but it's basically a
parenting, coaching and support
program. We're an individual, an
individual will come into your
home. They have a curriculum and
training, and they'll say,
here's what you should expect
developmentally of your child.
Here's what you should expect
developmentally as your
prenatal.
Here's resources. Let me give
you some screening and let me
help you with your questions.
That's what you want to
generally think about home
visiting now. We have lots of
models that deliver that in
different ways, and those models
have different outcomes.
And just like the bigger system,
when we're thinking about what
you want to change in your
community, you should also be
choosing models depending on
what you're looking for to
change. For instance, um,
healthy Families America has
been shown to improve uh
maternal child health and to
reduce child maltreatment risk.
And so if you have a provider or
a community that has a high
maltreatment area, you might
want to think about setting up a
home visiting program in your
community.
That is this particular model.
This is another slide of um some
of the Medicaid home visiting
models we have authorized in the
state, and if they have a check
mark in that policy area, that's
the national research is showing
that it has a positive effect on
that policy area.
So, um, this is not every model
we have in the state. This is
just our Medicaid eligible. Most
of you know that there's a
program called First Born in New
Mexico. Unfortunately, that's
not Medicaid eligible right now.
It does show positive effects.
We're just focusing on the
Medicaid ones for this
particular um slide.
And this is
So this is a projection of the
early childhood Trust Fund.
Just so we can all kind of
picture what that looks like
financially, and you can see
where we invested our initial
$300 million in 2021, and that
is projected to have a corpus of
$11.6 billion with a B by 2029
with the average output of to
the program fund of 523 million,
so that's just kind of a history
of how the trust fund is going
and what the distribution looks
like, and with that, I will turn
it over to.
Doctor Garcia.
Well Sarah's helping us get
upset, uh, set up. I'll point
you to a couple of documents, so
I'm now gonna talk through a
PowerPoint that looks very
similar, but says child welfare
system funding overview.
Um, if you'd like to follow
along, um, in your volume 2.
It'll be page 346 and volume 3,
pages 80 and 81. They look like
this. Um, have a couple of
charts and graphs related to
CYFD.
Yeah, you might have to slide
me. Thank you. OK, so, um, I'm
gonna keep this, try to keep
this pretty short and
straightforward. You all asked
us to cover two things, so I'm
going to talk about CYFD's
funding history and then I'm
also gonna give a summary of
some interim activities that
were specifically related to the
stage child welfare system,
including an LFC subcommittee
and Legis that, uh, as well as
the Senate Memorial 5 Task
Force. Oh, you can see my notes,
so you may see my notes, um, in
the slides.
Go ahead.
Um, OK, this slide just
It's OK.
Um, I'm not gonna talk about
this slide really in depth, but
the key thing to know is that
CYFD, the state's child welfare
agency has evolved over time.
Functions have been added,
functions have been carved out,
for example, the early childhood
care and education department,
um, and currently there are 4
program budget codes within the
child welfare agency, and that
includes protective services,
behavioral health, which covers
um behavioral health for all
children in the state. Juvenile
justice services and
Program support.
It
And this slide gives you kind of
a big picture view about child
maltreatment in our state. If
you saw me get this presentation
a couple of weeks ago, it had
older data. This is federal
data, um, and it comes from the
administration for Children and
Families that just released
their 2023 report and so the
data on this slide has been
updated. The key takeaways are
that New Mexico tends to have a
higher rate of maltreatment, um,
and we also tend to have a
higher rate of repeat
maltreatment than the national.
average. Um, and then the, the
chart in the middle shows the
breakdown um in 2023. That's the
federal data and the key
takeaway there is that, um, like
many states, the most prevalent
form of maltreatment is neglect.
Um
One thing to know about the
state's child welfare system,
which is Kelly mentioned or
alluded to is really intervenes,
um, when things may not be going
well. There are multiple
agencies involved. So you all
often probably hear about CYFD,
the child welfare agency, but
there are a variety of other
agencies that play a role, um,
when it comes to removing a
child and putting them into um
protective care by the agency.
And then the flow chart uh kind
of on the left, it's just a
reference for you all about sort
of what happened.
when a report of maltreatment is
received by CYFD, um, this
slide, uh, so in the last slide
it kind of gave you that what
happens. And in New Mexico,
historically, we just had kind
of one pathway which was
investigations. Back in 2019,
you all as a legislature passed
a bill that allowed for the
creation of a multi-level
response system, which is an
evidence-based practice that
sort of provides an additional
pathway once a report is
received by uh by the child.
agency. CD has not scale
implemented this program or
initiative and as articulated in
statute, um, though it is an
evidence-based one. They are
seeking technical assistance um
from Casey Family Programs to
have that additional pathway,
though it's not operational
right now, and I point this out
because it has a pretty
significant return on investment
if you look at national
research.
Excellent.
So now I'm gonna talk to you a
little bit about sort of what is
the funding history within um
CYFD, um, this, uh, roll up here
provides the roll up across all
of those 4 programs that I
mentioned.
What you'll notice is between FY
21 and FY 25 CYFD's total
operating budget grew by about
22%.
The general fund appropriation,
which is the number uh in that
bar chart grew by about 15%. Why
the difference starting in FY
24, you all began making a
transfer of about $18 million
from the TANF program into CYFD
and so that was a big chunk of
the growth, particularly in FY
24.
If you look at the chart next to
it, um, that is CYFD reversions.
So prior to this year, CYFD was
experiencing some experiencing
some pretty significant
reversions, um, and so for that
reason, um, and a few others,
you all as a legislature held
CYFD's operating budget
relatively flat in FY 25, but
made some specific targeted
investments in the grow outside
of the operating budget last
year. So
Last year in 2024, there was
about 24 million in
non-recurring special
appropriations to CYFD and that
included 18.6 million in the
grow, which is that 3-year pilot
fund with some specific
accountability measures.
Um, I'm gonna talk a little bit
about protective services, um,
in part because it is the
biggest chunk of CYFD's budget.
Um, I know it's also an area
that you all particularly care
about. If you look at the
protective services operating
budget between FY 14 and FY 24,
that operating budget grew by
about $100 million.
At the same time, and our, the
number of children in foster
care was generally declining.
That's one of the charts that I
mentioned in in volume 3. What
we were seeing, um, prior to the
pandemic was that the number of
children in foster care was
coming down. It kind of bottomed
out during the pandemic and
since that time it has been
ticking up. Um, we're averaging
around 2100 children in foster
care in any given month, but
that is still below where we
were.
Uh, in 2024.
I'm sorry, 2014.
Um, OK, I'm gonna talk a little
bit now about federal funds
within protective services. Why?
Because this will be kind of a
key component of the budget
conversation when, when we talk
about this, the two
recommendations for CYFD's
operating budget.
Within protective services, the
federal title 4E program is a
federal program that provides
states with reimbursement for
the delivery of foster care. Um,
not all, uh, components of this
child welfare system are
covered, for example,
investigations are not covered
within federal Title IV, um, but
specific costs associated with
providing foster care are,
they're kind of two pieces to
that. One is the actual
provision of foster care that
can be known as a maintenance
payment or the reimbursement
that.
foster care parent receives.
That is reimbursed for the state
at the Federal FMAP rate. So
that's about $3 and federal
funds for every $1 the state
spends in general funding.
The second part of that program
provides reimbursement for
administrative costs. The
formula is a little bit more
complicated, but it generally is
about 50% of administrative
costs times a multiplier known
as the penetration rate, which
is 50%, um, that's a little bit
technical. What you need to know
about federal Title IV is what
we have seen over time, um, and
you can see it in the first
chart is that the, the projected
federal revenue within
protective services has
increased.
Uh, we were expecting to draw
down more as a state. Why for a
couple of reasons. If you spend
more in general fun
theoretically you would draw
down more in federal funds.
Well we've actually seen is that
we kind of peaked in FY 22 and
in the last two years we've
actually seen a decrease in the
total amount collected in
federal funds within protective
services, specifically within
federal Title IVE.
If you look at the chart next to
it, that is the ratio of federal
funds to general fund collected
over time. We saw both a
decrease in the total amount
collected as well as a decrease
in the ratio of federal funds
collected, um, and I'm putting
this chart up there so that you
have it as background context
because this is one of the key
elements within CYFD's, uh, the
two budget recommendations, um,
the executive budget
recommendation will request
back.
Filling federal funds that have
been lost, the LFC
recommendation will recommend
some technical assistance to try
to collect federal funds in
before backfilling, but I show
this to you so you can kind of
see a visual about what's going
on in federal funds and
protective services.
Um, OK, so I'm now gonna
transition to talk a little bit
about the interim and
performance. The LFC established
a subcommittee over the interim,
um, and implemented, uh, what we
call a legiststat, which is like
specific targeted focus on
performance challenges. There
were 3 that LFC focused on this
interim. One was reducing
maltreatment and repeat
maltreatment in the state. The
second one was workforce
specifically addressing high
turnover and workforce
challenges and protective
services.
And the third is community-based
placements, specifically the
state's number of resource homes
or foster providers.
Um, so I'll talk a little bit
about each one of those and then
specifically mention some
investments you've made related
to each of those things.
So, I'm gonna talk about
prevention first, and that is
specifically connected to
reducing and preventing
maltreatment and repeat
maltreatment.
Kelly mentioned Kelly talked
about prevention kind of at the
system level, that's the top
layer of the triangle. We as a
state have some specific gaps
when it comes to more targeted
programs for families, um with
um key elements of risk over
time, LFC has recommended
implementing evidence-based
programs where we know we have a
return on investment, and you
all have made some specific
targeted investments through the
grow to do that. One of the key
things that we highlighted in
the Legistat is that we as a
state do not
have a federally approved family
first prevention services plan
that would allow us to draw down
federal funds to fund some
prevention programs. CRD has
submitted several um plans. Um,
we have not yet been approved as
a state.
And the second thing I'll talk a
little bit about is the
protective services workforce,
which is one of the key
performance challenges, um.
CAD continues to experience
significant challenges when it
comes to workforce, including
high turnover rates, um, in your
volume 3, you'll, there's a
chart that looks like this that
is a snapshot of case load data
within protective services that
the department shared with us
back in September, um, and what,
what we know from this data is
if you look statewide in the
aggregate, it doesn't look too
bad, but when you look county
level and by different type of
worker, COD is experiencing some
significant
challenges and high caseloads,
um, that are likely challenging.
Um, I'm not going to read them
all to you, but you all as the
legislature have made some
specific investments in
non-recurring appropriations to
try to address workforce, um,
particularly in protective
services, some within higher ed.
Uh, and then kind of the last
key performance challenge was
community-based placements and
behavioral health, um, we
specifically looked at kind of
are we making progress to
increasing the number of
community-based placements, um,
foster care placements for
children in care. So the
initiated a variety of
activities over the interim. We
have not yet seen it really
substantial increase in that
area. And again on this slide,
um, I point out just a few areas
where you all have made some
targeted investments related to
that.
OK, so I'm gonna kind of bring
us home with what were some of
the recommendations that came
out of the interim, in
particular the LFC child welfare
Subcommittee, um, determined
that they would like to sponsor
an LLC bill specifically related
to child welfare and address
some of the key challenges that
LLC program evaluations and
reports have made over time. And
so, um, this is the LFC
sponsored child welfare bill
that essentially does 5 things,
um, related to systemic
challenges, kind of codifying
Family First prevention Services
Act, making some changes and
amendments updates to, um, the
CAA program implementing
differential response statewide,
moving um an oversight function
and then establishing a
nominating committee for the um.
Secretary position.
go to the next slide. I'll give
you a quick summary of the
second kind of initiative that
took place during the interim
Senate Memorial 5 was um about
uh sponsored by Senator Linda
Lopez last uh session. It
resulted in the appointment of a
task force, the composition of
which is included in the back of
your packet. That group met a
variety of times, quite a few
times with a lot of time put in
over the interim, um, the LFC
provided staffing support and
what I included on the next few
slides.
Where some of the key
recommendations that came from
that task force, and you will
see in some places similar
themes. I will note this is not
every recommendation that that
task force made, um, there are
quite a few, but these are ones
that were targeted or addressed
toward the legislature,
workforce was a very key one, as
we're a community-based
placements and what I noted in
the key here is, um, places
where a recommendation from that
task force has something
connected or similar in the LFC.
budget recommendation and then
the little bill icon is a place
where something the task force
recommended is similar to what
is in the child welfare bill
sponsored by LFC. If you go to
the next slide, this is just
some of those other key
recommendations. Um, I will note
there are some other bills that
address some of the things the
task force recommended, um, for
example, related to juvenile
justice in the community
corrections fund that have been,
that have other sponsors not in
the LFC though.
Um, so that is kind of the key
summary overview of COFD funding
history, performance, as well as
interim activities.
Excellent. Uh thank you all very
much. I think this is very uh
comprehensive. It brings us sort
of up to speed. Uh, if we have a
few brief questions. Um, let's
do it for the panel. I know we
want to get to our secretaries,
but we just have the 2 today.
We're gonna start with Baca, go
to ranking member Chatfield, got
representative Doo on the list.
I represent that.
So, uh, representative Baca
please. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Thank you for your presentation.
I've just got a couple of quick
and I'm gonna be working off the
presentation, uh, early
childhood, ECECD.
Page 4, and this is uh Mr.
Chairman is looking briefly at
the, the funding, how it's grown
and the areas that I kind of um
Notice there hasn't been much
growth in his area of home
visiting and fit.
Can you, can you briefly
Or talk about what, what may be
causing that kind of anomaly as
the other funding increases.
Thank you, Mr. Chair members
Committee. Um, so for home
visiting, we have struggled to
expand our Medicaid home
visiting program, and so.
written into the um Medicaid
waiver is now several home
visiting models that would bring
down that $3 federal fund, $1
state fund matching rate. Now we
had hoped to be over 1000
families enrolled into that, we.
are close to 700, which is a
recent big uptake. We were only
close to 200, so the agency has
made some profound um growth in
that in the last few quarters,
but we're still massively under
leveraging our federal revenues.
We don't need new state general
funds to be able to leverage
those. We have quite a big state
investment. What we could be
doing to expand the program
significantly is expanding our
um Medicaid reach.
Thank you for fit, um, I will
note that both the LFC and the
executive recommendation have
$10 million rate increase
recommendations in them for the
budget hearing that you'll hear
next.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I, I do
think that as we, I saw through
the presentation or somewhere
either volume one. We have 72%
of all
Children born in New Mexico.
Our Medicaid eligible. So I, I
do think that this
Provides both an opportunity.
But it, it sometimes it kind of
is a little concerning is that
we haven't yet leveraged those
dollars and see an investment in
those early years for our uh
students. So, uh,
Just briefly, Mr. Chairman, and
I, I do mean briefly, I'm
looking at page 9.
Can you, I, I see on the bottom
bullet there, uh, actually, um,
6 to 1 return on investment
using NM results first model.
How was that?
How is that calculated and, and
what does that involve?
Representative Baca chair that
model and takes into
consideration all of our uh
national research as well as
looking at New Mexico specific
impacts, and then assigns a
dollar amount to those. And so
what's particularly important
about this is that this was
using New Mexico data looking at
what we're actually seeing in
the state rather than just
looking at the national
landscape. And what we're seeing
is with our data in our state,
we're seeing that positive
return on investment. I would
also like to caution though that
we are seeing that our
uh proficiency rates uh for the
program have gone down slightly,
and so we want to make sure that
we're continuing to get those
large impacts from the program
and that's why we're doing a
progress report on
pre-kindergarten right now.
And thank you, my last question,
really, and then I'll say the
others for the secretary.
Page 10.
And
This is on home visiting and
your slide.
It says that for
Fiscal year 25, we have capacity
of 5600.
Uh, individuals to be served.
And we have an operating budget
of 54.1 million.
Did you kind of break that down
for me? Yeah, just share me,
this is exactly what I was
talking about with the that
assumes that we would maximize
the Medicaid revenues that we
should be pulling down. Now,
that's 14 million of that 54
million. So if we're not pulling
that down, then we're closer
into the um or 30s, high 30s
range. But if you want to know,
um, specifically the revenue
source. Is that what you're
asking again briefly the revenue
source and and what we're
talking about.
about kids, we're talking about
5600 kids, and we're talking
about.
$40 million or $56 million is
Just, again, if you don't have
that,
I'm, I'm, I'm happy to talk
offline or you get that back to
me, but I I when I saw the
numbers and I saw the revenue
source and that we just have
capacity for 5600, although
we've identified this as a need.
I just would like some
clarification. I'll you my time,
Chairman.
Thank you very much from Baca,
uh, ranking member Chatfield is
gonna uh ask questions when the
secretaries are up, so that
means we're gonna go next to
Representative Dao and then
Representative. Thank you, Mr.
Chair. I, I want to ask
questions on the secretary's are
up too. Do you want me to wait?
And, uh, if there's brief ones
now and uh so this would just be
sort of clarifying questions
based upon our analysts, so go
ahead now and thank you Mr.
Chair and thank you, Kelly.
Thank you guys for the
presentation and for being
around, but I've been around
longer, so, but you're there,
you're there. It's pretty cool,
right, so, um, when it's a
follow up on Representative
Baca's question, because you're
saying that home visiting isn't
uh as big as it could be, the
expansion is because we don't
have Medicaid.
But we have an $11 billion early
childhood fund.
Why does every home visiting
need to be billable to Medicaid
for us to expand or to spend
more money in it.
Mr. Chair members of the
committee, uh, not every model
is eligible for Medicaid. So
we're not saying every model
needs to be, but what we are
saying is that there is a large
amount of money that the feds
were leaving on the table that
the feds could be paying for us,
that would help for expansion,
um, of these services that are
Medicaid eligible and $15
million is that's significant
amount of money, so do I think
every like firstborn, we have a
lot of hope for first burn in
New Mexico. We've put in the LFC
put in a
recommendation to redo the
evaluation on it so we could get
it, Medicaid eligible, um, but
it's not at this point and that
doesn't mean that we think that
we should not be also investing
in that. We're just saying we're
not leveraging the Fed funds
that we could be to do more
expansion.
OK. Thank you, Mr. Chair and
thank you, Kelly, and for those
that are funded, that we are
funding, are we funding home
visitors, nurse practitioners,
social workers, whether it's
associate or master's degree.
Are they being funded at
equitable pay to their peers and
other.
categories or if they're working
at pre-K, would they make more
if they were working at DOH,
would they make more? Are we at
parity pay for home visitors.
Um, Mr. Chamer's, uh, parity
pay. I'm not sure what they'd be
parody outside of a nurse,
there's not like a parody work
to put forth, but I will say
that the department is releasing
a workforce database that I've
seen that I'm actually pretty
impressed with, um, and I'm
excited to get some data this
fall out of it and it'll give us
more um granule data on
everybody in the workforce in
early childhood and their wages
and benefits. And so I think we
have some really good work
coming forward on that. Thank
you, Madam Chair, and then I
just, I'm
Because I have questions for the
secretary later. I, I have a
question regarding the pre-K
data that you showed. I thought
I heard you say that childcare
fade off by 3rd grade and pre-K
lasts a lifetime. How do you
know that when half the
providers are providing
wraparound care for pre-K for
pre-K children. Like, how, how
do you give the credit only to
pre-K, but not for the wrap
around full day year round care
that they receive outside of
pre-K.
Another doctor.
Um,
Mr. Chairman Representative
Dell. So that specific study was
based on the inaugural year of
of pre-K, when there was really
wasn't a lot of wrapround care
at that time. The, the pre-K,
um, impacts were monetized both
for high school outcome, um,
sorry, uh, test scores and high
school graduation, childcare,
the the the same way, so this
would be, you know, participants
in probably 2007, 2008, I
believe. That's, that's.
One of the reasons we want to
continue studying this though,
because, as you mentioned, you
know,
Kids are potentially receiving
multiple programs. We did, we
did another study years later
showing that um when pre-K was
paired with K3+, you got even
better results and it it almost
entirely eliminated the
achievement gap. So that that'll
hopefully be something that we
can, we can look at in the
future, um, we'll be probably
commented on by that pre-K
progress report, the evaluators
are working on.
Just one more comment on that,
um, and you'll understand this
very much is the dosage, as you
know, is really important and um
childcare assistance dosage is
not necessarily the same dosage
as pre-kindergarten. Families
may only need care 2 days a week
or for 3 hours a day versus
pre-kindergarten, which is a
full almost year round full day
of care, and so.
They, they're just different,
they're different, they're
different and that's why I was
saying like childcare assistance
does really good with economic
supports and helping families go
to the workforce and get
education and as you think about
how you're funding, if I could
get you to just take away two
things from this is how you fund
things matters and how we
implement that matters. So
without those things, it becomes
kind of a soup of are we gonna
get our ROI or not. Right? Well,
I want to thank you for that
clarification and I'm glad that
I asked the question.
Because there was a time based
on the way that we report based
on what we chose to study that,
that folks wanted folks in this
body wanted to reduce childcare
assistance to age 5.
And there was times when.
It could have even been, you
know, only the federal dollars.
But
the childcare assistance program
has a two generation impact
because it allows parents to
work and go to school. It allows
people to move towards
self-sufficiency and higher pay,
and it's the basis of, of all
economy, not just for the
family, but for the, the people
who have to employ folks who
need work.
And when we're allowing them to
do tutoring and homework help
and we're allowing them to
provide services equitable to K5
Plus, and parents are able to
have that wrapround care.
I, I just think we're not giving
enough credit to it, but I'm
glad that you made the
clarification and we should
probably study that too. Um, and
that you were able to say that
that was an initial study, you
know, there was only maybe, I
think we rolled out with 11
early pre-K programs or pre-K
programs in the pilot year
happen to be working in the
field when that happened and we
were one of them, and we were
already a star 5 program and we
already have wraparound services
and so, but we weren't measuring
it at that time. So I'm glad we
are and all votes have risen, so
I'm sure that the studies will
continue to improve over time.
Thank you, Mr. Chair.
OK
Thank you. Uh, next we have
Representative Herrera and then
Representative Lohan.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Thank you,
panel. Can you expand a little
bit? You were talking about
dosage and the length of home
visiting, uh, chair and
representative for, can you
clarify a little bit about what
you're looking for? I, I think
you're talking about uh the
length of home visiting, how,
how often, how long the people
stayed in the program, and, and,
um, and that was a significant
uh there there was a significant
finding about that. I just
wanted to know that chair and
Representative, uh, we were
talking a little bit about
completion rates and what we
were seeing is that most
families aren't completing. I
think the last data showed that
around 10% were completing the
program, and this is as reported
by their home visitor, whether
the home visitor when the family
withdraws says yes, the family
completed and what we're seeing
is that um for these families
who aren't completing it's
uncertain whether they're
getting the full benefit of home
visiting.
And Mr. Chair, and thank you for
that answer. What I'd like to
say is,
I, I'm curious what they
consider the the length of the,
you know, I.
I know a lot about home
visiting, OK, and what we know,
uh, evidence based as we know
that, you know, a teenage parent
probably needs 4 years of home
visiting or or till we can
transfer them into pre-K, OK?
They probably need that, uh,
college educated couple really
needs home visiting too, but
probably only used it for the
first year, and they've gotten
what they needed, and they're
ready to move on. They withdraw
from the program, but they can
always call that home visitor
again in the future if they need
help, so.
I just wonder if you're looking
at that because those are
important considerations.
Uh, chair and representative,
when we did the study, we looked
at um two different things. One,
which is what we use to
calculate this number was when
the home visitor themselves
reported that the family had
completed the program, uh, and
the reason we use that measure
rather than whether families had
stayed in for the expected
length of time, uh, based upon
uh the, the model that they
chose was that it was for this
specific reason you mentioned
because some families may need
more or less, and so we chose to
rely upon.
the home visitors, um.
a judgment.
Um, thank you, Mr. Chair and um
is the cost of doing home uh
home visiting under Medicaid,
more expensive than the cost of
doing Medicaid under another
program.
Uh, Ms. Sharon, clarify, the
cost of home visiting is more
expensive than doing medi other
Medicaid services. Is that OK?
Is the cost of Medicaid home
visiting more expensive than the
cost of, I guess, first born
home visiting cause that's the
only one we have, I guess. So
each, Mr. Chair, each model has
different costs depending on,
you know, the inputs. If you
have a nurse, it's quite
expensive. But because the feds
are picking up $3 to every $1.
It's cheaper for the state, no
matter the model, um.
To encourage uh Medicaid funded
programs. And, uh, Mr. Chair,
in, in my district, people have
said, well, we'd rather use
first born, but, you know, the
state is encouraging Medicaid
programs, so we go with Medicaid
programs, even though all of you
there know what evidence
the evidence game is very much a
game, and just because you're
evidence based doesn't mean
you're a better program, I, I
mean, we know that. I guess my
last question, I'll keep it
short, Mr. Chair. Please define
neglect for me.
Um
Mr. Chair, uh, representative,
hang out and have it written in
my notes, the precise
definition, um.
So in states have different, uh,
definitions, uh, Mr. Chairs
representative, um, there's a
federal definition in New
Mexico.
Um, the state definition of
neglect includes, uh, and this
is, uh, section 32A-4-2 of NMSA.
It includes the abandonment of a
child, uh, by a parent guardian,
a custodian, the failure of a
parent guardian or custodian to
provide a child with proper
parental care and control
subsistence education, medical
or other care or control
necessary for the child's
well-being. That's a long, long
winded one, and also when a
child is physical
or sexually abused in the
child's parent, guardian, or
custodian knew or should have
known of the abused and failed
to take reasonable steps to
protect the child from further
harm, and then there's also a
definition related to inability
to discharge responsibility to
or for the child because the
parental incarceration
hospitalization, physical or
mental disorder or incapacity.
I, I, Mr. Chair Representative,
I realized that's a whole lot in
the statue.
Uh, thank you, Mr. Chair. Yeah,
I
I would think neglect and child
abuse are pretty far apart. I,
I, I, that's all that all those
categories and are covered under
neglect, Mr. Chair
Representative Herrera, yes,
those are the categories for
neglect and then separately in
statute, there are definitions
related to abuse, and then under
the federal definition, child
maltreatment is made up of both
abuse and neglect.
Thank you very much,
Representative Herrera. Next we
have Representative Lujan and
then Representative Garrett, and
then we'll go to the secretary
of Sahan.
Oh sorry, son Pettigrew, we've
got you there too.
Mr. I'm gonna wait till we get
to the secretary. Thank you. OK.
Uh, we have representative
Garrett and represent Pettigrew.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Quick
question, is the primary or only
source of funding for these
programs, Medicaid. Are there
other federal sources. So, Mr.
Chair, for childcare assistance,
there's the federal childcare
block grant, um, we can also use
TANF for these programs. We're
not using TANF as much as we
used to anymore. We also have um
the McV fund, which is.
The Federal home visiting
dollars, so there's several
revenue sources and that's on
page 85, you can see all of
those revenue sources by program
for each of these. The Medicaid
would be the biggest. None of
those are matching funds.
Medicaid is the only matching
fund, so no matter how much we
put in, they will continue to
put in as well. The others are a
set amount.
Thank you, Mr. Chair, because
there's so much instability
around Medicaid just today and
yesterday, so I'm just wondering
because it would affect some of
these families. Thank you.
think you represent pedigree.
Thank you, Chairman, and I'm
going to do my very best to
focus on the presentation. I
have questions later for the
secretaries.
Um
Some things that I didn't see in
the presentation that I would
have thought would come from
LFC.
With respect to uh
Our data and IT systems CCWIS.
Uh, if I understand, if I
remember correctly, the program
was implemented somewhere around
2017 at a cost of about 17
million. We're now 82 million
into it and really not gathering
the data that we need. We're
still not able to use the system
that we can upload PDF to or
anything else, you know.
Critical data. Is there
something that you can add?
From the LFC side with respect
to expectations on next year's
budget was.
The department gaining some
ground on
What seems to be a black hole.
Mr. Chairman Representative
Pettigrew, that's, it's a good
question that that system has
been
under construction for a number
of years. Um,
there was some difficulties with
um
Uh
federal reimbursement because of
some of the contracting.
practices that uh
were taken on by a couple of
secretaries ago. Uh, we actually
had a meeting with um their uh
their folks this morning and,
you know, the, the bottom line
is they're, they're not on track
as far as
Um
Uh, expectations for dates for
uh
Or either component of that
system, both protective services
and JJ, the, the system has been
trying to be replaced going back
to 20008.
Or so.
Um, and what I'd say is there,
the, the budget has grown.
The scope has changed a bit, and
um and
We're, we're behind schedule on
it.
care, uh.
I think you for that answer.
Are we gonna hear today how
we're gonna get behind and we're
gonna get ahead.
Mr. Chairman Representative
Peter, I, I think the, the
secretary can address that. I
think right now that um
The agency is trying to work
through some, some contractual
issues with their, with their
vendor.
Um
Um
And
You may want to, you may want to
add to that, uh, when she comes
up for her budget here.
Mr. Karen, and thank you for
that. So, you know, we're
talking part of this was
respect to backfilling some of
the federal funds that, that
we're behind on in the LSC
recommendation suggests
technical assistance to go back
to the feds and get unpaid
funds.
Mr. might I suggest that maybe
we get LSC in the middle of
this.
And come up with a solution
instead of leaving it to CYFD.
suggestion here.
Um
On slide 7 of one of these two
find the right.
Sensation.
issue.
On the first presentation from
Kelly, I believe.
Talk about
Um
I think when
That's not that's not it, that's
basic, that's fine, um.
We're spending somewhere in 2015
around $5000.
For child now, we're north of
$11,000 per child.
Mr. Chair, with respect to this.
How much of that is actually
getting to the child, or is that
covered administrative costs,
cover overhead and all of that.
So Mrs gonna be the rates.
And I, I'm pretty sure I write
on this but I'll get ETCs
confirmation almost, I think
it's like
Almost 80% of the rates goes to
direct personnel costs at the
childcare facilities.
Yeah, right, OK.
So it is making it to the to the
classroom. It's mostly going to
teacher pay the lot, the largest
drivers it cost in childcare
assistance are ratios in teacher
pay.
OK.
Thank you for that. Thank you
for that clarification.
On the
6 of the other presentation here
multi-level or differential
responses.
The 4th bullet point, the 3rd
and 4th.
So, 6 years ago, New Mexico
enacted legislation Section
32-4-4.1.
To create a multilevel or
alternative response model.
Mr. Chair, the next bullet point
says we haven't done anything
with it.
Pictures like
Has not implemented as
articulated in statute or in
alignment with research-based
practice to date.
With the bullet point says.
6 years later,
We're still not following.
Enacted legislation, would that
be it?
Definitive yes or no.
Mr. Chair Representative
Pettigrew, that's correct.
And we're still funding this
agency.
Even though we give them laws,
tell them to do something,
Chairman.
And they decide not to.
That confuses me.
Um
on.
The 2nd presentation as well, we
talked about the 2025 budget for
CYFD was basically flat, but we
did put several different
projects in the grove.
Chairman, my next question with
respect to the presentation
alone.
How have we done in the 1st 8
months of
Almost a year now from that
grove.
Yeah, and let's, let's just
assume we're 8 months into it
because funding probably started
in in July.
So,
That is uh
And I know, chair, that we
didn't give a guard rails for
anything that we didn't grow
last year.
From an overall perspective.
How do we think we're doing so
far?
Um, Mr. Chair Representative
Pettigrew, I will note CYFD's
grow appropriation was actually
different from any other grow
appropriation in that in the
appropriation language itself,
you all established performance
measures for each of the
appropriations, um, uh, Mr.
Chair Representative Pettigrew,
we over the interim her plans
and different activities related
to some uh to these items, um, I
would recommend you uh engage
further with this.
about the status about of each
of those projects.
Thank you, Chairman. During the
interim, was there any updates
on, on any other on those grow
programs in an LLC document that
I could go back and read. Uh,
Mr. Chair Representative
Pettigrew, um, I will bring you
a copy of the last Leisat for
CYFD, um, and that will have
some an overview. and thank you
for offering to bring it to me.
I know where to get it on the
computer. I'm good. Thank you.
Um,
Chairman, um, one of the things
that I didn't hear in the
presentation that I am curious
about and we can go into it.
Maybe, maybe it's best to go
into it later, but I didn't
really hear a discussion.
From the LSC analysts and review
with since the change.
CYFD management to the three
pillar system.
How is it performing?
Um, Mr. Chair Representative
Pettigrew, I think again that
might be a great question to
talk with the secretary about,
um.
We primarily track specific
performance measures that tend
to be the same over time
regardless of the organizational
structure, things like repeat
maltreatment, turnover time to
permanency and things like that.
OK. And, and we can, we can do
that. I just feel like if we're
gonna change management
structure, chair, um, that
should probably be something we
should consider it from the
legislative body to reference.
Sure, the last thing I wanna say
is I've got from 2021 to the
current budget up here right
now.
And performance.
We're, we're treating less
people.
We're taking care of less
people.
We've funded them.
Exponentially in those 4 years.
And our performance is actually
reducing.
So, uh, if you want to add
anything to, to that from the
LSC side or if you want to pass
that off to the secretary.
Either way, that question's
gonna get answered sometime
today.
I think that's a great question
when we bring up the
secretaries. Thank you.
We'll go next to Representative
Duncan please.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Just uh
one quick question for you. Is
there a copay on any of this
care? It's been given.
So depending on the program, um.
Not right now, actually, uh,
cause they're still not doing
co-payments on childcare, the
copayments may come into effect
at some point. We used to have
co-payments on childcare. We
haven't since the pandemic.
They're currently not in now,
um, but pre-Ks.
There's, it's free home visiting
is free, uh, fit is free to the
family, so, uh, if co-payments
come back, it would be for
childcare assistance, and it
would be based on a percentage
of your income.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Thank you
for that, Kelly. I guess my
concern is, are we getting a
buy-in from the parent or
parents with this.
And are we seeing
Uh, or perhaps we're not seen.
Of that buy in and and so that's
probably or it could be the
reason we're not, uh,
Getting the impacts that we'd
like and so, um, you know, I
raising my own kids, I always
had them do it by him. You want
it? Save your money, and then
let's go do it. And, and I just
sometimes wonder if we're not
getting a buy in from the
parents or we're really getting
what we want.
For their children. So thank
you, Mr. Chair. Appreciate that.
Thank you very much for
representing Duncan. OK, uh,
that'll conclude that. Thank you
all very much, uh, extensive
information, great job members
digging in here, uh, we'll go
ahead, um, and invite up our
first secretary.
Put my
page here.
It'll be 6:11 uh and, uh, Madam
Secretary Kinski, thanks for
being here.
Mr. Chair.
members again, I'm Kelly Cle
with the Legislative Finance
Committee. I'm the analyst for
the early childhood education
and care department, and with me
today is Secretary Gerginsky and
my counterpart Mary Beth
Dinsmore, um, and we are on
agency code 611, so it should be
under tab 6 in your binder.
And we're gonna start with the
high level presentation of the
high level and then we'll go
into the different sheets. Now
this is not like some of the
other hearings that you've heard
where we're saying, oh, there's
not much of a difference,
there's actually a pretty big
difference here.
Um, so on your high level, um,
it's gonna be, you're gonna see
two pieces, um.
Well, there's 3 technically
different tables. The first
giant table, and if you
remember, we went through this
through your training on how to
read these. The first table is
State General Fund for the early
childhood education and care
department.
The 2nd table, which just might
be all on one page for you. I'm
not sure.
Um, is the early childhood Trust
Fund.
And the 3rd table is the
permanent school fund or the
land grant permanent fund.
And so we'll start with the
first table, which is the state
general fund and how you, to
remind everyone to read these,
each one of the large boxes is a
program code in the department,
and you have the initial general
fund operating budget, and then
what changes were made and then
that leads to the recommendation
for each recommendation. So for
instance, for the support and
intervention program on line
one. They had 59.7 million in
the current.
Fiscal year, the executive
recommendation included $5.2
million to increase home
visiting slots resulting in a
total general fund for that
program from the executive of
64.8 million, or an 8.7%
increase. The LFC also invested
in home visiting for this
program, but it's not for
program expansion, it's for
rates, and this was very
strategic because we know that
it's, as we've talked about in
the last conversation.
conversation, it's hard to get
to become a Medicaid provider
and some providers are not gonna
be Medicaid eligible, so we're
trying to do a financial
incentive to help providers move
into that medical Medicaid rate
or be able to stabilize better
as a non-eligible Medicaid
provider. So the LFC
recommendation is specifically
for rates while the executive
recommendation is for program
expansion.
For the next program, the Early
Childhood Education and Care
program, you're gonna notice the
major difference in this is a
revenue swap from the
Legislative Finance Committee.
So we took a 15.7.
Credits of general fund and we
backfill that with early
childhood trust funds in a
different table. So that's the
main difference in that program
with the policy research
initiative program, the LFC
recommendation included $3.5
million for pre-K support and
quality.
In the pre-kindergarten
programs, the both
recommendations did an expansion
of early pre-K, um, the
executive was at 12 million. The
LFC was at 10 million.
The final big differences in
state general fun only in
program support, you'll notice
that the LFC put $2 million for
tribal supports. I will note
that this is in the executive
recommendation. It's just in a
different revenue spot.
He used uh land grant permanent
fund for this, and we also gave
the agency some administrative
cost supports of 160,000. So the
total difference in the general
fund recommendations, just
general fun. Now we have to
think about this budget far
beyond general fund, um.
For the executive, it was almost
5% for the LFC. It was almost 1%
at the bottom. Now,
get to the other two tables
where these are where the
biggest differences are, well.
So the, you'll see online 38
through 66. This is the early
childhood trust fund.
The LFC recommendation lived
within what the current statute
says the distribution from the
fund will be in FY 26. The
executive recommendation is
including a higher revenue
because they are running a bill
to increase that distribution to
4 $500 million in total. And so
you're gonna see that the LFC is
much lower because we are living
within the current distribution
structure in statute while the
executive is changing that
distribution.
So both wrecks start, we're
spending $250 million from that
fund in the current fiscal year,
and you can see going down these
tables, the major differences
between the two recommendations.
So you'll see, for instance,
online 40, uh, the executive
recommended that tribal support,
and it says table 2 on mine
because I put that in general
fund, so they're both funded,
it's just in a different spot.
The biggest difference were all
the major money differences,
most of it, as you can see
online 42, childcare assistance,
the executive recommended an
expansion of $96.5 million for
childcare assistance, LFC was
11.2 million. So the big
difference there is $85.3
million. That's a big difference
between the two recommendations.
Um, both recommendations
included uh rates for the family
infant toddler program, which
goes to Representative Baca's
question.
Um, other giants.
There's a lot of big differences
you can see, given the executive
was working with a larger
revenue source, um, the
executive had additional 4.8
million for home visiting
expansion, um,
They also included 10 million
for the wage and career ladder,
which is currently happening in
Grow, if you remember last year,
there was a 3 year pilot for a
career lattice for infant and
toddler teachers that pilot is
just beginning now, it was not
included in the LFC
recommendation because we
haven't seen the results of that
pilot yet. The executive um
expanded that of pilot by 10
million.
Um, the executive also has a
much larger pre-kindergarten
expansion, then the LFC, you can
see online 64, they have an
additional 33.2 million.
Um, the LFC has an expansion of
10 million, which you, we
already went over in the general
fund, so I would note that the
executives pre-K expansion
includes the 33.2 million online
64 plus.
The $12 million online 67 for
$405 million in total. And so
because of the different revenue
sources, you kind of have to
look across them to see what the
total recommendations are.
Um, and so what does this all
have to do with the bottom line,
if we look at our different
sheet packets, which there's
these cream colored packets
before you, um, the total
difference between the LFC and
the executive recommendation is
pretty significant. It's $136.9
million and almost all of that
has to do with trust fund
increased distribution
recommended by the executive.
Um, and with that, I'm going to
turn it over to Mary Beth to go
over the first pe code.
Good morning or afternoon, Mr.
Chair, committee members. Thank
you, Kelly. Um, give me just one
moment to get to my page. OK,
um, so as Kelly just mentioned,
this is just a very general high
level, we'll go back and forth
between the programs. Um, I will
reiterate what Kelly said this,
this does look very confusing.
Um, so, you know, if, if we can
help, uh, answer questions about
where funding may lie and
One of the two recommendations,
um, happy, happy to do so for
that. Um, but just to get
started here, um,
For revenues, the executive
general fund revenue
recommendation was 14.2 million
above the LFC recommendation.
The executive recommendation
included 123.4 million above the
LFC in early childhood trust
fund revenue, and this is
contingent on legislation
increasing the distribution.
In the base, the executive uh
recommends spending in all
categories by 136.9 million
above the LFC, and this is
primarily for expansion of
programs, services, and some
operational costs for the
department.
For language, the only thing to
note again is that the executive
has language that would identify
the amounts in each program that
would need to be, um.
Approved through this contingent
legislation, um, since
The increase in theirs, they,
they don't have that language,
um, and I'll just say, uh, the
for performance measures, uh, we
have reached consensus on
everything across the agency.
Um,
With that, I'll turn it back to
Kelly.
Great, you turn to page 3, we'll
go over program support.
Um, so very similar narrative,
the LFC has more general fund
and trust fund this pe code than
the other codes, you'll see
added additional administrative
support to the agency for IT for
vacancy rates um for contractual
services. We also have a
transfer of 5.6 million um for
maternal and child Medicaid
health rates in the healthcare
authority budget.
Um, and the LFC recommendation
also includes a $600,000
transfer of trust fund revenue
to the Department of Health or
the doula certification program,
and that's contingent on a bill
passage, and the executive has
their contingency language on
their budget being um fulfilled
with the extended um
distribution. So overall this is
the LC just put a little bit
more into program administration
given the breath and size of
early how much the system.
has grown.
And I'll turn it over to Mary
Beth.
Thanks, Kelly, uh, Mr. Chair,
committee members, I'm going to
go over uh P622 with you. This
is a family support in an early
intervention program. This is
where some of the programs that
Kelly was mentioning in the
previous, um, presentation with
the fit program, the home
visiting program, these are all
in here, um, so for revenue, the
executive recommendation was
14.7 million above the LFC, and
this includes 2.2 million from
the general fund and 12.5
million.
from the early childhood trust
fund.
In the base, the LFC
recommendation for personnel was
slightly higher than the
executive by 66,000, which is
probably one of the more minor
differences throughout this
entire budget, um, but that's to
reduce the vacancy rate in the
program. Both recommendations
include increased funding for
home visiting and the family
infant toddler, that's a fit
program.
The executive recommendation was
14.6 million above the LFC for
these programs. I just want to
call out a couple of really
quick things here for you. The
executive has 10 million for
home visiting in this program,
and Kelly mentioned a moment ago
that there's $3 million for home
visiting rates, I believe, and
in this is the place in the
executive where those rate
increases would reside. Uh, they
are part of the 10 million. So
once again, there are things
funded.
in various places, um, the other
thing I just want to call out
for the executive in this
program is there is 4.7 million
additional for fit, uh, Medicaid
match. Uh, so that's to increase
the state fund, the state match
to be able to bring in those,
uh, Medicaid revenues, which is
about 72%, um,
And that's, yeah, that's it.
There's still a language from
the executive contingent on the
legislation to increase the
distribution and our performance
measures were, uh, we came to
consensus. Thank you.
OK, Mr. Chair, if we could have
you turn to page 6. The early
care and education program, um,
this is where childcare
assistance lives in the
peacoats, so you'll see rather
large differences in revenues
for this program, because that's
that large childcare assistance
expansion, both.
Recommendations increase
childcare assistance, executive
was just much higher than the
LFC given that expanded
distribution assumption.
So you can see that overall
there was a $70.3 million
difference, and almost all of
that money is in the other cost
category, cause that's how we
pay out childcare systems
through the grants line, which
is in that category, the
executive also assuming that
they were gonna have a large
expansion of slots, um, added
money for personnel for more
people to process those
applications, and so that's that
$2 million difference in
personnel, um, and contractual
services to to support.
that large expansion if it were
to go through.
And I think that's the major
points on that. Oh, the LFC, I
will note that the LFC is $11
million recommendation is
focused on expanding infant and
toddler slots, not just overall
slots across the age range.
And with that, I will turn it
over to Mary Beth.
Thanks again, Kelly, Mr. Chair,
committee members, um, I'm gonna
talk to you briefly about the
next P code is P 624. It's the
policy, research and quality
initiatives, otherwise known as
PRQI.
So for this program, the LFC
recommendation was 3.5 million
in general fund and $700,000 in
federal revenue above the
executive. The executive has
other transfers again from the
early childhood Trust Fund, the
increased distribution, and that
results ended up to be 24.3
million above the LFC. So in the
base, both recommendations
increase quality support
funding, the executive
recommendation was 20.2 million
above the LFC, and I'll just
interject here real quickly
this, this program is where the
agency works on things like
quality initiatives and
supports, um, so this is where
you'll find uh funding for
classroom supports for teachers
and that sort of thing.
Um
OK, but moving on, uh, the
executive recommendation was 1
million above the LFC for
personnel to reduce the vacancy
rate.
The executive recommendation
included increases in
contractual services to expand
the wage and career lattice that
Kelly mentioned currently being
piloted and grow.
It is also to expand early
childhood coalitions to expand
educator incentives and to
participate in the Dolly Parton
imagination library program.
And finally, in the other costs
the executive uh recommendation
increased, um, for IT services
and yes, for that, um, I think
that does it. I'll turn it back
to Kelly.
So we'll turn to page 8, which
is your pre-kindergarten
program.
And same story here, uh, both
recommendations increase
pre-kindergarten, the executive
was just significantly above the
LFC given their expanded trust
fund assumptions.
So that's the difference there.
We'll note that the LFC, I'm,
I'm not sure if this is part of
the execu but the LFC's
recommendation is for expansion
in 3 year old pre-k or early
pre-kindergarten, given that we
have pretty high saturation in
for pre-kindergarten, so we're
really kind of focusing on the
younger year too and mixed age
classrooms and Mary Beth is
nodding at me that that is also
the consideration in the
executive recommendations. So
we're on page on the same page
that that is policy wise where
we're all headed. Um.
And with that, I'd actually turn
the committee to the different
sheets for special supplementals
and deficiencies to go over
those, you will not be making
decisions on those today, as you
know, it's just a highlight.
So, um, some pretty big
differences in these as well.
This begins on page 13 of your
packet.
Um, the executive recommendation
had um over $104 million for um
piloting and expanded childcare
assistance program.
Uh, they included 1.3 million
for additional furnishings for
facilities in Las Cruces for
Rancho and other locations, um,
the executive included $7.6
million for a families in the uh
fit program.
Um.
The LFC, the executive
recommendation included 1
million for rate increases for
fit programs to go in during
this fiscal year, the LFC
recommended 2 million, hoping
that we could start those um
rates sooner in the year, given
that there was a little snafu
with rates that happened this
summer, well, a large snafu. Uh
and then the executive had 2
million for workforce supports,
so did the LFC, that's the same,
and so there's.
A total agency, uh, special
recommendations difference the
executive had 118 million while
the LFC had 4 million, so those
are also large, and I will note
that the revenue for some of the
executive specials and
supplementals comes from that
contingency that the
distribution for the trust fund
happens about 70 million of that
is contingent on that bill
passing.
Yes and uh secondarily, that's,
it's not in this bill, um, in
this budget, but both
recommendations did include $10
million.
To go to the NMFA to do
childcare, um, business fund,
uh, loans for building capacity
when it comes to like building
issues or other business issues,
kind of like Lita, um, and with
that, I will turn it over to
the.
Good afternoon, Mr. Chair and
members of the House
Appropriations Finance
Committee. Uh, first, I want to
thank you all for really going
deep on early childhood policy,
um, hopefully you're feeling
glad that you have a department
that the kind of negotiates and
handles this, but I really want
to thank Kelly also and Mary
Beth for for their great
support, um, and all your team
here at um the House House
Appropriations and finance
committee as well as the LFC,
um, as you see in this
picture, maybe it's how you're
all feeling right now, uh,
meeting the moment, building a
brighter future for New Mexico.
We have so much to be proud of
and I've I've told you that
before as I've come here, um,
it's really a giant success. New
Mexico is leading the country in
early childhood education, and
it's because of the wise
investments that you all have
made, it's because of the
collaboration of all of you. Of
course the leadership of
Governor Michelle Lujan Grisham,
the amazing advocates, providers
that we have here in the room,
we have home visiting in the
room, we have childcare, pre-K,
family infant, toddler.
Uh, and an incredible team at
ECECD that I just have to really
give a big shout out to raise
your hands, there's too many to
mention, um, but we've come
together collectively.
We had a great summit, you, the
report is in your packet of this
summer we had 250 people come
together and say, where do we
want to take New Mexico, where
do we want to go into the
future.
We know that this investment is
going to change the trajectory
for our state.
Without these investments, we
are going to see more and more
families and children not have
access, not just to the programs
and services, but to the
quality, I would say that this
budget represents the executive
budget represents a huge
investment in our early
childhood workforce.
I want to go to I gotta do
multitask of the you've seen
this statistic.
We all need to really grapple
with it and believe it, because
we know that the early childhood
trust fund right now is earning
at about 6.7% annually,
incredible work happening
through our state investment
council. Well, the investment,
these dollars then go into our
communities, into your
communities, into the providers
that work in your um cities in
your towns and your villages and
our tribal communities, and they
double that.
Because of the return.
Lower special education.
Better outcomes when they get
into school. Better lifelong
outcomes. It's so important when
we were down in Las Cruces just
a few months ago, 50
professionals were in the room
from all different parts of the
ecosystem, and they said, thank
you. I wanna bring that thank
you to all of you because you're
the ones who have made these
wise investments and that this
is changing, they said, let me
just get it correct. They said
they shared the deep
appreciation for what they
described as transformational
change that's happening in our
state in their
communities for families and
children.
It is so true, and I know you
all see it as you travel the
state, but this is our moment.
This is the moment where we say
we got it right. We did it right
here in New Mexico. We created a
department, we put in a trust
fund, we took it to the voters
and they said yes, 70% of the
voters said we want to invest
more in early childhood. Now is
the time to make these
investments, deal with issues
long term of public safety,
child well-being.
Other behavioral health
challenges that I know you are
all thinking about and talking
about every day here in this
legislative session.
This budget really addresses 3
key priorities. You heard it in
Kelly's presentation earlier. We
have to build the capacity. We
see it whether it's in our home
visiting programs, their
capacity to pull down and claim
Medicaid, whether it's in our
childcare programs, their
ability to have more facilities
to serve more infants and
toddlers, whether it's in our
pre-K program where they're
learning how to do more in
around assessment and curriculum
and building out the capacity of
their educators.
In our early intervention
program, they are doing
incredible work. You're gonna
see in um, in the presentation,
the needs that we have because
more and more children are being
identified as eligible.
The return on that investment
when they connect with fit. We
heard some incredible
testimonials last week that had
us all in tears of just a mom
with twins, born 3.5 pounds.
Her home visitor, her fit
program, her childcare program
came together at 2 years they
were meeting all their
milestones. That's what happens
when these programs work
together and we make it happen.
We care deeply about quality.
Quality comes in the
professionals who are delivering
those services. If we're paying
them $15 an hour and we're
asking them to build those
relationships and build those
brains and make sure that
they're ready, ready for school
and ready for what comes. That's
not OK. The first thing that
this
ration did, we recognized our
public schools needed more
support. We funded teacher
salaries. You're doing it again
in this legislative session,
because we know that the early
childhood professionals, the
workforce, the people delivering
this relationship-based, intense
work.
They are the key to quality.
They need to be supported and
this budget makes that happen.
We have to enhance outcomes. You
have to hold us accountable and
we want to be held accountable.
We have measures that we put in
place, but we want to hear from
you.
We're doing better on our
performance measures, and we
know that it's critical because
if we are not, these investments
are not changing the lives of
children and families and making
them more prepared for school,
better health outcomes, better
developmental outcomes, and we
need to be held accountable and
we need to do better, and I know
that my team is absolutely
committed to that, that's what
we do every day at ECECD.
Here's a little picture of the
trust fund of the distribution
change that we're asking for in
House Bill 71, which we will be
hearing in the House Education
on Friday. You can see here that
this year it was to distribute
298.9 million. We're asking for
that to go to 500. It'll stay at
500 for 27 and it'll stay at 500
for 28, and then you'll see it
catches up. So the corpus of the
fund remains strong, while we
invest in our people. We invest
in.
our children and our families
and the people who care for and
educate them. The wage scale and
career lattice is for everybody
in the early childhood system.
The Growth Fund has been
fantastic, and I'm going to show
you some data on that, but we
need to make sure that our fit
our early our home visiting, our
pre-k and our childcare are all
addressed through what
statutorily we are required to
deliver on. I won't enumerate,
you can see it there, but our
local early childhood
coalitions, the tribal
investment strategy led by
Assistant Secretary Flotilian.
Etti is having a tremendous
impact. They are bringing people
together. We know in Santa Fe we
can't build a system that works
for all families. We need to be
intentional about that build and
the childcare quality pilot is
going to be primarily funded by
the Early Childhood Trust Fund,
if we can have your support for
this budget.
The Childcare quality, this
piece takes our childcare
workforce to from entry level
people working in childcare, not
offering them a job for $15 an
hour, but being able to offer
them a job that pays at least
18. If they're a teacher, if
they're more skilled, they're
gonna be making 24, 25, but we
also want to make sure that
children with special needs
served in our childcare that
those childcare providers have
more access to supports. So it
also includes a $17 million of
that 104.
is for a special needs rate, and
then we want to make sure that
our infants and toddlers are
served in classrooms with not as
many children to adults, so they
can have those interactions, so
moving us from one of the worst
ratio group size in the country
to a better group size and ratio
of a 1 to 5 for infants instead
of a 1 to 6 right now.
Um, 16, yes, 1 to 6. Thank you.
Uh, so we want to look at that.
So this is where you can see a
big difference, but again,
recognizing only 35 million of
that 104 million ask would be
coming from general fund.
Here is the supplemental funding
request and I really hope that
we can reach negotiation on
this. We have our incredible fit
providers here from the
interagency coordinating
council. Thank you to the LFC
for doubling that request,
thanks to our partners at HCA
for working with us and getting
the public notice posted, so
we're going to be able to get
those rates in for the 3rd and
4th quarter, um, with all, all
goes well, but we have a
deficit. We are seeing more and
more.
children and you can only
imagine coming out of COVID and
everything else that our
families are dealing with, we
have a $7.6 million funding gap.
We're gonna run out of funds in
March to pay our providers for a
service that is, and they are
entitled to. So we definitely
are asking the legislature to
please take a close look at this
and help us make sure that in 25
our fit programs remain whole
and that we move into 26 in a
very positive direction.
The workforce is so important,
and I want you to get a sense
right now, we're at about 8, a
little almost 19,000.
We're gonna grow by 1000 through
this expansion that you're
hopefully gonna support for us.
That's 20,000 people working in
your communities every day to
help our youngest children. This
was Teacher of the Year in New
Mexico 3 years ago, Tara, uh,
Hughes, and, um, pay parity has
been fantastic. This
legislatures first um trust fund
distribution. We put 4 million
to pre-K pay parity, and look at
that, we have 192 New Mexico
pre-K teachers and
community-based settings
receiving that average rewards
of 14,000 annually.
we've also then implemented for
Head Start programs because they
have the same requirement, we
are now there at 16,000 on
average payments and 85 Head
Start teachers receiving this
infant toddler pay parity brand
new, so exciting to see that we
have 154 infant and toddler
teachers, uh, with that again,
10,000 more a year. They deserve
it. Um, this, this is the work
that is so challenging and hard
to do, and you'll see there was
scholarships and our bilingual
incentive. So overall, the
department is
Doing well. We're acting on the
um directives that we were given
through the legislation that set
us up, but we're a startup.
We're gonna be 5 in July, our
first two years were COVID, so I
think I hope you can feel proud
of the work that you all have
invested in and that the
department has taken seriously
to say, who are we serving and
who all are eligible for these
services. So for childcare,
there are 34,000 infants
eligible and toddlers.
eligible for care, for child
care. Their parents are in the
workforce, childcare cost of
child care is out of reach for
most families. So this year we
are projecting to serve almost
10,000 with this budget asked,
we're going to reach 16,000,
almost 46%. That is a big leap
from 29 to 46. We hope to have
your support with home visiting,
we see we are serving, and this
is a little bit nuanced, you'll
see in the note, we're looking
at that one year of Medicaid
births.
We're looking at all home
visiting offered in the state,
so we have big private sector
CHI Saint Joseph, we have tribal
home visiting, and then we have
what's funded both through
ECECD, but also it's funded
through Medicaid.
We have, we even made better
progress, Kelly, I think another
100, um, in Medicaid funded from
last quarter to this quarter,
but this is exciting. We want to
be serving.
As many eligible as we can to
get the saturation to make the
impact that we know is possible,
the research is clear on that.
For 3 and 4 year olds for pre-K,
you can see, as Kelly mentioned,
for 4 year olds, we're doing
really well. We, we need to
maintain that, and as you can
see the declining birth rate,
you can see we do better even
though we have less children,
uh, in for 3 year olds, but we
want to get from 54% to 73% in
26, and we know we can do it
because we have the resources
and the revenues to do it, and
we have an incredibly diverse
early childhood field out there
who is ready to take up this
opportunity and.
Families.
With that, I'm gonna close. You
have a whole appendix um of
breakdown of our charts, we know
there's a lot more to talk about
with early childhood, but I do
wanna again recognize the staff
at ECECD who work every day to
be more accountable, very
transparent and incredibly high
level of customer service for a
very diverse group of
constituents. We're working with
school districts, childcare
providers, early intervention
providers, home visiting
providers, and we work.
Very closely with our health and
our education secretaries and
their partners, so it is an
exciting time to be in New
Mexico, if you're working in
early childhood, and we hope to
have the house appropriation
support for the executive budget
moving forward for 26.
We stand for questions. Thank
you.
Thank you, Madam Secretary, um,
so I've got a
Starting list um of members who
have questions. Uh, I'm gonna
read them out and then uh just
flag me if I don't have you on
the list and I should, um,
representatives Baca, Silva,
Hernandez, Doo, and Lujan.
OK.
Great, I see a couple more. OK.
Um, actually, uh, Representative
Baca, you're the first on the
list.
Thank you, Madam Chair and thank
you for your
Presentation, um.
Pretty well known and a very big
advocate for
Uh
Pre-K to higher ed education in
Mexico, so.
I, I definitely, um, support the
effort. So, Madam Chair and, uh,
Madam Secretary, I'm gonna ask
some questions regarding this,
and if you don't have the
answer, I know you and I are
scheduled to meet later, and we
can talk about it. So, Madam
Chair.
Uh, we talked about the outreach
of 3 and 4 year old programs.
Can you please tell me how many
programs or how they have
increased over the last couple
of years, and along with that is
the
Other funds that are needed to
build or create uh facilities to
go with the pre-K or 3 to 4 year
programs.
Uh, Mr. uh, Madam Vice Chair,
Madam Chair, and Representative
Baca, um, I, I know the numbers
of children that were serving,
but are you asking more the
number of programs that we've
expanded to. Yes, madam Chair
and Madam Secretary, I guess
what I'm saying is, is we look
at the distribution of the
state.
We see some under um
Supported areas of the state,
and I'm actually talking
physical programs that school
districts and or charters.
are out there and they are
creating.
In addition to that, I'm
actually saying is how
The funds that are needed
because for some of these
schools, they're
their inability to serve kids
may be the fact that they don't
have the, you know, the
facility, the actual brick and
mortar buildings. So that's,
that's my first one and we can
get back to that, um, Madam
Chair and uh Madam secretary.
One of the points that we
brought up here is really the
part the collaboration with that
part C to be, OK? And, and, and
Madam Chair, I, I really
I want to know as far as how
How this
First of all, what types of
activities are we doing?
And what impact has that on our
serving kids. In other words,
when you're saying that you want
to get to a goal of serving, I
don't know, by 26, you just went
over that number increasing the
number of kids served.
How can we leverage our
relations with our Part C
partners so that we can meet.
Madam Chair, I Representative
Baca, if I could bring up our,
our bureau chief for fit just to
describe some of what they're
doing there to do the C2B. I
think she works on this every
day, Leah Davidson, our bureau
chief.
Let's go like this.
OK,
Representative Baca, um, Madam
Chair, thank you for this
question. Secretary is correct.
We do a lot of work in the Part
C workforce to build bridges at
the local level with the Part B
workforce. And so I think one of
the things that we are trying to
get better at with the um part B
619, which is preschool special
education coordinator coming
over to the ECECD is to build a
partnership where it's easy.
for families to transition into
a variety of destinations and on
both sides, the seaside of the
early intervention side and the
B side, um, there is, there is
equal kind of knowledge and
understanding of both.
Um, school-based destinations
and community-based destinations
so that that process feels more
seamless.
And that's just when we talk
about one of the other reports
that I was reading, um, it talks
one of the major concerns is
actually completion of the
programs.
And so that we may have
Uh, many enter into uh these
different areas of preschool.
But when we're looking at
completion of programs,
especially in the area of home
visiting, when I, I saw that,
that was, that was somewhat.
Uh, um,
Concerning, uh, Madam Chair, the
other question about it and we,
we talked about this as return
on investment, and I, and I
brought this up several times
before.
But one of the areas that really
is for return on investment is
kindergarten ready because we
talked about this.
I've been in education 32 years,
and we said that 20 years ago,
many of our kids came to
kindergarten, 2 to 3 years
behind.
With this huge investment that
we have made.
What impact do we have on
kindergarten ready, and then how
do we track that?
As we go into, as you said,
decreased special ed numbers
increased attendance and
increased college participation.
So,
Can you just tackle the
kindergarten ready and how that
is assessed and what that data,
how that data is tracking.
Madam Chair, Representative
Baca, I love that question,
thank you for that, um, this
last year in 24, we partnered
with the public education
department and collected, um,
what we call the early
development instrument, 98% of
our kindergartners were assessed
in each of the five areas of
development, social competence,
emotional maturity, general
knowledge, physical health, and
language and literacy. We are
going, and we have taken that
data we've mapped it to where
the children live. The districts
have.
information, how many of those
kindergartners are English
language learners, how many have
individual education programs,
we saw that in each area of
development, at least 73% of our
kindergartners were on track.
But when we looked across and we
saw all kindergartners, we could
see that they were, um, I don't
know I'm gonna bring that
tomorrow when we meet, I'll
bring you that data, but this is
a, this is an accountability
measure for the early childhood
system. We, this is something
we're gonna do since it's a
population based measure, we're
gonna do it every 2 years. The
districts were fantastic, the
teachers were great, ECECD paid
for the contracts, the subs
release PED did a brilliant job
leading the effort to get this
is the best data we have on the
youngest of our.
children, and we plan to use
that with our local early
childhood coalitions, they're
gonna motivate people because
they can see it as census track
level, what percent of children
aren't ready, aren't on track,
and they can work together on
strategy, so very excited about
um this opportunity and, and the
work that we're gonna do
together in the coming years.
Thank you, Madam Secretary.
Thank you, Madam Chair.
You know what are the other, um,
premises behind investment in
early child education is early
identification, early
intervention, OK? We'll have
greater. So my question, Madam
Chair, is how many students are
being referred.
For testing for a number of
different areas, but more
importantly, how many are being
exited that have been addressed
in, you know, as far as their
needs are met and that they can
um as far as
Uh, participate in the other
programs.
Uh, Madam Chair, Representative
Baca, we have a whole um annual
performance report on that, but
um, I don't know Leah, if you
have that could bring Lea right
up. She knows that information.
Madam Chairsentative Baca, um, I
do have, I'm gonna give you sort
of estimated numbers based on
our data and then maybe I can
give you some very specific
numbers to bring, so, um, we get
approximately 9,000 9000
referrals a year for early
intervention, so these little
babies they get referred.
And then, um, somewhere between
like 50 and 60% of them once
they exit, they are either in
the process of or they are um
eligible for special education
services, so that the the the
transition to making the
decision about whether they're
eligible to starts very early
around their 2nd birthday. And
so many are do end up being
eligible or or still in the
process of eligibility when
they're referred.
There's, there's, I would say
there's a fairly large link
there.
And, and thank you. I definitely
understand the, the, the
transition meetings are
required, I think it's 90 days
before they turn age of 3 or
something like that, I been a
while since I've been exited
from uh.
Overseeing preschool many years
ago. My last question, Madam
Chair.
And it was actually brought into
a report, and I think this is an
area that I think we can make
huge increases and gains in his
parents' teachers.
To support our families, our
Our parents, our guardians.
To help to read or help to
prepare our students.
To be successful, as we say for
many of us.
You know, uh, my children
learned to read it, you know,
basically sitting on my lap,
right? So for others, so I do
think that when we talk about
parents as teachers, and we
talked about.
The multiple different language,
uh, different models. I think
there was like 30 models I
counted in some report. I think
we're only utilizing 5 or 6, but
I do think, Madam Chair, that
the parents and teachers as
we're investing with family, if
we're supporting them through,
through, through the Medicaid
and other services, I, I also
believe sincerely that investing
as parents and giving parents
the resources and training to
deal with this would also have a
huge impact on early childhood.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Thank
you, Mr. Chair.
Thank you very much,
Representative Baca. Thank you,
Madam Vice Chair. Uh, next,
we're gonna go to Representative
Silva, then Representative Her
Hernandez.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Thank you,
secretary. Um, I just have two
questions. Um, concerning the
special appropriation for the
childcare quality pilot, um,
What if the wage stays at 15 an
hour, how might that impact the
retention of early educators.
Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Mr. Chair, uh, Representative
Silva, um, such a great and
important question, I think it
will have a great impact on the
ability to recruit and retain.
Quality staff that we know
people want because we know what
other industries are paying.
For retail for um sales,
anything, so um I think it will
have a very negative.
Thank you. And then I wanna, um,
I have a clarifying question
about
The wage and career lattice,
that uh line 60 on the budget.
Um, did I hear correctly that
the 10 million is in growth
funds for this year or is it not
in, in the LFC budget at all.
Mr. Chair members the committee,
so last year the LFC put into
the Ground, a 3 year pilot.
For wage lattice or infinit
toddler teachers, as that is a
priority growth area for us, and
so that is only in its first
year of implementation right
now, and given that we don't
have the data on how that pilot
is working. We felt like it was
too soon to make.
OK, so there's no additional
funds. Thank you, chair. There's
no additional funds.
For the career wage lattice for
this year.
There is the money that is in
the grow that goes this year,
next year, and then the next
year, 3 years. OK. Thank you,
Mr. Chair. And how much is that
Miss, Mr. Chair and
Representative Silva, I think um
in the executive budget, there
is 10 million in our operating
base budget for the wage scale
and career lattice, because
again, it's for all early
childhood professionals of the
infant and toddler Ground, you
have to be serving at least one
child on childcare assistance,
um, to, to access the.
Infant toddler, um, parody, uh,
and so early Head Start programs
aren't eligible or home visiting
programs are not eligible for
that for that parody, so, um, I
think I might have forgotten the
last part of your question, but
so it's not in the LFC
recommendation, but it is in the
executive recommendation for
that for actually in our base,
so that we can support it year
over year.
OK, thank you. And just a
reminder, you, uh, ECCD is
required by statute to
Create the uh lattice, right?
OK, thank you, chair. And then
what's, is there a risk of not
meeting that statute obligation.
Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Uh
Mr. Chair Representative Silva,
we will be, um, releasing, as
Kelly mentioned earlier, the
professional development
information system, which will
show where people are, and we
have a um
And we'll have a career lattice
we're working on right now with
the community, with the early
childhood professionals, but in
order to fund it, um, there
would be a risk of not being
able to actually fund what we
develop without more resources.
Uh, Mr. Chair, I just, I just
like to add that you can't.
Previous legislation can't.
Financially tie future
legislatures. OK. Thank you, Mr.
Chair.
Thank you very much,
Representative Silva,
Representative Hernandez and
then represent down.
Thank you chair.
Um
Madam Secretary, and you're a
wonderful staff that's here. Uh,
Mr. Chairman, I've, I've had the
pleasure of working with um many
uh uh folks there, including,
um, constantly, I, I'm always
seeing, uh, assistant secretary,
uh, Sneady, uh, and on the
Navajo Nation on the ground
really means a lot, uh, know,
knowing that, um, coming from,
from your agency. I have a
couple of questions. Um,
Madam Secretary, uh, you, you
are probably familiar with the
early childhood workforce index
that was published by the
University of California at
Berkeley last year, which shows
a significant of early childhood
educators in New Mexico still
living in poverty.
Is your plan to address this
serious problem by passing HB
71, which would provide the
funding we need to make sure
your budget requests to raise
wages is funded.
Mr. Chairman
Representative Hernandez, thank
you for that question, and it's
been wonderful to get to know
you and and your priorities and
agree about Assistant Secretary
Snetty and her engagement all
across the state with tribal
communities. You'll see here in
the House Bill 71, there is a
significant increase to 10
million for the wage scale and
career lattice, but also for the
special appropriation request,
uh, where you see here in the
childcare pilot $69 million a
little over.
almost 67 going to specifically
support the uh way moving from
15 to 18, the portion of that
104 that will make that happen
is about $74 million so
absolutely this is a
workforcement.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman and
Madam Secretary, uh, I, I had
made a list right now, uh, first
off, Mr. Chairman, uh, Navajo
Nation has over 30, uh, early
childhood centers, um, just in
my district was the chairman,
uh, in, in New Mexico House
District 4. I made a list on my
own and I have 99, whether it's,
it's private or or ah public,
uh, uh, early childhood, uh,
centers for, for, for, um,
people.
in my community. And so, um,
Uh, the, uh, Mr. Chairman, do
you, um,
The, the building needs, uh, you
know, which would be put in NMFA
would, would, would, would this
be accessible to the these 9
centers that are lacking, uh,
you know, uh, when it comes to
like maybe uh uh uh uh a new
heater or or a air conditioning
unit or even just regular
building needs. Thank you, Mr.
Chairman.
Mr. Chair, uh, Representative
Fernandez, uh, yes, that uh if
they are private for-profit or
nonprofit, they would be
eligible for that, um, childcare
revolving loan, low interest
loan.
Thank you for, for the question,
uh, uh, my, my last question,
Mr. Chairman, um,
I know that the uh Madam
Secretary, Mr. Chairman, that
you, you started to implement
piece of early, early educator
weight and, and, um, and career
ladder, as, as you are required
to by statute last year, we can
expect data, uh, to, to be
coming out on this, uh, again,
Madam Secretary, Mr. Chairman,
um, just take it into consider
of uh of, of what we should be
showing right, right now and
again, my, my, I'm just really
trying to look at uh what we can
do right now and, and I do
understand that, that we got to
wait, wait, wait, wait for, for
that data to, to come out. But
um, would, would you, would you
agree that while we are waiting
for this data, we should not um
use our current lack of data as
an excuse to continue.
poverty wages to our early
educators and the executive
budget will help.
Uh, to end poverty wages.
Mr. Chair, Representative
Hernandez, I think, um,
absolutely this executive budget
speaks to the need to invest in
our early childhood
professionals. I'll just say
also in addition to what when we
talk about the wage scale and
that increase, all of the
programs in our department, we
use a cost modeling approach, so
we are setting that whether it's
early intervention or home
visiting or childcare or pre-K,
we're looking at what are the
requirements. We want to make
sure that the requirements that
we're putting on our programs.
That we're funding them, but
they're not unfunded mandates.
So we use the cost model to make
sure that everything we're
asking of our providers, we are
actually building into our rate.
We can't always pay 100% of what
that rate costs, but at least
we're using a true indication,
um, when we set those rates, so
we're we're clear eyed about
where we are and where we want
to go, so hope that answered
your question, but this bill,
uh, House Bill 71 um is
Essential in order for us to
make the investments in our
early childhood workforce.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I have
further questions specific to my
district. I'm gonna go offline
and uh thank you very much, uh
Mr. Chairman, for allowing me to
ask these questions. Thank you,
Representative Do, please.
Thank you, Mr. Chair and thank
you Secretary. It's really
exciting to see the growth of
early childhood and, and the
expansion and um I have a lot of
questions. I'm going to try to
really narrow this down. OK, so
I haven't been in the field
since 19, but at that time, 80%
enrollment in pre-K was
considered a 100% capacity,
because 2% of 20% of families
would not choose a voluntary
program. Mr. Chair secretary, is
that still the data that we're
looking at today?
Mr. Chair, Representative Doo,
uh, it's great to see you and to
see that you're back in, uh, so,
um, what I would say is they say
um nationally anywhere between
72 and 84% is considered
universal. OK. Yes, university.
So we're at Universal pre-K and
Mr. Chair and Representative,
what
I'm sorry, secretary, what's the
take-up rate on infant care
because I'd assume it's
So a parent has a young child.
That may choose.
Outside of, of ECECD family
neighbor relative care. What is
considered saturation for
infants.
Mr. Chair Representative Doo,
it's such a great question. I
mean, we are leading the nation
in this area, so you'll see here
on this slide, uh, with the
budget, the executive budget
will be at 46% of eligible
infants and toddlers served um
with the with the um with the
executive of the governor's
budget.
So I would say, you know, it
depends because we know families
use lots of different
arrangements and so we feel that
this is very close to universal,
I mean, we, we can debate, we
can talk about what, what is
universal, but this is
definitely you're giving me the
look.
I mean, the issue is that we
have a lot more data to collect.
We are almost in the final
stages of a supply and demand
study for childcare, which
include parent surveys, provider
surveys, so we're gonna be able
to share that data with you.
every portion of the state. So
that will be done, I think in
the next 6 months.
By May, by May. So we'll see the
supply and demand and we'll see
how parents choose care what
their choices. Thank you, Madam
Chair. I mean, Mr. Chair,
secretary, sorry, apparently I
need some caffeine. OK, so on
the pre-K programs.
What percentage of
PED pre-K programs are serving.
children with IEPs in the most
inclusive, least restrictive
setting.
Uh, Mr. Chair, Representative
Doo, I will have to get back to
you. I think it's 100%.
I mean, in the Is there a child
in a
at a PED in pre-K program are
least restrictive, most
inclusive settings.
The, the pre-K, pre-K site. Mr.
Chair, Representative Doo, some
of those children may be served
in a community-based setting or
in a Head Start setting the
pre-K.
I PED pre-K. PED pre-K. Mr.
Chair, Representative now all
pre-K is ECECD, but it is
offered in schools and it's
offered in community-based, but
you're saying in Mr. Chair,
secretary for the programs that
are happening on a public school
setting.
What percentage of the pre-K
programs at a public school
setting.
are fully inclusive, and their
IEPs are submit at the public
school setting.
Mr. Chair, Representative Doo,
all of their IPs are met, not
all classrooms have the true
inclusion because they have
children who are, I mean, some.
I'm gonna get back to your other
one, so um we have Sandy's here.
It's a little, I mean, you're
asking a a a a nuanced question
that I don't want to mislead you
and I don't want to mislead the
committee um or the public who
are here Mr. Chair and
secretary.
Are you saying that some of the
New Mexico pre-K programs
operating on public school.
are still separating children
who are DD children out of New
Mexico pre-K, or are the
children who are 3 and 4 year
olds who are DD Pre being served
in an inclusive setting with
other pre-K children, typical
developing pre-K children.
Mr. Chair, Representative Dell,
both are happening in public,
we, we, because there are, yeah,
so yes, there are, there still
are classrooms that are.
Only children with disabilities
and children with IEPs, um, but
I think the goal of the state
and the goal of most of our
school districts is end of our
community based settings is for
full inclusion. Yes, yes, we
agree 100% inclusive. Well, it's
actually what federal law
requires under the Americans
with Disabilities Act.
It's a, it's a federal
requirement. Oh, Mr. Chair. So
Mr. Chair secretary, is it not
federally required under the
Americans with Disabilities Act
that children be served in the
least restrictive, most
inclusive setting.
Mr. Chair Representative Do it
is required that they be served
in the least restrictive
environment, yes, OK, so Mr.
Chair and secretary, my next
question. For children with IEPs
who are served in a
community-based.
Setting
How many of them are having
their services delivered by the
PED who is the deliverer of IEP
services, how many of them are
being provided at that
community-based pre-K, which
would be the least restrictive,
most inclusive setting.
Mr. Chair Representative down
that I have to get back to you
on, I cannot give that answer to
you right now, but I appreciate
the question. So, Mr. Chair and
secretary, the reason why I'm
asking is because I see that the
expulsion bill is back.
If children are not going to be
served in the least restrictive
setting. And if we see more and
more children with autism
spectrum, since reintegration,
and they are now having to cope
with and deal with being best on
a, transported on a bus.
Two sets of classrooms, 2 sets
of peers, 2 sets of rules.
In the middle of their naptime
and mealtime.
And then they, they are danger,
they're they act out because
they are not able to use their
words as you described, and they
are a danger to themselves or
others. Who has a liability if
that incident occurs at a
community-based setting.
Mr. Chair, uh, Representative
Doo, I think our responsibility
is to serve all the children and
to serve them in the least
restrictive environment, so
that's why we are very excited
that in the office of special
education, they moved the 619
coordinator 2 ECECD and working
in close collaboration with the
department, we can bring
resources, but we need to work
on it, we don't have all the
resources we need, and I know
you all hear that from your
constituents, the resources are
not even in the school based
setting sometimes so.
Our goal here is to support all
children in that least
restrictive environment in the
environment, their parent chose
to have them in, so it's, it's
a, and I know you know how
complicated and and nuanced that
is, but yes, so there is the,
the responsibility is for us as
a state working with our
providers that we fund to
deliver the services to make
sure that those children do get
the supports that they need, so,
so, Mr. Chair and secretary, if
we're in the process of building
the system together.
Is it a little early for an
expulsion bell when we're not
serving children in the least,
we're not meeting the federal
requirements for IDEA. I, we, we
can talk offline about that, but
in this diff um the funding for
the rate increases, is any of
that a differential
differentiated rate for children
with special needs.
Mr. Chair Representative Doo,
yes, 17 million of that 104 is
for a differential rate for
children with individual family
service plans or individual
education programs for 504.
Awesome. OK, thank you, Mr.
Chair and thank you, Secretary,
that makes me very happy to hear
that. Um, you talked a little
bit about lowering the ratios
from 6 to 5, I'm assuming that's
one. Do we still have star
levels? OK, is it still focused?
Mr. Chair, Representative Doo,
yes, 5 star, it's 4 to 1 for
infants. OK. Thank you. This is
license level, so we're changing
it, yeah, um, Mr. Chair, Mr.
Chair and secretary, that was
gonna be my next question. OK.
So you talked about the ratio,
but you didn't address group
size. What are you doing with
group size?
Uh, Mr. Chair, Representative
Doo, same, so reducing group
size to 10 and a ratio of 1 to 5
for infants. OK, and that's up
to 12 months.
Mr. Chair and secretary, so
reducing infant capacity
statewide.
Mr. Chair, Representative Doo,
we would be very mindful of
continuity of care, we wouldn't
have providers, you know, no
families would be expelled or
kicked out, but the issue is,
yes, we do have that is a key
indicator of quality is to have
more of those 1 to 1
interactions, so yes, you are
correct, it would reduce
capacity, but improve quality
and there then outcomes for
children. So Chair and
secretary, I want to make sure
that this committee heard. When
we reduce the ratio and cap a
group size, then every single
ratio at.
Every single childcare center
serving infants and toddlers,
the ratio of the capacity of
that community for infant care
will be reduced.
They either have to find more
buildings.
More, more space, or they will
have a longer waiting list.
Mr. Chair and secretary, do you
have the infant toddler waiting
list?
Mr. Chair, Representative Dow,
waiting lists are kept at the
provider level, so we don't have
a statewide um tracking of
weightless, we do know and we
hear from programs that they do
have large wait lists, which is
why we're excited about the 10
million for capacity building
for um facility building and
also, um, to be really
understand this childcare supply
and demand study to see where
those investments can be made,
we do need public private
partnership absolutely to
improve access and quality. We
need both.
You, Mr. Chair and thank you
Secretary. Is any of the money
that you're asking for to pay
for training or substitute care
if paid family medical leave
passes.
Mr. Chair Representative Doo,
the um we would model that any
impact that that would have, um,
if that comes online, but right
now they're that is not modeled
in here because it wasn't, um,
we only model what is current
law and current requirements.
So, but thank you for that
question and thank you, Mr.
Chair and Mr. Chair and
secretary, uh, I seen the
saturation charts for New Mexico
pre-K and some of the
saturations like 250%. At what
point will you stop requesting
expansion of pre-K.
Mr. Chair Representative Doo,
this is our last big request,
um, so that we get, we're not
requesting any more for fours,
as Kelly said, we, we agree, um,
but for our 3 year old, so I
think we want to get to that
universal for our threes and
fours, and you're absolutely
right, we um inherited two New
Mexico pre-K systems when we
created the department, when is
it administered by our public
education department and one by
our children, youth and Families
department. So over the last 4
years, we've been working to get
clear and clear about where
children are, and we know.
I remember from my first
hearings here, that was a big
issue and why the department was
needed, so, uh, we're our pre-K
application is due, uh.
Valentine's Day, uh, and so we
hope to see, and when we uh the
team Sandy and Truil Medina,
Shawna Brunk, she might be here,
they take uh that work very
seriously to make sure that
we're not pushing out programs
that we're serving um all
eligible children. OK, thank
you, Mr. Cha. Thank you
Secretary. I have 2 questions
left. On the loan program that
was specifically designed
because the government
facilities can get a grant, and
schools can get a grant. That
loan, I remember.
Way back in the day was designed
um for a revolving loan for
private providers. Are you still
gonna be prioritizing the
private providers, um, or, or
making sure that people don't
have an alternative funding
source.
Before they access the loan.
Chair Representative Doo, I'll
have to get back to you on that
because that will be run through
NMFA obviously in collaboration
with ECECD, but we'll, we can
get back to you on that, um, and
Mr. Chair, this is my final
question to the secretary. I, I
see a bill on the Senate side
which was brought to me by a
private provider that created up
to $10,000 fines for centers.
Per day
Is that, OK.
I don't know if people have ever
seen a licensing survey, but
unless they've changed
significantly since I was there,
you could get
A crack tile stain on the
ceiling tile, foot pedal on a
trash can doesn't open. We once
got a, a fine for a triangle
block that was wedged under a
door to hold a door open when
kids were going in and out of
playground, out of the
playground, because the doors
have to automatically shut.
And the fine was because when
they counted the blocks in the
center, there wasn't enough
smooth blocks, like it's, it's
pretty nuanced as to those
centers. Why do we need a
$10,000 fine when we're trying
to support these minority owned
and operated female businesses.
Mr. Chair, uh, Representative
Doo, um, great question, so that
is for operators who will not
come into compliance when asked
and when given, um, and this is,
we have a lot of large operators
that are very um would rather
pay a fine than come into
compliance, so we do not issue
those fines for anything, and so
it's, it's really a tool in the
toolbox to keep children safe.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. I'll just
point out that um PED providers
do not have to be licensed, so
this would only be imposed on
the non-PED providers, correct?
Mr. Chair, Representative Dowd,
this is for our licensed
childcare facilities, homes.
Thank you.
OK, uh, next we have
representative Luhan and then
Representative Herrera.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Uh, thank
you, Secretary and
Everybody presenting today, this
is always a lot of information
and
Um, so all the work that you've
done, Madam Secretary, um, Mr.
Chair, I got to attend, um, the
conference that they had for
ECECD this year and then I could
follow up with the um, so
they've been very, very busy and
diligent on working on some of
these issues that we're looking
at today, my questions are going
to go back to the the previous
presentation with Kelly, um, in
regards to the.
Um
The $2 million that uh is above
the LFC recommendation for the 4
additional ATEs, uh, or that's
not, that's not quite it, but
there's an additional $2 million
that is is that for just the
expansion for the programs,
Kelly.
Or um the home visiting programs
and
There is an additional $2
million you mentioned. I'm
trying to find, I just took a
note of that.
Uh, could you page.
I'm actually looking at page 6,
but I'm not.
Uh, sure that that's, I'm seeing
that $2 million there, but I'm
not sure if that if that is that
related to the.
On visiting the 4 FTEs, Mr.
Chair.
I think uh
on the high, Mr. Chair, uh,
Representative Lu Han, are you,
I think, I think you might be
conflating the the policy
quality
program with early intervention.
Yeah, Mr. Chairman, Is that $2
million in personnel is for the
early care and education program
in the executive budget, and
that's for additional personnel
for the childcare.
Um
Interviewers and eligibility
interviewers, and that would be
contingent on the expansion of
the program. That's, thank you,
Mr. Chair. I, I knew they, they
were together, but I wasn't
sure, so, um, but what is the,
the addition for the expansion
of the program so I can be
clear, Mr. Chair.
Uh, well, so that's different.
So this is for childcare, um,
the expansion for home visiting
the LFC recommendation included
$3 million for rating increases
while the executive
recommendation, I believe, was
10 million for expansion. Thank
you. Thank you. Great. And then,
thank you, thank you for
clarifying that with me, um.
I'm getting more information and
writing you notes, Mr. Cha, as
we're going through this, but
um,
Trying to stay on topic of what
I'm I'm trying to talk about,
um, and then also we're looking
at related to childcare, the $10
million of NMFA. That's all
contingent on policy we passed
this year, or that's already in
there, Mr. Chair.
Mr. She remembers me, that's in
both recommendations regardless
of the expansion of the fund.
Thank you. And that, that fund
was already there because of a
previous revolving fund. Can you
explain that too? I'm just
the information I'm hearing from
the conversations we're having
today.
Mr. Chair, members, so there is
a revolving fund at NMFA, um,
which was created many years ago
with the intent of giving um low
cost or no cost emergency loans
to childcare providers to help
with um expansion or emergency
needs. It's never really been
funded. There was a couple times
where it got a little bit of
money, but nothing really that
would affect the system level,
given that we are asking
providers to really expand the
infant toddler world, and that
is expensive in capital, we
believe.
That it's the correct policy
decision, both the executive and
the LFC to uh see that funding
with $10 million to allow for
providers to have a an avenue
for low cost or no cost
expansion when it comes
particularly to infant and toler
expansion.
And maybe Beth like that, Mr.
Chair, um, Representative, just
real quick, um, the agency has a
bit of seed money this year
already, about 1.8 million. um.
I'm sure that they have
information on, you know, the
applicants and, and all of that
that she can speak to.
Yes, Mr. Chair, Representative
Lujan, I that application, I
think is being finalized this
week.
Looking at my teeth, uh, and
we've been working closely with
NMFA, so yeah, that was 1.8
million in the executive and
request last year, and we will
prioritize providers that, you
know, have hard time accessing
capital. There's some other
things on it. We actually worked
with our public private um
partnership subcommittee of the
Early Childhood Advisory Council
to set the rulemaking and put
some parameters on on who who
receives those loans, so.
That answers your question. It
does, but it adds more questions
like what are the parameters and
you'll get those parameters and
how you're making that those
decisions to us because um yeah,
thank you, um.
Because this is all, it's all
compounded for me and and how
these, how this is all working
together and how we're putting
this specific budget together in
conjunction with the transfer of
funding from the trust fund and
and everything and how this is
all relative and where things
want to be moved. Is there
anything tied, Mr. Chair, to,
um, and we're talking about some
of those parameters I think
anything tied to who gets the
funding for some of these
programs, Mr. Chair.
Incentives and such, Mr. Chair.
I know we were talking about
that at one time, especially for
the home visiting.
But there would be
There's some things that you're
already doing, but are you
seeing a result from that? We're
giving out some kind of
incentive.
To the families, Mr. Chair.
Uh, Mr. Chair, and
Representative Lujan, I know
last in this year, um, that, uh,
I think it went, it went from us
to HCA.
For the incentive money, so the
money that came into our budget
for home visiting incentives,
um, was actually a part of a
transfer over to the healthcare
authority. We, there is a study
underway right now, and I forget
the entities at UNM that's
looking at this because during
the COVID relief money we did do
some incentives with home
visiting with families and home
visiting, so.
It's got we just met with them a
couple of weeks ago, so we will
have some more data on that, but
we can also follow up with the
healthcare authority and how
those dollars are being used. I
appreciate that. Thank you
again, just trying to track how
how these things are moving and
and some of the
How that's been reported back to
us and how we're, how, how we
can better improve these things,
um, also on, so on page 9, we're
looking at the um performance
measures, Mr. Chair. Um,
The percentage of children
enrolled in home visiting for
longer than 6 months. We
received regular well child
exams as recommended by the
American Academy of Pediatrics.
Those are great numbers we're
seeing there, but what
specifically which programs from
the list that we've been given
are doing the best job there is
to see these, these type of
results.
Mr. Chair.
So Mr. Chair members committee,
this actually doesn't break out
the the changes between models.
This is just a universal look at
all home visiting programs and
how they perform on reaching
those well child exams, and
we've confirmed that with the
LFC evaluation at home visiting
does increase the likelihood of
well child exams.
So it's not broken out by the
model. We look at it
universally. Thank you. So would
that be true for the rest of
these?
Uh, measures that we're looking
at here.
Yes, I don't, I think we have
one measure that's on a very
particular, the family's first,
which is a model, but the rest
of the home visiting as a
universal look at the umbrella
program.
Which perked my interest Mr. Mr.
Chair, when we're looking at the
Families First, which has been
around for quite a while, um,
and we know that it does uh meet
quite uh many of the standards
for um for the, the federal
grants that we were, we're
looking for them to match, but
Um, that's, that's what's,
that's why I was asking that. I
wanted to know which programs
we're doing better and why we're
having these, these are good.
Marks, by the way, um.
I have one more question here. I
think that this is, this is just
going back to how well and why
we need these programs, and I
want to know more about the, how
we can incentivize these, how we
can get more in there so that if
we can justify the expansion,
Mr. Chair, because I think I've
been a, a supporter of that for
quite a while, having, having a
little bit of of experience
that, but that's what the
volunteer program, they're not,
they're volunteers, we're not.
Are you using Mr. Chair, which
brings the question up any of
these, uh, models or programs?
Or they, they volunteer base,
Mister Chair.
Mr. Chair, Representative Lu
Han, all our programs are
voluntary. Families choose them,
but the people working in them
are paid. That's my question,
yes, so they're paid. Thank you,
Mr. Chair. Thanks, that's all I
have.
OK, thank you. We have
Representative Herrera and then
Representative Garrett.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Thank you,
everybody, panel, great
presentation. I, I wanna make
sure I understand something.
You're talking for, you're
talking about, I hope I got
these numbers right, 7.9.
Um, million allocation from the
general fund.
To cover, um, to cover the uh
increases in um staff and fit
programs, etc. etc. Is that, is
that correct?
He, here, um, Mr. Chair,
Representative Herrera, here's
the numbers um that we
projected. We've seen an 8%
increase um in the number of
children coming into fit, so
yes, this is the gap. This is
our gap for 25. OK. And uh I
guess, I guess, will that also
include
That
I don't know what to call it,
um, the fit problem with those
agencies that weren't getting
enough money for the service
they had provided, but they were
left out of the formula and then
so they just took a loss, Mr.
Chair Representative Herrera,
the first line, the fit provider
rate increase. That's what that
um is addressing, which, um, the
LFC recommendation is 2 million,
and so we just, as I mentioned,
we worked with the healthcare
authority to get the public
notice out so that when we
Finish it and we, the budget
gets finished, then we can go
back and pay for the last 3rd
and 4th quarter of rates using
Medicaid too. It was a concern
that we wanted to make sure
that, as Kelly and everyone, we
all believe that Medicaid should
pay for the children who are
Medicaid eligible, so, uh, it
was a great partnership um with
LFC with the inter uh
interagency coordinating council
and all the fit providers, we
built, you know, obviously
terrible about what happened, as
you mentioned, and it was, you
know, my responsibility. So
we're we're grateful.
That we can do this, but we are
concerned about the gap in
funding generally because of the
number of children we're seeing.
We are number one in the nation
for finding children up to age 2
in our early intervention
program. So we have a lot to be
proud of, but we also need to
fund it. Well, Mr. Chair, I'd
like to congratulate all of you.
That was a huge problem. And,
and I know it was very difficult
to resolve, so thank you, uh,
you know, just thank you for
that. Now, uh let me see.
You know, I read that home
visiting evaluation I think our
analysts want to add uh on that
conversation.
Mr. Chair Representative, no,
no, you're completely fine. I
just wanted to make a, a push
for that 7.6 million, um,
Because I think everybody
appears to be on the same page
about providing some funding for
uh the provider rates, right?
Um,
But I just want to point out
that it's very difficult to
implement rates when you're, um,
program is not funded at the
level it needs to be funded at.
That presents a big
That could be an issue for the
agency if they receive provider
rate increases again that the 2
million from LFC, the 1.1 from
the executive, um, it just puts
the agency in a difficult
position.
If they are supposed to be
providing provider rate
increases, but they can't pay
for all the children in the
program.
It, it puts them in a really
tough spot. Thank you. And now,
uh, Kelly, anything to add?
I just want to make this a
little bit more nuanced for us
all. We're also having financial
struggle in this because we are
not pulling down the right
amount of federal revenue, and
so the department needs, the
system needs to actually certify
more kids medically eligible
that are Medicaid eligible, and
that would significantly reduce
what this general fund need is,
and so it's a little bit more
nuanced than that. Great. Thank
you, well.
Uh, back to.
Good question.
OK, now let me ask my, you know,
I read that home visiting
evaluation study. The problem is
You did put everybody under one
umbrella. So you can't tell what
program is doing what?
Is that correct?
So if that maybe there's a new
evaluation thing that I haven't
read.
But I'd love to, but the last
time I saw it, you asked all
home visiting programs, and then
you, you put all that
information together.
And you couldn't tell what
program was doing what.
In my humble and representative,
I would like to point you to our
2023 home visiting evaluation.
It is true that uh typically
when you look at the annual
reports that come from ECCD,
they group all of the home
visiting programs together. What
we did in this evaluation that
was different is we broke them
apart, looking at the um
4 different models that were
being run, which is, uh, first
born nurse family partnership,
parents as teachers and
standards, and so you can see,
uh, depending upon which outcome
you're looking at, how those
different programs uh perform
and what you'll see is that um
for some of the cases, uh,
you'll see vast differences. So
for mothers initiating
breastfeeding, uh, nurse family
partnership has a much higher
rate than the others, um, for
length of stay in the program
again, you'll see that uh nurse
family partnership seems to be a
higher uh for other ones such as
average.
s per month by model, uh, first
born has, uh, the highest rate
there. And so, uh, it really
depends on what what component
you're wanting to look at, uh,
and I can take this offline and
show you the report, that would
be helpful. uh, Mr. Chair, thank
you, and I will, I will get
offline with you because family
nurse practitioner, I get, it's
a very, it's the most expensive
model too. So what you also want
to do is, what are you getting
for the cost? You know, I, I
love family nurse practitioner.
We never went after it because
You know, we don't have enough
nurses and we don't have enough
money, so I never even looked at
that program, but for high.
For high needs kids, I get they
really need that. I get that,
but that should be kind of the
minority minority of the
funding.
Because that should really be
for kids that are really hard to
serve, and, and I guess, so let
me, uh, Mr. Chair, I guess.
I know no one wants to hear
this, but I'm just gonna say it.
We shouldn't chase federal
funding if it makes what we have
weaker.
I'm just saying that, you know,
if, if we have good programs and
we know they're good, we should
go after that. I get it's a 3 to
1 match. I get that and that's
really good for the budget, but
not.
If we're supporting programs
that don't really work very
well.
And I, I know all these programs
and some of them are not very
good.
And I just think.
When we do this new evaluation
of home visiting, I think we
ought to take into consideration
what is the cost per child, you
know, how, how people have
progressed in in different
fields. I get that, but, but
really chasing after money
that's gonna create weak
programs, I don't think is a
good way for our state to go,
especially.
Especially when we have this
money.
So, and yes, I'll support your,
you know, your 7.6. I, I mean,
that's what you in here. I get
it. I get how hard that is, and
I get it. That's a hard ass to
this committee too. That's a
real hard ask when you have 500
million.
Or you're gonna have 500
million.
So that's all I have to say, Mr.
Chair.
Thank you very much for
representing Barrera. Uh, we now
have some Garrett, then
represented Duncan, uh, and then
we'll keep going.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. I'm
Secretary, when did you come on
and take this job?
Uh, Mr. Chair, uh,
Representative Garrett, that,
uh, December of 2009, November
2019.
OK, I, I just want to thank you
because I think I met you at
Berniosaccio, your first public
event and you had unwavering
positivity, you like the tree
with the roots planted. You're
not going anyplace, and I know
we're just all grateful for the
kind of comprehensive
leadership, um, I, I just want
to thank you because it's really
made a difference for our
families and our youth. And then
I have one, Mr. Chairman, it's
kind of a
Odd point, but well, I asked my
question, I'd like everybody to
think about the earliest picture
books that you use sometime
between the ages of 1 and 5.
Just picture that book. Mine was
Naha Boy of the Seminoles. But
I'm looking at uh the policy
research and quality initiative
where, yes, uh, the executive is
20 million over LFC, but what
thrilled me was to see that we
want to participate.
participate in the Dolly Parton
imagination library. Can you
talk about who that would cover
and explain to everybody what
that is, Mr. Chair
Representative Garrett, I would
like to turn it over to
Representative Brown to now
she's the champion. This adds to
our already $660,000 in the
agency budget to make us a full
Dolly Parton's imagination
library state. Uh, so this is
exciting and it reaches every
county and now in uh New Mexico,
um, English, Spanish, they
that book every month, and we
want to get family signed up
right there at the hospital when
they have the baby ideally, so,
um, Leila, uh Wendell and her
team um run that, but I we can
get you all the details we have
amazing reports and again,
Representative Brown since my
day one, presented to me, we
gotta do this, so I'm I'm so
excited to see this moment and
so is the governor, and we're
all big fans of Dolly Parton and
the great, great work she's led
in this country to improve
literacy.
And Mr. Chairman and and to to
Madam Secretary Betty, uh, why I
asked you to think about the
book is we're all about
structured literacy now, but we
can't forget the joy of reading
and imagination of children
holding the books, making up
their own stories, so they want
to read. So just thank you from
all the families and children in
our state who are gonna benefit.
Appreciate it. Thank you. Uh,
we're gonna go next to
Representative Duncan and then
Vice Cha Dickson.
Thank you, Mr. Chair.
I'm gonna be the odd man out on
this group.
You've got a budget of 3/4 of a
million dollars.
And
Um
I will
Contend with you until we fix
the family. We can throw money
at this until the cows come
home.
You know, move the bar a little
bit.
But not a lot. I don't even know
how I, um.
I graduated high school without
all of the programs you're
offering.
We have taken it away from
parents.
And in some cases, there are no
parents in there.
We've taken it away from parents
that responsibility to raise
their kids if they're going to
bring him into this world.
And get him educated.
I think we do a disservice.
You've made a couple of my
friends really rich.
Off of their businesses. I think
we do a disservice when we don't
cut back and say,
Mm
Miss
When you're in college, we broke
and, and that's a rhetorical
question.
We all have to stretch.
In that college years comes to
mind, raising kids comes to mind
because that's how when I
started having my kids was in
college, and unless we
For parents
Go back to that and stretch a
little bit and become who they
need to become our kids will
never become who they are
intended to be.
Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Thank you
exactly what home visiting does,
they support that family and
being all that they can be.
Thank you, uh, Madam Secretary.
Next, we're gonna go to Vice
Chair. Thank you, Mr. Chair. Um,
I actually just had a question,
um, my questions on the career
ladder have been answered, uh,
but
I wanted to check on.
The substitute sort of educator,
um, prospect and see if, if you
had any update um or information
that you could share with the
committee about
Efforts to support um our early
childcare providers, um, meet
staffing ratios, uh, as some of
the state policies, um, look to
be changed.
Uh, uh, Mr. Chair and Madam Vice
Chair, thank you for that
question, you and I've had a
couple talks about this, uh,
recently, myself and Secretary
Nyer had a presentation from a
group that we actually work
with, um, who is doing our
childcare finder and they did a
pilot in Mississippi, where they
stood up a pretty cool
technology solution to getting
people to become substitutes and
then connecting them with
providers who need them.
One, we need that kind of
solution because we know we have
retired teachers, we have
graduate students, we have
people who can do part time and
could help out, but we need a
technology solution to connect
them, but then we would cost
model.
They probably need more more
substitutes, um, if I I don't
know if you're thinking about a
paid family leave passes, then
we would change that cost
modeling and.
We'd have to do some work cause
you know, not everybody's a.
Well, everybody would probably
be impacted, so, um, we have
some great experts we work with,
but one I think we do need to
work on that solution to attract
people to become substitutes,
um, so that we have those, OK,
good, was that an applause.
Um, and I think we probably get
some applause in the audience
because we know there are some
people out there, you know,
again, who can.
I can work 4 days a week, half a
day, but you know, sometimes
that helps um fill in and it's
it's not ideal, but it's, um,
they had amazing success in uh
Mississippi over 3, I, I, I'll
get you the numbers, um, but we
are looking at that and seeing
if there's ways that we can
support that here in New Mexico.
Thank you, uh, thank you, Mr.
Cherry. Thank you, Madam
Secretary, and our analysts for,
um, always doing a nice deep
dive and thorough discovery.
Excellent. Thank you, Madam
Weiser. Thank you, Madam
Secretary. um, I ask a few brief
questions. First, this would be
the largest trust fund in fusion
really since sort of we got
going.
Mr. Chair, yes, last year the
LFC recommended 250 the year
before 150, so this is kind of
our last, yes, this is our last
big piece and build the
brighter future. That's right.
And so, and Madam Secretary, um
the the
With the, the, how it's
proposed, I guess the bill now,
do you have a rough breakdown,
how much would go into um infant
and toddler versus um the uh
pre-K and up.
Mr. Chair, um, Mr. Chair,
the 98 million for childcare
assistance here is focused on
infant and toddler, a little
over 6000 infants and toddlers,
we hope to support, um,
families, and then as you can
see here the um for pre-K, it's
a little about 33 million um.
Though our goal in there is to
again reach 3 year olds to
support the
Did I, did that answer? I think
so and how many, uh, Madam
Secretary, how many families, so
we have, you know, 22,000
births. How many families do you
anticipate supporting with that
98 million.
Mr. Chair, uh, is around 50,000
families and around 86,000
children, um, in, in total with
this budget for FY 26, that will
reach. Sorry, what I meant to
ask for infant and toddler,
right.
And for the infants
specifically, because I get sort
of dive and sort of going
zooming forward. It seems like
our, the, the greatest gap.
And the greatest benefit are all
with our um infants.
In that very early age.
So here you'll, uh, Mr. Chair,
you'll see, we want to reach
16,00041 total of the 33,000
that are.
Uh, and after, thank you, Madam
Secretary.
um 500, sorry, that represents
about 9500 families. Got it.
If we go down the road that's
being proposed by the
department, we don't get any
other bites at this apple that
that are this big, correct?
Correct, Mr. Chair.
And Madam Secretary, we've got a
number of studies you started a
couple on your end where you're
waiting for results. Obviously
there's the wage and career
lattice. Is there any worry
about the infusion sort of being
out of alignment with the data
we get back.
Mr. Chair, um.
In terms of too much or not
enough, and actually I want, I,
I, you know, hearing, um, uh,
the, the representative from San
Juan Duncan, I think we're
creating some, you know, a
private sector.
That is fully publicly funded.
In its entirety.
And not only sort of that
structure, but now we're
proposing a very steep increase
in that public funding for that
private sector.
And it makes me, I guess I'll
just throw a few concerns out
there, Madam Secretary,
acknowledging, I think what the
committee has said, which is, I
think broadly one, and I've
shared it privately and
publicly, your sense of urgency,
your team's sense of urgency is
a wonderful thing, and I, the
tension that we can sometimes
feel here in HAFC is all about,
we know how important this work
is, and so we're all trying to
do the best job possible, never
a question on that.
That said,
In this increasingly well funded
and lucrative sector. Do you
have any fear of out of state
corporations really saying,
look, childcare is the hot
thing, particularly in New
Mexico because they're pumping
65 million barrels of oil every
month, and they have got this
giant trust fund, and they have,
they are unleashing the money
into this sector.
And so out of state folks were
like, hey, this is a great deal.
Mr. Chair, uh, thank you, thank
you for that question and for
the deeper explanation, I think
we share your concern to make
sure that the people who are
serving children in New Mexico
are committed um to the
outcomes, I would say a couple
things, one, the governor and I
think as you all have wisely
invested in, we're building a
universal system. So it's for
all children, um, and it's, it
needs to be supported. I think
the early childhood birth to 4,
birth to 3.
I entirely supported by.
Private, nonprofit for profit
industry. That's just the nature
of how it is in our entire
country. So the guardrails that
you're recommending, I think are
wise, and I think we can put
those on. The 7 million
investment for childcare quality
puts our department inside these
programs, make sure that we know
what is the level of quality,
what are the people who are
working and they're being paid
are the dollars the state's
investing actually reaching the
classroom teacher. These are the
types of things as a department
that we can do for that account.
mobility and that transparency,
but the reality is prenatal to 5
prenatal, I mean, are they're
delivered by private nonprofit
and for profit businesses, um,
as a matter so if we want our
children to be served, I think,
but I appreciate what you're
saying in terms of guard rails
that we have to put there so
that those dollars reach the
families and the results we get
are what we intend.
Thank you, Madam Secretary. um
bless you, uh, the, um,
You know,
the, the dollars following
families and particularly, you
know, those new kiddos and their
families. Um, I'm not convinced.
I'm, I'm convinced we're all
working towards that. Uh, I'm
not convinced that um because
the sort of the infant.
And toddler to wide range. It's
0 to 3.
The, the sort of 0 to 1.
is what I've been told and maybe
it's wrong, but that is of
Really outsize importance in
those early and, and probably
that early part of that 0 to 1,
even more importance.
And
You know, that seems like maybe
it's still a further challenge
for us to refine this to support
families in
Unique and creative ways so that
they have the choice to sort of,
you know, they have choices,
they have options, um, and what
a what an amazing opportunity we
get to do that. Um, they, they,
Madam Secretary, want to go back
a few things that have been
flagged, the pre-K piece, I
think has been flagged and, and
rightfully so as we that's
outside, you know, that is the
one of the larger differences
here.
And we don't want to supplant,
um,
So I think that
Different areas that need work.
Further committee members, I
think this is a relatively
I don't know if it's unique, but
doesn't happen all the time
where we're presented with sort
of a budget ask contingent on a
bill that is not yet here, which
is, you know, we, we're, we're
working very hard, you all are
working very hard so that we
have the time to think about
these things. But I've not sort
of necessarily seen that in a
way where, where an entire
budget depends very
substantially. So that's
something we have to think
about. Um, but Madam Secretary,
thank you, thank you to your
team, thank you to the
providers. We'll ask for the LFC
recommendation right now. We
have a number of work groups
that are going, uh, and know
that there's more work to do
here.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Thank you,
members of the committee. I
really appreciate the time and
the interest and look forward to
talking with each of you
individually more about your
specific um areas and also just
wanting to understand more how
is a department we can make sure
that the dollars we're spending
are being held accountable at
the level they need to be, so
appreciate your um support.
Thank you very much.
Mr. Chair, I would move that the
committee adopt the LFC
recommendation at this time.
OK. Uh, there's a motion.
Uh, is there a second?
Seconded by Representative
Hernandez, uh, any opposition to
that motion?
Uh, please show Representative
Pettigrew and Representative
Duncan and.
OK.
Uh, we'll go ahead and invite up
our um
Uh, Secretary Casados.
people
You on this,
uh, members, should we take a
quick 5-minute break, OK, thanks
to the vice chair for the
suggestion. Uh, OK, we've got
We're gonna be, let's do a 10
minutes, we'll be back here at
5:10. Thank you all.
Hm
Uh
All right, we're gonna get going
again, uh, Madam Secretary,
thanks for, uh, allowing us that
time for a little break. Um,
Doctor Garcia, thanks for being
here.
Um
We're gonna go, uh.
Uh, dive in, Ms. Dinsmore. Thank
you.
Um, we'll go ahead and get
started uh with agency code 690.
Great, uh, Mr. Chair, members of
the committee, thank you. My
name is Rachel again and I'm
with uh Mary Beth Dinsmore, the
DFA analyst for CYFD as well as
Secretary Teresa Casados, um,
Mary Beth and I will walk
through the big picture
differences uh related to CYFD
and then turn it over to the
secretary Casados, um, in this
case, uh, there is movement
between programs and so my
recommendation is you're really
tracking the high level, uh,
Mary Beth and I will reference
the different sheets, but that's
probably the easiest.
this way to follow along with
us. Um, following Kelly, uh, the
overall difference between the
LSC and the executive
recommendation is relatively
small, but there it's 9.2
million overall, but there are
some pretty big differences in
where and how 00 yeah, and if,
uh, feel free to pull it close
to you, yeah, that one.
Chairman, is that better? Got
it. OK, great. Uh, there are
some pretty big differences in
where and how the two
recommendations funds.
CYFD, um, I'll put them into
kind of 3 big buckets and then
Mary Beth and I will go program
by program, um, biggest
difference number one, the LFC
recommendation holds the CYFD
operating budget relatively
essentially flat and makes
targeted investments in the grow
that is similar to the strategy
the legislature pursued last
year, whereas the executive
recommendation makes investments
in the operating budget. Um,
second big
difference is the uh executive
budget recommendation would
create a new program or budget
code within CYFD, um, moving
money primarily from protective
services, some from juvenile
justice as well as behavioral
health into a new program called
the Family Services Division to
um deliver prevention
programming, the LFC
recommendation doesn't make that
reorganization instead funds
prevention within protective
services.
And then the 3rd big difference
between the two budget
recommendations, um, is that the
executive budget recommendation
would reduce federal funds by 14
million, primarily within
protective services, um, and
backfill general fund, whereas
the LFC recommendation holds the
federal funds flat while making
a recommendation for additional
technical assistance, uh, within
the non-recurring. So those,
those are the big high level
differences Mary Bethton and I
will point you now.
to specific differences um
within the programs.
Uh, Mary Beth, my recommendation
is we go in the order of the
high level, cause I think it
might be easier to track where
money moves. So my
recommendation is we start with
program support, um, and go in
the order of that.
Hello again, Mr. Chair,
committee members, um, thank you
very much.
Um, I will work kind of off the
different sheets just as a, uh,
you know, sort of a a jumping
off point for discussing the
differences, um, so for program
support this, this is not where
you will see a lot of drastic
differences, um, within the
agency, so I won't spend too
much time on it, but the
difference is about $216,000 of
generally hire on the executive
side, um, and that's, uh, for an
additional position, uh, to
support the Kevin.
data needs, um, and it also
includes a rate increases, um,
that's one thing I'll, I'll just
say really quickly, um, another
difference in the
recommendation, um, as Rachel
said, there's some targeted grow
increases, um, on the LFC side
and one of those is liability
rates, so the executive funds
these increased rates for CYFD,
um, in the base, in the programs
where they're attributable to.
Wow, LFC does fund these rates,
but they fund them as a
non-recurring, so they are
funded in both places.
Was it?
Um, and let's see, da da da. Oh,
I get, yeah, OK, so that, let me
just clarify, that's liability
rates. There are other rates
that are within, you know, that
the agencies are responsible to
pay. Those are worked in here.
So, um,
The LFC and executive budget
recommendations. They both have
105.1,000 and that's for GST and
other IT rate increases, but I
just spent way too long on that
program. I'm gonna give Rachel
the next one. Great.
Uh, moving on to juvenile
justice is the next on your high
level, um, overall, the LFC
recommendation provides 282,000
more than the executive budget
recommendation, and that's
primarily because
is the executive budget
recommendation would move
518,000 in general fund from
juvenile justice to the proposed
family services division along
with 8 FTE, um, and then, uh,
you can see in your high level,
uh, the executive funds the
vehicle rate increases and the
liability insurance within the
base, the LFC recommendation
doesn't do either of those, uh,
instead, as Mary Beth mentioned,
overall the LFC.
refunds the liability insurance
premium increases as a
non-recurring and didn't provide
an increase to juvenile justice
for those vehicle rates, taking
into account the fact that no
money was moving out of juvenile
justice and they could absorb
potentially that cost.
That's, that's juvenile justice.
Yeah.
OK, thank you, Mr. Chair,
committee members. So
Protective services, this is.
Where
Most of the differences you'll
find in the agency are, um, I
will start just by noting that
There's a big difference in
here, and that is because about
$18 million was moved out of
protective services in the
executive recommendation into
the new family services
division.
So it makes it a little hard to
track these sometimes when you
have a reorganization in one and
not the other, uh, but I'll do
my best. I'm sure we'll all do
our best to help you understand
where these items are funded,
um, and at what level? So, um,
so overall, LFC in protective
services is about $35.6 million
higher, um, and that is the
total amount moved. That's, um,
The executive recommendation
moves the funding and the FTE. I
believe it's about 146 positions
would go over to the new family
services division.
Um, and that is 18.8 million
from the general fund, um, and
then in addition to that, the
executive has several items
funded in protective services
that are funded by LFC in grow
or maybe not supported. So both
of those things are there, um.
I will, I'll just start with the
federal, um, one of the things
that the executive
recommendation does is
backfields federal revenue, um,
I think you'll probably hear
from the secretary about the
challenges that they have faced
um around Title IVE claiming um
the uh federal revenue.
At what rate they're supposed to
be claiming it at. Are they
claiming enough? Have they, have
they maximized uh the match that
they're eligible for and all the
different pieces of 4E, um, so
the executive does think that
they have exhausted their
resources. They did work with
someone from, I believe it's
Annie Casey Foundation on their
federal match for Title IVE,
which showed, I believe that
they are maximizing their
federal funds at this.
Point. They don't see anything
egregious that the agency is
missing.
Um, but that, so that is one of
the larger differences is that
there's $10 million in a general
fund, um, infusion in protective
services that just, that's just
not on the LFC side. Um, other
things that are in the
executive, um, so there's about
2.5 million general fund. There
is some federal match, and this
is to support additional
positions, caseworkers in
protective services with a hope
to
really start meeting these Kevin
S deliverables, bringing the
case loads down for each of
these investigators and
caseworkers, so the executive
funds this in the base. It is a
recurring expense. That is why
the executive has it in the
base. However, the LFC does fund
this effort. They have a 3-year
grow appropriation for this for
30 million of that 2 million
each year is a federal match, so
they under this um the LFC
budget would
receive $8 million in growth
funding for 3 years, um, to
support the personnel needs of
the agency.
Along with that, the executive
has 3.2 million, and this is to
fund group, uh, basically a
congregate care group home, one
for boys, one for girls, and
this is intended to help reduce
the current reliance that the
agency has on office days. I'm
sure you've all heard many
things about this, um, the
agency is trying to move away
from that. It is a, a, uh, in
Kevinness settlement, they're
not supposed to have.
Um, any office stays, I believe,
so that's an effort to try to
work, uh, to get that off of
that reliance, um,
And
I think I'll just let that go
for now. You, I'm sure you can
all read some of these other
differences, but I think those
are probably some of the
biggies, so, um, as I said, LFC
maintains relatively flat
operating budget with those
targeted investments and grow
and in specials, um.
So there's the 24 million for
the caseload standards. There's
also 5.4 million in general fund
to develop pilot, and evaluate
the results of a child welfare
training academy, which is
something that agency is working
on.
And as I mentioned, the LFC
recommendation funds liability
in grow. So again, some of those
differences. So the biggest
differences in this program, in
addition to some of the items
that the executive has the LFC
doesn't have. Your big
differences are the federal
infusion on the executive side.
The movement to to families
services on the executive side.
And then the um little things
funded in the executive face.
And certain items funded on the
LFC side. Um.
I think I will leave it at that.
That was a lot. So, um, I'll
turn it back over to Rachel.
All right. Um, I'm moving down
your high level to the family
services division, um, this is
the proposed this is the program
code that the executive budget
recommendation would create and
move funding primarily from
protective services as well as
juvenile justice and behavioral
health to create a new division
specifically focused on prevent.
the LFC recommendation does not
include that reorganization
instead keep spending for
prevention in protective
services, um, if you look kind
of down the list on what moved
in the executive recommendation,
you'll see um about 16.5 million
in general fund from the
behavioral health division that
includes 5 FTE and all of the
domestic violence program
funding, um, within the general
fund, 18.
7 million from protective
services, and that includes 146
positions, a total of about 44
million, um, including all
revenue sources in the executive
recommendation would move from
protective services into family
services, and that includes
about 18 million in TAF funding,
um, then the executive
recommendation would move
518,000 from juvenile justice,
as well as 11.
TE into the family services
division, and then the rest of
the items on that list are sort
of new, new items, um, within
family services, net general
fund increases, so that includes
rate GST rate increases for
vehicles, um.
The liability insurance uh
increase that CFD would allocate
to family services, um, as well
as $360,000 for the mobile, uh
mobile family resource center.
Um, in addition, the, uh,
executive budget recommendation
would provide 3 million in
general fund to offset a
reduction in federal funds that
came from ARPA for domestic
violence programs, the LFC
recommendation provides 1.2
million in general funds.
to offset that reduction in
federal funds, but does it in
behavioral health.
Um, one note is that it didn't
quite look like the ARPA
spending was at the $3 million
level. That's the reason that
the LFC recommendation had a
little bit less, um, in the
back, so. But that's kind of the
summary for family services.
OK, um, Mr. Chair, committee
members, this is the last
program, um, at CYFD. It's
behavioral health services. So
again, as, as Rachel mentioned,
One of the big differences in
this program is the executive
has a chunk of money moving out
into family services. So again,
it's difficult kind of for an
apple to apple sort of
comparison, but, um.
But I'll, I'll just give you
the, the information, right? The
LFC recommendation provides 19.4
million more, um, in revenue
than the executive primarily
because the executive proposes
moving this funding from
behavioral health services into
the new family Services
division, um, in this LFC
doesn't have that
reorganization, um, as Rachel
just said, there is an
additional 1 million for uh
replacing pandemic era, uh,
domestic violence grants, the
executive has the 3 million
again.
Family Services, not in
behavioral health, um, the LFC
recommendation also provides an
increas in general fund of
200,000 to replace lost court
fines revenue with uh associated
with the elimination of the
fees. Um,
And in the base, I'll just see
if there's anything else of
importance.
Um
Yeah, that's, that's about it. I
think we've covered the
differences.
Thank you. Um, and then Mr.
Chair, members of the committee,
um, we have included in your
packets the specials different
sheets, um, but it's, uh, we
also put at the bottom of your
high level because it makes it
kind of quick and easy to see,
in particular because the LFC
recommendation kind of uses both
non-recurring and recurring
together. So I'm going to point
out a few key differences on the
non-recurring side, and you can
see the summary as well as a
roll up by section of the bill
on the bottom of your high
level.
Um, so key differences in the
LFC and executive
recommendation. The first items
on the list are those areas
where the LFC recommends
targeted investment in the grow
or specials in lieu of an
operating budget increase. So
that includes 1.47 million for
the liability premium insurance
increase, um, in the general
front, uh, 5.4 million in the
general fund for the child
welfare training academy, so the
executive has this in the.
rating budget as well as in
grow, LSD has it in grow, um,
and then the LSD recommendation
would have, would, uh, include,
as Mary Beth mentioned, 24
million within general fund 6
million. That's divided over 3
years to specifically address
the Kevinness caseload standards
and that should fill about 101
positions within CYFD.
Um, for 3 years. Then there are
a few other additional
non-recurring uh investments
through LFC recommendation
includes not in the executive,
that includes, and these are
connected I mentioned in the
previous, um, presentation to
items, for example, the Senate
Memorial 5 Task Force, uh,
recommended and that includes um
100,000 for an organizational
health survey and employee
survey to better understand uh
retention needs.
Um, 100,000 for a rate study for
foster care and treatment foster
care providers to look at the
rates and those providers are
receiving, um, and then below
that you'll see a few uh fund
transfers into the Children's
Trust Fund in NextGen fund, and
those are included in both
recommendations executive has
4.2 million, um, LFC
recommendation across the two
funds has 10 million, um, and
then the LFC recommendation also
as you go down has that one
time, um, non.
occurring in uh appropriation
200,000 or um an additional
consulting and technical
assistance support related to
Title 4I in lieu of
Um, back selling federal funds
at this time.
Then below that on the list, the
uh executive recommendation
includes 20 million in a
supplemental for FY 25, um, and
12.2 million in the I'm sorry,
uh, yeah, 12.2 million in
deficiency um for FY 24 that
aren't included, uh, in the LFC
recommendation.
If you look at the bottom,
that's kind of the roll up by
the different sections of the
bill and the non-recurring. One
thing I'll note is, um, it's a
little bit hard to compare
apples to apples in the grow
because it is over 3 years, so
one way to think about it is the
LFC recommendation would provide
about $11 million in FY 26, um,
on the non-recurring side. The
executive recommendation on the
operating budget side provides a
net increase of about 10
million.
Um, that's a summary of the
non-recurring in these two
pieces work together. Mary Beth,
I think you're going to round us
home with bars and performance
measures.
Thanks, Rachel, Mr. Chair. I, I
actually don't have too much to
say about this part, the
performance measures, um, we are
in consensus, um, there was a
little bit of.
Kind of, uh,
I know what the word I'm looking
for is movement, yeah, so that
little bit of off, you know,
being off because the executive
supported moving a couple
measures from protective
services into the family
services division, right?
Measures that had to deal with
prevention, um, those sorts of
things were moved, but.
Regardless of that, we are in
consensus with everything else,
um, and
Or bar language.
No, I didn't break. I.
Um, I did not bring that form,
so I, I don't think we'll go
over our language right now, but
I, I don't believe they have too
many requests. There is one, I
think actually I will put
forward, um, they, they are
asking for program transfer
authority across the agency, um.
I, I will, I will leave it at
that.
Or does John have it?
the LFC recommendation does not
include program transfer
authority.
OK. Uh, thank you to our
analyst, Madam Secretary. Thanks
for being here. Feel free to
introduce uh members of your
team. I know there's a number of
folks, so how you wanna handle
that, but we'll go to you.
Um, Mr. Chairman, members of the
committee, thank you very much
and um Mary Beth and Rachel,
thank you for that. Um, I feel
more confused than I did when I
came in, so hopefully they
understood that. No, I'm
kidding, um, it's a lot. I mean,
there's a lot going on at the
department and the agency and a
lot of ask and so um I will try
to keep it brief today, um, so
that I can allow for time for
questions cause I anticipate
that there will be um lots of
those um.
So I just kind of want to start
off by um really talking about
our workforce and I will take a
moment to introduce some of my
staff, cuz I do have a lot of
them here and I really couldn't
do this without them every day,
and I know that sometimes I can
be really difficult, but they
still show up and I'm not really
exactly sure why, um, but they
do. They show up every day to
continue this work just like our
frontline workers in CYFD, they
continue to come and do the work
that is so incredibly hard. So
I'm gonna be really quick and
over here in the first row I
have Kathy Phoenix Doyle, my
deputy secretary over, um, I
don't know what she's over.
She's over behavioral health and
our family services division. I
have Valerie Sandoval who
oversees protective services in
juvenile justice. I have Cindy
Montoya, who is my ASD director.
Um, I have Heather and Andrea
who work in ASD as part of my
budget and contract staff,
federal funds.
I have Aaron Solis, who is my
director of protective services.
I have Joseph Bottos, who is my
CIO. I have Elizabeth Hamilton,
who is my director of behavioral
health. I have Scott Patterson
Elatori, who is my director of
Family Services.
Um, let's see, I've got Melissa
Soto, who is, um, the director
of performance and
accountability.
I have Henry Sandals, who is my
um deputy secretary of
operations. I have Ramona
Martinez, who is my deputy
general counsel. I have Tisha
Mays who is our HR director.
Um, I have Jessica Preston who
works in our comms team.
I have Jennifer.
Webber, who is new to the
department, 2 weeks and she is
my director of public outreach.
Did I get that right?
Public affairs, overseeing comms
and legislative. Um, let's see
who else do I have, I can't see
back there. Oh, I want to
introduce one of our newer
employees also, that is, um,
Lisa Hamilton, who is our
director of education.
Next to her is Don Walters, who
is the director of the Office of
Advocacy?
And next to her is, give me a
moment, Par Brooks, who is the
newest member to our team, and
she is our director of workforce
performance and
Workforce development. She does
all of the training for us in
the department.
And I think I got everybody
who's here, I hope. So that's a
lot of people, but um, a lot
going on at the department and
it takes some really dedicated
staff to do that work and I'm
grateful. Um,
In addition to that, you know,
we're really been focused on
workforce recruitment,
retention, that's been a
priority for us over the last
year. Um, one of the things that
we talk about a lot and I wanted
to make sure and address it
today was social workers, right?
We hear that all the time, like,
CYFD does not have enough social
workers, and I agree, um, you
know, we're working with the
universities. We're also working
with some out of state
universities to really figure
out how do we build that
pipeline and get more social
workers.
in the department. We currently
have 284 employees with a
master's or bachelor's in social
work, um, that number is
continuing to rise. Um, one of
the things that I'm really
excited about from grow funding
was last year the legislature
appropriated some growth funding
for us. That was very specific
to retention of licensed social
workers. Um, so what we did with
that funding is we provided them
with 10% temporary salary
increase to thank.
them for their dedication to the
department to thank them for
being a licensed social work and
really to try to encourage more
individuals to really go down
that path. Um, we have a lot of
social workers in the
department, as I said, 284 of
those 129 of them are actually
licensed. So our hope is really
to work with those additional
social workers to help them
achieve their license. Um, we're
doing a program where we will
bring somebody in to do
supervision with.
will pay for the license, um,
for the testing and really
trying to work with them to
obtain that license while still
trying to recruit more license,
more social workers to the
department. So that was part of
the growth funding. I'm
grateful. Um, I think the staff
was incredibly grateful, um,
that doesn't diminish the role
of others in the department,
right? We have um counselors, we
have case workers, we have so
many others that work so hard
that are just as deserving, um,
but the language is very
specific to.
target social workers and so we
did. We've also recently had a
rapid hire. So, um, end of
January we did a large rapid
hire, and I was really um
excited with the results of
that. Um, we had over
400 people, I believe it was 286
individuals who came in person
to Albuquerque at Expo to
interview for jobs at CYFD and
then another 111 who around the
state went into one of their
local workforce development
offices, um, and interviewed
virtually for positions at the
department, so I know we hear
constantly people don't want to
work for CYFD. Well, there are
400 New Mexicans who do, and so
we were excited to interview
them as of.
Yesterday we've made 128 offers
to people to come into the
department and so um we're
excited about that.
Um, this next chart shows really
where we are with our vacancy
rate at CYFD, um, so that has
continued to um.
Hold steady, basically it's
where we are in the department.
So overall we're at about a 27%
vacancy rate, um, it has gone
down, um, and then it continues
to rise. We still struggle a
little bit with retention for
employees, and that's one of the
areas we're focusing on, but I
think, you know, one of the
important things to look at is
after the offers go out to
everybody. We're looking at
about a 23.9% vacancy rate after
the rapid hire, um, so we'll be
doing.
more targeting interviewing and
we're looking at some of the
resumes for individuals that
didn't get hired that applied to
see if there's other positions
that maybe they're a better fit
for, um, and see if we can still
work some of those individuals
who are excited to work for CYFD
into the department in some
capacity.
So as I mentioned, we have Pilar
Brooks who um has recently
joined the department in really
developing a new way to do our
training. Um, we want to really
focus on what is needed. I think
that really drives our retention
and people who come into the
department and don't necessarily
stay for long periods of time,
um, and so Pilar is really
focusing on that and you guys
can take time to read this at
your leisure. I won't go through
all the different things that
are happening in the department,
but I think.
a couple of things that I really
want to focus on is um what our
partnership with New Mexico
Highlands University, um, they
received a federal grant to
train and develop workers for
child welfare agencies and so
right now they have the grant to
do 125 workers are doing cohorts
of 25 to really work with them
on um trauma training and really
building their skills and
Trauma informed practices and
worker well-being, which I think
is really important for the type
of work that they do. Um, we're
hoping to expand our partnership
with New Mexico Highlands
University to really help focus
on those employees who are not.
Workers to be able to provide
them training that will lead
towards a child welfare
certification, so they won't
have a degree in anyway or um in
social work but really giving
them some of that coursework
that is so important to helping
them to understand the work that
they're doing and working with
families and so, um, that's one
thing and then the other thing I
want to highlight is just really
the way we're doing our training
now. We used to bring the staff
to Albuquerque for long periods
of time for training and we
hired or we're in the process of
hiring regional trainers that
will be in all of the regions
and available to staff, you
know, in their offices or in
that region and doing more on
the job training with those
trainers locally, um, so that
they're working side by side
with that staff in their
communities and helping them and
so we're doing um 5, the 5
regions and 3 trainers in each
region to work with those staff.
Um, and then I'll let you look
at the rest of our training plan
and answer any questions that
you may have.
Um, also new to the department
is our Office of Advocacy, so we
started that in January. We took
our office of um
Our Office of Constituent
Services, um, and then kind of
combine that with some advocacy
work and Don Walters, who had
been one of our children's court
attorneys is in that role, um,
and working in that area. Um,
they've done amazing work just
since July and setting that up,
so they work in areas they
handle youth grievances. They
take calls from foster parents,
um, they work with our staff
when they have questions, um,
they just want to make sure that
constituents, foster families,
advocates that their voices
heard and they.
have an avenue into the
department to resolve those
cases. They have specialists
that work on education issues
and they work closely with our
Department of Education. They
work on bids for school, um,
children, and they just work to
really resolve issues and so
they've been really successful
thus far, um, we're tracking
what that looks like so we can
know how many cases are coming
in, when our time frame is for
resolving those cases and
ensuring that individuals have
opportunities.
They also have a couple of staff
that focus on immigration and we
have some contracts so that we
could um refer people out for
assistance on immigration and
protective services on legal
cases. So, um,
That is Don, who I introduced
you to, um, just a couple of
minutes ago.
Our Office of Education is not
necessarily new, but expanded.
So CYFD, as you know, has their
own school district and we have
a superintendent who operates
the two high schools that we
have both Aztec Youth Academy
and Foothills High School. Those
are both
Um
High schools with under CYFD's
purview and those serve kids who
are adjudicated and in our
facilities both at the John Paul
Taylor Center in Las Cruces and
at YDDC in Albuquerque. So we
took that superintendent
position and we expanded the
responsibilities, um, so that
that individual could really
focus on education for all kids
at CYFD whether there have been
adjudicated and they're in the
juvenile justice system or their
kids in state custody and care.
And the reason that
that is important is because our
caseworkers are also responsible
for conducting the IEPs with the
kids that they're working with,
the bids so that they can stay
in their district.
Transportation issues, that is
huge among children in state
custody when they moved from,
you know, one district to
another, and how do they get
transport, transported to their
home school. So Lisa has been
working on those issues. She was
previously a superintendent. She
worked at publication department
for quite some time and I'm
excited to say.
that she was one of our foster
parents, um, a while back and so
has experience um in the foster
system and so she has brought a
ton of knowledge to the
department and working across
all areas, um, again, I'll let
you look at kind of the
successes and what we're doing.
I just want to point out a
couple of things, um, our high
schools have an incredible
success rate for diplomas across
um those schools. Um, I know
this says um 55%, that is a
type.
We are really happy to say that
81% of the kids in our high
schools, um, obtain their GED or
diploma, um, upon completion of
these programs, um, we're also
working to figure out, you know,
how do we then expand that so
that they can continue their
education through a community
college and it's something that
we're working on. Um, so that is
what our new Office of Education
is doing.
Um, and then I just really
wanted to highlight our
behavioral health, um, under the
direction of Elizabeth Hamilton,
they've really looked at, you
know, how do we expand and
figure out what we're doing with
behavioral health. And it's not
just behavioral health for kids
in state custody. CYFD is the
entity that is responsible for
behavioral and mental health,
um, across the state for all
children. And so they work
closely with the healthcare
authority with the Department of
Health, um, but really working.
expanding those services. We
have an open fun pool that
serves children in the state
that do not have, um, Medicare,
Medicaid or um private insurance
and so to date there have been
1500 children served through
that fund pool, um, and there
are other areas, one that I
really wanna highlight is the
work that they've done over the
last year for high fidelity
wraparound services. Um, we have
13 providers, um, 6 more.
sites are currently in the
training process to become
providers, and we've grown our
facility facilitators in July of
23. There were 26 facilitators
across the state, um, in August
of 24, that number has grown to
63 facilitators, so they've done
an incredible job in kind of
moving that forward and
identifying and working with
those um individuals.
The next slide that you have
available to you is a recap of
the $20 million that was
appropriated. Um, there's been
lots of questions about how that
money was appropriated and
spent and this is kind of the
detail of what that is. So, um,
many of those are expansion
programs in some of our rural
communities and across the state
of services that they currently
have for children and they are
expanding those to serve more
children about 4th of those are.
new programs that have been set
up with new providers across the
state, um, and that was done
through an RFI for providers to
be able to fund them.
Lastly, I'll talk to you about a
program Family Services. So I
know there's a lot of
controversy about setting up a
new division or a new program at
CYFT. This is not new. All of
this is work that is currently
happening at CYFD. It's been
happening for years. It's been
budgeted for as Rachel pointed
out, it's not new money, it's
not new FTEs. These people were
doing these jobs. It's really
for us streamlining how that
happens and giving it.
its own key code so that we can
track it. We can say this is how
much the state is investing in
prevention and intervention
services, and we can really look
at that data and determine what
is our return on investment? How
many kids are we serving? What
are we doing for prevention and
intervention, and it's not
scattered across different
divisions within CYFD and really
trying to piece together how
effective are those services.
This will really give us the
opportunity to look at that
data, to look at
that budget and to really hold
it all together so we can see if
the prevention and intervention
services that the department has
already been funded for and
already been providing are
actually being successful and so
I'm just asking that you give
consideration to isolating that
money into one P code, um, so
that we can better track it and
know how that is being spent.
Um, I think there were questions
earlier about the multi-level
response.
Um, and I
Out that that work has been
happening. It's been under a
different name at CYFD. It's
Family outreach. Um, they did
set that up. It was allocated,
the law went into effect in 2020
and funding was allocated, that
program was then set up.
Unfortunately, after shortly
after the program was developed
in July. Um, there was a stay at
home order under COVID and it
did was not as successful and
people were not out there as
quickly as need be, um, but they
did start the family outreach
program. It was the first phase
or the first track, as they
called it of multi-level
response and current
participation is 180 families,
um,
Family services now working on
track 2. They contracted with
Casey Family Services to really
come in to help develop the
program, right? So many times we
just hire people and send them
forward to do a program and
sometimes it's successful,
sometimes it's not, and this is
a really important area, um, to
really meet families where they
are and provide them services
and so they've worked closely
with Casey to really develop
what that program needs to look
like. We have since.
hosted the positions and we are
going to be piloting that
program in San Juan County,
where there um seems to be a
high need, um, and then we will
do a program evaluation after 3
months and 6 months to really
look at how we're implementing
that and ensure that we don't
need to make any changes, um,
and then we'll look at the next
level or the next area that we
really need to pilot that
program. Um, the rest of this
she just really details the
programs that were being done at
CYFD that have now been.
Consolidated under family
services, um, and I tried to
give you information on, you
know, participation of those
families or counties that were
serving them in and a brief
description of what those
programs do.
All right, our next slide, as we
said, really talks about the
budget request and so the
request for CYFD is 412.7
million.
There's been a lot of
conversation that I've heard
where they feel like there has
just been lots of money poured
into the department that really
hasn't provided the results that
anybody wants to see. And I
think as Rachel pointed out um
earlier, um.
From 2021 to current date.
There's been an increase of
about $33.7 million to the
department. Um, but a lot of
that was not new money that the
department was then expected to
expand to really improve
programs or start up new
programs, um, a huge percentage
of that almost 70% was for the
compensation package that the
legislature appropriated for
state employees.
And so that was worked into
House Bill 2 for salaries and
compensation, um, across the
board that was given to Allstate
employees, so the increase to
the department for services was
not nearly what it looks like on
paper when you look at what that
infusion of general fund money
has been over the years, so I
just kind of wanted to point
that out so we could kind of
level set, you know, where we
are in the department and what
we have received as far as
funding for new programs or
services.
So.
Um, the budget request that
we're asking for, um, it's a
6.1% overall increase, um,
including 37.7% of general fund.
So, oh, I'll move my next
slides, you can see that.
Um, this kind of details where
that money would be going, um,
so as you can see the first ask
is for federal funds and we're
gonna talk about that, um, at
length and try to explain and
understand kind of the federal
fund allocation and what the
concern is, um, with
The department and the drawdown
of federal funds. Um, as they
said earlier, there's funding
available for those 101
positions. Those positions were
determined based on current
caseloads and where we are, and
the caseload standards that have
been implemented through the
cabinet litigation. So in order
to meet those standards, we
determined how many employees we
need to get them to that 100%.
Um, for the caseload standards,
so it was
determined that we needed for
frontline workers about 101
workers, um, and funding. We
don't need FTEs cause as you can
see we have plenty of vacant
FTEs at the department, but we
did need funding for those
positions.
There's a $3.4 million ask that
is for the multi-service homes
that Mary Beth talked about.
That is a temporary solution for
the department for office stays.
As we've talked about so many
times, we have about 20 kids
that are typically staying in
offices for lack of appropriate
placement for them. I want to
just make it clear that it's not
because we don't have beds
available. We still have beds
available for kids that
take care. We don't have the
appropriate type of placement
for some of these individuals
who might have, you know,
different trauma, higher needs,
um, that just need more specific
care than what some of our
foster families are able to
provide. So we opened up um AMI
in May of last year and Hope
House in, I believe, December of
last year, so it's been open a
couple months, and those are
multi-service homes that are
staffed 24 hours a day by.
Providers with CYFD does not
staff those, we contract with
individuals to do that, um, for
them to provide an environment
for these youths to live with
services for them, um, 24 hours
a day, 7 days a week. So while
we're doing that, we are also
building out our foster care
plus program and we are using
the Oklahoma model, they started
a program several years ago,
Oklahoma was also in litigation,
and this was one of.
the efforts that they did to
help with their foster parent
retention and recruitment and
with ending their office days
and so we're working with them,
um, individuals who had been um
at Oklahoma's child welfare
agency during the lawsuit have
since started up, um, their own
business and are interested in
coming out and helping New
Mexico to really launch our
Foster Care Plus. And what that
is, is taking um foster
families, were you working right
now with
Current foster families, um, who
are interested in maybe
receiving more training and
wraparound services, and I think
the wrap around services is what
is really key to making this
successful. So they would
receive additional training,
they would receive wrap around
services, so that when they take
a child who has higher needs
into their custody, they know
that they have that additional
support and somebody who can be
there with, with services 24/7
to help them through, cause
typically.
what we see is these children
get placed, and then when they
escalate, the family doesn't
necessarily know what to do or
who to call, and then they're
just like, I can't do this, and
they then want to um have us
pick up that child and so we're
hoping that if we can provide
more services to them, give them
community supports, not just
department support, um, that we
can really start to see success
with some of those kids who were
placed in office, um, and really
try to um work our way away from
the multi-service.
but that is what we're using
right now to really try to
support staff and not having to
do office days. Um,
The next amount there, um, as
Mary Beth said was the duet and
GST rates of $3.2 million. Um,
there's a $3 million ask for
expansion of our training
academy for those regional
trainers so that they can be
available to staff in their home
office locations, um, to help
them with training and on the
job training and mentorship.
Um, those regional trainers will
also work with our community
partners and our foster parents,
so we moved foster parent
training under our workforce
development and training unit so
that they can then be a support
to foster parents for training
as well and not putting that
responsibility on our placement
workers who are responsible for
recruitment and retention of
foster parents, um, and not
having them do the training.
Um, there's additional funding
1.7 million, um, that is for
positions under the Kevin S
compliance and so right now it's
a department, we have one
individual, Biancaoper, who is
responsible for making sure that
across the department we're
meeting or working towards all
of the Kevinness requirements,
and there's over 100
requirements at the department
is responsible for, so, um,
bringing in some additional
support for that being.
and people can, who can really
do some program audit and
looking to make sure that we're
making progress, um, and then,
um, filling a few positions at
the receiving center in
Albuquerque, where kids under
the age of 12 come um before
they are out in placement and so
fully staffing that for some of
those kids.
There's a $0.6 million
for our mobile unit. So one of
the things in family services is
really getting out to those
rural communities and providing
services to families, um, tax
and rev, um, had a mobile unit.
It was a truck in 1/5 wheel that
they used to use as a mobile MBD
office, um, and since they've
gone to small kiosks, it's no
longer needed, so that they did
an agency transfer, um, and gave
us that unit with the truck, and
so
You're retrofitting it to be a
mobile resource center that can
go into communities that don't
have a family resource center
and provide services to families
and so that is just to maintain
that unit and um buy gas and
make sure that it can be out on
the road as needed. There's a
half million dollar for cultural
activities for tribal children
in care. Um, there was an
appropriation for that a couple
of years ago. It didn't get
fully expended, but I still
believe that it's critically
important for us.
To do that, um, we're asking for
additional money to do that, um,
one of the events that they did,
which I think could be a great
event moving forward was kind of
a a cultural awareness, um,
convening or summit in
Albuquerque, where they brought
in um different individuals to
talk about different cultural
activities. They brought in the
foster families and the kids to
really partake in some of those
activities, um, and I thought it
was a great idea, um, we just,
you know, needed more time to do
the marketing for that and to to
bring people.
in, but I think providing them
to um in keeping them connected
to their culture is really
important to them when they're
in custody with the state.
So those are the budget requests
that um are asked for in our
Roll up
Um, the next slide, I guess,
really details as they already
pointed out to you, you know,
where the differences are
between the executive and the
legislative branch, and as you
can see that, you know, the
total percent increase on the
executive side is 2.4 million
and the legislative um request
basically keeps the department
flat, and then as they
mentioned, the biggest
difference there is really not
um isolating that funding to
family services.
Um, this next slide is the
supplemental and deficiency
recommendations, um, I think
they went over that earlier.
Biggest difference is really the
deficiency that the department
had last year, which was $12.3
million in protective services,
um, and anticipated to be about
$20 million this year. I will
say that last year when we first
um found out about that
deficiency, it was much higher
and then as um spending, you
know, didn't materialize in some
of the contracts that they
didn't spend that money, we were
able to lower that deficit.
The department did revert
funding last year, um, and we'll
talk a little bit about that.
One of the requests that I had
last year was for program to
program budget authority. And
the reason that was important to
me at the time was really coming
in and taking a look at the
department and understanding how
it was operating, really
understanding our ASD department
and our budget and where that
money has been allocated to, um,
and giving us the opportunity as
we were reorganizing the
department to
be able to reorganize the
funding where it needed to be
with a different programs, um.
You'll see that there were
reversions in our protective,
and not in protective services
in our juvenile justice and our
behavioral health, and had we
had the authority to reallocate
that funding to protective
services our deficit would have
been closer to about $5 million
I believe, um.
Last fiscal year. Um, so we're
really looking to um.
clear that deficiency, um, I
know that there's been
conversation about holding that
on the books while we really
look at where the federal funds
are and figuring out why we're
not drawing down what we're
eligible to draw down. That's
been the conversation, um, but
that has other effects on the
state as a whole and not just
our department, um, carrying a
deficit on your books has other
implications, you know, all the
way up to affecting the bond
rating for the state and so I
truly believe that that.
It is there, um, if we were to
be able to go down and draw down
additional federal funds for
some reason that funding would
still come into the state and it
would revert back to the general
fund as we roll that out. And so
it really wouldn't affect the
money that we're able to draw
down from federal funds, but it
would have a negative impact on
the state as a whole. Um,
So there's an executive
recommendation of 32.8 that
includes that deficit, um, and
that is not included in the LFC
recommendation. Um, if we don't
receive funding this year and
we're forced to make decisions
on that $20 million deficit, um,
it would likely require us in
this last quarter to really look
at services and how are we going
to recover that $20 million over
that period of time and what
needs to be um eliminated in
order to do that.
Um, the next slide is our
information technology
recommendation, and I know that
representative Pettigrew had
questions about the sea with and
as it's called now, New Mexico
impact project, um.
Over the years this
appropriation was in 2018. He
was correct about that. It was
an initial allocation to the
department to really just do
planning for a new system, um,
so at that point in time, I
believe the department went out
to go look at what that system
could look at. They, I think
we're working with Epics at the
time as a vendor to be able to
do that. It was later determined
that they could not meet the
needs of what needed to to be
implemented, um, the federal
government.
then laid out some guidelines
for a new CS project and
The recommendations and the
requirements of what that needed
to be, um, at that point, the
department um received funding,
um, they received one time
funding, I believe that was in
22, and that was for
implementation of the program
and so, um, implementation
started um.
I believe we entered into a
contract in November of 20, what
year are we? 3. So in November
of when I came to the department
in May of 23, um, they were in
conversation. They had issued an
RFP for this system, and there
was in they were in conversation
with a vendor to provide that
services. Um, we looked at that,
there was a slight delay because
Madam Secretary, I know we have
a number of folks on the the
list for questions.
We can address it then we'll go
through.
I will move past you, um, OK, so
let's see, then the last thing,
let's see, I want to talk to you
about is just the reversion. I
just want to really quickly talk
about the reversions because
when you look at it, um, it
looks like there are high
reversions from the department,
but a large portion of those
were in 21 and 22, 1723 million
of reversions, but that was
because of one time COVID
funding that the state received,
and so COVID funding was
is used for a lot of the
programs that were taking place
at the department and so general
fund was sent back to the state
in general fund because COVID
funds were used. Um, last year,
a reversion in was about $7
million and that was from
protective services and
behavioral health funding.
Lastly, I just want to talk
about the federal funding, so I
believe you have the graph here.
So this graph shows historically
the federal funding and what
that has looked like over the
years. So if you look at that,
you can see that even back to
2020 we were bringing in about
$78 million. The next year, $77
million. But as you can see, the
projections or what was
budgeted actually increased over
those next few years all the way
from 80 million up to $100
million. So that was a
Rejection of what we expected to
bring in, but as you can see
over the years that amount was
never realized. They did not
realize that cash over the
years. And so it continues at
about 80 million and then you
see a drop of about 11 million
in fiscal year 24.
That was due to several things.
One, there were 3 federal grants
that the state had that expired.
Those grants were finished and
there was no additional funding
to draw down. That was about
$3.7 million. Um, also, the SSBG
funding that we bring down, we
had new staff within the
department that was really
looking at the methodology. How
are we determining what we were
eligible for, and they had
questions.
The person who previously did it
was gone and they were really
trying to figure out how are we
eligible for that money, so they
rolled the grant funding from
that fiscal year to the next,
um, so that they could figure
out the methodology, so that $5
million was not um drawn down in
fiscal year 24, but it is
available to us now. They have
figured out the methodology and
they'll be drawing down that 5
million plus the additional $5
million that's available this
fiscal year to.
us for that federal grant, um,
and then the difference that
we're really talking about is
the $1.4 million entitled 4E.
Those are an administrative
dollars.
And so we're looking to see, you
know, what that cause of that
decline was we did switch our
vendors for our random moment
time sampling, so, um, that
could have um accounted for some
of that decrease, but we also in
that same time period increased
our Medicaid admin drawdowns by
$2 million. So although we lost
1.4 in the federal, we increased
our Social Security. And so, you
know, because
we've had that conversation on
and off for a long period of
time. We worked to try to find
somebody to come in and do an
audit of our 4E funds and so um
through Casey Family Services,
they provided a contractor to
us, um, by the name of Don
Winston in your packet, you have
information on Dan. He's a
consultant with over 4 decades
of state and federal experience,
and you can read his bio. I
won't take time to read that to
you. Um, but Dawn provided a
report.
and he is available right now,
um, to speak with us and I think
he's on there now to talk to you
guys briefly about his findings
in his review of our federal um
drawdowns, so, um, Don, if
you're there, I'll turn it over
to you if that's OK. we'll,
we'll take, I think we'll, we'll
jump into the questions or let's
finish up on the presentation on
your end, Madam Secretary. With
that, I am done and I'll stand
for questions. Great, thank you.
Thank you for the detail.
Thank you for your staff who's
here today. Uh, we'll go first
to ranking member Chatfield and
then Representative Silver.
Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Uh
Whenever a child is taken
In or out of a home.
What, where do you
do an assessment. How do you
assess what they've been
through, what are their needs,
what is appropriate placement
for them. How, where do you go
about assessing that?
Um, Mr. Chair Representative
Chatfield, so an assessment is
done of all children coming into
custody. So once um it is
determined by law enforcement
that a child is coming into
custody, um, they're taken in
with the investigator and an
assessment is done by the
investigator, including our
behavioral health team, so they
will staff to look at that
individual, um, to determine
what the needs are before um
sending them for placement.
Where's this done at?
It is typically done in the CYFD
office.
your statewide office.
Um
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Uh, Mr.
Chair, how much do you pay
foster parent?
Um, Mr. Chairman, I'm sorry, I
didn't hear the question.
A foster parents, how much do
they get paid?
Um, Mr. Chairman, Representative
Chatfield, that depends on the
different levels that the child
needs and the age of the child,
so it can range anywhere from
$400 a month, I think is on the
lowest end, I have that I
apparently have a sheet in here
that.
It's gonna be handed to me. All
right. So the, um, the lowest
rate in a daily rate, um, is
2091 per day, and that goes up
to um a maximum for specialized
foster home of 2908 a day. And
then there are other rates
depending if they're level 3
placement and needs specialty
and most of those are medical,
um, maybe they have a feeding
tube or they have some sort of
paralysis and they need special
care, um, and then we have the.
Arca rate that can go up to
$6000 a month. So,
you know, I've, I've been a
daddy, I've been a granddad.
I've been a foster parent.
Winning
80 a day.
And, and that includes food and
clothing and.
And everything that that child
needs, it means that that foster
parent can't have any outside
job because they have to haul
them.
Uh, you know, we used to haul 2
hours to Las Vegas to, to see,
see a therapist.
And so that took all day long to
get there and get back.
Some of the foster children, you
had to go to school with them to
make sure they didn't.
To attack the teacher, uh,
Oh
I, I'm just thinking about you
saying that you have, you're
keeping kids in the office.
Because you don't have enough.
Foster parents
I mean, $29 a day.
Um, Mr. Chairman Representative
Chatfield, there is a proposal
and in our budget request, um,
aside from what we just talked
about now, um, there is a
request for additional funding
to double the rates for foster
parents up to 90 up to a cap of
$900 a month.
Um
Mr. Chair, what does a, what
does a therapist get paid?
Um, Mr. Chairman, Representative
Chapville, do you mean a
therapist that works for CYFD.
Yes, Mr. Chairman, that's what I
mean. That's what we're talking
about right now. Um, yes, I
think that just really depends
on the um experience of that
therapist. Um, I believe they
make anywhere from 35 to 52 $53
an hour.
How much a day?
Mm, depending if they're at the
$55.
$400 a day
so $400 a day.
And they get to go home and
then.
They go over there and talk to
the child and then they go home.
The foster parent has the child.
They're buying their clothes,
they're buying their cereal,
they're buying food for supper.
They're uh
Taking them to therapy, they're
buying gas, providing a car.
And they get $29 a day.
I mean, I, I don't see that. I
mean, I am astonished.
Uh
I, I don't know how we
People care about children.
But we need to enable them.
To do something about it. We
need to make it where they can
do something about it. I.
I mean, I think that's
Heard of or saw the governor on
TV say she's gonna try to get a
raise for foster parents.
You know, $30 a day, is that
where we're going? I mean, uh,
it, it.
That is not acceptable, and that
is maybe the root of the
problem. Uh, if you're a, a
professional person, you have a
great job.
You care about children, you
say, I would give up my job if,
just to help that child or to
help that little family of
children.
You can't do it for $29 a day.
You can't pay for their food and
clothing.
Um, OK.
Thank you for taking this job.
It's a hard job, but you're who
they sent out here to answer
questions to me and you're who
I'm gonna ask him, OK?
I, I appreciate you, but I'm
still gonna ask the question. No
problem. I will be here to
answer, and I agree with you, it
is not enough money for them,
which is why we're hoping at
least to double that, I mean it
doesn't even get close. I mean,
it doesn't even get close.
It needs to be a lot more than
that. It needs to be
Equal to if someone gives up a
job because they love children
and they want to work with
children, they should.
We paid enough to
Seemed like they had a job,
right?
And and to go to training and to
get better at what they do and
uh.
So, yeah, anyway, I don't know
what to say about that.
Uh, I will take whatever funding
and apply it to those rates that
you want to give us. OK, uh,
let's talk about that. What is
your, what is, what, what was
your funding last year?
Um, Mr. Chairman, Representative
Chatfield, it is worked into the
protective services budget and
part of that is a federal match,
um, but we can sit down and talk
about what you think is an
appropriate amount that they
should make and then we can back
in and tell you based on the
different levels for those kids,
how would we, how much it would
cost to get to that level sorry,
uh, ranking member Chatfield, I
know Miss uh Doctor Garcia wants
to add to that. Oh, Mr. Chair
Representative one key point
related to foster care.
reimbursement rates right now in
CYFD's budget, it's roughly $60
million in maintenance payments.
Note that maintenance payments
are the portion I mentioned
earlier that's reimbursed at the
federal FMAP rate, so 75% of
that is picked up, uh, if the
child is eligible by federal
funds, um, I will also note, um,
neither budget recommendation,
uh, includes an increase for
foster care reimbursement rates.
Um, it wasn't in the agency's
original.
You know, request, um, though
the LFC recommendation does have
this special for study.
So
Mr. Chair, I'm thinking maybe
that's the problem.
That's kind of where the rubber
meets the road is the actual
person that's interacting with
that child and the child models
their behavior. They, they're
the ones that cares for them,
feeds them, clothes them, uh,
maybe, maybe that is a, I mean,
it's a huge problem to me and uh
I don't have to understand the
entire federal budget, state
budget. My point is, I think the
money stays at the top. It
doesn't go down to the children.
And uh I'm all for people get
paid well and they're, they've
trained, they've gone to school,
they learned to, uh, something,
but some of that money needs to
get down there to those kids.
I don't, um,
Um,
how many,
Kids do you have in custody?
Um, Mr. Chairman, Representative
Chatfield, currently we have
about 20,040 kids in custody,
um.
You
40.
Mr. Chairman, how many employees
do you have?
Totally.
Um, Mr. Chairman, Representative
Chatfield, we have 2,088 kids,
so we have increased that
number, um, how many employees
do I have? We have about
1400 employees right now, I
believe, 1800 employees.
1928 after the rapid hire.
I many employees yeah close to
2000 employees. We do. So you've
got a one employee for every
child.
Yes.
Roughly roughly in different
areas, right, because a lot of
those employees are in juvenile
justice or behavioral health. So
in protective services, I think
we have right around 1000 FTEs,
is that right, Valerie? 1100
FTEs and some of them are just
getting paid $29 a day. So not
like we have probably 2 children
for every employee and
protective service.
Medicaid.
How does our Medicaid, I, I've
See all a lot of agencies say we
need more Medicaid, we need more
people to be on Medicaid. How
does our Medicaid rates compare
to Texas, Arizona, Colorado, or
do we reimburse at about the
same level as other states? Mr.
Chairman Representative
Chatfield, I think that would be
a question that probably
Secretary Armijo from the
Healthcare Authority could
discuss with you. I don't know
exactly how we compare our
Medicare rates to other states
around us. I can get you
information on that.
Uh, you know,
Representative Chatfield, um,
LFC did a program evaluation on
this back in 2023, and part of
it is what has in in uh
motivated you all to make the
significant increases in the
Medicaid rates, um, the target
is around 150% of the Medicare
rate, um, though I will uh
caveat that with there are some
rates that aren't comparable
because Medicare doesn't provide
them, example, Medi Medicare
does not deliver uh.
s for children, um, but, uh, uh,
each day is targeting 150%.
So
Mr. Chair, oh,
I'm sorry. Go ahead
please. Thank you, Mr. Chair,
um, I just wanted to know, um,
now that I've lost my train of
thought, um.
Oh, thank you very much. The
Rachel just mentioned, um,
basically it's behavioral
health, um.
Rates that don't have a Medicare
equivalent in the healthcare
authority budget this year, um,
so you've all adopted LFC
currently and they have, I
believe it's about $5.8 million
in there for these non-medicare,
uh, behavioral health service
rates. So that will also assist
with, with some of these, um,
uh, provider rates.
Um,
our state Medicaid.
He's 150% of Medicare.
But we don't know what they pay
in Colorado or some place. I
just know that some providers
are really
Talking about leaving the state
because they say our Medicaid
doesn't pay enough.
Um, Mr. Chair Representative
Chatfield, we have done some
analysis and I think we can
follow up with you from our HCA
analyst who has looked at, for
example, comparisons with
private pay rates and that may
be what you're referencing that
kind of additional comparison to
what private insurance may pay.
Last question, I promise.
AMI
Uh, many years ago you all had
to
Several group homes and they,
they were contractors that, that
did that work and they come upon
some problems and uh then you
didn't have any and then last
year you didn't have any and now
you do have some and I think you
need those.
How do you decide who is able to
put in a group home, what are
the qualifications to put in a
group home, and what are the
qualifications to live in a
group home.
Um, Mr. Chair Representative
Chatfield, so we're not
necessarily looking to expand
group homes. Um, we're really
looking to have kids in private
placement in a homelike setting,
um, these were um situations
where we were really trying to
figure out how do we find a
bridge between office days and
them getting in placement and it
really was um working with these
providers who were already
providing services in the state,
um, who had capacity to open the
f
in Albuquerque, um, in a quick
manner. We really were looking
trying to get something stood up
quickly to get kids out of
offices and into a more stable
environment.
So, Mr. Chair, that was not my
last question. Do you not have
children that reach a certain
age, and, and they're people are
really at a certain point,
they're not.
Really want to adopt them, and
they, they're really, some of
them are kind of big and tough,
and, and every family just in
out there wanting to bring them
into their home. Uh, you also
have
The boy girl issue, uh, as far
as placement, um,
So you don't have any children
that you think you're gonna need
a group home in the future,
yeah.
And I know your, your first
choice is to put them in a, in a
home with a mom and a dad and,
and, uh
But my experience is there's
some kids that just don't fit
into that. I know that if you go
to right not far from where I
live, there's Boys ranch in
Texas. I've, uh, some of my good
friends that worked there. They
have
Huge, uh,
Uh, rooms and
places for, for the boys and
they, they
They do all kinds of horseback
things and they learn trades,
and they do wonderful work with
those kids, but their group
home, you don't foresee that New
Mexico has any need for that
sometimes. Um, Mr. Chairman,
Representative Chatfield, um, at
this point, I believe that with
the AMI and Hope House.
You know, we have about 20 kids
that are typically staying in
offices and so I don't see a
need for any additional group
homes. I really want to give our
foster care plus an opportunity
to see if that can work to try
to find these um kids, um, but
we do have some kids who are
older, you know, that age out of
foster care, um, you know,
fostering connections was
created several years back to
really help so we don't have
that cliff effect, so kids who
are aging out still have the
opportunity to have services
with the state to still have
that mentorship and really
working with those individuals
that are, you know, 17 years old
to really try maybe some
transitional living or, um, you
know, independent living with
them while they're still with
the department, so we can help,
um, you know, to move them
towards adulthood and living on
their own.
Thank you, ma'am.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Thank you
for taking my questions. $29 a
day is not enough. Agreed. Thank
you very much, ranking member
Chatfield. We're gonna go next
to Representative Silva, please.
Thank you, chair, and thank you
secretary. Um, I'm wondering
this CYFD is doing a lot.
And if you could name like one
or two levels, levers that you
That you needed to pull in order
to make significant gains for
better outcomes at CYFD. What
would those levers be?
Thank you Chair.
Um.
Mr. Chair Representative Silva,
um, I believe one of the biggest
issues that has been challenging
to solve is really the
workforce, um, not having enough
qualified individuals, um, a bit
wanting to come to the
department, um, so if we could
somehow fix that and really
fully staff the department with
individuals who, you know, we're
not constantly having that
turnover. It takes about 6
months before an individual can
fully carry a caseload. And so
when they
come and they stay 3 or 4 months
and you go through that training
and then they leave. You have to
start all over and that burden
of those additional cases falls
on the staff that are there,
which is why I think we have so
much turnover, so I think that
would be the first lover is
really figuring out how do we
get to the department to have a
stable workforce, um, that can
meet the needs of the kids that
it serves. Thank you, uh, and
thank you, chair. Uh, so, of the
2000 or so staff that you have,
how many um super
advise other people. Thank you,
chair. Um, so, um, Mr. Chairman
Representative Silva, so it's
not quite 2000 staff. It was
about 2000 kids, but we have,
you know, in most areas,
especially in protective
services, um, it is a 5 to 1, so
you have 5 frontline workers and
then they have a supervisor and
then, you know, there's 5
supervisors and then they have a
manager and so um that is the
structure.
Thank you, Secretary, and thank
you, Chair, and of those
supervisors, um,
Could you name how many have any
grievances filed against them or
I know there might be personnel,
but this number, like, what's
the rate of grievance, uh from
managers to managers from staff.
Um, Mr. Chairman Representative
Silva, I don't have that
information available, and I'm
happy to get back to you with um
some statistics.
Thank you and thank you, chair,
and then of
That do you, um, does CYFD do
exit interviews for people
before they leave the
department. Thank you, Chair.
Um, Mr. Chairman Representative
Silva. Yes, they do do exit
interviews. We are looking at
maybe a third party vendor to do
those interviews with us so that
staff feel more comfortable in
having that conversation so we
can get, you know, more of those
interviews done cause not if
they're voluntary and sometimes
people just aren't comfortable
doing them, um, but I think if
they had a vendor that was not
associated with the department
and then we could get those.
reports on a timely basis so we
can better understand the
reasons. I think that would be
um, good. Yeah, I, I would
agree. Thank you, chair. Um, I,
and I wonder if part of the
outcomes in future.
Studies is also studying the,
the workforce, like how many um
grievances might were issued or
um dealt with in the, in this
fiscal year. And um how many
people had exit interviews from
all of those that left. I think
those might be important metrics
to look at. Um, if you're saying
like this is an important lever
to pull and as someone who's
managed many people and um and
just done that culture.
strategy for breakfast. And if
there is not a good culture
there, um, it, that like that's
gonna erode the very thing
you're saying is critical. So
thank you, chair. Thank you.
Thank you very much,
Representative Silva. Next,
we're gonna go to represent
Luhan and then representative
Baca.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. um, and I
will just say like what.
I think I'm hearing in what
representative chat, thank you
for your your service. Thank you
to all your staff for your
service.
Um, to New Mexico, um, because
it it you are.
Just as much in service as we
are here sitting with you, um.
I think I, I think I I I heard
some of the questions that I
was, was, I was uh uh going
towards by Representativesila,
but I'll expand just a little
bit regarding the um.
The pay increases for, um,
especially for our social social
workers, I know that this was an
issue. Did you work with Spo?
Uh state personnel office for
alignment of those positions and
salaries in such madam chair.
Mr. Chair, sorry.
Um, Mr. Chairman, Representative
Lu Han, um, there was a study
that was conducted last year,
was it last year, um, that was
done through um LFC through
appropriation um with Spo to
look at those salaries for um
all state workers and so we've
been working with Spo to kind of
realign and and look at what our
salaries are, um, some of those
showed that we were not peeing
sufficiently. Some of them
showed that we were competitive
with our.
private sector.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. I've been
doing a bit of that myself, a
little dive into that because
I've had constituents come to
me.
being here in Santa Fe, um, I'm
working, um.
the state employees and having a
lot of them in my district, um,
and just the comparison with our
social workers and and alignment
or misalignment, if you will,
with DOH and maybe other
agencies, especially regarding
um a licensed medical and
public, uh, social workers. So.
Is there any way, have you been
working, uh, along with all with
the other agencies to to really
meet the, the alignment, Mr.
Chair.
Um, Mr. Chair, Representative
Luhan, sorry to jump in. I think
that, um, the study that was
referenced just a moment ago,
that is supposed to address
these issues statewide. So one
of the things that it's my
understanding is that it's
looking to address is the issue
that we face all too often where
you have comparable positions in
other agencies, and if the
agency you're in can't afford to
give you the increase, maybe you
jump to another agency where
you're doing the same work.
So this is supposed to address
that by collapsing the multitude
of pay bands and pay structures
that we have in the state.
And simple.
So hopefully that will, that is
being addressed right now and
I'm not sure where we are in the
implementation process, I know
it's happening, um, but I just
wanted to make sure that you are
aware that that is something
that we're hoping to address as
a state. Um, so we don't have
that popping between agencies.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. I, I, I do
understand that, but I also have
worked in state agencies too,
and so something that um
It could take 2 weeks.
Maybe, maybe a month to get the
alignment in place and do that
sort of thing is taking us way
too long.
Um, and I just want the body to
understand that here too, and I
can imagine how stressful it's,
I know it's been stressful on
this agency as well, um,
particularly when we looked at,
uh, 2 years ago, we looked at
legislation to really address
that, but we're finding is that
misalignment until that happens,
we're kind of just, you know,
waiting for something where, you
know, there's there are
actionable um courses or courses
of action through the state,
state, um.
Personnel rules that I believe
exists that could could really
speed this along, Mister Chair,
um, I just want to bring that to
light, and I know that this is
an agency that takes, takes
action, um, when it comes,
you've been asking to anyway, so
I just hope we can get through
that, um, and be a little more
deliberate about it, and that's
not just for you, I'm uh this is
for everyone that's listening as
well, um, so that, that
addresses my salaries and
compensation, um, and what
you're talking about the, you
know, the infusion.
We heard, uh, from you as well,
but, you know, the
It's really, it's really a
thing. I know we have other
things that we're working on,
Mr. Chair, my concern to you is
that we're gonna be looking at
legislation that's going to land
here in this committee, and
there are many, there are
several different, uh, uh.
Uh, legislative initiatives that
are looking at restructuring and
reformatting this this um
agency, and at this time I know
I don't believe it's premature,
but it could be if you and if
you're not willing to respond to
it right now. Um, I'd just like
to know with as big of the is
this agency is and really as
you're working and trying to
make a lot of these improvements
and everything. Is there any
piece of legislation right now
that you are considering that
will really help you in those
efforts or change efforts, if
you will.
Mr. Chair.
Um, Mr. Chairman Representative
Luhan, um, I think there are a
couple of pieces of legislation,
um, that, you know, we're really
looking to, um, I know that
there has been conversation over
the last couple of years about
an ombudsman bill. Um, I know
that Senator Padilla dropped the
bill. I think the governor
alluded to the fact that she
wanted to create a child
protection authority. Um, it is
similar to what an ombudsman
office would do, um, but it's
not an ombudsman and so that
bill dropped, I think.
it really gives the opportunity
for an outside entity to really
help to look at some of the
concerns that individuals have
and gives them that outside
opportunity to have some place
that they can go to lodge a
complaint if they're not
comfortable doing that within
CYFD, um, but that really helps
us to really understand what
some of those issues are and fix
them. I mean, I look at it
similar to an audit when they
point out the problems, you know
where to focus your energies on
fixing, and I think this is the
same way to help us determine.
You know what needs to be looked
at are our policies and
procedures effective, you know,
are things that we're doing
leading to um harm for children
and give us that opportunity to
correct those um behaviors and
so I don't think that's a bad
thing, and I think that's
something that you know we're
considering, um, and so I think
that would, you know, really be
beneficial. All right, thank
you, Mr. Chair. That's all I
have right now. Thank you. I
appreciate the answers too.
Thank you, thank you very much,
uh, Representative Baca, and
then Representative Herndon.
think it was Sherman to thank
you, Madam Secretary.
Um, I'm gonna be kind of brief
and direct, so please don't feel
that you have to give me a.
An answer, but, um, Mr. Chair,
Madam, uh, Madam Secretary,
about 2 hours ago, we heard a uh
an estimate of about 27% vacancy
rate. OK, so my question, Mr.
Chairman and Madam Secretary is
what impact has that had on our
court or legal proceedings.
With our students or with our
children that may be somewhere
in the process of CYFD and Mr.
Mr. Chairman, Madam Secretary,
if you can talk as far as
Timelines and what impact that
has in clogging.
Or the system and making it or
kind of drawing out the time
where where kids can either be
reunited with their families.
Or there could be a separation
and they could actually be
Free for adoption or other.
Um, other outcome.
Um, Mr. Chairman Representative
Baca, I believe that does have
an effect, those vacancy rates
we have vacancy rates in our
permanency. We have vacancy
rates and placement. We have
vacancy rates, not so many now,
but we had huge vacancy rates in
our children's court attorneys
and so all of that has an effect
on that system, right? And so if
the permanency worker, you know,
doesn't get that report and then
the the court hearing could then
be delayed or postponed, or if
an attorney is double.
looked into two hearings in
different areas, one of those
has to be um vacated for them to
be able to do that. And so those
vacancy rates, um, do have an
effect on the work and the
outcomes that we have for kids.
And, and thank you, uh, Mr.
Chairman. Thank you, Madam
Secretary, can you, I mean, and
I don't need it because I know
every case is unique and
different.
But what kind of timeline are we
looking at for, for, for many of
these cases, are we talking?
A month, we're talking 30 days,
we're talking in 60 days, we're
talking 90 days.
Just to, just a ballpark you're
chairman
Mr. Chairman Representative
Baca, I think it just depends on
the situation with that child.
There are times when the
department is late and getting
that done and that could delay
it a month, 2 months. There are
also times when um there are
circumstances, for instance, if
there's reunification is the
plan and the parents are
required to participate in some
sort of a treatment.
If that's not available in their
community for them and so it's
not that they're not willing to
do it. They're just not able to
when we go back to court
sometimes the court will then
say we're gonna postpone this
case because the family has not
had the opportunity to do this,
so there are several different
things that could contribute to
a case being delayed.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman and
thank you Madam Secretary. I've
got 2.
That question is very simple and
it's really just a number.
Mr. Chairman, Madam Secretary.
How many kids are up for are
able to be adopted now. What is
the number of students or kids
that are
eligible for adoption.
Um, Mr. Chairman Representative
Baca, I want to say somewhere
around 400, but I don't know if
that's right, so give me one
second. No, I was completely
wrong, so thank you, Val, um,
208 are freed with a resource,
69 are freed without an adoptive
home right now, so, um, and then
8080 are free for guard or under
guardianship.
Thank you my question again is
this another simple how many
students are on the run or have.
You know, have basically, you
know, run away from, from this
or.
Um, Mr. Chairman Representative
Baca, I don't know the exact
number right now. Maybe Val
should just take this chair.
There are 41 youth who are
currently on the run.
Well, thank you, Mr. Chair, and
just, you know, to to echo my
colleagues.
You have a very complicated,
difficult job.
But it's a necessary job.
And I think that we need to make
sure that we complete what we're
tasked with.
And I do believe that the
resources and some of the things
have been brought up are an
essential part of that.
But I, I am like, you know, uh,
I am a little bit.
Concerned
Some of the other performance
measures and some of the other
uh areas, so, Mr. Chairman,
thank you for my questions.
Thank you. Thank you very much
representative Baca. We have
Representative Herndon, then
Representative Vincent, then
represent Ereta,
then heard it.
Thank you, Mr. Chair, and thank
you, um, Madam Secretary. I, I
just have a few things to ask
you then to comment. So with
respect to the counseling, the
counselors.
And the social workers, I'm
sorry, you indicated that you
there are 284, 129 of them are
licensed and you've been working
with Highlands University. I, I
think that's highly commendable.
We met with Highlands University
this summer, and one of the
things we talked about was the
difficulty that some students
were having and taking license
exams. And so the fact that
you're offering that training is
really good. I think that most
students have a difficult time
in taking standardized tests and
learning how to take the
test will actually help them. So
congratulations on doing that.
Now, we're looking at a
counseling compact. If we had a
counseling compact that was
passed in the state with that
help you with the social worker,
uh, shortages that you're facing
right now.
Um, Mr. Chairman, Representative
Herndon, yes, I believe that it
would help with the shortages
that we're facing.
Well, that's good to know. We're
gonna keep pushing that, Mr.
Chair, uh, Mr. Madam Secretary,
and then I just wanna, you
talked about the number of
students who were graduating in
uh who had received their GED in
your, in your care, but that was
a difficulty in taking them to
the next step, and Mr. Chair,
Madam Secretary, so we offer
this opportunity scholarship.
What do we need to do to help
you to just move them to that
next step because there's no
cost to them for that initial
training.
Um, Mr. Chairman Representative
Herndon, um, you're right, there
is not a cost for them with that
training. We're working right
now with um both CNM and um
Other community colleges along
with higher end to really figure
out, you know, how do we bring
that coursework into them at the
institution because they have to
stay there for that class work,
um, and, um, not then, you know,
put them at a disadvantage in
the work so that they can't be
successful in doing that. Um,
you know, I've seen in our
places we do have some training
for them that is, um, you know,
outside of just the normal
curriculum, such as welding or,
you know, um, auto mechanics and
things.
That would then prepare them,
um, you know, for positions
outside of that, um, but I
believe more of that trade work
um needs to be done within the
institution. Thank you, Mr.
Chair and thank you, Madam
Secretary. I totally agree with
you. Working with the unions,
they're willing to work beside
you, so I, I hope that we're
able to make that connection in
any way this legislature can
help you, uh, Mr. Chair, Madam
Secretary, you know, one of the
things that you brought about,
you indicated, Mr. Chair, Madam
Secretary, that you have an
advocate now of working there, I
think it's an offer, office of
that with you see. One of the
things I often worry about is
students who go, who, who are
being summons for disciplinary
action, and they end up going
before that disciplinary action
without an attorney, some
others, uh, professional there
beside them. Will that office of
advocacy offer that assistance
to students, Mr. Chair, Madam
Secretary.
Um, Mr. Chairman Representative
Herndon, when you're saying, um,
are you talking about in our
facilities and those youth?
I'm sorry, Mr. Chair, Madam
Secretary, uh, you just talked
about this Office of Advocacy
and they were there for
children. So what I'm worried
about is that their children
sometimes that end up in CYFD
sometimes they're, they are
cited for doing things that
maybe sometimes people don't
understand the cultural reasons,
but they also go, but when it's
time for disciplinary action,
they go before them, they're
gonna be expelled, but they're
there alone. There's nobody to
advocate for them. So my
question, Mr. Chair, Madam, uh,
secretary, is with your office
of ad.
To see work to stand beside
those children, sometimes they
just need a little help.
Um, Mr. Chairman, Representative
Herndon, yes, we would not send
any kids that are in state
custody into a situation where
they are required to basically
represent themselves and so it
would either be somebody from
our office of advocacy or
somebody from um our protective
services, their placement worker
or their permanency worker would
accommodate um accompany them.
Thank you, Mr. Chair and Madam
Secretary, uh, let me just move
on to behavioral health for just
a moment. One of the things that
you said is that your behavioral
health there for all children,
whether they're in CY.
They are not. And my question
is, do you work with PED. They
have a behavioral health
division that we are working
with, we meaning this
legislature to make sure that
they are mental wellness rooms,
for example, that are staffed
with uh counselors who are, have
studied psychology, sociology,
and uh and also and behavioral
health. And so are you working
with them in order to address
behavioral health. Um, Mr.
Chairman Representative Herndon.
Yes, we are. We work with PED,
um, I believe Don has regular
meetings with them to talk about
that, and we are a huge support
of those rooms.
And thank you, Mr. Chair and
Madam Secretary. Mr. Chair, I, I
just have a couple more
questions and then I'll stop
here. I, I think that that's
really important that we have a
place for for students and
children to go and talk about
how they're feeling and wait and
not wait for them to be referred
to us because they've done
something that is not been
acceptable. So thank you for
that and working with PED and um
one other thing I just wanted to
know, you talked about that, I
think it was tribal cultural.
affairs or or rights, uh, I
think it was one mount, uh, it
was 50,000 500,000. Yeah, met
Mr. Chair, Madam Secretary, and
you talked about bringing those
kids and families together, so
you could support their culture.
Well, I think that's a really
great idea, but one of the
things, Mr. Chair, Madam
Secretary, I'd like you to think
about is like how do you take
that, that culture out to a
different level in schools or in
other places where these
students are because most many
times as we looked at the Yaz.
Martina's case, there was just a
misunderstanding and not
recognizing the cultural
differences that might occur,
that it's not really bad things
that are happening. It's just a
lack of understanding. So I just
ask you to continue those, those
uh seminars are, are, or
conferences, but bring more
community, uh, I think educators
all into that and not just the
kids and their families, Mr.
Chair and Madam Secretary, I
asked you to think about that.
And then the final thing, Madam
Secretary and Mr. um Mr. Chair,
that I'd like you to
Think about it and go back to uh
Representative Chatfield's
statement about not having
enough money for our, for our um
for our families, our foster
families, and you said they were
gonna raise the amount to $900.
Well, if I divide $900 by 30
days in a month, I'm still at
only $30 a month, which is
definitely not enough money. So
Mr. Chair, I'm asking that we
put that issue on our list to
look at, like, well, how much
are we paying these foster?
parents and uh to look after our
kids who need more assistance,
more love, more care, and, and
how do we go about raising those
rates and particularly, I'm just
saying, I know there are lots of
things that are involved in
this, Madam Chair. I see this as
I look at the reversions and
this says 5 million for CYFD. If
I'm looking at this right, but
we could put more money into
that, into that program, Mr.
Chair, Madam Secretary. So, uh,
thank you and, and those are my
comments, Mr.
Thank you. Uh, we have
Representative Vincent and
I just want to clarify, Mr.
Chairman, I'm sorry, Mr.
Chairman. Um, it is to double
the amount of their daily rate
up to a maximum of $900 so we
have some rates that are.
Um, very significant and so like
for an ARCO rate at $6000 a
month, so we wouldn't double
that. They would get 6000 plus
the cap of 900. Um, but for
those other rates, it would
double their rate. Just wanted
to clarify. Thank you. OK, uh,
next we're gonna go to represent
Vincent then represented.
Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Welcome, Secretary,
um.
I can't believe it's already
been 3 years and I've cheered
you along every, every time, and
I know I've asked you some hard
questions through the interims,
but I really feel like you're,
you try.
And I think that you and your
team are trying to plug the
Titanic.
And it hasn't sunk.
It's, it might be sinking, but
it hasn't sunk yet.
And
Mr. Chair and, and, uh, Madam
Secretary, I have a recruitment
and retention question and what
is your, what is your uh vacancy
rate and protective services.
Mr. Chair.
Um, I know I have that, so.
Yeah, 26.
Um, Mr. Chairman Representative
Vincent, it's 26.6, so 27%
vacancy rate in protective
services. OK, thank you. And Mr.
Chair, so I just
I'm in receipt.
Of a memo that come from your
leadership staff.
On mandatory protective
services.
Um, overtime.
And could you explain why that
came out of your office,
Madam Chair. Representative
Vincent, yes, so back in the
fall we were really working with
um kids that were in office days
and really trying to find equity
for staff. We had the same staff
that were continuously
volunteering for overtime rates,
um, and as you can imagine that,
you know, after a while when
you're asking them to work
during the day and do their day
job and then they have to
volunteer for office days and
then maybe they're also on on
call.
Um, it got to the point where it
was the same staff continuously
and so, um, they worked with the
union to develop our
conversations with the union to
really work on, you know, how we
can do that so that there's more
equity and so we went to um a a
process where we were notifying
people that they were going to
be required if necessary to do
overtime, so we do volunteer
first and try to get people who
are willing to volunteer, um,
then we go to a seniority
process, um.
And then we, um, if we still
don't get people to come in and
stay with kids that are in an
office that we do a mandatory
assignment of overtime, so that
memo was just for them so we
could clarify what that process
was.
Thank you, Mr. Chair, and in the
interim.
I, I heard you mentioned that
about burnout.
About the burnout rate.
And after reading this.
After reading this memo.
What would happen if you have an
employee.
That was burnt out.
And they'd had enough for the
week, and they turned down.
An overtime assignment. What
would happen to that?
Employee.
Um, Mr. Chairman Representative
Vincent, um, you know, I think
that ideally they should work
with their supervisor to, you
know, explain that situation. We
all suffer from burnout, myself
included, and you know my staff
is usually there to push me back
up, um, but I think they should
work with that supervisor and
really figure out a way. I don't
think mandatory overtime is the
answer to getting the need met.
I think it was more of a here's
kind of the system that we have
to follow, but you know, we
should be working with them and
we rely on workers.
Outside of protective services.
I have to say like our
behavioral health staff, our
family services, and especially
our juvenile justice staff, they
come and staff those offices
right alongside our protective
services when needed and so we
are looking, you know, part of
the remedial order and
arbitration, um, tells us we
need to really figure out a
system for employees not doing
that, so we're looking at
creating additional positions,
um, you know, that would then be
available to do those overnight
shifts if we don't have
capacity.
You had either AMI or Hope
House, but our the ideal
situation would be to get them
into the 2 multi-service homes
that we've provided and really
that intent of those is to end
the office days and not have
employees working overtime at
all. Thank you, Mr. Chair, and
how many you, if you don't have
the answer, it's OK. How many
employees do you have that are
that are on salary?
Mr. Chair.
Um, Mr. Chairman Representative
Vincent, the only employees that
are actually on salary are
exempt employees. OK, so the
leadership, I don't, um 100,
it's not that many. How many
maybe 2025. And Mr. Chair, what
I was getting at is sometimes
maybe we could work with.
Leadership
That are on salary, where you
don't have to burn out your
hourly people if they don't want
overtime.
And, you know, when you try to
work somebody like a government
mule, they're gonna sit down on
you.
And we don't want them to quit.
We want them to stay there and
Mr. Chair and Madam Secretary,
I, I just wanted to tell you I,
I feel like that's
counterproductive to mandatorily
make your employees work
overtime when they don't want.
It's not if they don't want to,
uh, in your business.
I understand the burnout rate.
I understand what they see on a
daily basis and what they're
having to put up with, and it's
a lot.
So some people can take the
overtime, some people just don't
want the overtime, they wanna go
get with their family. Today was
House Memorial.
I can't remember our, our family
day 22, and you know, family is
important and that's where that,
that's where that when you've,
when you've had enough, you had
your vehicle home and you know
that you're gonna get some love
over there, so thank you, Mr.
Chair, for the time. Thank you
very much. Thank you,
Herrera, then Representative
Pettigrew.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Thank you,
and all this stuff for
everything you do, it's deeply
appreciated.
Um,
I have a question. How much
money do you spend in the agency
on guardianship services.
Um, Mr. Chairman, Representative
Haneda, I do not have that
answer, um, but, and I don't
think we have it, will you have
it with you?
But I can definitely. That's OK.
We can get to that later, I
guess.
I guess I just did a survey of
all my schools. It was very
curious about, I have another
bill on kinship, guardianship.
I, I was very curious about what
the population was of
grandparents or can raising
grandchildren in our school
districts and um for the most
part it was 10%. Most of these
people just take these kids in,
um, a lot of them are on Social
Security.
Uh, you know, they get a call
from the parents get a call from
CYFD and they say, you know, if
you don't don't find a place for
your kids, we're kind of, we're
gonna get them tomorrow. So of
course they call the
grandparents, happens in my
district and they say, OK, come
on over and um nothing like
having 3 mad teenagers at your
door, um, but these people,
these grandparents and kin or or
other relative or other people
who know them well.
We'll take them in and and they
don't get any reimbursement for
that. And um
So,
I just realized that the kinship
guardianship, I did not know
this, that when you go through
the process of becoming uh a
kinship guardianship, you don't
get reimbursement like a foster
care person does. You just take
them in, or can you correct me
on that if I'm wrong? Um, Mr.
Chairman, Representative Jadea,
so if they come into the system
through CYFD. So if CYFD
conducts an investigation and
they are going to remove kids
from a home. We typically would
look
First at kin to see if there's
an appropriate placement there.
But if they're in our custody
and we place them with Ken.
There is a they do receive the
daily stipend for those
children. If they don't go
through CYFD if there's not an
investigation or they haven't,
if you know, let's just say for
instance, if somebody is dealing
with maybe their child who is um
A drug addict and is going to
treatment and then they take
those kids in, but they haven't
come into our system, then there
would not be any sort of
reimbursement from CYFD for that
placement. And I think that's
the population, at least when I
worked, you know, in senior
services, that was what you
typically saw happening with um
individuals who are just taking
their kids to help their child,
but there hasn't been any
involvement with CYFD, um, and
so there is no financial
assistance for them.
Right, and miss your chair and
that and that's the population
I'm trying to, I'm looking at,
OK, and, and that's a lot of
people, and that's a lot of
people who and, and it could be
a brother or sister, you know,
it's, it's a lot of people that
fall into that category, but,
but going through that process
takes a lot a long time.
No, Is it fast? I don't know.
Um, Mr. Chairman Representative
Hadeta. So if it's a kinship
placement. It's an expedited
process and so we typically can
place that youth with them while
they're on a contingent license
um while they continue that
process to get licensed.
And Mr. Chair secretary, do they
get paid during that time? Um,
Mr. Chairman Representative
Haneta, yes, they do. OK. Um,
Well
I did not know, and this is
news, Mr. Chair. I think
everybody can should know that I
just found out yesterday through
Don Waters. Thank you very much,
Don, where, uh, actually.
That a lot of, a lot of
grandparents don't want custody
for a lot of reasons, and they,
they just don't want it. And um
some of that is age, some of
that, there's a lot of factors
that they worry about, not
taking custody and a lot of them
really don't want to deal with
CYFD. I'm just gonna tell you
that they're, they're scared to
death of dealing with CYFT, OK,
so.
So, um, gosh, now I lost my
train of thought. So
So what I'm trying to do is, is,
um,
Get the money.
In between, you know, in
between, and then we deal with
the anti-donation clause, but,
but I am, I am going to, I'm,
I'm working with some private
foundations to do that interim
thing where people take in
money, uh, taking kids, but they
really.
Don't want custody or they need
they need legal help to tell
them how, what, what does it
mean to be a kin guardian, or
what does it mean to take full
custody and and what are the
consequences of that and what
are the long term consequences
of that. And I'm not, I'm, I'm
not sure they get that, and
that's what I'm concerned about,
Mr. Chair and secretary.
Do they get legal help?
And advice as to what their,
what the process is and how they
can go from one to the other or
what it means and what it means
in terms of money and what it
means in terms of
responsibility. Uh, John just
told me that, um,
that if you are uh a grandparent
or any kin that kind of takes
custody of kids, you can go to a
a notary and you can sign a
form.
that they have on the CYD
website. Thank you very much,
that you fill out this form, you
get it notarized, and then you
have both medical and um and um
school authority, and that's a
big problem for these people
that are in a temporary
position, that is good for a
year, and I didn't realize that
either, and that's something I
think we can all use. So I'm
just, I'm just trying to see
about how we protect and help
grandparents or kin or or even
just a
person who knows the family
because
These people really understand
what happened to these kids.
They know them.
You know, the worst day of their
life for these kids is to, you
know, be yanked out of a home
and be put in foster care.
worst day of their life. So if
they have connection with
somebody, how do we, how do we
make that easier? How do we?
This is where we hope these kids
will go to somebody they know. I
mean, they may be mad about it,
but at least it's a family or
it's a grandparent or it's a
brother or sister, it's somebody
we know and how do we help them?
I guess that's the answer I'm
looking for, um, Mr. Chair and
secretary.
Um, thank you, Mr. Chairman
Representative Hadera, um, you
know, I think that I don't have
all the answers for kids that
aren't in state custody, but
maybe it's something that
through our office of advocacy
alongside um aging and long term
services cause I know this is
something that they deal with a
lot with grandparents raising
grandchildren, um, and maybe PED
we can, you know, put minds
together and figure out how we
can put together a tool kit that
can be shared with parents so
they understand, you know what
is available. How do you access
it, um, and.
something that can be handed out
to people that's informative for
them, um, that gives them
information on what can be done.
Thank you, Mr. Chair, and uh we
are working on a bill to go
through the Department of Aging
and it's a growth fund bill and
partnering with foundations to
give a
Um, at least if, uh, um, oh
gosh, $500.
A month's payment to these
grandparents for a period of 3
years while they're in this
transitional place to kind of
augment that, so that's all I
have, Mr. Chair. Thank you.
Thank you very much. We have
representative Pettigrew then
represent Brown.
Thank you, Chairman and thank
you, Secretary for suffering
through this.
I do appreciate the work that
you and your team do and uh I'm
gonna ask some hard questions
and uh.
Um.
Uh.
I, I will.
Ease the, the chair's mind. I'm
not gonna relive the two
presentations earlier. I feel
like you did respond to most of
that in your presentation.
I don't they feel like I'm very
happy with some of the
responses, but at the end of the
day you didn't respond, so.
Um
Chairman, my first question is
just more of a clarification.
Uh, the three pillar system that
was implemented a few years back
on investigation permanency and
placement. I understand that
your department
It's going to get rid of by the
end of March, is that correct?
Um, Mr. Chairman Representative
Pettigrew, no, that is not
correct, so we are still keeping
the pillar structure, um, I
think the whole intent was that
of that was really to streamline
how those workers receive
directions, so previous to the
um restructuring we had 5
different individuals who
oversaw the department all.
So you had somebody who was
responsible for all of those
different areas. And so when a
directive or a new policy came
out, it got implemented
differently in each of those
regions, depending on who was in
charge, so you could have an
investigator in two different
communities that did things very
differently and so the whole
intent of that was to have all
of the investigators under one
pillar, so that direction got
sent out the same forms were
used and it was consistent
regardless of what part of the
state you lived in.
Same for permanency and
placement. What we are changing
is the leadership at each county
office because we had a county
manager that oversaw those
different areas who was required
to travel to different offices.
We've changed that, so we go
back to one county manager who
oversees staff in that office
and they don't have to travel to
different counties, but the
leadership above that, the
pillar system still exists so
that there's um continuity in
the way that Chairman of
understand this correctly.
Your pillar is still gonna be
there, so you're investigators
will get direction by a single
person.
But there's day to day is gonna
be managed by county manager.
There will be a county manager
responsible in each office for
the day to day operation of that
office, but there will be a
deputy director for
investigations, the deputy
director for permanency and a
deputy director for um
placement, um, that will still
provide the direction in those
pillars.
Mr. Chair and secretary, I hear
your answer.
I I have significant concerns
with that when it becomes
conflict between the county
manager and
The Deputy director of
investigation or permanency
placement.
So you have one person saying
this is the way I want it done,
you have a county manager saying
this.
Uh, I've worked in those
scenarios before, um, I'll pray
for you, um.
Chairman, um, that's concerning
for me.
Chairman was uh moving to the
next one.
I want to
clarify something that
representative or in our ranking
member Chatfield, um,
Brought up, he has very specific
question on
How much our foster parents get
paid.
Mr. Chairman, unless something's
changed within the last few
hours.
Our foster parents don't get
paid.
With stipends.
For the kids, based on what the
kid, how the kid is, is
identified and qualified.
So
And I bring that up because
during the state of the state
address, our governor talked
about a $25 million
Ask for $900 a month.
And if you do the math.
Somewhere around 2000.
Kids.
900.
Times 12.
You're just shy of 25 million.
Mr. Chairman, neither one of
our, our recommendations has
that 25 million in it.
From the executive side or from
The, the LFC side.
Um
Mr. Chairman and Secretary on
The discussion and the detail
sheets.
Um
We're looking at a new division.
that
would be the family services
division.
And
One side of the budget has it
the other side of the budget
doesn't have it within that
division. And this is where
Um
I get concerned with bar
requests.
And one of the reasons why I
fought so hard against him. It
concerns me that the bar
language could be written in
such a way that we can say, no,
we don't want to see family
Services Division this year.
But then you could have bar
languages that allow movement
between P codes and that
concerns me. Thank you,
Representative Peter although
noting here that we disallowed
the program transfer authority.
Um
Uh, last year.
Thank you.
Mr. Chair and Madam Secretary,
you talked about a
Um, rapid hire deal where you
had over 400 applicants on site
and a couple 100 or maybe 100 or
so, uh, at Workforce Solutions
around the state.
And you put in the department
put out 128 job offers.
Can you give me some examples of
what physicians, salaries,
counties, and
are included in that 128 job
offers.
Um, Mr. Chairman, Representative
Pettigrew, I don't have that
information available. I know
that we did hire people in
several offices across the
state, um, and it was all
positions and so we hired some
children's court attorneys.
There were case aides. There
were investigators and placement
workers, permanency workers,
finance staff, um, any position
that we had vacant at the
department was up for hire at
that, um, event and we had staff
there ready to do interviews for
all of them.
Um, I'm happy to put together,
um, kind of a detailed
spreadsheet that says how many
in each of those areas, um, the
different areas and maybe by
county if that's helpful.
Mr. Chair and Madam Secretary, I
don't know how my colleagues
feel about it, but I, I'd
definitely be interested in, in
the numbers for Southeast New
Mexico.
We'll get that for you. Um.
Mr. Chair, Madam Secretary
we dealt through an issue this
last summer, um.
And I appreciate your help with
respect to that.
I still have concerns because
When a foster parent or a family
that, that a child is
Living with has to leave town.
We're still sleeping.
In buildings.
Um, Mr. Chairman, Representative
Pettigrew, I'm not sure, so
you're saying a foster family
has a child and they're leaving
town, so then we take the child
and have the office, and I may
say this wrong, yeah, I'm, I'm
not as in depth into the proper
terminology with this. But if a,
if a kid, Mr. Chair, is staying
with the family and they have to
leave town.
Um
And they can't take the child
with them.
Last summer
Um
We had the potential of 15 on
one weekend at the hobs.
Uh, CYSD office.
Um
That didn't end up that did not
end up happening that way, it
wasn't near that number, it was
less than half of that.
But that's still happening
today.
And if I understand from the
Kevin.
Um
Last moderation.
That's not supposed to be
happening anymore.
German, so what is, what is the
position of
From the top down with respect
to making sure we're not putting
kids sleeping kids overnight in
offices anymore.
Um, Mr. Chairman Representing
Pedigrew, that's one of the
issues that we're still
struggling with trying to
resolve so the intent of AMI and
Hope House was to be able to
move kids from offices to those
two multi-service homes, while
we still continued to look for a
placement. Um, some of those
kids who are in offices or in
AMI or, you know, sometimes they
need a higher level of care and
that oftentimes is difficult for
us to find. Sometimes they need
um.
Residential treatment or a TFC
and they get denied and so in
the interim while we're looking
for that placement, the we have
to keep them and so we keep them
in our office and so, um, I
think, you know, as we've
explained, it's not like there's
a desk and they're sleeping
under a desk. We house our
offices with rooms that are set
up similar to a bedroom with a
bed and a dresser or what, you
know, we need there and then the
staff come and staff it there.
The intent really is to try to
use AMI and Hope House.
While
they are there to then really
improve on our foster
recruitment for foster care plus
with families who really can
meet those needs and so that is
something that we've started. We
have our first cohort of
families going through the
training. Our staff went to
Presley Ridge to get the
training on how to recruit and
how to provide those additional
supports for families that have
children that have higher needs.
So we're working towards ending
office days, but we are not yet
there.
Mr. Chair and Madam Secretary.
If I read Keviet's arbitration
from 2024 that clearly puts CYFD
out of compliance. Um, Mr.
Chairman Representative
Pettigrew, it does.
OK. Um,
That's disheartening.
Chairman, I'm gonna continue on
on some of the questions with
related to Kevin S.
Um
according to
The arbitration document.
BYFD is directed to ensure that
CYFD is taken all steps
necessary to request adequate
funding from the legislature
during the 2025 session to fully
fund all caseworker and case aid
physicians required for the
department to meet the caseload.
Chairman, this may be best
answered by our LFC analyst.
Um
Are we there?
With the budget that we
That, that will probably be
approved tonight that I will be
voting against, but we
Mr. Chair Representative
Pettigrew, this might be a good
time to look at your PSA, um,
CYFD is running a lot tighter,
uh, in protective services then
they were a year ago. It's
likely in part because of the
high rate of overtime. So if you
look at your PS calc, this is
data pulled back in December,
protective services at that time
could have filled about 13 more
positions in protective services
if they were drawing down
federal funds at the budgeted
level.
Backwards you have submitted
their operating budget request,
they included requests for an
additional 101 case workers, um,
and, and, and so I'll say two
things. One, I don't know that
we have.
Stated case load data to
validate the specific number of
caseworkers that CYFD needs
today to meet the standards. Um,
what I do know is the LFC budget
recommendation within the grow
should fund an additional 101
case worker positions, which
last fall looked like that would
get them pretty close.
Um, but Mr. Tay, I can't speak
to what that number is today.
Um, Mr. Chairman Representative
Pettigrew, um, that's a great
question and so based on the
remedial order that came down
that you're referencing, um, we
have gone back and looked to
see, you know, have we asked for
everything needed to meet the
requirements of that remedial
order, and the answer was no. So
included in your packet as um
she said earlier, there wasn't
an ask for additional funding
for increasing the rates for
foster parents because the
budget had already been
submitted and that was
something.
that the governor announced that
her state of the state. So in
your packet, you have something
that talks about our budget
priorities on one side and on
the other side, it lists all of
the requests based on that
remedial order that we need to
be in compliance with that and
in addition, it has the request
for the recruitment and
retention to increase that
foster parent payment, um, that
cost that we are asking for for
foster parents is 15 million,
um, and then
the rest of those are really we
listed by the remedial order
number and what it requires us
to do and then what we need in
order to do that and what the
cost is, so there's an
additional ask outside of the
budget request that was
submitted, um, that really
addresses the issues in the
Kevinness litigation.
Thank you, Madam Secretary.
Thank you Speaker, for, for, um,
I have a few more.
And with that,
And again, I'm, I'm just gonna,
I live like.
like wide open anyway. I'm not
in agreement with this budget at
all. I'm not going to support
either one of them.
But, uh, with that, I would ask
that we have LSC DFA sit down
with, with our leadership on the
House side and just go through
and check the boxes and make
sure that um we feel like we've
done everything we can to meet.
The arbitration requirements of
the 2024.
Mr. Chairman and Madam
Secretary, um,
Item 4 on page 2 of that.
Requires CYFD.
In a report to the code neutrals
no later than March 31st, 2025.
25 and copied to the plaintiffs
and the arbitrator.
On how it has spent the $3
million.03 million special
appropriation made by the
legislature exhibits da da da da
da. So this was from last year.
And Mr. Speaker, I'm sorry, I
like, uh, Mr. Chair, Madam
Secretary, it is my
understanding that that money
has not been spent yet. Is that
an accurate understanding? And
if not, are you with less than a
month and a half or what or just
a little more than a month and a
half away. Are you ready to
Consolidate that report in
conjunction in in compliance
with item 4.
Um, Mr. Chairman, Representative
Pettigrew, um, yes, we will be
providing that report to them.
There has been allocations made
to that, um, $3 million and we
are expanding that funding.
Mr. Chair and Madam Secretary, I
appreciate that. I understand
that that 3 million if it came
in a special, probably wasn't
available to you to till July
1st, which means you probably
didn't get it till September or
October, if you're like the rest
of us. So, um, I, I hear you.
I'm just making sure we're doing
everything we can be compliance
with the lawsuit against the
state.
Uh, or CYFD and, and so, Mr.
Speaker, on item 5,
Um, you were to dedicate one
placement staff worker in 5 high
need counties. Are we there yet,
Madam Secretary? Mr. Chairman
Representative Pettigrew, yes,
those individuals were
identified as required on Monday
of this week, um, we have, um,
hired workers that are specific
to the foster care plus, um, and
recruiting workers that are
specific to those 5 high
counties, so several 2 I believe
for the Haney counties have been
high.
and the workers that are
dedicated to just recruiting for
foster care plus have been
dedicated to that right now
while we're still continuing to
hire, but there is somebody in
each of those high five need
areas that is solely responsible
for recruitment.
Thank you for that, Mr. Speaker,
with respect to the Kevinness
piece.
Um, I'm, I'm just gonna say this
on item 12 with respect to the
CCs, however you say it, CCWIS.
Um
I was disappointed with the
presentations that we got
earlier.
And then I was not really overly
impressed with
The responses with respect to
the
To the presentation.
And, and how that was responded
to. I do appreciate the comments
that, that we got from LSC and I
am concerned and that Mr.
Speaker, I would ask that we
from an LSC standpoint.
ask our, our
I see people to do a deep dive
into this and make sure this is,
this is good funding because
From 17 to spending 82/82
million and then now the new ask
and we're still not in the
working system that concerns me.
Um, and so, uh, that's, that's
just a request.
Um
And, yeah, get, we have, we
still have 5 or 6 on the list.
OK.
So with that, I, I have other
questions. I think everybody
else does as well. I am still
very concerned about the 24, 20
million on behavioral health. I
don't think I received good
answers on that either, but with
that, Mr. Speaker, Speaker,
again, uh, we're, we're gonna
elevate you, I guess, or at
least I am. Thank you very much
for your time. Thank you, uh,
Representative. Thank you
Madam Secretary and everyone
here, thank you for staying with
us for all our.
Questions, um, I think.
You have some of the hardest
jobs in all of state government,
and I do appreciate what you,
what you are attempting to do.
Um,
Mr. Chairman and uh Madam
Secretary, so I'm looking at
The arbitration, uh, remedial
order number one, Kevin S, um,
as a representative from Lee
County just uh kind of walked us
through part of that.
I, I just want to get
clarification, madam, uh,
secretary that
CYD CYFD is tasked with
requesting an advocating for the
funding.
To make sure that all the
caseworker and case aid
physicians are funded, um, as
they, as they need to be, but
the arbitrator is not.
Ordering the legislature.
to provide the funding that
you're requesting. Is that your
understanding, Madam Secretary,
Mr. Chair.
Um, Mr. Chairman Representative
Brown, that is my understanding.
We are required to determine
based on that order what the
need is for the department and
ask for it, but the way I read
it, it is not saying it has to
be funded, um, but if it's not
funded, then can we actually
meet the requirements of that
order, I guess is the question.
Yeah, thank you, and, um, Mr.
Chairman and Madam Secretary, so
it also says here that CYFD
shall file a report in this
arbitration at the conclusion of
this legislative.
session no later than April
15th.
Documenting how you calculated
the funding a number of
positions and so forth, and I
know you'll do that.
So Madam Secretary, Mr. Chair,
if the grow money does not
materialize, and it's been well
explained that that's where some
of this funding will, will be
found.
Um, Is this where you would
think you would need to have
authority for a uh a budget um a
bar budget adjustment request,
would that be one way to
handle it, do you think, Madam
Secretary? Um, Mr. Chairman
Representative Brown, I don't
believe that the agency has the
amount of money needed to fill
the requirements of that
remedial order just, um, you
know, in other areas of the
department that we could borrow
it over if we had to make up
that difference, it would
require us to um possibly reduce
services in some areas in order
to meet those requests.
OK. And, and Mr. Chairman, I
know the committee has discussed
uh what to do about VARs and uh
I guess we'll, we'll see where
we end up with that, but, um,
final thing I have.
Excuse me, Mr. Chairman is um
CYFD is also tasked with
preparing a plan to create a new
classification of worker and add
such persons to handle, and this
is on call emergency and
overnight work and um
I, I know we've we've spoken a
bit about
Uh, caseworker burnout and, you
know, some people are willing to
volunteer the extra hours and
some people are not.
Uh, so is this something that
You have done yet resist
pending, Mr. Chairman. Um, Mr.
Chairman, Representative Brown,
we have looked at that, um,
again, it's in your package
under the arbitration remedial
additional funding request, and
it details those positions for
us, that's a difficult thing to
try to establish because it
would mean.
On-call individuals if they get
an investigation called that's
an emergency at 2 o'clock in the
morning. It could be in any
county, and so that would really
require us to staff up on call
people across the state and so
um I think in the plan that we
did, we, we did it so that they
would be regionally so that they
could drive um any distance
within their region, which then
means if you get a call at 20 in
the morning and you know you
have a region to cover. You
could be on the road for.
A couple of hours, so it's not
ideal, but um, you know, hiring
24/7 in 33 counties, um, you
know, at this point seemed to us
like.
A request that was not going to
be supported and so we've put it
in for regional on call and
overnight staff.
Thank you. And then just
finally, I, I guess the idea
here is to uh make sure that
primary case workers, they have
primary responsibility. This is
to not extend their workday so
much that it becomes a, a real
issue for them and their
families. So I, I appreciate
that too. So, thank you, Mr.
Chair. That's all I have. Thank
you very much, Representative
Brown, uh, great questions.
Next, we're gonna go to
represent Duncan, please.
Thank you, Mr. Chair.
I think all the questions have
been asked and answered, um, I
just have a comment.
And Secretary, you're in an
unattainable position, and I
don't envy it.
Um, Mr. Chair, I wish this were
a hearing on uh how we can break
up CYFD in the smaller
manageable departments.
I come from the self-employed
world.
If you were my manager, I'd fire
you.
You have great people under you.
You're the manager.
And unfortunately, your
evaluation is in the paper. It's
in the news.
It's you.
That's where the buck stops, is
with you, Madam Secretary. Um,
I've sit there and watched this
for year after year after year.
And Mr. Chair, I'm probably
gonna be here when
It is broken up, and it is
changed, and it needs to be.
For the sake of the kids that
you and I both want to help.
Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Thank you, Representative
Duncan. Uh, next we're gonna go
to Representative Hernandez.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Um,
Madam Secretary and uh
Uh, Mr. Chairman, first I wanna
acknowledge the staff that's
still here.
Uh, you know, it means a lot and
this means a lot to me too, um,
Madam Secretary Mr. Chairman, I
still have my DSM 5 book when I
worked at an adolescent youth
treatment facility in a case
manager capacity.
Um, Mr. Chairman, uh, Madam
Secretary, I heard you, uh, and
building on, uh, on, um,
representative uh ranking member
Chatfield, um,
Um
And that was a nation.
Uh, foster parent service.
We get $0 and, and I'm waiting
to get a, a, a absolute, um,
verification on that, uh, Mr.
Chairman, uh, Madam Secretary, I
only know this because my cousin
is one of those foster parents
and uh and that's the
frustration that my cousin who
sends who sends my niece.
To a state public school.
And, and my cousin works.
Of the reservation in, in City
of Farmington.
And pay state taxes, but Mr.
Chairman, uh, Madam Secretary,
I'm just, I'm just trying to
understand more about like, ah,
you know, there's, there's just
we're, we're, we're missing.
Um, you know, trying, trying to
understand how we can ensure
that all, all children are
being, are, are, are, are.
Being taken care of, uh, and,
and also following federal law
when it comes to Indian
children.
And, and I know that that this
is a really unique, um,
Area of, of ensuring that
federal law is, is, is applied,
um, but Mr. Chairman, Madam
Secretary, as, as you know, the
the there's just a a much
heavier need in tribal
communities and, and, and just
trying to take in consideration
how can we, um, you know,
Um
achieve some type of of of
equity, um, when it comes to
taking care of our of our
Of our native children and and
Mr. Chairman, my, uh, Madam
Secretary, I, I just also want
to follow up is, is, um, I, I, I
appreciate this initiative with
cultural relevancy and, and just
want to, uh, Mr. Chairman Madam
Secretary, understand more about
how, uh, tribes are consulted
through your agency when, um,
you know, uh, helping, uh,
children, uh, um, native
children that are in your cus
custody.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Um, Mr. Chairman Representative
Hernandez, thank you for that.
I'm definitely gonna go and look
back and see what the allocation
from the department and how we
work with, um, you know, the
tribes and nations and the
pueblos. We have an office of
tribal affairs, um, Donalyn
Sarasino, who works closely with
all of the the tribesha and
nations. Um, she has worked with
them on MOUs with them to work
with the department. Um, I would
love to maybe schedule some time
for you to meet her and
understand, you know, the role
of that office of tribal
affairs.
And I will say that last year
when we did our cultural event,
um, Navajo was the most
represented at the event and and
there and so um I'm grateful for
that and the participation that
we've had with you, but would
love to have separate
conversation on how we can
strengthen that.
Thank you.
That, that concludes my
question. Thank you very much
Represent Hernandez. Uh, thank
you, members. I don't have any
more questions, Madam Secretary,
I do want to go back to
something that Doctor Garcia
pointed out with RPS alc in
behavioral health services were
shown a funded vacancy of 4.2
million, slightly over that.
Um
Please provide us a uh for the,
for the rapid hire, how many
folks went into the behavioral
health.
Division, do you know? Um, I
don't have that information, but
I will have it to you by the
morning. OK, because, um,
Mm
The question about and, and it
also shows us here in memory,
this is on page 20 of our
packet, um.
It does show again what Doctor
Garcia noted, which is that the
fund and vacancy rate in
protective services is quite
low. It's 1.3%. So if we need to
transfer from behavioral health
services or other, if we need to
look at that in this budget, um,
and we'd appreciate your
guidance on that. Number 2,
Doctor
Garcia
and Madam Secretary, from last
year's grow appropriation, how
much has been utilized of the,
can you tell us that, please?
Mr. Chair, um, this was one
where likely CIG will need to
answer in part because the
agency is using some of the grow
funds for personnel term
positions, and that's not
encumbered in share, so you all
would likely have to kind of
speak to that.
Um, Mr. Chairman, I will get a
report on where we are on growth
funds to you as well. OK, thank
you, Madam Secretary, because
that's, you know, that's a place
where things can be adjusted
upwards if and as necessary. I
think there's
uh I, I think is broadly known,
there are deep differences, and
I think in a lot of ways,
differences that won't be
bridged between the executives
approach to CYFD and I think a
growing sort of bipartisan
legislative approach that said,
we are committed to uh fund it.
So that's 12,
a question that represents so
vast for sort of an observation
that question I was able to ask
in the summer around culture and
around some of the challenges
and some of the reasons for the
turnover corroborated with some
feedback from constituents. I
know that in stories that folks
share.
I guess the question is, how
much latitude do you have to
change positions and sort of, if
folks are not in the right
position for them to no longer
be in that position.
Um, Mr. Chairman, we have some
latitude to reassign staff
within that so long as we're not
moving their location of work or
changing your salary, Madam
Secretary, if there're no, if
they're not right for CYFD now
what latitude do you have there?
Mr. Chairman, that would depend
on what a couple of things,
whether they are probationary
employees or not, um, and
whether or not we've done
progressive discipline for that
employee, and then whether or
not they are covered.
buy a bargaining unit. Got it.
Uh, OK, thank you, Madam
Secretary. I think, uh,
I won't go to any deeper.
Um, appreciate the attention to
detail. There are gaps that
we're not gonna close in this
administration. I asked our uh
Doctor Garcia who's we're
fortunate to have work on this
with you and the team to look at
the growth side, see if there's
increased investments there to
look at potentially if there's
internally, if there's a desire
to shift resources, um, and then
I think there's been some very
good
Points brought up that could
potentially be addressed as far
as some uh
Additional, potentially growth
funds. I don't see how
I, I don't foresee the level of
confidence to be able to invest
a lot of new recurring dollars,
but we want to, to support
needed functions, and I think to
support the staff and noting for
instance, as I understand it,
the protective services director
no longer an acting physician
after being an active position,
an acting position for a while.
Yeah, there, there's a lot to
A lot to sort through. Thank you
for the time tonight. Doctor
Garcia, please, we'll stay in
very close contact over the in
Doctor Courtney as well. Um,
members, we're gonna ask for the
LFC recommendation, um, but
expect uh some additional work
here, um, with that, Madam Vice
Chair.
Mr. Chair, I would move the
committee adopt the LFC
recommendation at this time. I
second. OK, it's been moved by
vice chair, uh, Dickson,
seconded by Representative
Silva, uh, anybody in opposition
to that motion. Please show
Representative Duncan,
Representative Pettigrew in
opposition to the motion.
OK, members, that's gonna
conclude their uh for staff for
other folks, uh, for the
security who's here, the state
police, we did end up getting
some pizza in the back if folks
