Representative Castellano
present.
Representative Chatfield.
Representative Crowder here.
Representative Dixon air.
Representative Ezzell.
Representative Garcia.
Representative headed up.
Representative.
Hochman Vigil.
Representative Lane your.
Representative Lara.
Representative Sarinana here.
Representative Sweetser you.
Representative Trujillo.
Vice chair small.
Here.
Madam chair we do have a quorum.
Thank you.
Interest Representative Anderson
is present as well ma'am.
Thank.
Okay so we do have a quorum
thank you everybody couple
things I want to say before we
go to war first bill I want to
remind the committee that on day
one I talked to you each about
committee protocol.
That time I had explained that
under the committees protocol
questions go through the chair
with that we just don't burst
out we just don't make comments
we go through the chair.
And we also don't make
our assumptions about what other
people are going to do or what
they're going to say we allow
people a chance to complete
their sentences and to make the
statements that they're willing
to make.
But we don't interrupt.
And you wait to be.
Called on bye Mr chair or vice
chair small if he happens to be
Cherry on that day.
I just want to remind the
committee if these protocols
aren't followed whatever bill
we're working on at the time
will simply be rolled over and
re scheduled for March
eighteenth.
So if you can't follow the
protocols would just reschedule
that bill for March eighteenth.
So with that being said let's go
ahead and go to our first.
Our first step bill which is
house bill one eighty four and
is representative of address
Romero here please.
Madam chair on I am writing and.
He's just.
Thank you very much committee
members I'm gonna go ahead and
get started here thank you so
much chairman Romero for being
with us today.
Please go ahead Sir with the
house bill one eighty four.
Hi everybody thank you Mr
chairman and madam chair so
house bill one eighty before as
we had talked about yesterday is
providing flexibility in the K.
five plus extended learning
programs so in terms of
flexibility this means
equivalent hours so currently in
statute to participate in these
programs you would have to add
days to the calendar so for K.
five plus you have to have
twenty five days
Higher to the start of the
school year extended learning
would be ten days this would
allow for approval in our so the
equivalent of twenty five days
or the equivalent of ten days I
know there had been talk a
yesterday obviously of the
amendment within this committee
and I think it was made pretty
clear about the wishes of the
committee on that amendment so
if the committee wishes to to
look at the amendment and
adopt it should the committee so
choose I think that would be
appropriate if that would be
appropriate with you Mr
chairman.
Thank you so much chairman
Romero.
So absolutely I think I would
agree with you that it would be
a phone this time to consider
the amendment for the proposed
amendment and everybody share
file for house bill one eighty
four.
In that.
moved for discussion madam
chair.
Sorry.
Can we have a motion and a
second for to move the house
bill one eighty four proposed
amendment things some of.
Great it's been moved by
Representative Dixon.
Seconded by Representative
Hochman Vigil.
For the amendment.
And.
We all have that amendment in
front of us.
Is there any okay Representative
small yes can you hear me here
freezing out I'm afraid okay I
apologize madam chair.
Can focus Adam chair committee
can people hear me.
We took yes we can you okay
great and I'll just go off of
video in order to to go there
okay.
Thank you Committee we have the
motion and a second for the
amendment.
Got it.
We're gonna go back briefly to
madam chair.
And thank you so much for
taking.
I am not on mute it according to
this computer.
You a very can you hear me now.
Yes.
great thank you very much.
We.
Motion and a second.
I apologize the
internet service here keeps
bouncing me out.
Try again.
Thank you Representative small.
So we've moved the discussion of
the amendment.
We have some folks that would
like to discuss the start with
Representative Syriana.
Thank you madam chair I really
like this ammendment I think it
really
gives the schools the
flexibility to either go to long
more days or more hours and
that's what kept us from doing
it because more days wasn't good
and wasn't good but but extended
days was good and I I like the
way you have it based on the
twenty eighteen twenty nineteen
school year so we have a set
time we're we're basing it on
and and then adding the days or
the time
I like this and I think the
schools will like this also and
the teachers will be willing to
do this thank you madam chair.
Thank you representative
Representative Lara.
Thank you madam chair and
members of the committee I I
want to echo what Representative
Sarinana is
sentiment with the bill you know
the the the purpose of this bill
madam chair and committee is is
to offer the school districts
that possibility that they need.
In order to implement this up
extended learning time and I and
I and I appreciate and I like
the the the the basis of the
bill and and the others
something article I can get
behind I also want to mention
that by using the eighteen
nineteen data it will it will
it'll give us what I like about
it and madam chair that will
give us some more stable
reliable baseline for the bill
as far as the as far as the the
the attendance and and the
student council we have so that
said I think this is a very good
look very good amendment to the
bill I think it's still keeps
the of the the premise of
offering the school districts
that option madam chair and I I
I want to offer I want to say
that I support this amendment
and I think this will will be
the the the the the part that
gets just over the the home care
to get this bill out of
committee thank you madam chair.
Representative Herrera.
Thank you thank you madam chair
and I to the I talked to I
superintendents the before we
came here the share and and
we're talking about what was
gonna happen in the state and I
was talking about K. five plus
extended learning and they all
said if you keep it flexible we
can work with it because they
really couldn't work with it
when we came out of two thousand
nineteen and I said just give us
the flexibility and we'll make
it work so for that I just would
like to add with my
superintendents told me and I I
think this amendment would make
that point thank you madam chair
that's all I have.
All right so I need to ask
because of my computer had the
chance to me out who is the
member that actually put forth
in the amendment because I'd
like for the public to
understand what the amendment
actually does and
Representative small what you
explain how this time is to the
budget yes madam chair in
committee thank you madam chair
and thanks related to you and
also our house Education
Committee bringing innovative
policy and here and House
Appropriations madam chair all
of us ensuring that
We can implement that policy in
a clear transparent and
effective budgetary manner madam
chair and committee when we go
to the last page of the
amendment
the prior part madam chair Inc
the the the most important part
and it's also at the beginning
of the amendment madam chair and
committee is that it bases it on
the number of and this is in B.
section one the base is the
extended the the option the
innovative option that our house
Education Committee is bringing
to us that allows for either
extra days which is been
historically the cases chairman
Romero outlined now we also
allow for extra time and madam
chair and committee in B.
section one it bases that extra
time on the number of
instructional hours and
instructional days I'm reading
verbatim provided in the twenty
eighteen twenty nineteen school
year.
Whichever provides the greater
number of total instruction
instructional hours for the
school year before the EDD
dition of extended learning time
programs so madam chair and
committee the innovative policy
our house Education Committee is
bringing to us to allow as
Representative southern Jana
noted the flexibility of adding
additional time.
We create as Representative Lara
noted through this ammendment a
clear baseline the year before
the pandemic at the twenty
eighteen twenty nineteen year.
Based upon the number of
instructional hours and
instructional days.
From that school district and so
this madam chair and committee
is a very important budgetary.
Approach that gives us a clear
starting point and allows us
with flexibility so whatever
those districts in those schools
were doing in that twenty
eighteen twenty nineteen year
right before the pandemic at it
says that's going to be the
foundation and this and this
looks ability to add additional
learning time for which we've
budgeted an additional seventy
million recurring dollars in
house bill two we can feel
confident that that will be
based off of that most recent
twenty eighteen twenty nineteen
year will add this extended time
in a flexible way madam chair
committee that we've heard our
school districts educators
parents children and our house
Education Committee state is an
important step that we need to
take thank you very much already
thank you is there any other
questions on my proposed
amendment.
We've moved it for discussion is
there anyone in opposition of
this ammendment.
Seeing the amendment has been
adopted back on the bill what's
the pleasure of the committee.
I move we do pass for house bill
one eighty endorsed by amended
second we have a motion and a
second is there any opposition
to that.
Saying the bill is passed out of
the appropriation committee
thank you madam chair thank you
all right let's go to the next
bill which is house bill two
thirty six.
We rolled over this bill
yesterday at the request of the
sponsor so go ahead Dawn
Representative and just as a
reminder we.
Focus on the financial piece of
bills we feel that these bills
have already gone through the
policy related committees we
don't need to have tons of
detail but we do need to
understand.
How this is being paid for so go
ahead Representative Roybal
Caballero.
Excuse me madam chair like to go
ahead and
invite in with me the co sponsor
the senator Jeff Steinborn he's
in but he's listed under my name
that it's this picture.
Can we bring him in place is
somewhere yes
It's.
On there with his mask and then
with my name.
Okay staff can we bring a man.
This is house bill two thirty
six yes ma'am.
Then.
Representative small thank you
madam chair as a.
Folks can see in the panelists
section madam chair that under
Patricia Roybal Caballero to and
we'll go ahead and and change
that name madam chair that is
where
Senator Steinborn is go ahead
the but he's on madam chair
thank you okay.
It madam chair can you hear me
we sure Council and straddling
to the US and you're on the
computer with the broken camera
so I can switch you over if you
would like to see my face or
maybe it'll help my vote if you
don't.
Whatever you're more comfortable
with Senator were comfortable
with so that I'm gonna switch
over madam chair she's going
second okay go ahead on the new
laptop go ahead thank you very
much sign in honor.
Madam chair while he's doing
that I just want to note that
I'll briefly just introduce the
bill and what it's doing and
then the lead presenter for
today will be Senator Steinborn
I'll be available with experts
do I need to let you know who
those experts are now more on
when Senator Steinborn addresses
the committee after Senator
Steinborn in that that way if we
have others that have joined us
we don't have to start over
thank you I appreciate
Senator whenever you're ready
should I go ahead and start
introduced a bill indeed and I'm
not right now all right thank
you so madam chair and
Committee thank you I am
together with senator Jeff
Steinborn today introducing
house bill two thirty six which
is.
Excuse me a bill relating to
public finance enacting the
public banking act in creating
the public thank you Mexico that
will allow is for the state of
New Mexico charter its own bank
and it will require just a
fraction of our deposits and
what this will do is allow New
Mexico to support small
businesses economic development
infrastructure development clean
energy and much more and to
discuss the what you requested
to be discussed
in the our introduction of the
bill I will move to.
Senator Jeff Steinborn.
Okay thank you madam chair.
All can you hear me OK.
Yes.
Thank you so much for here in
the bill.
The committee Senate bill three
thirteen does seek to set up.
With bank and like like a normal
bank you would have to be
chartered in the state of New
Mexico you have to follow
federal federal chartering
requirements which there are
many requirements for a bank to
be charter including having a
business plan and a lot of other
produce share requirements thank
could not courting the
legislation going operation
until that occurred.
It's.
It would have appointments
eleven board members appointed
between the governor and the
Legislative Council as well as
the head of the finance
authority.
The state treasurer and the hat
secretary Economic Development.
It would allow for a range of
of.
Opportunities and investments
which kind of combine investing
in public projects as well as
supporting emergency merging
businesses and community
development needs here in the
state I thank all of these
weights are what make this
unique from other state
functions we're doing right now.
It would
It would be seated with a
deposit from the state treasurer
of fifty million dollars
non appropriation for the
deposit just like in the state
treasury deposits funds and
other banks and deposit start
with fifty million in seed money
in this bank and also an
investment from the state
investment council I'm not an
appropriation but an investment
in the from the state investment
council like they invest they
would also see fifty million
dollars into this fine and
finally committee to just keep a
high level this is really
similar to what we're doing
right now I think some people
say well this is really
innovative this is crazy state
government supporting the
private sector we just did this
on a much larger scale than what
we're proposing with the New
Mexico financed Authority
starting with a four hundred
million dollar bill last year
for the pandemic to specifically
support distressed businesses
not necessarily the most
wonderful businesses but because
they were distressed and we do
that as a public benefit
now we're extending that there's
a five hundred million dollar
bill this year to that this is
kind of but of course those
sunset in those are limited to
the pandemic what we see here is
an additional instrument that
can help New Mexico create jobs
support communities and then use
that money made from those
investments made in a sound
investing way with season
financial managers and put that
those that those earnings back
to state for the same purposes
back for the citizens of the
state.
I will just close chair by
saying that the legislation
requires that the board higher a
very seasoned financial manager.
who has successfully managed a
similar size institutions the
board members all have expressed
similar experience related all
parts of the bill it will all be
very transparent yes finally
madam chair that did the board
the fund was setting up will
also that employee the board CEO
as well as the other staff.
And without manager will say we
have an amendment it's very
important as well.
For the clarity of the bill and
and the questions are going to
be asked about the relationship
of community bankers and.
Would love to our.
Discuss.
All righty what we're gonna do
as I I had understood that there
are people in the audience that
would like to make a comment we
what brief comments so we need
to know who they are and
Representative small bring and
then and again on March and
guidelines on how we take
comments in this committee
representative small thank you
very much madam chair I madam
chair attendees who wish to
comment upon this
the the comments will go for one
minute.
We will time those in support
and then in opposition or.
And so once you're recognized.
Will ask first for support and
then for opposition and then
just remember that once you
begin we will start the timer
for one minute of public
comment.
And madam chair I'm sorry R. I'm
I'm not familiar with your
process and I just want to make
sure we did have expert
witnesses are they those expert
witnesses included in the what
you're just asking for the pro
and con or do they address at.
Coming and and find expert.
What we're going to ask your
expert witnesses to talk about
Representative is the financial
piece okay and if they can add
anymore like to that they're
welcome to speak at this time if
not they would talk in general
with the regular audience.
Is that what they're purposes
yes madam chair I I would like
okay
the end may feel.
Again okay.
Then we have Stephen Gluck
stern.
Robert I think you set up and
then.
Angela Marquardt and I just
would like to let each one of
you is expert witnesses to it
here please to the chairs
suggestion protocol that we
address the financial aspect.
In your presentation and make it
please very brief thank you
thank you madam chair.
Dan Mayfield madam chair if I
could begin with them may feel.
Going.
Thank you madam chair committee
my name is Dan Mayfield
Representative Affleck New
Mexico's public bank's think
tank the time has come for New
Mexico to make the bold step of
taking control of its own
finances we believe this could
this bill is good public policy
that will not required
appropriation today to Mexico
lose up to half of the money it
spends on debt service interest
payments to big banks with bring
that money back home by creating
a public bank with H. B. two
thirty six which is the public
banking act this act will allow
New Mexico charter its own bank
by simply moving a tiny fraction
of its money which allowed
Mexico to put money toward small
businesses economic development
infrastructure clean energy and
much more we'll hear stories
every day of small businesses
to try but can't get loans to
open or expand their businesses
this these act this act can help
those entrepreneurs dreams come
true we already have support
from the City of Albuquerque the
City of Santa Fe the city of Los
crucis and the counties of
sanity Santa Fe Santa and San
Miguel who have all passed
resolutions and memorials in
support of the public banking
act of the credit union
association of New Mexico as
well as several chambers of
commerce and environmental
groups all support our proposed
today the state uses Wall Street
banks the only difference with
the public bank is that it would
be owned by the state
independently manage that means
the profits stay with us and the
legislature and is bored with
her will determine the
priorities of the past the state
would move not appropriate just
simply move money from current
accounts to the public bank and
invest some from the severance
tax permanent fund to be read to
be reinvested back in New Mexico
we believe this is a savings
bill not a spending bill the
state pays millions in fees
every year to big banks just
oversee our money imagine what
we could do we kept that money
right here this is good public
policy they'll create new funds
without spending any money or
raising taxes thank you very
much of Madam chairwoman
committee.
Right next is is is that yes
even go ahead.
Hi you're on mute.
Sorry about that thank you madam
chair members of the committee
my name is Steven Gluck stern I
have a Santa Fe resident I am
also the chair of the New Mexico
educational retirement board I
have a thirty year career in
finance and and asset management
I've been working with these
sponsors of the bill and the for
the.
Your organizations at the
looking at the financial aspects
that will I reiterate what Dan
Mayfield said is that this is
not a spending bill this is a
savings will it's not requiring
probation this is money today
the state of New Mexico on
average has billions of dollars
on deposit with money center
banks a very small portion of
that we would like to see put
into a New Mexico bank to secede
the ability of this bank to
support businesses in the state
of New Mexico and I'm happy to
answer any of the technical
questions that may come up later
thank you.
Okay let's go to Angela are you
on.
All right that'll started on.
Go ahead okay thank you.
My name is Bob Lang and I shared
a banking committee that put
together the the concept on
which the bill is based on
primarily here just to answer
any questions that come a come
up but I'd like to just up as
far as a couple of things one is
the.
Purpose of this bank this to
help economic development
throughout New Mexico including
our rural communities there are
suffering to a very large extent
from the need for finance
secondly it would grow the but
the state's revenues as well as
the bank as it creates its own.
Our income net income each year
would add to the states of.
resources so the bank would grow
and the third is that the bank
would be able to use the funds
that are being invested and
deposited into.
To leverage more loans this is
something of funding cannot do
but a banking the banking act
enables a bank to do this and
under regulation.
That it could loan ten times the
capitalization or the equity at
after the equity begins to grow
so it enables the state to of
acquire more funds in order to
that that are actually created
by the bank that enables the
state to use more money in
pursuit of infrastructure and
economic development.
And I'm open to any questions as
we go thank you.
All right does go to Angela
would you go go ahead ma'am.
Thank you madam chair and
members of the committee I'm
Angela Merker executive director
of alliance for local economic
prosperity and what I'd like to
emphasize is that the public
bank could be an additional tool
in our state's finance system to
keep our Revenue safe local and
working for New Mexicans rather
than for Wall Street and we do
have interest and there is
recognition from several of the
departments and agencies that
this could be a compliment to
the funds that are currently
existing in contrast to the
competition.
So what will be will be
available for questions later
and I appreciate the opportunity
that we have to present the
bill.
Okay now this for the experts we
have others that want to make
just a brief comment on the bill
itself.
Thank you madam chair if I might
go to the attendees I had thank
you madam chair okay please
again we're gonna go for public
comment for one minute I'm going
to go down the list as it
appears in our attendee list and
so once your your your name
please come off of mute and
again we're gonna time for one
minute and then I I will we will
jump in and one minute for for
everyone okay we're going to
begin these are comments and
support we're going to begin
with Clifton Chadwick.
Clifton Chadwick please comment
for one minute.
Okay we're what we're yes please
go ahead.
My apologies I.
By local movie whose idea is
that one of the important ways
for growth in New Mexico's to
maintain our resources within
the state just over the past
several years I've been
involved with trying to help
promote this act on the same
principle the only opportunity
for growth the state has right
now is to keep as much of our
resources within the state of
public bank will help do that
and keep our money recirculating
with the state thank you very
much I hope we can pass this
bill.
Thank you very much Mr Chadwick
next we're going to go to George
and the gamble that.
Please go ahead for one minute.
Okay Georgian do gamble on mute
yourself if we don't hear you
will just go down the line and
then come back to you Georgian
do gamble.
Let's go ahead then we're gonna
go we'll come back we'll go to
now the Las Vegas peace and
justice center.
Thank you.
My name is Pat Lee and madam
chair committee members we
appreciate this opportunity the
state that the Las Vegas peace
and justice center here in
northeast New Mexico is in full
support of a public bank for New
Mexico we saw how it worked in
North Dakota they got their
folks through COVID nineteen the
O. eight recession storms floods
all kinds of things we need that
now you're for New Mexico all
the projects we need here in
northeast New Mexico could be up
to forty percent cheaper if we
had a public thank are part of
the state deserves is economic
justice we hope that you will
vote in favor of house bill two
three six thank you so much.
Thank you very much let's go
back George and do gamble.
Okay let's go ahead next we're
going to go to Paul Gibson Paul
Gibson for one minute please.
Thank you madam chair and
committee members my name is
Paul Gibson co founder retake
Our Democracy an all volunteer
organization with twenty five
hundred members statewide and
recheck our democracy strongly
supports this bill H. B. two
thirty six was roled so the bill
Sanchez could respond to the FIR
assertion that H. B. two thirty
six was seeking a and dollar
general fund allocation they
have And that response and I
would hope that given that lack
of this fiscal impact this
committee can move this bill
will.
Are so many good policy in
fiscal reasons for doing so.
Urged.
Excuse me please continue I'm
sorry public key bank can
leverage its deposits by a
factor of ten meeting the
proposed fifty million from
deposit can be magnified ten
times creating five hundred
million dollars lending power it
can then further leverage that
power by partnering with local
jurisdictions credit unions and
community banks in.
The State Bank has been in
operation for in North Dakota
for a hundred years and it does
not compete with community banks
thank you very much for your
service and support we support
H. B. two thirty six thank you
very much next we're gonna go to
Georgian do gamble.
Can you hear us now yes thank
you.
Thank you madam chair and
committee members my name is
Judy gamble a Georgia night are
outreach volunteers with the
alliance for local economic
press.
Prosperity and prior to COVID we
travel to the seven counties in
our area speaking with county
commissioners and community
members about the about
economic.
We have.
quite a let me of things that
county commissioners and
community members told us about
the needs and communities to
bring them back to life and of
we especially want to make the
case for small farmers and
ranchers who a small farmer
could put up a whole house to
extend his or her growing season
or possibly five thousand
dollars and it just takes those
little kinds of efforts to make
these rural communities come
back to life.
Very much Mr and Mrs gamble
thank you next we're going to go
to Rebecca hi also argue that.
This time so I get ready thank
you please.
Thank you madam chair members of
the committee my name is Rebecca
just thank you Larry I am a
member of senseless Public bank
will help community banks credit
unions and community development
financial institutions multiply
and thrive I Lente capital to
them at lower rates it will have
more capital to plan to members
of the community the public it's
not a competitor it's a I'm here
the bridge was built she was
partnership you get it they know
that a public man will help them
expand their services places
where the only alternative were
small business and needs just a
few thousand dollars degree
Lente that's why they support a
public bank I hope that someday
capital will be available to
everyone everywhere in New
Mexico all farmers and ranchers
will gain better access to much
needed loan opportunities as
well in an engine in our
indigenous communities will have
more options than a payday
lender about.
Allies this is as this bill
thank you thank you very much
we're now going to go to Sarah
manning.
Sarah manning please are you
there.
Okay we can come back to me
please go ahead miss manning
thank you madam chair and
committee members I think that
New Mexico will always real from
oil and gas cycles until you
change our investment policy
when we invest in and build up
our communities our local
businesses we will develop a
robust resilient state economy
Mexico has the opportunity now
to the create this investment
told our communities need.
New Mexico's public bank will
become the New Testament
investment tool that I'm
referring to capitalizing the
bank with fifty million from the
severance fund which is simply a
change in investment
will create this missing
investment tool in generations
from now New Mexicans will be
grateful that our legislator had
wisdom to invest in our own
people New Mexico's bank will
invest our money in New Mexico
through working through our
community banks and credit
unions to develop let's programs
thank you.
Thank thank you very much next
we're going to go to Justin
Friedman.
Mr Friedman all.
Madam chair and committee
members I'm Justin Friedman I'm
from house I had an in depth
conversation with a local banker
in our area I was not able to
determine his objection to
having a public bank I heard him
say that our state government
resorted to large beyond that I
could not determine why was so
adamant in his opposition I've
been involved with lobbying for
public bank for a number of
months and to this day have not
been able to understand local
bankers objections to a public
bank no amount or method of
reassurance that the legislation
is constructed to support and
strengthen local banks may seem
to matter I came to the
conclusion that there is
something the business model of
independent local bankers that I
must not really understand and
then must account for their
opposition but tell us needs
this legislation we passed our
county commission and town
council or waiting to see how
you proceed our community needs
a public bank thank you.
Thank you very much next we're
going to go to Melissa Pickett
Melissa Pickett please for one
minute.
Thank you madam chair committee
members my name is Melissa
Pickett I'm a former vice
president of the New Mexico
community bank my bank was an
early casualty of acquisition by
Wall Street banks I speak in
support of house bill two three
six.
Mexico Public bank will serve
the function of economic value
added to support our local
communities public banks are
supportive of community banks
and credit unions for example
your ninety four separate banks
in North Dakota eighty five of
which have a working
relationship with the public
bank of North Dakota this is
representative of a partnership.
There are many disruptors
affecting community bank
viability the public bank
however is not a threat Wall
Street banks and most notably
fintechs or financial technology
companies are a threat as a
banker I propose that a public
bank will be a partner with and
support for our community banks
and credit unions there are many
ways the public bank will serve
New Mexico please give this
pulled a practical solution an
opportunity thank you.
A.
The it optimal.
Thank you.
Madam chair members of the
committee my name's Dave because
TI Services CEO for native
community capital we're a native
community development financial
institution or CDFI with our
headquarters in Laguna New
Mexico Mr Garcia is on this
committee is our representative
in the state legislature over
the last ten years we've
deployed over eighteen million
in loans to support
entrepreneurs and homeowners and
we're going to in other Indian
reservations passage of this was
the legislation to establish the
New Mexico public bank would go
far in advancing the work we do
to increase equitable access to
capital and communities at a
previous hearing members of the
New Mexico small bankers
association seem to suggest that
day and other state agencies
already do the work that is
needed and proposed for the New
Mexico State Bank that assertion
based on my twenty five years
working on tribal economic
development issues is frankly
and simply laughable
Representative Garcia can attest
that the typical banking
services only gonna and in the
country in general is out of
reach for most tribal members
more often predatory lenders
practice their deceptive
extractive practices before any
community bank would think to
provide services we only provide
a small number services
otherwise available for a more
typical under due to our small
size and yet we've been able to
move for without the investment
support assistance with New
Mexico Mexico banking community
with the exception of one
particular project progressive
credit union madam chair members
of the committee I urge you and
your colleagues to approve this
legislation allow for all of New
Mexico citizens benefit from
better access to financial
services thank you.
Already said we now have my for
Richard bringing the folks stand
sense Representative small
needed step.
Are you bringing them you have
the list there.
Hello I was just on mute I able
to go public content don't go
ahead and give us your name and
make a statement for one minute
please.
Hello madam chair members of
committee my name is our agency
your merry coffer and I'm here
on behalf of Jessica you should
outcome crisis action for those
of you who don't know us just is
a use like comment and of our
mental justice organization with
membership throughout northern
New Mexico in our home state the
connection between environmental
justice economic justice is
undeniable we have an abusive
relationship with extractive
industries that is funding one
third of our state but of our
state budget we shift our
economic system so that it
begins to serve the people of
our state so that it serves
about community us young folks
and working families so that it
doesn't assess the take the
desecration of our lands the
poisoning of our bodies and so
that it doesn't threaten our
future we see public banking as
a way to facilitate greater
democratic control over our
financial institutions and
economic system we see this way
to cultivate deeper investment
in our communities in the
cycling of dollars within our
local economy we are strong
supporters of HB two three six I
thank the sponsors and you madam
chair and members of the
committee for voting yes on this
important bill thank you for
your time all right.
Do we have anyone else Mike
you're bringing a man.
All righty bill are we do we
have a staff person bringing
these people and so they can
speak.
So madam chair I've been on
muted so I may be the next
person but I've been not all
right we're going.
Thank you your Lundstrom and
members of the committee my name
is Kim Shanahan I've been home
builder in Santa Fe for over
thirty five years I'm also the
former head of the Santa Fe area
home builders association and
presently write a column on home
building issues for the Santa Fe
New Mexico Representative
Crowder the past president of
the New Mexico homebuilders
association knows very well the
ability of small local home
building developers to get
subdivision infrastructure loans
from any local banks that
haven't already been swallowed
by regional banks is darn near
impossible if we can't get
infrastructure loans we built
visions and we can't help solve
the housing crisis State Bank
empowered self to make or back
such infrastructure loans for
local development please ask
lobbyist Jerry Walker when the
time comes how many of his banks
have provided non recourse now.
Ma'am I'm gonna ask you not to.
Bring up specific names in your
comment I want you to talk about
why this bill is important thank
you madam chair and thank you
for correcting me I did not know
that what what I would suggest
and hope that you will on the
other side comes forward ask
those local bankers how many of
non recourse infrastructure
loans for new to subdivisions
they have granted like they did
before the housing collapse.
It won't be in it maybe not.
Thank you all right next.
Next we will go to Lisa bark a
little blue so if you could go
ahead please.
Are muted miss Parker global.
Okay.
Your if we can go next to a Neal
Sawyer.
You can go ahead.
Madam chair members of the
committee my name is Amy
elsewhere I am a vice president
for region one for the
communication workers of America
local seven seventy six and I
want to but you know that are
you strongly supports the idea
of keeping our money securely in
New Mexico under the watchful
eye of the New Mexico State Bank
where the money can be used to
help New Mexico businesses and
community banks New Mexico New
Mexican people that we represent
rather than hedge funds hedge
fund managers on Wall Street.
New Mexico is not a poor state
with nearly twenty billions
invested on Wall Street New
Mexico sits between Texas and
West Virginia terms of the value
of our sovereign wealth fund if
the New Mexico state investment
council operating bank.
Two hundred billions of dollars.
No need for representatives to
continue pretending that we do
not have the capital to invest
in our people it's time to bring
some of this money how to invest
in our great people especially
in this time of multiple crises
let's bring New Mexico into the
twenty first century no putting
our money where it belongs in a
State Bank I hope that you all
will support H. B. two thirty
six as we do thank you.
Okay next.
Okay in order to all
one minute limit and we'll go
next to will we support.
We say okay this is your chance
to say something for.
We need done Miller.
Mike she's muted.
Okay madam chairman able to
renew her so we will go to our
next commenter let's go to Gary
Payton here if you could go
ahead and speak Sir.
Madam chair committee members my
name is Gary Payton representing
a coalition of sustainable
communities New Mexico the
coalition of the elected leaders
representing communities of
forty percent of the state's
population our coalition is
focused on sustainability
climate action and social equity
in December and January the city
councils or the county
commissions the cities of
Albuquerque Los crucis Santa Fe
County yes singular discrete
resolution to memorials calling
for a public bank Santa Fe
included support and an overall
legislative priorities
resolution.
These communities in vision
support for municipal solar
arrays on public buildings
community solar projects in low
and moderate income
neighborhoods start energy
independence and lower their
cost burdens support for farmers
and ranchers to bridge the
transition can more.
Longer addition laterals to
mitigate exposure to urban heat
promoting healthy walking and
biking we urge you to vote yes
on how to build to thirty six
thank you very much.
Okay we have unmuted Louisa.
I'm gonna let you speak for one
minute and I've got
Representative Sweetser helping
time on that.
So go ahead.
Thank you very much madam
chairman
I would like to speak for a list
of the dire who is a member of
our group and she has another
committee which is meeting at
the same time.
Is that okay.
Go ahead thank you
my name is Elizabeth Dyer I've
been in neighborhood in Rio
Rancho I spent thirty years of
my career planning and
implementing housing and
community economic development
programs to local governments
during my tenure at and she's
facing like concerned
about the debt like cities and
communities create remain must
continuously fund infrastructure
projects by issuing bonds that
create tax free income from
private investors and now said
the state's last five camper
show that cost added to
principal as a result of
interest bond insurance costs
and fees range from twenty one
to fifty percent.
We must continue at that we have
our dollars in that okay.
Then your time's up I apologize
that's I thank you for letting
the state thank you very much
okay Mike this go the next next
and that's up is that your next
will go to Pamela Roy.
Okay.
Go ahead.
Madam chair and committee
members this is Pamela Roy I'm
here representing the New Mexico
food and agriculture policy
council we are in full support
of house bill two thirty six
public banking act because we
really believe that this is an
important opportunity to expand
economic opportunities in New
Mexico keep our money home at
least some of that home in New
Mexico and they really would
provide options and benefit food
agriculture and energy
initiatives in the state so we
think the committee and the
sponsors for bringing this bill
forward and for your support
thank you very much.
All righty next.
But we have next my next chair
will go to Lee less lean please
okay.
Go ahead please.
Can you hear me now yes thank
you did you representative Lente
same solemn and I've been
advocating for a public bank in
New Mexico for the last five
years ever since I first learned
that all of our taxes are being
deposited into Wall Street banks
are charging speeds when passing
those dollars and things like
one gas pipelines weapons of
war.
I don't want my tax dollars
being vested in these kinds of
things and making more street
bankers and their investors
richer I think it's fair to ask
that we the people of New Mexico
should be able to decide where
that money is invested and so
much the better if we can
invested locally in small
businesses infrastructure and
other socially economically and
environmentally ethical ways so
I can to support public thank
you.
Thank you.
Thank.
Next we'll go to Athena and
please forgive me Christodoulou
perhaps thank you to you've got
it perfectly perfectly right
thank you so much chair
committee members my name
Justina Christodoulou and I
represent I am the political
director the island a
progressive caucus and we are in
full support of the H. B. two
thirty six for public banking we
realize that and it might take
educating the community banks
based on the last hearing but
we've been in touch with the
promoters and understand what's
going on and we want the money
to stay in New Mexico be used in
New Mexico invested in New.
It invested in grow in New
Mexico and we want to be able to
transition with confidence to a
clean and diverse economy
please.
Okay do past for H. B. two
thirty six thank you.
Next thank you madam well let's
go to Vince Higgins.
Yes thank you madam chair and
thank you for having this moment
for us as a service in a rural
county I am in support of H. B.
two thirty six as well as
partner in the Senate what I
find is the growth that is
needed in New Mexico is upon
local development not
development from outside banks
not development from others what
we need is more banks in our
communities and I find the the
way that the bank is working
with the New Mexico to.
Is it has developed more banking
opportunities it gives people an
previously unbanked areas
opportunities to bank their
funds law actually not be
subject to the predatory lending
the some of the storefront
lenders get I urge the committee
and all of the representatives
to support this bill is full
measure thank you.
Next.
Okay.
The other would be.
Hello thank you madam chair of
my name is Tom leatherwood I
live in Santa Fe but I've worked
with New Mexico counties and
towns for thirty years and
community and economic
development including projects
as you know in Gallup and
McKinley County what we all know
is that the needs of those small
towns and rural areas and
throughout the state is great
but the opportunities for
financial investment and for
economic development or to limit
I have been an advocate for
public banking for many years
beginning decades ago as senior
staff to a California Senate
select committee we're I drafted
legislation for State Bank
following that North Dakota
simple and often not referred to
FDR's reconstruction finance
corporation.
Alas in spite of widespread
support from hearings across the
state community banks credit
unions producer consumer quote
housing small business advocates
and many others we did not
succeed in large part because a
predictably false claims I
believe from the banking
industry and of creating an
atmosphere where caution was a
was one of.
Tom Hey your time's up okay I
just strongly support the bill
thank you thank you Tom.
Next.
We'll go we'll we're please
there.
Yes my name is will we're.
good evening good afternoon
madam chair and members my name
is will where I'm from right in
New Mexico I'm twenty five years
to twenty five miles east of
town out on the prairie I'm the
owner of Preah American a
business that audits
correctional facilities all
across the country
I'm just wanting to show you an
example I'm just one of hundreds
of different ways that this bank
could be successful you know the
that you're talking about the
funding the public bank grows
from its investments I am a
criminologist and as time goes
by here in the next few years
there's going to be a major
shift from mass incarceration to
community.
Alternatives to incarceration
and if I go to a regular banker
at this time without the public
bank they will roll their eyes I
will not be asking for anything
that's risky I will simply be
utilizing funding that is
already there but the and the
public bank when the legislature
decides that this is a priority
and they free up state.
Of funding for this because then
I will be able to get money
through a local bank and I will
be able to pay that back easily
because this is going to be a
big a big deal so I'm just
wanted to show you how it's
growing and to provide that
simple thank you okay next.
My Chris next.
We'll go to rocks and Alan
please.
Madam chair members of the
committee thank you for this
opportunity my name is Roxanne
Allen I live in Albuquerque I'm
a member of results of citizens
anti poverty advocacy
organization I'd like to give
you another example of how the
North Dakota state public bank
makes a difference North Dakota
shares of river border with
Minnesota in nineteen ninety
seven that river flooded twenty
feet above flood level cities on
both sides of the river
inundated North Dakota on the
west bank used State Bank funds
to help it recover quickly
Minnesota on the east bank had
to rely on the theme of private
funds are traditional state
funding the North Dakota side
recovered quickly the Minnesota
just Minnesota side never really
did New Mexico has its own
problems to be addressed you
heard yesterday about the lack
of funding for urgently needed
after school programs a state
public bank would help fund
projects like that that struggle
to provide funding I
respectfully urge this committee
to give New Mexico that
advantage by approving H. B. two
thirty six.
Okay next my.
We'll go to next year's please.
Thank you
Madam chair and and members of
the committee my name is Nancy
burst and I am the Bernalillo
county treasurer and I fully
support house bill two thirty
six of personally of this is the
State Bank of the public bank
came out of my board of about
eight to ten years ago so I've
been involved in following of
the track of public banking in
New Mexico that long and fully
support it I think it's another
option another banking option
for New Mexico and as the county
treasurer I'm excited to have a
another tool in my toolbox and
secondly you know we have to
remember this is the people's
money it should be used for the
people it this is a way to
democratize our tax dollars for
public good and I fully support
that so I ask that you also
support this in the committee
and passes public bank act thank
you thank you Nancy okay next.
Next we go to it is Swinton mobs
please.
Eight are you on.
Yes I am.
Your phone.
Well.
Okay.
Go ahead.
Madam chair and committee
members thank you for your time
I am with the Las Vegas peace
and justice center and then in
Santa Fe right now my name is it
is one of this and I am twelve
years old and I'm in support of
the public bank bill house bill
two thirty six because the
public bank keeps money inside
the state instead of sending it
out of state public banks
because on the save up to forty
percent in New Mexico or any
state it can make a big
difference with the public with
this in mind I hope you'll
support house bill two thirty
six for New Mexico thank you
madam chair committee members.
All right it looks like we have
Bill also that's been unmuted
Esther.
A good afternoon madam chair
members of the committee thank
you for your time today I am a
high school history teacher and
a member of any a national
education association I
supported a public banks in New
Mexico for many years now.
Testing on state revenues out
money in Wall Street inventions
shareholders all over the world
let's keep our money here in New
Mexico.
We can invested in our own
people
I don't believe the public back
a public bank will compete with
community banks in fact in North
Dakota and other places where
they have public banks community
banks are actually assisted and
supported by public funds
please support house bill two
thirty six the public back to
New Mexico thank you.
All in support that we have Mike
well yes madam chair okay let's
go to the center in opposition
to this bill could you please
raise your hand and then we'll
we'll call on you accordingly so
go ahead Mike and.
You madam chair will begin with
the typical press will be
Albuquerque number.
Okay Kerry call your first thank
you very much madam chair
members of the committee from
both president and CEO of the
greater out on one side two
points made by weight loss.
Public plans that lay their
reports thank one one by market
down here public thank you.
So why is all right the agency
might be able to do
that is why I wrote the day
Mexico is where what problem
this legislation.
All what secretary will be
widely expected government job
this last thank you.
Additionally I think soccer
backwards what.
Our work.
The
chair members of the committee
we are going to reflect this
legislation why I appreciate the
opportunity thank you very much.
Thank you next my next.
The Jerry Walker that's next yes
okay Jerry go ahead.
Chairman thank you very much my
name is Jerry Walker I'm the
president and CEO of the
independent community bankers of
New Mexico madam chairman we
represent to all of the home
banks here in New Mexico
statewide every community bank
in the state as a member of ICBA
New Mexico we feel that the
creation of a State Bank far
outweighs any upside that will
be demonstrated here by the
speakers following me I want to
do is to encourage the committee
and I know they will take a hard
look at the FIR that was
presented to you madam chairman
the FIR shows it is a fifty
million dollar nonrecurring
appropriation from the severance
tax fund and a fifty million
dollar nonrecurring
appropriation from the general
fund and beyond that Madam
chairman and members the
committee the bank would lose
about four hundred and eighty
million dollars in the first
year nine hundred and I'm sorry
four hundred eighty thousand
dollars a first year nine
hundred and sixty eight thousand
dollars a second year in about a
million and a half third year
and madam chairman of the F. R.
O. also goes on to point out
that let's
expect the the looks to be very
working Jerry sorry madam
chairman thank you very much we
thanks.
Thank you very okay let's go
next we have next Mike in
opposition.
to Ashley Wagner please.
Okay.
Thank you madam chair members of
the committee and Ashley Wagner
director of public policy for
the Mexico chamber of commerce
we oppose this bill for many
reasons already stated because
it aims to divert public money
away from immediate economic
recovery needs and put it into a
risky investment however there
is little concern about whether
this measure you can meet the
definition of investment in New
Mexico constitution authorizes
the legislature to determine how
money in the severance tax
severance tax permanent fund
will be invested but strictly
limit the distribution from the
fund well other economically
targeted investment programs
have a requirement or mechanism
that allows for pre payment or
investment returns to flow back
to the S. T. P. S. according to
the F. I. R. the language in the
bill would appear to make the
fifty million dollar S. TPF
commitment more like an
appropriation that investment
with no possibility of realizing
investment gains or losses thank
you.
Okay next thanks a lot.
In.
Madam chair members of the
committee on Carlos funds had
the president of the New Mexico
business coalition we
respectfully oppose this bill as
we believe that community banks
excel in building up quality
community partner there's over
two hundred and twenty locations
providing lots of jobs to New
Mexicans safely providing sixty
percent of all small business
loans and more than eighty
percent of all agricultural
loans one of the most important
issues for providing safe loans
is to have an established
relationship with the consumer
there's no better scenario than
a community bank with the banker
making the decisions knows the
people and knows the community
and knows their needs community
banks have their own dollars at
risk not those of the state tax
payers we hope you will oppose
this bill and thank you for your
consideration thank you for
listening.
Can you hear me madam chair yes
John Wayne Anderson we can hear
you go ahead thank you so much
madam chair members the
committee
I'm John Anderson I
Representative New Mexico
bankers association are the NMAA
stands in strong opposition to
H. B. two thirty six we are
opposed to the public bank as we
believe it is not necessary and
provide no benefit to New Mexico
residents or businesses the
implications are creating a
public bank pose risks to New
Mexico taxpayers and would
settle the state was significant
on wanted costs to replicate a
highly competitive regulated and
federally insured banking system
that existing communities
throughout New Mexico starting a
public bank would consume public
funds about a hundred million
dollars that could be used for
other urgent needs such as
health safety infrastructure
community development instead of
offering financial services
which are already provided
addition late by tax paying
private sector banks are.
John I'm gonna have to cut you
off there we sorry only had a
minute thank you.
Thank you madam chair okay who's
next.
My because of this tax.
If.
Sure we had submitted a list of
witnesses.
Okay.
Already we have the who are you
leading in next line.
J. standing.
Thank you madam chair you able
to hear me yes Sir.
Thank you and thank you to the
committee members I'm Jed
fanning CEO of citizens bank of
Los crucis I'm also a board
member of the independent
community bankers of New Mexico
in service board chair for the
greater Las Cruces chamber of
commerce there's no shortage of
community bank locations with
dollars to land a willingness to
serve New Mexico consumers and
small businesses Furthermore the
fiscal impact reports it's been
referenced prepared by your LFC
raises multiple concerns and
questions and specifically
indicates that funds dedicated
to a public bank would be an
unnecessary duplication of
public resources there are other
pressing needs that deserve our
state's resources especially now
also November letter from our
New Mexico financial
institutions division to the New
Mexico Indian Affairs Committee
five of the nine pages outline
multiple studies to evaluate the
feasibility of a state owned
bank in different states based
on costs and risks lack of need
it's no surprise that many banks
have decided against the idea in
Washington state treasurer study
of studies from that it was
determined and I'll quote none
of the studies conclusively
provided a business plan or
complete market analysis which
would answer the question what
is lacking and how would a State
Bank conclusively fill the gap.
Close this bill thank you thank
you get.
Okay who's next Mike.
They were at.
Hello.
Getty good afternoon I can you
hear me yes we can go ahead my
name is Jay Jenkins I'm
president and CEO of CMB banking
Carlsbad and we are strongly
oppose this bill.
I represent a bank it's about
five hundred million in assets
and we are meeting the needs of
our customers thousands of
customers locally and throughout
the state with several
development projects going on in
Carlsbad as well as other
communities pardoning partnering
with other community bank in New
Mexico
what's been mentioned on that
financial impact report six
pages of concerns The New Mexico
financial institutions division
that was also mentioned nine
pages of concerns as a bank it's
hard to talk about financials
without regulations we're proud
to be regulated by the FDIC and
the New Mexico financial
institutions division the public
bank is trying to steer clear of
regulation and at that a high
risk to our taxpayers again I
hope the committee will strongly
oppose this okay here okay next
is
The more we have tax money.
Okay.
I think madam chair this is
Debbie Moore president CEO The
Great offices chamber of
commerce okay we're ready for
you to be more go ahead thank
you madam chair members of the
committee on behalf of the
greater Las Cruces chamber
farmers we are in all the
reasons stated prior to any
opposition we stand opposed
because one of the reasons as
diversion of state revenues are
going to close the bank one of
the following financial risk and
certainly of the constitutional
regulatory probe for him
provisions including the average
donation laws among other things
we strongly asked the committee
to oppose this legislation thank
you madam chair okay thank you
who's next.
Hello this is Paul guessing at
the Rio Grande foundation.
For a free market think tank
organization opposes this
legislation when.
It's claim that there are all
kinds of great benefits to a
very vague proposal it's
something that should make
policy makers hair stand up on
the back of its they're not
because.
This is a dangerous proposal.
It could result in a politically
driven bank and the the idea
that we have.
Banking authorities here that
are not going to be able to
handle what's already needed we
have banking needs that already
are filled I just question what
possible benefit could be coming
from this kind of banking system
well we we already have bankers
that handle all the transactions
needed thank you.
Next.
Who is next is it Teresa Molina.
Thank good afternoon madam chair
and members of the committee my
name is that some of the non
present a first New Mexico bank
condemning the likelihood of a
public bank receiving access to
the federal reserve says payment
system or deposit insurance FDIC
is practically nil without
access to the federal reserve
payment system a public bank
would be severely limited in its
abilities to process payments in
a timely manner or have access
to the state short term
liquidity funding program that
federally insured institutions
are requests there are currently
several governmental and because
I grab a mental agencies in New
Mexico that provide access to
lower cost funding for community
infrastructure improvements
economic development projects
and affordable housing I
strongly urge the committee to
oppose house bill two thirty six
thank.
Okay next is the.
Clemente Sanchez.
Go ahead
go ahead Senator.
Good afternoon madam chair and
members of the committee great
to hear your voice again
like you know I pose the
question madam chair well what
market failures are gaps exist
to require a need for a public
bank I don't see them I don't
know where they're at so I I
don't see where that need is.
In addition.
This would put the funds that
will be put in this of all the
bank the state funds will be at
risk because I don't see the
possibility of the State Bank of
Tate FDIC insurance or the
federal reserve payments is
access to federal reserve and
system.
We as community banks and banks
right now we have to pledge
securities on any public funds
that we that we have in our bank
so the funds for the to the
taxpayer are protected by that
message along with other.
Other avenues that we have and I
would just like to conclude
there is a big risk when you
have this type of the public
bank and the board structure of.
Could invite undue political or
financial it influence of we I
think we're seeing that in some
of the legislation that we
passed in special session we
had.
Wells get financing or ran
through the that system so I I
strongly opposes and mainly
madam chair members of the
committee because I just don't
see where they're at where the
market failures of gaps exist
never require a need for public
bank banking system now is
taking care development
mortgages acceptance thank you
madam chair all righty thank you
very much that concludes our
public comment
We got a lot of public comment
today in support and in
opposition of this bill so now
we're going to go to the
committee members for questions
and we're gonna start with
Representative Anderson.
Thank you madam chair madam
chair I'm gonna be short this
afternoon because I know we've
got a lot of bill still coming
up ask anybody who feels one of
my questions to please keep your
answers short of because time is
is really kicking madam chairman
I listen this afternoon and I
think while public bank what a
marvelous idea that makes no
sense and by that I mean house
bill two thirty six a I hear
about a bank that's going to
provide infrastructure loans
which could reduce New Mexico's
dependence upon oil and gas
revenue it's going to increase
the safety of New Mexico cash
thank you put here in New Mexico
it's going to help economic
development New Mexico it's
gonna find five thousand dollars
for growing barred it's gonna be
for because forty percent
cheaper projects it's going to
provide food nag initiative
funding money stays here used in
New Mexico clean economy
eliminate predatory lending good
grief how can you not be for
that.
Well the reason I have right
doubt is I do not hear anybody
talking about
The
level of capitalization is
sufficient to make this bank
profitable or is that even
objective I've heard the words
of a profitable but for
nonprofit well I have heard
comments the relative to a
highly unprofitable bank so I'm
I'm here to just the the the
sponsor is just going to be a
federal charter or state
charter.
Sanchez thank you madam chair
Senator.
Madam chair representative yes
it's going to be state chartered
following federal laws so you
can get the best of both.
And if I could just briefly
answer your other question it
up.
It it will actually you checked
off a lot of great reasons of
what they can do you're right
it's limited by the amount of
capital that will fund that and
we're starting off with a small
amount of money relatively
speaking to be able to do that
so
is there a need that we need is
demonstrated by the funding that
we provided.
Just this last during the
pandemic about loans to
businesses that were struggling
that obviously needed that
liquidity but certainly there's
lots of other opportunities but
I just want to put it into the
sentence by saying that it will
all be professionally managed it
up but legislation requires that
will have a very seasoned
financial manager with the board
that will oversee that person
following the rules of federal
chartering so it will not go as
it grows so to speak but you're
right they can do a lot of good
for New Mexico and that's why I
want to do it thank you senator
in in doing a lot of good for
New Mexico and keeping that
money here in Mexico and not
letting it get to Wall Street
Sir I my question to you is do
you really believe that the
establishment of a New Mexico
bank will provide.
From flowing to Wall Street
question.
Well Madam chair representative
really important component of
the bank will be working the
public bank will be working
through community banks to loan
out money so it's actually it's
actually a partnership
arrangement so it's not there's
nothing in the bank says stop
money from flowing anywhere it's
it's really about flowing money
to New Mexico Public purposes so
it's it's possible that are you
know with the range of
partnerships that will be
involved in investing this
capital that it could end up
lots of places.
Thank you thank you senator
madam chair I'm gonna try to
wrap this up because I I don't
want to become redundant but
when I hear.
Madam chair of the idea of.
Thanks needing additional of.
I'm a little unclear whether
it's G. that they the support
from the public bank is going to
be in the form of debt for
equity into these community
banks but I'm really left.
Pondering.
Are the community banks.
And capable through their
current capital structure to
service the loan needs within
their community question.
Madam chair and Representative
thank you for the question I
think I'm going to take a first
job at it and then call on Dan
Miller who member.
The the concept of the idea is
that we have
the public bank leveraging so
when we talk about standing in
partnership than it is to
complement.
and to leverage what already is
there and to help circulate.
On the money but to keep on
circulating and leverage.
And complementing the money.
In the state of New Mexico from
the state of New Mexico taxpayer
money has been has been stated
and then
Keeping it here so do you like
to ask for that madam chair.
Thank you madam chair
representative Rebecca Rios and
representatives committee so how
we see this working as of as
it's a bankers thank you doesn't
have a retail locations right
this is a place where banks go
to get capitol there are sixteen
bankers banks already all across
the nation most thanks in New
Mexico use a bank called the
independent which is in Texas
just like you to bank account
bank also needs a bank account
and we're basically losing all
of that money to the independent
in Texas when we could start our
own public banks here and keep
that money working for New
Mexico here thank thank you very
much for that response and of
these sixteen banks that already
exists that are bankers banks
they are deficient in meeting
the needs of New Mexicos banks
is yes collusion yep for now at
I'm really short of my time so
please make it short.
Madam chair representative I
will make the short they are not
deficient in meeting the state
in the the community banks needs
here in New Mexico well if we
could start public bank your we
could add capacity to that in
start lending money to those
banks and lower interest rates
and by having a lower interest
rate that makes every loan down
the line less expensive it helps
the whole situation.
Thank you.
Wait a minute wait a minute
we're going to have one at a
time so let's go back to
Representative Anderson and that
will Senator Steinborn thank you
madam chair madam chair I'm
gonna take at eight in service
complete and full of I am
concerned that
we're not.
We're not creating something
that is just a marvelous idea
and I really and Tax to try to
see where the gap is that we're
trying to fill with this this
public bank because
I'm I think if if the bank is to
loan money to community banks I
think will help they may not
want to.
The one equity what if they
don't even want to equity what
if they say no private equity
that we already raised with
large often within their
community or not is sufficient
and and I'm I'm very puzzled
about the wisdom I do believe
the full faith and credit of New
Mexico will eventually be on the
line somehow some way that it's
just merely us putting equity
and to a newly created public
thank it's going to lose money
for several years if not longer
thank you madam chair.
At the following comment briefly
Senator Steinborn did you want
to madam chair and and
Representative I just want to
add that it's not just intended
to be a source of liquidity for
community banks if you look at
age eight and nine of the bill
of course.
You can see you can see a list
of the purposes of the banking
what support from community
development to frankly some
economic activities that
commercial banks are not meeting
they are well over a week that
federal reserve yes I think it's
better reserves found that one
of our counties was critically
underserved after bank closures
we have different economic
situations across the state and
provided that the all right
let's go to our next person and
they'll be Representative
Chatfield.
Thank you madam chair.
I guess my first question is
that this bank is to target the
loans that were not otherwise
able to obtain funding and I
wonder if these types of loans
would have a greater incidence
of default.
Madam chair I defer to senator.
Thank you representative madam
chair Representative it's
possible that in some cases some
of the loans will be two
businesses that are the most
desirable.
Cherry pick loans that meet the
requirements of community banks
which is what we just did with
the pandemic assistance in fact
in North Dakota they have some
massive leading the bank was
there to help keep the community
propped up so certainly I think
the you know those parameters of
Lente will be different and it
might pick up some New Mexico
entrepreneurs and businesses
that are not meeting the need in
some cases it might be just as
Dan says expanding their any but
in all cases that will be done
through them so they will be a
partner in that kind of like
what we just did with the
finance.
So these are a higher risk loans
with the interest rate be higher
or lower.
Well I'm Senator do you want
them to that question.
Well this is an easy question to
answer madam chair
representative which is just as
again as a public bank it's got
a different motivator it's it's
motivator isn't profit margin
motivators helping the citizens
of the state and so because of
that you're able to do some
things and keep your interest
rate lower just again like we
did with the mortgage finance
authority where we set an
incredibly low loan rates will
allow the community partner to
make money on it but but
nonetheless were able to to keep
interest rates very low so but I
will pre pre ordained that
because that'll be determined by
professional managers of the
institution.
Representative Chatfield you
still have the floor thank you
madam chair when you describe
how this bank was set up you
talked about putting up a
certain amount of the state's
money which would leverage a
larger amount of money from out
of state which sounds very
similar to me to have bank in
the bank is set up and so can
you tell me how this practice
different and why would not
compete with existing right.
Senator you want to thank you
we're doing the dance manager
Matt madam chair representative
it's different you're right it
is similar it is a bank that has
to be charter but it's a public
bank and that's what makes it
different if you go to page
eight and nine on the bill it
gets to do a variety of things I
like to say public funds for
public purposes and so and so I
think it's mission is different
its mission is not just to make
money on the most no bankable
save loans it's it's purpose is
to not lose money number one no
question about it but number two
is to help make New Mexico more
prosperous to invest in
community development.
Support nonprofit sector in help
support public infrastructure as
well and right now again through
some of our institutions we're
putting a lot of money out the
door we just did you know four
hundred million dollars last
year but if we were using the
thanks for that then we were we
would be able to capitalize
those resources more and make
it go farther so hopefully that
helps is your question.
You should Chattfield your muted
we.
Can you hear me now yes we can.
Madam chair last question what I
heard how the board was set up
that would have oversight over
this bank I just wonder it was
hello eight people either
politically elected or appointed
so how would we keep the the
politics out of the bank.
Madam chair.
Representative.
And Representative group great
question this board would be
appointed in a bipartisan way
in a bi cameral way because some
of the members of the
Legislative Council it would
include the biggest money
managers of the state of New
Mexico but in the state
treasurer
and the head of the finance
authority.
And some of them by the governor
and then I will pick a
professionally experience with a
proven successful track record
the financial institution
manager to run it it will be no.
No more last level and then any
of the other instruments like
the state investment council
that we pack in similar fashion
and so.
Okay.
Are you are going thank you
madam chair I am.
Representative Garcia.
Thank you madam chair the first
question is the best to David
Mayfield you said that you're
reached out to a certain few
banks madam chair and you
mention Santa Fe law schools is
in Albuquerque that's a make or
overstate twelve very child to
other reporter were still on the
on this what you're trying to
reach you madam chair.
Madam chairwoman and the
representative Garcia we reset
all across the state we have we
have meetings inTaos right now
they're they're considering
similar memorial resolution
inTaos right now we talk to
people in Farmington duralast
Committee hearing we had.
Representation Farmington area
about how much they believe this
would help them we have support
in the Los crucis area San
Miguel County has been a big
supporter of this in in San
Miguel county to county passed a
memorial just a few weeks ago
supporting the idea and we
really do have strong support
all across the state and that is
you heard to at the beginning
when we have public comment
because the who does a lot of
work in your neighborhood
Representative Garcia he you
believe strongly this would help
your neighborhood get a lot of
the funding for a lot of the
project that you need and all
really across of many of the
problems and across Navajo
Nation to.
Madam chair and thank Senator
madam chair all.
Is this of bank of State Bank is
trying to establish it's going
to be covered by the FDA say.
Madam madam chair will oversee
Representative Garcia how we see
this working is it would have to
follow all the state and federal
guidelines every other bank has
to follow and when you're when
you're staying covered by the at
the see I'm assuming you're
gonna need the insurance on
deposits and interest on
deposits today just cover up two
hundred fifty thousand dollars
and we're talking about fifty
million dollars in deposits so
those are two apples to oranges
comparison yet yes you wouldn't
work in that case but today our
money's not insured either so
it's the same same as it is
today with with the insurance
money but we do believe that we
would have to follow all of the
same every single banking
regulation the FDIC has for
every private bank the public
bank would also have to follow
those guidelines protect banks
and make sure that they keep all
their liquidity and assets in
line.
Madam chair of just a yes or no
one sure Sir is that the A. C.
gonna cover.
Funded people put into the bank
is yes or no answer.
No.
Thank you madam chair of.
Where once under this question
is all we're gonna put in fifty
million from all servers track
bond fifty million from the
general fund how we gonna make
sure that these bond that this
money is hundred million dollars
is covered in this bag bill will
belly up and we lose a hundred
million dollars what guarantees
are you giving this the
committee right now for our
state of the of the funds that
hundred million dollars over to
put out there.
Sanchez I would like to respond
madam chair Senator again.
I'm happy to
Madam chair representative
that's a great question it will
be protected the same exact way
that our funds are protected
right now the state investment
council.
Manages these funds it's
We hire professionals to manage
this we put in all the
safeguards we point all the best
people to oversee that and
You know we take a certain
amount of risk is a state with
everything we do with our money
and and that includes this
instrument but we work really
hard to get all those all right
kind of protections and quality
built into this so that are
first criteria success is not
losing money and that's by
having an experienced manager
over it.
Senator I and madam chair I
understand that you're not in
there to these money nobody
wants to lose money my concern
is we're putting a hundred
million dollars out there and
there's no guarantee that the
state will ever recoup that
money the whole help you
guarantee this committee.
Or myself for that matter you
know who live in my question.
I need to have some kind of
security on how the state is not
going to the hundred million
dollars.
Madam chair and representative.
This Senator mentioned the very
same protections and regulations
regulatory and compliance
measures and requirements have
to be in place
for the public thank just as
they are with our state
investment council and our other
protectors of honor of general
funds and other funds in the
budget now we also know that
it was mentioned by one of the
experts that there is a business
plan and the business plan
incorporates it is our council
and board of directors and that
we require with all of our other
money management groups from the
state very strict compliance
measures and these will be
overseen by the professional
chief executive officers that
are the same positions thank
titles thank positions that are
required in order to be able to
function as a public bank so
we're doing nothing different in
fact we're even have stronger
regulatory compliance
requirements because of the fact
that we are handling direct
I mean tax money tax payer funds
and so those are just the the
securities that we've insured
not just in the business plan
but we're going over and above
in order to be able to pre vent
what has occurred in past
practices Senator.
Yeah Madam chair representative
I think it's something it may
make you feel a little better is
the bank of North Dakota.
The well known public bank in
the country had at eighteen
percent rate of return last year
and has returned hundreds of
millions to the general fund of
the bank of North Dakota so
they're not in the business
losing money and and we're not
either in a and and they can
with all the copy out so onerous
but.
The fact performance to
Representative Garcia and madam
chair and presenters of the show
have concerns because no there's
no if yes you protection of
people that actually deposit
money in your bank in other
words vulnerable deposit a
million dollars in your bank we
have to really think hard look
at it really hard and think
about it goes all if there is no
protection of give my money to a
gold away fugal belly up that's
that's a hard thing to swallow
Chair Madam chair representative
excuse me Senator.
It's just that and he I don't
think this is a question just a
comment we're going to have to
move this along I've got a long
agenda today and we're going on
the floor at four thirty so go
back to Representative Garcia is
this a question are you just
making a comment madam chair
just trying to make a comment
and because I know we have a lot
of a lot of new today we don't
have a lot of hard remove this
bill for right now so thank you
madam chair all right let's go
to representative Costello.
Thank you madam chair and I'm
I'm going to be a quick question
I just want to read on page two
word says significant issues.
The bank's greatest strength
could be its greatest weakness
the state treasurer's office
would likely be one of the
largest depositors of the bank
as stated above the state trade
office funds are short term in
nature income fluctuate
dramatically and must be
available to me the day today
cash we of the state well the
state general fund investment
pool totals four point seven
billion currently as recently as
two thousand seventeen a total
list in a billion as actual
revenues fell short of
projections
lending programs are just
upgraded to be long term loan
programs geographically
constrained in New Mexico that
could be outstanding several
years in adverse economic events
balances held by the state
treasurer's office and other
respondents would need to be
withdrawn rapidly to operate
government madam chair I have a
concern with that because right
now we're in a pandemic what
would happen if our investments
would go down and we lose an
investment money and I'm with
our Representative Garcia that's
a concern if we're going off
investments and I'm somewhere
else on on this bill it says
that we need to match I think a
hundred million dollars in order
to keep this bank Boeing and
private I'm I would funds I
believe how how do you guys plan
to.
To keep to get that money to
generate that investment and you
know keep that capital in a
private bank if we were to lose
Madam chair real quickly I'm
gonna just sort of
just two things one I want to
clarify that the state of New
Mexico we will be the single
only depositor into the public
thank it's we're not talking
about any other deposits that's
one for clarity and then in
reference to what Representative
Castellano brought up I'd like
to defer real quickly to Angela
to make a quick reference to
what we did with the FIR for
clarity.
Senator Angela because we're
gonna wrap this hearing at this
particular bill go ahead Angela
certainly thank you so the bank
would be
the quote one of the questions
was how to how we would ensure
that those deposits state hall
or what would happen if there
was a strong draw on them and
that would
yes we're leveraging god
capitalization in other words
that fifty million from the
severance tax fund those
deposits would stay liquid and
that they they come and go are
in in in he time we have a range
of three to seven to nine
billion dollars deposited in the
various Wall Street banks so we
would account for that and it
would be possible it wouldn't be
there would be limitations on
the lending capacity they are
that it would adjust to the
Economic pull but the the
compliance and regulations of
the bank that we'd be working
within the structure would
address that just as other banks
would be adapting to that too
but it would be possible to be
flexible with that and still be
having those short term treasury
deposits.
That the bank would be making to
to create a to generate
A revenue on those deposits as
is done in the Law street banks
now.
Representative Castellano you
still have the floor thank thank
you madam chair it's a real will
credentialing last question I
think it was stated that we were
not going to accept any deposit
it was gonna be state money that
would be a deposit into this
bank account and it says right
here The New Mexico finance
authority not the following
issue in order for the public
bank to grow beyond its initial
state commitment of a hundred
million dollars it's lending
activity one must capture new
deposits the state treasurer has
the option another requirement
in likely not the insensitive to
make deposits beyond initial
commitments specified in a
public bank will need to attract
the deposit from either the
public sector or private sector
or bones with no marketing
advantage in doing so so that
tells me that there can be other
deposits into his bank which are
not state funds correct I'm.
Senator.
Madam chair.
Representative the law the the
bill before you clearly says it
could only only accept deposits
from the state of New Mexico and
from local governments which you
know we're open to talking about
that one okay because we know
the Canadian banks have concern
about it but that's that's small
price it's so so it will not
it's would be prohibited by law
from accepting private deposits
which kind of addresses
representative Garcia is concern
earlier about FDIC we're not
taking those deposits and I I
disagree with the FY are because
as we grow right of return on
that principle grows on that
corpus then you have increased
money you're able to generate
increased activity so you can
grow that without taking new
deposits it will grow slower.
But but yes if it's successful
and we're doing well then the
state treasurer has the
opportunity through this
legislation to make additional
deposits but not required to.
Exactly but it can be done is my
question thank you madam chair
and I think the next member and
that would be Representative
Crowder.
Thank you madam chair just make
a couple of quick comments not
really any questions I guess my
first comment is I don't recall
seeing and house bill two we set
aside fifty million dollars for
this and so that's the first
time we walked that I see then
what do you call it a
appropriation or transfer.
The the money is to the best of
my recollection the money is not
in hospital to as far as the
transfer from the severance tax
permanent fund of fifty million
dollars.
I heard make comment that the
the public bank would be able to
loan the money out of much lower
interest rate the fed bank in St
Louis said the third quarter
reported twenty thanks for
returning about a point zero
point five percent return on
investment in twenty nineteen
their annual return on
investment for the bank's
overall one point three percent.
So we're taking money out of the
severance tax fund whose target
rate is six to seven percent and
they're getting close to that
right now.
And in the interest earned all
that money in the severance tax
permanent fund of the land grant
permanent fund as for the
schools it appears to me that if
we press the for the money out
of severance tax over to a bank
loaning money the lower interest
rate.
Then the return on investment is
going to have to be lower I
don't know how I could be higher
if you're loaning money at a
lower rate I think the loser in
this deal as schools and so are
madam chair I I'm like a few of
my colleagues I I have some very
very.
Difficult feelings about this
public bank thank you madam
chair
Representative Dixon.
Go ahead thank you madam chair
I was wondering if someone could
talk to me more about the
constitutionality of taking the
funds from the severance tax
permanent fund because this
wouldn't be an investment with
the way to measure up there's no
way to get the funds back into a
at I appreciate help on that
thank you.
I'm just curious if any are you
are you on.
Sir is it the monthly online by
any chance The Oprah.
Okay.
Senator okay well madam chair
Representative that's that
that's a good question and
something that we've gone
through I'm sorry I don't have
the constitution in front of me
that provision in front of me
but we we we clearly try to make
sure that this was
constitutional and leave it just
and I'm sorry that I don't have
a more specific answer is I
don't have that provision in
front of me we have lots lots
lots of conversations with
Legislative Council and drafted
this in a way so that it was
appropriate constitutional.
And I will add madam chair just
that we work very closely that's
why we were asking for Anthony
because it has the bill drafter
he studied this issue and
presented various ways in which
we should address it and then we
finally all came to the
conclusion that it was
constitutionally appropriate
provided for otherwise we would
not have submitted to the bill
at this point.
Thank you for.
Thank you I I would definitely
appreciate you know a further
elaboration maybe from Council
services our finance staff
moving forward but the other
question that I have it relates
to the anti donation clause
issue and that's something that
I'm learning more about and so I
wonder are we running afoul of
that as well in anyway thank
you.
Do you have
Madam chair representative I'll
just say no because what we're
doing is we're we're you giving
this money or we're putting this
money in the public bank that is
then making these loans it's
kind of like what we've done
what that New Mexico finance
authority
so.
It's.
You know it's similar to what
the state of New Mexico is
already doing.
Thank you madam chair I have no
other questions
Representative Anthony Allison.
Thank you madam chair it was
mentioned earlier that the
meetings were held all over the
state and it was mentioned
Farmington and also the Navajo
Nation.
I know there are some
individuals from the Navajo
Nation that are interested but I
have not heard anything from the
Navajo Nation leadership and I
think if the there was
tremendous interest I would have
heard about it just a comment
thank you madam chair.
All right let me see if we've
got any other hands up from the
committee members
I don't see any I don't see any
So we've had a long discussion
about this bill we've had a lot
of testimony I'm going to ask
the committee would chair of you
know what's the pleasure the
committee and I'm gonna start
with the Representative small
with the motion.
Before he does I'm going to ask
each Sanchez in one minute
closing if you what.
Madam chair I will you for to
the senators start.
thank you thank you madam chair
madam chair committee that this
is an innovative idea for New
Mexico and this is an idea that
that we structure to help manage
rest that's something we all
have concerns about rest is the
first criteria of what would
make this bill even viable from
my perspective for I was willing
to go forward we worked
incredibly hard but that in but
beyond that I mean we have an
existing model we can look to
back North Dakota and we can see
it's rate of return you can see
how it's support it's you know
business community through tough
times to support its communities
through tough times and this
bank allows us the opportunity
to leverage what is billions of
dollars sitting idle and funds
to be able to put it to use for
New Mexico and that's what we're
proposing to do and
And it's a very small step into
that world it's it's not a lot
of money in terms of billions we
have sitting there so we
appreciate your time today very
much so to have a discussion
thank you madam chair.
All I'll take my minute now I
just wanted to respect the
senator and different first as
always thank you madam chair for
allowing closing.
Emphasize several points that
were made in as madam chair
knows she and I have your street
in our community and economic
development I and community
economic development and as such
we've seen the many struggles
that our local communities have
gone through in order to be able
to access and leverage existing
funds in order to be able to
address the vital components of
infrastructure development and
attracting business development
expanding business development
and just basically offering
programs and services that local
communities are charged to do so
from that perspective this is a
strong push forward and it also
Reiterate the point about
there's one single customer and
that's the state of New Mexico
one single deposit that's the
state of New Mexico one single
client that's the cut the
taxpayers to single state of New
Mexico and again what we're
asking and and this is an
innovative and creative approach
towards providing leveraging and
circulating monies but more
importantly representing the
community an aspect in the name
public and finally on madam
chair and members of the
committee I will stress that
we're looking at transfer funds
not appropriating the funds and
when I was seeking clarification
from our leadership and and the
speaker and others I understood
that this was this was this was
my understanding when I
researched it further is that
the the whole idea is to have
the state treasure make a
deposit one single deposit and
that's what this is calling for
so I would encourage all of us
to be bold very creative very
innovative and to take
the best decision and the best
risk on behalf of our
populations in our local
communities and rural
communities who stand to benefit
the most by keeping and
circulating our money in the
state of New Mexico thank you
madam chair and members of the
community.
All right.
I thank everyone for The
presentation today I'm going to
call on vice chair small for the
motion.
Thank you madam chair I would
move to table house bill two
thirty six.
We have a.
And a second to table able to
bill.
Is there opposition to this
table in motion.
Okay Representative Senator
Steinborn you don't get to vote
on this committee anymore.
Right
Maybe next time when you get to
come back to the house but up so
it looks like we have one in
opposition yes Representative
Sarinana is that correct.
That's correct Madam already all
right well you you've heard the
the motion and the will of the
committee I would like to thank
you for being here today and for
a very enlightening discussion.
So thank you and let's move on
to the next item committee thank
you madam chair and thank you
members of the committee and I
hope to continue and lightning
everybody as we continue to move
forward in further discussions
thank you.
All right let's go to house bill
eighty seven.
Madam chair yes I don't have
Representative small.
Thank you madam chair at the
request of the Sanchez we can
table house bill eighty seven so
I would move to table house bill
eighty seven.
Yeah we have a motion to have a
second.
Representative the second is
there any opposition to that
motion.
Saying that it's been terrible
now go to a committee substitute
for house bill one fifty is
Representative bash in the group
I'm here.
All righty.
Representative bash for house
bill one fifty go ahead.
Yes I do have an expert witness
her name is Dr mark McGrew.
From them.
Okay we'll bring her in but
we're gonna ask you to talk
about the bill all right this is
a bill to provide tuition
forgiveness for medical students
who finish their residency and
practice and live in New Mexico.
They would get a year's tuition
forgiven for every year served
and the the criteria is that
they must be graduates of a New
Mexico high school.
Or a high school on the Navajo
Nation or graduates of New
Mexico home school or
graduation equivalent.
Such is the G. date.
the students of must sign a
contract that they will live and
work in New Mexico and
this will call for investment of
six million dollars and I'm
calling it an investment because
for every physician that stays
in New Mexico according to a
twenty eighteen study of drafted
by the New Mexico Medical
Society each physician returns
one point nine million dollars
to the state economy nine
hundred and twenty nine dollars
and.
Two workers compensation to
workers wages and benefits and
seventy five thousand dollars to
state and local tax revenue and
We have the the of the just of
it Representative we're gonna
allow your your expert to make a
couple comments but before she
does a I just need to let you
know and and I don't believe you
better from of the committee
before that we're focused on the
financial piece of each piece of
legislation that comes through I
do not believe that this bill or
this issue is in the budget.
I don't know if it's in junior
and a last bill to check into
that but let's go to your expert
for a couple of comments and
then we'll go to bill go ahead.
You're you're muted good
afternoon madam chair and
committee members thank you for
allowing me to be here he is you
know also in the payments and
loans for medical school affects
specialty choice in where people
will practice medical school
costs a hundred and ninety one
thousand dollars
after ten years in the loans are
paid off our medical school
currently costs a little over
fifteen thousand dollars a year
for tuition later other expenses
including fees and of course
living expenses our goal is to
keep people in New Mexico even
if they leave for their
residency and we know that we
want to get them back we want
them to practice here we
particularly want them to
practice in rural and
underserved areas in the most
needed special bodies so if you
I can give you more information
but but
But appreciate what no one what
you would want to.
Thank you very much and
Again as I mentioned earlier
because this
This particular.
Medical school scholarship act
is not currently in house bill
two.
we're gonna have to table this
bill I don't know that there'd
be any money in the junior bill
waste not at that level so
I need I need a motion
Representative small madam chair
I would move to table house bill
one fifty the committee
substitute for house bill one
fifty second.
And we have a second.
On that to
of the table receive bill are
you on.
Your muted.
I am madam chair.
If you're saying all these
things coming through for junior
is there any money in there for
this no there's not madam chair
okay already with that being
said is there we've got a motion
and a second is there any
opposition to that motion.
Think it's tabled and thank you
Representative bash for being
here with us today.
All right let's go to the next
bill which is house bill one
fifty six as amended this bill
doesn't belong with us gone
through it and read the read the
FIR we need to move this along.
Madam chair pardon me but I
think you believe you skipped
House Bill Murray separate out
the one fifty one I don't know
if that was intentional.
It's intentional because I see
Representative Barreras here so
let's go to one fifty six as
amended go ahead Representative
small.
Madam chair I would move a do
pass on house bill one fifty six
as amended second okay have a
motion and a second is there any
opposition to that.
No opposition so that one moves
along it does it I don't know
why it ended up here so let's go
back to house bill one fifty
one.
More.
Madam chair one fifty one has a
twin bill in the Senate that is
Senate bill one ninety one and
senator Linda Lopez is finding
funding for that bill in the
Senate and so we ask that you
would temporarily table one
fifty one.
Okay let's go to Representative
small for the motion the
temporary table committee
substitute for house bill one
fifty one.
Representative is there any
opposition to that saying that
bill's been temporarily table
okay let's go to house bill two
fifty nine of the table bill.
Sponsored requests.
Yes ma'am chair okay Sanchez
request we've been asked to pay
for it.
Fifty nine.
Madam chair I move to table
house bill two five nine.
And
then the second any opposition
to that motion.
Okay thank you very much.
Okay we have house bill two
eighty two.
Representative Trujillo yes
thank you madam chair members
the committee of my house bill
two is an external diploma
program for adult dead and I'm
working with
The.
Well in the Senate to try to I
think at the beginning you said
that we could work with folks to
it amended so that we House Bill
to so we can have the the bill
moves forward it and that's what
we're trying to do.
Okay what we're going to have to
do.
I think bill and David may have
spoken to you.
We're now I haven't had anybody
speak to me bill you speak to me
now.
Madam chair my understanding
there working with the Senate to
fund this in house bill two
however this bill as written are
has appropriation and it and I
don't believe we can send it on.
Okay David you're on the you're
on the go ahead David thank you
madam chair and working with the
sponsor and Mr little on my
staff to see if you're able to
get money in another place in
the bill as needed right I think
we can are reporting that
tomorrow so
Early table this one Madam we
get a report on the money I need
a motion madam chair I move to
temporarily table house bill two
eighty two as amended second
okay so let's see what happens
there any opposition.
I don't see any well we're gonna
hang on to that one for awhile
thank thank you okay.
House bill two eighty seven yes
Representative Johnson on.
That bill got money in it.
Madam chair yes it does now we
are receiving.
A junior requests for this bill.
And we probably need to amend it
to remove the appropriation and
then you could be able John are
you can do that now we're
getting our way to make money
we.
Page one of house bill two
eighty seven but we would strike
is lying fifteen is making
appropriation would also strike
at the very back the section to
on page nine this is a hundred
and fifty thousand dollars so
it's not a ton of money it's a
hundred fifty thousand dollars
and it is
non reoccurring in the FIR so I
think it be pretty easy to pull
together a hundred fifty
thousand dollars so
let's know the amendment
Representative small madam chair
I move the amendment.
Representative.
Second.
So we understand looking at the
bill were striking making
appropriation online fifteen per
stage and then the last page
striking out section two which
says it's a hundred fifty
thousand dollars.
Is there any opposition to that
amendment.
Okay saying now the bill is now
amended.
So we need to move this along
like we did for representative
Sarinana they need that language
for it in this that they don't
get the money don't happen so.
Seven thank you madam I am
native do pass on house bill two
eighty seven as amended.
In that chair okay we have a
second from
Garcia is there any opposition.
Saying now that one is out and
it's amended and the money's in
the junior bill.
Okay let's go to the next bill
which is house bill two seventy
four.
Just go ahead and get
Representative Serrato initiate
here.
She she is madam chair she is
also.
That vote madam chair for us to
table this today and she's
working continuing to work on
it.
Okay make a motion
Representative small madam chair
I move to table the committee
substitute for house bill two
seventy four.
Have a motion and a second is
there any opposition to that
motion.
Saying that bill as been tabled.
Madam chair I see Representative
Serrato is here now.
OK Representative Serrato do
you.
We just tabled your bill we
understand that you are
Continuing to work on it is that
the case that's right madam
chair on that we want to make
sure that we work out some we
were trying to work around
support through on state issues
with anti donation clause and
the amount we put aside for on
our first staffing and
mistreating this program but we
do plan on bringing this forward
during the instrumental fully we
can work with any the folks here
on this bill as well all right
very good so we have and a
second is there any opposition
to that saying the bill is is
table okay we have completed our
agenda for today.
And I believe bill will we start
hearing Senate bills this week.
madam chair I have no schedule
for tomorrow for the rest of the
week it's a if you so desire we
can start doing that we have a
few hospitals of comments
inspect.
Okay.
All right so I just stay tuned
we may not have a meeting
tomorrow which is good that
gives us a day off and that's a
good thing Representative
Trujillo you had a question yes
I just sent you a text madam
chair I just received some very
very sad news.
H. R..
Our former representative ed
Santa has just passed.
That is a moment of silence I
agree so if we could everyone
list the second moment of
silence.
All right.
Thank you everyone just for
those of you who don't know
former Representative bad Santa
the server for many many years
in the New Mexico legislature he
started out in the Senate and
then ended up with us in the
house for many many years he
served more most recently as the
tax chairman.
Capital outlay chairman you
served on tax and revenue
stabilisation he served on LFC
he was directly involved with
the finance committees and also
did a tremendous amount of work
on mental health issues thank
you I remember clearly he and a
former representative Dennis P.
grow would always come in with
these bills that the dealt with
mental health.
Is a big advocate for that and
also a big advocate for faster
programs foster care programs
things like that so it is a
major loss to the state of New
Mexico by losing at today.
And not just a very good ma'am.
Anyone else might want to say
comment Representative Trujillo
would you like to make a comment
yes madam chair I Madam well I'd
lobbied for a felony if T. at
the session and he and
representative Rick meta we're
very very close and tight
friends so we kind of all had a.
What an interesting relationship
regarding.
Well you know he you know him he
had a warped sense of humor he
was fun and funny and
and he just made life easier
being around the round house
sometimes when things got crazy.
But during his tenure being ill
you know that he had COVID and
he was in the hospital for a
very very very long time I
stayed in touch with them on
Facebook and he would ask for
prayers that he would get around
still he's in he would say okay
day ninety one and counting you
know those kinds of things we
have a long illness and just
didn't seem to be able to do to
overcome it.
But for those of you who ever
missed interacting with them you
missed a lot because he was a
good decent human being madam
chair.
Thank you very much thank you
for letting us know and
certainly are our condolences
and prayers for the family.
All righty of that concludes our
work for today so we'll stay
tuned in to see whether or not
we need to come back tomorrow so
thank you everybody.
Thank you madam chair thank you.
