Here.
Representative Brown here.
Representative Castellano.
Your.
Representative Chatfield.
Representative Crowder here
Representative Dixon.
Here sorry.
Okay Representative Ezzell
Representative Garcia.
Your.
Representative Hochman Vigil
your.
Representative Lane.
Representative Lara.
Here.
Representative Sarinana.
Representative Sweetser.
You.
Representative Trujillo.
I'm here.
I sure small.
Here madam chair.
I'm here analysts so standard
now there are no Representative
Sarinana okay issues later right
here on time also so madam
chair.
Representative Sarinana is in
House Energy presenting okay all
right that was going to start
the first bill we're going to
hear this afternoon Mister house
bill forty two which is the
public project revolving fund
projects Representative Herrera
go ahead and tell us about your
bill.
Thank you madam chair and
members of the committee I if I
could admit to
Marquita Russel the CEO of the
NMFA as the expert witness to
this bill.
We madam chair we see sure I'm
here okay thank you thank you
madam chair.
HB forty two is in New Mexico
finance authority the NMFA's
public project revolving loan.
Revolving fund authorization
bill I'm caring this legislation
on behalf of the NMFA's
legislative oversight committee
as amended the bill authorizes
the NMFA to provide loans in
excess of one million and that
PPR
yes two hundred ninety separate
state local government entities
included in the bill based on
the terms and conditions
established by the NMFA he P. R.
F. legislation authorization
carries a three year
authorization.
The PPRF the joys the triple a
rating from S. and P. and passes
the benefit of that rating along
to PPF R. S. our farmers
regardless of their underlying
credit from inception in
nineteen ninety four to date the
NMFA has made over one thousand
nine hundred and ten PPRF loans
totaling more than four point
two four billion NMFA is
currently servicing nine hundred
and fifty three PPRF loans
totaling approximately one point
one billion five hundred and
seventy six million and to with
that madam chair members of the
committee and like to con
marketed to see if she has any
additional information to.
Madam chair this couldn't be a
more annual bill you have no
seen this since nineteen ninety
four annually I would note that
there is an amendment on the the
initial bill has ninety projects
the amendment adds an additional
one hundred projects the finance
authority does outreach and we
drive the original list back in
the fall and then between then
and now additional projects have
come in asking for provided
authorization the authorization
is good for three years.
Okay we're gonna go to public
comment we're gonna ask
Representative small to help us
with that we don't want more
than a minute if we do have
public comment.
Representative small do you see
anybody that is got some burning
questions or comments about this
bill.
madam chair we see able one hand
up
so I'm going to briefly promote
them to a panelist just a quick
reminder there is a a hard one
minute
Limit for testimony and someone
to promote them the.
Analysts this see the.
If that happens with thanking
them for I believe we do not
have any public comment for so
for the two.
We don't have any public comment
that we can see we're house bill
forty two as amended so let's go
to the committee of us go to
Representative Garcia.
Thank you madam chair of.
thanks for all bring this bill
of.
Yes said the second one
testimony that it regardless of
credit you still lose loan is
that correct.
It over to Marquita so she can
explain.
thank you madam chair
representative so the finance
authority sets policies for
underwriting criteria and as
long as you meet that
underwriting criteria it's the
same interest rate so they could
be slightly riskier credits or
Steve very safe credits at all
get the triple a interest rate
but they do have to meet
underwriting criteria.
Thank you madam chair the reason
I asked the question because of
the Representative Herrera.
Said it doesn't matter on
credit.
That's kind of a big it's a
broad deal up it doesn't matter
on a credit so if you have real
that created what do you do that
and that that that's what it
will the reason I asked that
question thank you.
Thank you madam chair so again
these are all public entities
and some credits may be riskier
than others but as long as they
meet the criteria to get the
same interest rate regardless of
their under right lying credit
so and on rated credit couldn't
go out on the bond market and
get a triple a interest rate
they can come to the PPRF though
and get a triple a interest rate
so I think that that is the
differential.
Thank you madam chair Rick you
know do you guys take any kind
of collateral for these loans.
So madam chair if I might the
loans to public bodies are
secured by revenue streams
either an ad lower property tax
G. R. T. of the net revenues of
a utility for public bodies were
unable to accept hard collateral
because public bodies are unable
to pledge hard collateral they
can't give a mortgage for
instance so they're all secured
but they're secured with revenue
streams so there's a dedicated
tax of utility revenue stream
but there is a so there is
security but not collateral in
the same sense as you would get
from a loan at a at a commercial
bank.
You might get a thank you all
Representative bira the only
question I have thank you madam
chair.
Yes Representative Hochman Vigil
thank you very much madam chair
I just have one quick question
for miss Russell I'm miss
Russell I know you touched on
this a little bit before but are
there any other criteria for the
selection of these projects
other than if there meet their
able to meet the underwriting
requirements.
So thank you madam chair they
have to be a qualified entity
under our statute which is most
public bodies Land Grant recess
the sec as counties cities
tribes so they've to be
qualified project an entity and
have a qualified project which
is a core infrastructure
projects or capital equipment
then we set underwriting
criteria based on the kind of
a revenue stream that's backing
that loan
and that that's and then they
have to legislative
authorization of course.
Thank you madam chair and thank
you miss Russell and so yeah
that just for my own of
education every qualifying
project is and listed in the
bill each year.
Madam chair of those that have
come to us to say that they have
a project that they think they
might want to finance through
the finance authority comes to
us and again we do some very
broad outreach in the fall they
bring to us projects they may or
may not finance from being on
this legislative authorization
list does not mean they're going
to submit an application.
And and if they do submitted
application it doesn't mean it's
not a guarantee that the loan
will be made but it does give
them access to submit an
application for us to consider
it.
Thank you very much I'm sure
thank you miss Russell for that
great lesson and how all this
works.
Thank you Representative
Chatfield.
Thank you madam chair my
questions for Mr Russell.
Need to speak for a moment about
the different types of projects
that are funded with this.
By this fund.
Certainly madam chair what what
the finance authority sees are
basically three kinds of credits
this is what you know our
typical pattern is about a third
part of the bills are made to
school districts so school
districts issue their general
obligation bonds and that we
purchased them into the PPRF
they do that with no costs of
issuance or fees associated with
that and then again they get the
very low triple a interest rate
or if they have lower median
household income still have a
disadvantaged interest rate of
zero were two percent about a
third of them are school
districts about a third of them
are based some sort of tax based
projects so could be
at a road project or
the swimming pool project but
that the city or county is
backing up with the gross
receipts tax so we see about a
third of our projects there we
have a significant number of
equipment projects as it relates
to fire protection police
protection.
and then lastly a lot of water
and wastewater utility system
loans a come through here PPRF
is one of the few places that
you can fund for instance the
purchase of water rights you
can't really go to any other of
funding source for that in the
state so those are the kinds of
things that we see.
Thank you madam chair thank you
mistrust but this sounds like a
worthwhile project.
Thank you very much
Representative Castellano.
Thank you madam chair on this
question is also miss Russell
also I see a bunch of entities
on this list on on the bill how
do we reach out to these
entities and let him know if.
They are awarded the loan of the
grant really just have to come
in and tell you know you are on
the billion your name got put on
on the list it's coming to get a
loan against we reach out to
these entities question thank
you madam chair so every entity
that's listed on the initial
bill of ninety projects plus the
amendment which I believe the
committee has of a hundred
additional projects have
contacted the finance authority
so there has been somebody an
authorized officer on behalf of
the city county mutual domestic
that has come to the finance
authority and requested that
they be put on this
authorization bill so we have
direction from those entities to
appear here they then have three
years to the bill passed to then
apply for to to make an
application to the finance
authority so each of the
entities here knows they're on
it or someone from there
entities are public body knows
about it because there are some
requirements that they have to
be in order to to request
funding.
Thank you madam chair thank
Martina another question.
How do we get this I guess the
information how to these
entities in order to get on
this.
On this bill.
In my area pickles or one of the
various pickles in Las Vegas
there's some water projects and
that did they ask for capital
outlay but maybe for next time I
could just you by are you
direction on how they can get on
this list thank you madam chair.
Madam chair in years past when
we had infrastructure
conferences or for a school
district conferences finance
authority would be able to meet
with a number of these officials
in in person over the last two
years because of restricted
travel we've been using a more
of.
L. electronic approach so we
have sent out through a mass
mailing to our massive database
which has mutual domestics
cities counties tribes school
districts all of these bills to
let them know that we're
soliciting input for this
authorization bill so that's the
way we've done it these last two
years and they told us the kinds
of projects that they like to
have authorization for and given
us again there they're
authorizing their authorized
officer than submits that on
their behalf the authorization
that was good for three years so
it's very possible that Pecos or
Las Vegas.
Got that authorization last year
or the year before so what you
see is about a usually it lists
are between a hundred and fifty
and three hundred authorized
projects each year and again
about a third of them fall off
as a result of three years
having expired so that's my
guess as to why you may not see
them though they do have
projects.
Thank you thank you madam chair
the.
Thank you very much
Representative Allison.
Thank you.
This question was personally
answer but I'll still go ahead
and ask anyway others that are
not on the list the eligible for
these low and one of the
questions was these are loans
and they are not requests is
that correct.
So madam chair I'll answer the
second part first which is the
test fees are a hundred percent
loans there's no provision
forced to make requests from the
public project revolving fund so
a hundred percent of these are
loans either zero eight percent
interest rate or very very low
market rates
and if the if they don't appear
on this list and we don't have
current authorization from
either of the prior to
legislative sessions projects of
less than a million dollars can
come to us for funding
we have taken the stance that
every project that once our
funding should come forward on
authorization bill so when
number of these loans or
projects though they may be less
than a million we still if we
know about them we bring them
forward for provided
authorization but technically in
the interim should one come up
and they don't have current
authorization they be limited to
a loan of a million dollars.
Madam chair.
I can you hear him Marquita I
believe the question madam chair
was how do we treat non profits
okay that the question so
nonprofits are generally not
eligible for funding the only
nonprofit because they're not
qualified entities they would
have to be a nonprofit
associated with a higher
education.
In order to qualify for the PPRF
those are the only non profits
and if there some nonprofits
than qualify also was mutual
domestics or coops they would
qualify but the interest rate
might be different that they
get.
The
state.
The most.
Office.
Marquita.
I believe what the question was
and make sure it I heard that
correctly representative Allison
is that there was a project or
two on from your area on this
list and is there anything that
you need to do to let them know
that they're on the bill and I
would just if that's a question
I would reiterate that every
project that's here and on the
amendment
came to us proactively in
response to either a direct
email solicitation were our
folks calling them to tell them.
About the authorization bill so
everyone of them has come to us
and asked to be on that bill.
Thank you madam chair thank you
miss Russell that is all my
questions.
Representative Brown.
Thank you madam chair.
I am really glad to see the
amendment we went from ninety
projects potentially getting
some funding if they meet their
criteria two hundred ninety
madam chair did we already moved
the amendment and vote on it.
We have not made the amendment
yet I thought we would have
discussion so people understood
it but I will come back to you
when it's time to move the
amendment very good thank you
madam chair and it seems to me I
have to
One other well I can't remember
the question all of what it go
with that thank you very much.
All righty let's see if we've
got anybody else we don't so
was.
Madam chair I'm sorry
Representative.
Thank you a real quick up miss
Russell I just want to clear up
on my mind real quick that will
the action we take today is one
that allows a low loan to pro
seed but it is not it's a
necessary step to ultimately
gain loan approval is that
correct.
Madam chair that's exactly
correct.
Okay then my last question is is
there anything in the Altamonte
loan approval that pledges the
full faith and credit of the
state of New Mexico point level.
Madam chair no thank you very
much madam chair that's all my
questions.
Thank you I just want to make a
couple comments and I'm gonna go
to Representative brown for the
living of the amendment.
We carry this bill for ten years
and I just wanted to let the
committee know that what this
bill does is a way allowing the
legislature to court to
participate in appropriations
process but we get to see this
last this list was brought forth
for the FY twenty two year as
you'll see on your one year of
fiscal impact report and goes
out to FY twenty four.
so the initial ninety projects
were then included another
hundred which is the amendment
so for FY twenty two would have
a hundred ninety projects thank
you so the whole list is pretty
extensive.
Also like to say that from what
I recall in in caring this bill
you would never have to default
because if there the projects
are backed by governmental gross
receipts tax that is sequestered
from that government.
To make sure that
There's no loan loss with the
project so it's their own money
so to speak that's backing up.
I don't think we've ever had a
default and if we have how many
it was a Marquita madam chair
there's never been a default in
the public project revolving
fund so Marquita what's the cash
balance in the in the P. probe
public project revolving fund
program thank you madam chair so
the public project revolving
fund is our that loan balance
goes up and down based on how
many loans we make and how often
we issue bonds we just drew from
our line of credit thirty two
million dollars to tide us over
to that'll loves to close all
the projects that we currently
have on our calendar through
March when we will be issuing
bonds so right now we are
you know because we only issue
bonds about quarterly to
reimburse the fund right now we
are our fund balance is being of
Boyd up by a line of credit
trough and then we dissipate
issuing I think about fifty
million dollars worth of
A bonds so then that would take
it up to about a twenty nine
about once a quarter we go out
issue this reimbursement bonds
the bonds typically run fifty to
seventy million dollars.
All right let's go back to
Representative brown for of
living and then in that case.
Madam chair I move the amendment
to house bill forty two the two
oh two numbers point to to to to
to to eight point one.
Thank you.
We have a motion and a second is
there any opposition to that
motion saying now must go back
on the bill.
What's pleasure.
Two passed.
Second.
We have a motion from
Representative Anderson second
by Representative brown.
Or do passed as amended house
bill forty two as amended.
Is there any opting this
position to that motion.
It has a do passed as amended
thank you Representative Herrera
thank you Marquita thank you.
Share thank you members of the
committee.
All right.
So bill tell us about house bill
eighty nine we get a comment
from the sponsor on the.
Chair did not receive any
comment from the sponsor I also
don't see a minute and fully.
I will go ahead.
And small.
Representative small.
That was it that he had.
Checked in and and was the the
first the inclusion of funding
in the two.
I understand and so willow.
It went today but the
recognizing the progress of the
line.
Okay.
So I need someone to make the
motion of tabling on September
effectively motion for house
bill eighty nine is that correct
Representative small.
Madam chair yes I move to table
house bill eighty nine thank.
We have a second Representative
Anderson that's proper motion in
a proper second the tabling is
the result of the fact that many
of the projects that are
identified in this bill are in
the budget so there's no reason
to move the bill on so we have a
proper motion we have a proper
second is there any opposition
to that motion.
Saying we have table house bill
eighty nine.
Now let's go to
house bill twenty two limited
English access to state programs
do we have Representative there
she is Representative Roybal
Caballero.
Thank you thank you madam chair
members of the committee and the
public IDL Representative table
who was also on with me on this
bill and I get to see her
earlier so
Representative Madam chair
representative will go out and I
are here to present house bill
twenty two which is known as the
language access bill giving all
New Mexicans equal access to
state services regardless of the
language they speak.
HB twenty two would require
state agencies language needs
and the resources needed to
ensure access to services.
Public benefits and unemployment
insurance and madam chair we do
have an amendment which you
should have before you and we
take your guidance on how best
to proceed our with this
ammendment and then
Representative but it does have
a few words thank okay if we
look at the it's two two what I
see here is two two two four
nine zero point one is.
That's correct madam chair.
And what this ammendment does is
on page one live thirteen and
fourteen districts making
appropriation.
On page six seven strike section
to.
This.
Okay.
And remembering.
So basically we're taking the
appropriation out in the amount
of money and I guess my question
is representative well why why
do we need this ammendment is
this money someplace else or
what.
Yes madam chair we were very
thanks to a representative I'm
going to senator Sergio Lopez we
were able to find a total of a
hundred and ten thousand dollars
junior funds to be applied to
house bill twenty two yes the
amendment.
The motion on the amendment
please.
Second.
We have a proper motion in a
proper second reduction of the
amendment is there any
opposition to that the option of
this amendment saying now the
bill has been amended so we'll
go back to the representatives
to talk.
The.
Thank you madam chair and I
believe representative from
court on.
Yes Representative here.
And thank you Representative
Cabrera and good afternoon madam
chair and members of the
committee and members of the
public this first and foremost
as a community supported bill
there sixty two organizations
across the state of New Mexico
that have signed on to Dorset it
also received an endorsement
from the twenty twenty one
legislative HHS interim
committee in essence this bill
would do three things as
Representative Herrera mentioned
difference it's requires state
agencies for secretaries yes to
assess the number of people the
server that primarily speak a
language other than English and
determine the resources needed
to ensure meaningful access to
services it requires that state
agencies with secretary agencies
develop and implement an annual
plan to provide meaningful
access to state programs for
individuals who primarily speak
languages other than English and
it also requires that state
agencies with secretary submit
the annual report to the
governor and the legislative
finance committee this bill has
support from DFA CYFD and HSD as
well as committed support from
New Mexico courts which has a
very strong language access and
they also offer their services
for the state of New Mexico to
implement their creation of
language access plans as well as
the City of Albuquerque's equity
inclusion office which is also
supporting the city's language
access plan which was passed to
ordinance in December of twenty
twenty one.
And then we have an expert
witness sovereign Hager from the
Center on Law and Poverty I'm
not sure if and if she's in the
room but would also love to at
invite her to speak otherwise we
can stand for questions thank
you madam chair.
Here we
just for very very briefly we
have an expert can we bring that
expert and Representative small.
It just.
The expert is.
I'm we're asking them to mute to
briefly present.
Very briefly faced if you
wouldn't introduce yourself
thank you madam chair members of
the committee briefly just to
share with the group that this
legislation takes the approach
that other states have taken to
give our framework for meeting
the requirements and federal law
of providing meaningful services
which is just planning and data
analysis of languages and then
sending that to a hub for
efficient provision of those
actual language services
and so that's what this bill
does to meet the needs of of New
Mexico communities and any
further questions I'm here thank
you.
The committee now and generally
what happens with these bills it
sounds to me that the because
there is money in the junior
year all legislation they still
need the language so the reason
that we stripped the
appropriation so they can move
the language along to track with
that junior allocation let's go
to the committee to see if
there's any questions from the
committee for the
representatives.
Representative Brown.
Thank you madam chair and
representative I
I'm concerned about whatever
reading on what's page three of
the fiscal impact report where
it's pointed out that there's a
lot of lack of clarity in the
bill.
Regarding which languages would
be addressed there's no
definition of state program are
meaningful access and I think
that's that's what probably on
king on the most is not defining
what meaningful access is so
that the rest of the page here
does indicate some other some
basically raising some questions
about this
I I appreciate the fact there's
junior money behind it but
I just don't think I can
supported bill where there's not
a little bit more definition of
but I think it's a very key
components so I understand I
think the intent behind the bill
madam chair representatives but
I just don't find the bill to be
all that what drafted so I in
that in that regard I can't
really support it thank you.
All right it looks
Representative Chatfield.
Madam chair.
You know when I look at the bill
and I think I immediately think
about Spanish and some of the
native American languages that
we use in New Mexico but the
reality is says that we will
provide services or an
interpreter or whatever is
required to be provided by every
agency in the state of New
Mexico and I don't really think
a hundred and ten thousand
dollars would come close to that
so it to me it seems like an
unfunded mandate to I am for
making sure that everybody has
access to those services and I'm
for helping all the all the
people in New Mexico but I I
this doesn't limited to the to
the regularly spoken languages
of New Mexico which I think is
Spanish English and native
American really doesn't limited
to anything so it's kind of just
left wide open as to what we
have to provide services for
four hundred and ten thousand
dollars so I have trouble
supporting an option.
Adam Cammack where I.
We're gonna make it let
everybody make their comments
and then we'll come back to you
Representative those good
Representative Ezzell thank you.
Madam chair thank you very much
thank you for presenting this
bill today representative for
about a pair of.
You have problems with that
whenever I'm reading after the
FIR one department is saying
that it's going to cost him over
eighty eight thousand eighty
eight thousand dollars per year
just for one full time employee
to be able to fulfill the needs
of this.
And as Representative Chatfield
pointed out we I am one of those
that just assumes that Spanish
English and native American is
there are the three.
Most predominant languages in
our state.
But there is lots of others and
not my concern is how are we
going to accommodate those Madam
chair representative I do have
some problems with this thank
you very much.
Let's go back to the sponsors
for some comments.
Thank you madam chair I'll let
will Representative table court.
Go on.
I can answer some of those madam
chair and thank you
Representative.
I'm and thank you for the really
good questions that are being
prompted they are important but
we feel like we are we can
address them so in New Mexico
the four most common languages
spoken I believe our Spanish
outside of English Spanish did
may it means and Chinese
Mandarin as well and the way
that meaningful access is is
gathered it's really looking at
a four factor analysis so the
reason why it's not more
specifically defined within this
bill is that just has to occur
in this bill really addresses
the coordination of the
assessment for the different
state agencies to understand
what is their language right
responsibility that we're
providing language access for
their.
That's for the programs and
services that they provide so
that includes in the four factor
analysis understanding the
number or proportion of limited
English proficient individuals
that are eligible in their
service population the frequency
at which these LED individuals
come in contact with their
introduce health program
activity or service the nature
and importance of the entities
health program activity in
service and the resources
availability available to the
entity in cost so while this is
not an implementation bill it
does set up each state agency to
get to that point
implementation I also wanna let
sovereign he greased speak and
she had some of those answers as
well.
Madam chair briefly.
Yes chair members of the
committee just quickly that
meaningful access is so
important is clearly defined in
federal law and so what the bill
does is takes the approach of
other states to efficiently
provide these are language
services is it requires the
planning and says what
meaningful access is according
to following the test that some
federal law just to put it in a
plan and then it goes to the
governor and the LESC so that
can be efficiently funded what
we find in our work with
extensively with community
agencies you are trying to help
folks in state agencies as the
state agencies don't know about
the resources that other
agencies have statewide pricing
agreements for translation for
example HST has that and CYFD
doesn't know about it could be
utilizing that contract so this
is really about efficient
provision of services
in planning and then determining
what those languages are is
based on the service population
so once you do the analysis you
can tell what translation needs
to occur what trip
interpretation needs to occur
and there's clear threshold for
that in federal law so this just
sets up planning an efficient
way to get those services out so
there's not duplication.
Madam chair one thing I would
and I and and just to add is
that there are interpretation
lines so we don't need to
provide interpreters for every
single language out there there
are interpreting station lines
are different agencies use that
you can dial into somebody that
speaks the language thank you
madam chair.
I think we've heard the bill
we've heard the experts exposure
the committee I'm moving to do
pass on house bill twenty two as
amended.
That.
We have a proper motion in a
proper second is there any
opposition to that motion.
Anderson okay why don't we go
ahead and have the roll call
please.
Representative Allison.
Representative Anderson no.
Representative Armstrong.
Representative Brown.
So.
Representative Castellano yes.
Representative Chatfield.
I'd like to explain level.
Representative Crowder no.
Representative Dixon.
Yes.
Representative Ezzell.
No.
Representative Garcia.
Yes.
Representative Hochman Vigil
yes.
Representative Lane no.
Representative Lara yes.
Representative Sarinana yes.
Representative Sweetser yes.
Representative Trujillo yes.
Representative Armstrong.
She gone.
The right I don't see any yes
madam chair I think she's
presenting a bill.
Vice chair small yes.
Madam chair.
Yes.
Eleven yes and six knows or.
We do have a
Eleven to six
in favor of the past motion as
amended so the bill has been.
And will move along to the floor
but we do have a couple people
that may want to explain their
vote and that would be
Representative Chatfield and
Ezzell go ahead.
Thank you madam chair.
I'm I don't oppose so what this
bill seeks to do I think we need
to tighten up the language a
little bit and provide adequate
funding I don't think it's a and
if money to provide the services
that we just required and I wish
earlier in the year that we
would start working on it so
that we could do it right thank
you madam chair.
All righty Representative
Ezzell.
Thank you very much you want to
voice their concerns at
Representative at field might.
Was I sleeping whenever we pass
the amendment for this
particular bill.
It was open.
It might be my ears Medical.
We did it when it went through
okay thank you very much all
right thank you madam writing
one person the committee I I
went to I went through the
amendment I read it everybody so
they knew exactly what we were
about not so I think the
representatives today and you do
have a due pass motion thank you
very.
Thank you.
Bill we're now on house bill
sixty two we have Representative
Dixon here and I think that's a
tabling motion isn't
Representative Dixon at no madam
chair up there is a funding in
the budget.
In house bill two.
Generally what happens when we
do have funding in the budget
unless there's a reason to have
the language.
We do table because there's not
money already in the budget so
is this a if we could everybody
look at house bill sixty two.
And tell me if that language is
needed.
Madam chair it does set up a
fund matching grant funds and
yeah so okay.
And we need to do the bill let's
go to Representative Dixon to
talk about the bill.
Thank you madam chair members of
the committee may remember
portions of this bill from last
session of the department of
finance and administration has
moved forward with establishing
a federal grants administration
to work with political
subdivisions to help them
leverage federal funds this bill
would create a matching grant
fund and it would also provide.
Program opportunities council to
provide regular feedback
between DFA the stakeholders
and political subdivisions so
that we can ensure that we are
maximizing potential as
mentioned there is money for
this fund and this would allow
are smaller more rural
communities particularly to have
access to funds.
So that they can compete for
federal grants thank you madam
chair.
Okay do we have anybody that in
the audience would like to make
a comment.
We.
Just to let go of this
Then Mr.
Again can you get them for first
gonna start with Dan Fe for no
more than one minute.
Ago.
Mr they go to okay so good
afternoon chairman members of
the committee my name is Dan
state and I am tracking
broadband related issues as part
of the Adelante progressive
caucus with broadband
implementation we are leaving
considerable federal money on
the table due to not having the
resources to properly a prop up
live for federal grants this
bill would aid considerably and
helping groups in New Mexico to
successfully apply and receive
these requests thank you.
Okay now let's go to misstep the
Weisberg staff you have a
minute.
Thank you Mr chair and members
of the committee
on the half of the three fifty
New Mexico rural advocacy and
also the DPMM rural caucus we
stand in strong support of this
bill I have talked to lots of
people from different levels of
government in rural areas and
one huge need is help with
applying for learn about and
administering grants and I think
this is a wonderful bill that
will help with a lot of much
needed projects forward thank
you very much.
Thank you miss wise word finally
madam chair we have one more
member for public comment Mister
Lawrence of the essence.
Yes Sir.
Can you hear me yes we can okay
thank you very much of Madam
chairman of the committee my
name is senators so we just got
some some impact and
strongly supported passage of
this bill thank you.
Thank you Sir already I think
that's all the public comment so
R. I see a hand up the public
comment.
Madam chair I think that's the
the public comment we just have
a Representative.
Okay I have the representatives
listed let's start with
Representative Representative
Hochman Vigil.
Thank you very much madam chair
and I just have a couple quick
questions Representative Dixon
at first is Representative Dixon
why only
the public subdivisions why not
I'm larger entities.
Sorry madam chair and
Representative Hochman Vigil do
you mean
The state why not state
agencies.
Yeah exactly why not state
agencies.
Thank you Madam chair
Representative Hochman Vigil I'm
the.
The issue really is for our
smaller communities that don't
necessarily have the budgets and
the ability to set aside funds
or know exactly when federal
grant opportunities are going to
come up that require in match
and so this allows them to.
Apply for better competitive
federal grants that require
imagine so they can have they
can do this outside of the
capital outlay process on and
when there's an opportunity to
really get an enormous return on
investment.
Thank you madam chair and I'm I
apologize Representative Dixon I
misspoke I meant to say
political subdivisions I haven't
had enough capping at today but
that leads me to my second
question which is for those
projects that could have a
potential federal matching funds
how do you envision this office
interfacing with federal with
the federal grants office and
their ability to assist in this
capacity as well.
Thank you madam chair and
representative that's a great
question so one of the things
that has happened over the last
year is DFA has established and
Administration to facilitate
federal grant funding by stream
what you know so this is what
they are doing that work already
one of the things that we can do
is work closely with the federal
delegation.
And so there is a spot on the
grant opportunities council for
that direct linkage to the
federal delegation as well as
someone from USDA so that we can
make sure that all opportunities
are highlighted and we can
really make sure that we're
working together
you know we frequently miss out
on things because we're not
streamlined and don't have the
communications where the
capacity so this six to remedy
that.
Great thank you for your answer
and madam chair representative
Dixon I that concludes my
questions thanks.
Okay.
Let's go to Representative brown
and I'm gonna come back to
Representative Brown because
we're gonna have to amend this
bill so let's go to
Representative Brown.
Madam chair thank you very much
and my thanks to Representative
Dixon the refs were
the work they did on the bill I
know we had discussions the last
go round about ten some concerns
that I had in those have now
been a mediated so very much and
thankful for that madam chair
and representatives
I also had a question about the
possible defective nature of the
bill but I think we discuss that
a little bit and
we have a federal grant for
bureau within the DFA and also a
community development.
development council and so if
the sponsors don't mind madam
chair if they give us a little
bit of information about the
current scope and funding of the
community development council.
Thank you madam chair and
representative route the
community development council.
Madam chair representative so
that's mentioned here and our
analysis that these are current
service efforts
that already exists so I just
you know anything about in
particular that development
council.
Thank you madam chair and
Representative Brown actually
and I'm familiar with the
community development council
and it's rules what I would say
is the grant opportunities
council is set up to find a
different function it's not
designed to replicate what DFA
is doing in terms of outreach
and support for the local
entities what the opportunities
council is designed to do is
advise DFA and and this entire
effort and the matching grant
fund.
If I may please Representative
Brown the community development
councils established primarily
to review and make
recommendations on how CDBG
funds would be spent NH one of
the planning and development
districts has a representative
on that council fund over
northwest New Mexico it's a
fellow by the name of Jeff Kylie
I'm not sure about the rest of
the state that this council
comes together once a year.
For the purpose of reviewing and
and awarding CDBG grants.
Thank you very much madam chair
that's really good information
so it seems to me and at another
differences that under house
bill sixty two there would be
more nuts and bolts every day
help grant writing and so forth
not just identifying where
opportunities might exist but
actually helping with the the
writing of those requests Madam
chair representative Dixon in my
mouth point on that.
Madam chair and representative
brown I'm not the council does
not provide grant writing
support that is done through DFA
the cogs and the municipal
league.
Madam chair representative so I
perhaps student and raised that
just right but under your bill
house bill sixty two there would
be more.
Nuts and bolts help for
applicants is that correct.
Thank you madam chair and
representative around the.
Council would be providing
feedback to DFA would be working
with all of the part you know
people that are involved in this
process from the bottom up to
help make sure that DFA has the
tools that our local
municipalities have the tools
are there gaps that need to be
addressed so we can make sure
that as grant opportunities of
all we are providing the
necessary support okay thank you
madam chair representative so I
probably Rivera anyone page
three there's a bit of a scope
given a of what Council and your
bill would be doing my last
thing I would mention madam
chair Representative says that
this match requirement there
would be some assistance court
meeting match requirements and I
I guess I'd say think about as a
closing funded source and I
think that that can really help
some of the applicants achieve
their goals so I think that's a
really good part of the bill
so madam chair I and
Representative thank you again
for the bill I I think it's much
improved over last year thank
you.
I'll come back to Representative
brown for the and proposed
amendment after we have all the
other legislators ask questions
so let's go to representative
Garcia.
Thank you madam chair of
Representative Dixon thanks for
the presentation I have one
question you're on your bill
does cover of the nation cried
Pueblo in the land grants that
is she known language the bill
where might be an over stayer my
part just think there's.
Thank you madam chair and
representative Garcia so my
understanding is that we are not
including them because of anti
donation issues and weigh the
funds would need to go through
to tribes and and a sovereign
nations
But and that's something that I
discussed with Legislative
Council services I can certainly
get additional insight on that
if needed.
Share a reduction that would be
nice to close up they're asking
me why they were left out you
know and they're in rules and
laws for everything but the
people out there in the in the
on the on the ground don't
understand it and they're not
given very much help in our that
would be would a clarification
so we can explain to people
exactly what's going on with
this bill thank you madam chair.
Representative Sweetser did you
have a question.
Thank you madam chair my
question was really just whether
we need to strip the
appropriation it sounds like
you're dealing with that thank
you.
Representative Anderson.
Share my questions been answered
thank you.
Representative Crowder.
Thank you madam chair in the
thank you Representative for
bringing this forward I just
have one question is about all
the government appointed of
person three from the counties
three from the municipalities of
the three representatives of
different political subdivisions
I assume could be water
districts or or other political.
Areas of the state my question
goes back to is it contemplated
that the funding for the per
diem and mileage would come out
of the one million or does it
come from somewhere else for.
Does it come from.
When I first read this is a
three county Representative
three minutes well I thought
well those are elected officials
our city managers.
But they could be anyone from a
municipality or anyone from the
county.
Order I'm just trying to sort
that out is to what is that just
for the costs and we're with the
dollars come from for that.
Representative if I may this is
in the budget which we have we
just passed.
So when we get to Representative
brown we're going to strip the
appropriation and we're also
going to strip.
Bill.
Section three.
Because there's already funding
in the house bill two which
means that we have to move this
language along.
So that's where the funding is
going to come from but I'll let
the representative answer the
rest of the question.
Thank you madam chair and
Representative Crowder I'm in
the according to the FIR yes the
assessment is that it would be a
relatively minimal impact to
provide per diem and.
That we do have the funds in the
budget as to whether or not
DFA pays for that it would be
set under.
The department of finance and
administration I appreciate that
I just was unclear whether the
funding for the party having
trouble would come out of the
the money's been set aside or if
it would come from a different
buckets thank you.
Go back to Representative brown
for a
amendment place.
Madam chair because there is
funding in for house bill sixty
two in the Committee sub for
House Bill those two and three I
move to strike section three
from house bill sixty two it
shows up on hold just for and I
I is striking the appropriation.
Okay we have a provide of the
motion that basically strikes on
page one line fourteen making
appropriation and then on page
four and five section three.
So with that proper motion
proper second there any
opposition to that motion.
Seeing none let's go back on the
bill what's pleasure the
committee.
Level Adam chair of house bill
sixty two as amended.
Okay we have a motion and a
second.
Or what do.
House bill sixty two thousand
mended is there any opposition
to that motion saying that it is
been passed thank you let's go
next to house bill eighty six.
Thank you madam chair I'm an
actually Representative Lane if
it's possible would present this
bill.
It is very possible
Representative Eli.
Share our house bill eighty six
are creates a fleece retention
Fund there is money in H. two
two for this five million
dollars and we do have a an
amendment for the committee as
well chair.
All righty wanted to move your
amendment.
the amendment in the tier two
numbers to to to to zero six
point three.
Thank.
Let's let's talk about the
amendment I'm just catching up
with that right now if you would
just go ahead and pull it out
let's talk about it.
Actually chair so there's
there's two what I would say
substantive changes so the first
is really to try to address the
constitutionality of this bill
as madam chair knows member the
committees no is in New Mexico
you can't give any payment or
consideration for past services
so the language here in
paragraph D. is created to try
to address that situation so
what it does now is if you're a
law enforcement officer.
You're eligible for bonus stand
your four nine fourteen and
nineteen on the condition that
you then serving additional here
with that same agency and if you
finish that additional here then
you get the retention bonus and
then the other substantive
changes paragraph Ian this is to
address the issue of what
happens in the future if there
are enough appropriations given
to this fund and there are
enough there's not a high enough
balance to to be able to pay out
of this fund it tries address
that situation situations well
chair.
All righty so we basically
referred they explanation for
the amendment Representative
lines amendment.
Robert motion on this.
In a proper second is there any
opposition to this amendment.
Saying with the amendment has
been adopted let's go back to
the bill.
So basically what we're doing is
we're setting up this fund so we
do need this language is what
I'm what I'm reading here.
Madam okay let's go to the
audience do we have anybody in
the audience as a comment on
this bill.
Madam chair there are two
currently to first we're well
there's a few.
First madam chair we're gonna go
to join approve Cup and then
we'll go to J. B. JD Bullington
Joel.
Good afternoon madam chair and
members of the committee I'm
calling in support of this bill
house bill eighty six and my
concern is that the bill fund
may not cover all of full time
police officers in the state so
I that is a bit of a question
actually and I urge support that
we include all full time police
officers in New Mexico including
those department of game and
fish officers who are often
called to support the sheriff's
departments in the state police
all across our state there are
almost daily examples of that
and I also want to make certain
that state parks officers are
included in this because they
also deal with interesting and
sometimes very dangerous
situations in state parks across
the state and they too can be
called to assist other police
agencies so I vote in support of
the retention fund but I also
want to make certain that we
include all New Mexico full time
peace officers who enforce our
laws across the state thank you
very much Mr Krupa next we're
going to go to Mister JD
Bullington.
Mr Burlington.
Thank you madam chair and vice
chair our.
I am speaking on behalf of the
greater occur to chamber of
commerce my name is JD
Bullington and the chamber
supports house bill eighty six
we need several hundred
additional is an Albuquerque
we've known that for years and
this bill provides an important
reward to officers for staying
in this difficult profession and
for choosing to continue
policing the streets in our
state part of making New Mexico
more difficult state to engage
in criminal activity is ensuring
that there are enough of the
good guys police in the streets
and holding.
In those people accountable for
their crimes the chamber
strongly urges your support for
this legislation and we applaud
Sanchez for bringing it forward
thank you.
Already I'm gonna go back
Representative lane did you have
a comment on that first comment
that was made.
Yes Representative you give up
to that so I I was Messin in a
meeting that questions so the
amendment that was adopted by
the committee also expands the
definition of of police to to
include everything that was
mentioned that first comment.
We have any questions from the
committee.
Thank you experiencing
Representative Lane vapor lock
so we'll go to you for a motion.
Do passed house bill eighty six
as amended second.
We have a motion and a second is
there any opposition to that
motion state line you have to do
that.
Yeah okay let's go to house bill
fifty nine any word on that
bill.
Heard from the sponsoring that.
Already this month yes
Representative not a.
Maready Representative Lara do
you have a request to the
committee.
Thank you madam chair are you
included that all possible I
would like for for the committee
to to to hear out the the bill
please.
We can hear the bill.
It is.
All I want to mention it's a
fifty two million dollar.
The budget the let's go ahead
and have you talk about the bill
and then we'll go from there.
Thank you madam chair and
thank you members of the
committee I I understand that.
That the that the that the
funding isn't there but I still
believe that it's important that
we are bring awareness and
attention to this matter you
know we I understand the the
process and how it works and and
I've spoken to some of my
colleagues in particular
representative Allison and we're
gonna start working towards of.
Correcting this for in the
future
in the future so madam chair
members of the committee this
bill seeks to address the cliff
effect that is going to happen
when we give or when when the
school's school employees
receive their services increase.
some of our lowest rate of
school employees will see S. R.
we'll see a loss in income with
the with the increase of with
the pay increase and with the
increase in the index health
insurance so this bill.
Once he gives.
Access to health care for for
those lows stratum please boards
of school other because other
than that of those employees and
activities whether they are
going to have the most of the
school health insurance or not
or take a pay cut and this is
something that's really
significant because I believe
that it's it's it's we're trying
to help your raise that make the
make salaries more competitive
we're trying to encourage more
teachers to apply we want more
recruitment but at the same time
we have with the fact that I had
mentioned and is really under
cutting a lot of folks and and I
think this is a really important
our bill I think this is
something that really needs to
be discussed I think this is
something that needs to really
be considered in in the in the
framework of somewhere in the
framework for four or for us to
address these needs and I I
realize that this bill is what
day and what you can say is is a
bandaid that's only gonna help
now we do need long term
solutions to this we have a lot
of people who who are depending
on on on on this and having to
access only to health care but
also being able to bring home we
have decent pay.
Miss madam chair input all
possible I have I have somewhat
of an expert witness if she can
speak or if also I would like it
if if Representative Allison
what also also like to see some
things because you and I have
hyped up Senator discussions on
this as well.
Would you like to make a few
comments.
Thank you madam chair yes
Representative Lara has said we
have talked about this because
the situation that he is
experiencing I am also
experiencing and my our general
area so I also visit with you
madam chair on how to get how to
work on the get you some money
on to our bills and your
recommendation on attending some
LFC meetings this summer but
during the interim would be one
of the ways to do it and I share
that information with the
Representative Lara so we will
be of can bang at this the
project this summer.
You know what I'd like to
recommend is that this is the
exactly the kind of issue that
would come to our public
education subcommittee.
You could be put on the agenda
Representative Sweetser chairs
out she's on this committee.
She could easily add that and so
you get a full review you know
it's not just a silo approach
here is that you're mentioning
Representative Lara if we do
have somebody in the audience
that wants to make a comment
will allow that but it needs to
be briefed as we need to move on
here so go ahead.
Okay but
there were limits.
All right we're gonna go to
public comment we're gonna start
with miss Linda Knutsen and
again it's of one minute the
public comment at how many
people do have one here for
public comment on this bill.
Right now we are over ten so
madam chair can we go ahead and
limited to seven members yeah
we'll just do about let's just
do I I apologize but we're up
against the two o'clock war
session so let's just take five
Representative small and then
we'll go from there.
Sounds great thank you madam
chair we're gonna step our with
miss Linda Knutsen for one
minute the agency did send
please go ahead.
Thank you good afternoon madam
chair and all
in addition to the costs of
insurance going up
we also need to remember that
the cost of living has been
going up as well so
That's a concern to not only me
but my co workers those are
married off and have their
spouses you for their insurance
because they get better deals
and then I had co workers that
have second jobs to pay off
medical bills because they
haven't been able to afford the
premium policies and some
postpone getting insurance all
together when they're younger
they're thinking oh I don't need
insurance but we all know that
that's a risk.
And I did drop my husband's
insurance.
Because he has going on Medicaid
but I know that that's going to
set us back even more money
because thank you for yes thank
you thank you so much miss
Minson.
Next we're gonna go to merry par
Sanchez.
Merry go ahead for one minute
please.
And go ahead and I'm mute merry
miss merry par Sanchez.
Thank you can you hear me now
yes okay I would like to just
briefly referenced a hearing pre
prepared by LFC analysts Conner
Jorgensen in twenty twenty that
shows that there is an.
It's inequitable the amount that
NEP Sierra
insured members pay compared to
their counterparts in the
General Services Division and
APS
Mexico has funding cliffs and so
for the general services
division everybody making under
fifty thousand dollars
you get eighty percent medical
premium rate to two of the
twenty percent contribution by
the.
APS is the same it is for people
making under forty thousand from
Sierra
people making twenty thousand
dollars are paid a higher
percentage of their premium so
there is an application we would
really.
Are you.
Hearing this thank you.
Thank you very much
Representative thank you so much
Mr potter senses.
Next we're gonna go to lease a
Cooper date would be may.
A lease can you go ahead for one
minute please.
Lisa Cooper due date would be
may we'll go ahead and move on.
let's go now madam chair we're
gonna go to all of our Rowe.
All over for one minute please.
Thank you Mr small members of
the committee.
I just wanted to speak out in
support.
Of this legislation on on behalf
of really all of the teachers
out here in rural districts my
wife and I teach in New come New
Mexico.
And it is as Mary said it's an
equity issue for us because we
are effectively paying twice the
premium as APS are General
Services employees of this bill
in my opinion as a taxpayers
member of the public and as a
teacher it's a very good
targeted intervention to address
that in balance and that
inequity and I think it's
honestly fifty two million well
spent.
Thank you very much Mr row next.
Let's go ahead
Mr Lisa Cooper day woody bay.
Okay.
Yes good afternoon thank you
madam chair members of the
committee I'm Lisa Cooper they
would even I'm a first grade
bilingual teacher the twenty
twenty one New Mexico teacher of
the year and a current teach
plus policy fellow and in my
work with teach plus we're
studying key factors to increase
recruitment and retention of
teachers all over the state and
diversity in the pool of
educators and take home pay is
one of those key factors so I
think the Sanchez for bringing
forward HB fifty nine for this
awareness my colleagues and I
support this the work that we do
support our families and every
penny counts and however the
excitement and gratitude
generated among us related to
possible pay increases are
greatly tempered by the looming
premium increases for health
insurance or NMPSIA a state
employees we firmly believe that
everyone on our staff deserve to
benefit from the eighty twenty
ratio of contributions to best
value the work of our educators
through commensurate
compensation comprehensive
measures to ensure and increase
take home pay at all levels are
critical so finding a way now
for these eighty percent
contributions towards our
premiums will really help to
establish more parity with other
state employees this is
fundamental for our teachers
thank you so much for the
opportunity to speak thank you
so much.
miss Cooper date would be may
we're
Amendments that you want to
right yes madam chair you want
the number.
I I do want the number but I
want to make some comments so go
ahead it's it's two two two.
Point eight what what eight
point one sorry.
We have the amendment or you
should have
in front of us I need to say
something that troubles me about
an amendment like this is any
time we stride a previous
committees to tire of them.
We don't get into the policy.
Representative Sweetser take a
peek at this and report back to
us we'll let let representative
Sarinana talk about the
amendment but if we are striking
a policy issue we don't do that
and appropriations we look at
the financial impacts so we'll
take a look Representative
Sweetser take a peek at that
level that representative
Sarinana talk about your
amendment.
Representative what is this
amendment do all it does is it's
just clarifying language it's
just moving see up to up up a
little bit when it's read
apparently the drafters said
when it's read they don't they
should have fixed it but they
did so it's just taking lines
see from the very bottom of why
I am moving it up so that's the
first thing they see you cannot
hold a level one two or three
licensure but you can be a
teacher and be in this program
it's alternative license and a
person who is going to be a
brand new teacher that's all
it's doing.
Representative does is there
money in the budget for.
Yes there is okay within this
ammendment also needs to strike
The appropriation.
Okay.
Do I need another minute or what
we can do that one on the fly
but I'm not I'm not going to
accept this ammendment itulah
get clarification are we
changing policy from the first
committee when we are striking
we're striking the entirety of
some other committees amendment
I just want to make sure that we
are.
Doing something that we
shouldn't be so.
But if you go back on the bill
that Representative Sarinana and
let's talk about the bill before
we get into all this ammendment
stuff I will just limit to the
most important part of the bill
so right now it's a pilot but
works with alternative licensure
that means someone who has a
degree in something outside of
education can come in and be a
teacher and it's called the
teacher residency because it's
similar to a doctor in a
resident they were the teacher
in the expert work hand in hand
the soon to be teaching expected
handed him for a whole year it's
a great way to learn how to
teach and our pipeline we have
over thousand empty classrooms
they don't have teachers and I'm
so this is just part of the
pipeline so
It expands a teacher residency
program to those
students in their senior year of
a department approved teacher
licensure preparation program.
And the other large thing it
does is it changes the stipend
for residents from twenty
thousand to thirty five thousand
and that's in hopes that the
resident doesn't have take on a
second job during this program
as I go through this program
those are the two biggest
changes to biggest
We believe draws would bring
people more into this program
and into teaching.
Or that I'm just looking at some
of those so let's go to
do we have anybody in the public
Representative small that wants
to make a comment on this bill.
We do madam chair we have Mister
John Drees.
And we have.
A man be so two members.
Okay we go to them was asked
Representative Sweetser what do
you think are we changing
policy.
Thank you for that madam chair
the way I'm reading it it really
does just reorganize I do not
think it's changing the policy
or the intent that came out of
the house Education Committee
some thank you madam chair.
Okay
so this amendment would have to
be corrected anyway.
You have to include.
On line one excuse me on page
one line twelve.
Acting making appropriation if
this bill has got if this is
already got money in the budget
and then page seven all of
section five.
Eighteen through twenty four.
So that would be included on
this ammendment.
Everybody.
Okay.
Okay.
I need somebody to move this
ammendment.
I so madam chair.
The second okay we have a motion
and a second to move the
amendment.
I understand that it doesn't
change policy.
Is there any opposition to this.
Seeing with.
Has been adopted.
Let's go to the people that want
to talk about the bill
Representative small thank you
madam chair we're going to start
with Mister John Deere's John
can you go ahead for one minute.
Thank you Representative and
members of the committee John
urged with a hefty New Mexico
we're here to show our support
for house bill thirteen with the
included amendments that were
made today the residency pilot
deserves to be and in statute
it's been showing to be a great
recruitment tool and as the
sponsor noted it allows our
incoming educators to be focused
on their work and not have to
take out additional jobs in
order to make ends meet so we do
urge a yes vote on house bill
thirteen thank you.
Thank you very much one either a
public comment let's go to Mr
quite navvy for one minute
clinic in.
Good afternoon madam chair
members of the committee this is
clean happy with New Mexico
State University we to stand in
support of this bill we want to
think Representative Sarinana
she worked with us to include
amendment language that help to
ensure that this can recruit new
students into the teaching
pipeline which is obviously of
great importance at this moment
so we thank you all for your
consideration for your support
thank you.
All right let's go to the
committee this committee have
any questions Representative.
I move a do pass we're gonna go
to questions before except that
motion let's go to
Representative Crowder.
Thank you madam chair just one
quick question I I remember
seeing this in the budget but I
can't remember where
Madam can you remind you whether
it's not in the SCG but I can't
reference specials are
supplementals or where our
order.
What.
Right at the tip of my finger
tips here but let's see ability
got that handy.
Let him look for that also
because I'd be curious as where
it is also in the budget.
You have any other questions
well these look and no ma'am
that's my only question.
Okay we have anybody else will
questions.
Representative Lane.
Thank you madam chair I was just
gonna say it's on page one
ninety six in the budget line
item.
Okay.
Is it is there for of madam
chair.
It's like five point five
million.
Okay.
All right anybody else with any
questions.
Representative Trujillo for the
motion.
Move I move.
To pass on this
Bills.
Okay we have a motion for do
passed as amended and seconded
is there any opposition to that
two passed motion.
There's a deep pass.
Let's go to house bill twelve
thank you madam chair.
All right madam chair that house
bill twelve this is one where we
have junior money that covers of
all the entire appropriations.
Do you want to go over the bill
or what what would you like me
to do and chair.
All right so this does this does
have junior Montana correct
okay.
Can you.
Let me take a look here.
Well it's been a junior money
and you need to have this
language.
No we don't okay then let's make
a table in motion.
Representative after the tabling
motion okay I'm sure right I
move to table the house bill
twelve.
We need a second.
Okay we've motion and a second
to table was there any
opposition to that motion saying
that it's been table thank you
Representative thank you madam.
House bill twenty three.
Thank you thank you madam chair
Still looking for money and the
on the Senate side so this will
need to be tabled.
Already could you please make
that motion madam chair.
I.
That I need to table this bill
house bill twenty three.
We have a second period for that
motion staff and we have a
second here Representative
smaller center opposition to
that motion is built been tabled
are wrecked ID thank you
everyone we've we've heard our
agenda for today I just wanted
to remind the committee that
will meet on Monday maybe early
following the floor session
hopefully we can start at our
usual time at one thirty but
we'll see how things go so thank
you all will see all of you so.
Thank you madam chair thank.
Or or.
