Thank you. We do have quorum, so
our first.
Presentation to the today will
be by the commission for the
Death and hard of hearing
persons.
This is
Committee 604, would you please
come forward?
So Ruby and Esbel, you will be
starting our conversation today,
and then you will then please
turn it over to the next
individuals and you will
announce them by name.
Thank you, um, good afternoon,
Madam Chair and members of the
subcommittee.
Uh, hopefully the technology is
cooperating with us now, you're
having a little snaps with that
so just welcome to uh.
Uh, the members of the
commission for Deaf and hard of
hearing and the public and of
course my DFA counterpart, it's
agency code 604 in your binder,
so behind your tab 6.
604.
I'll give you all a minute to.
Find it.
All right, 604.
Alrighty, um, Madam Chair.
So for commission.
For deaf and hard of hearing
persons. I, I might just go over
the different sheet really
quickly, just I know you all had
a little primer earlier and
stuff, but since this is the
first one and we're kicking off
the subcommittee here, so let,
maybe we'll just take a step
back and do that first, so
included in your packets.
Are
First off, your different sheet
which is followed by narratives
sort of summarizing the main
differences between the
legislative finance Committee,
LFC, and the executive
recommendations. In addition to
the different sheet, you also
have included in your packet,
what's called the personal
services calculation sheet or we
call it the PS calc and these
are uh derived from the
legislative finance Committee.
And it's looking at the agency
from a snapshot in September
every year. These are always in
the packets, and it kind of
gives you an idea of where they
were funded in the actual year
and FY 24, what the operating
budget FY 25 looked like for
personnel and then what's
expended as of September and
what the vacancy rate is, so it
gives you all of that data and
information on this sheet and
you'll see these for every
agency, so you're.
You're gonna see these. And then
we added a new uh sheet this
year per I believe the
chairman's request and this
agency does have one, and it's a
summary of the differences
between the not in the
non-recurring funding, so the
special appropriation, so we do
have one for commission for deaf
and hard hearing, and it looks
like this. This, it's on page.
I can't see the number because
it's got the holes in it, but
anyway, it looks like it's this
form here, so we'll be covering
that as well for this agency and
you will see that for multiple
other agencies, because we, as
you know, we have a lot of
special appropriations um for FY
26. So that's what's in the
packet.
Now just to to briefly go over
the different sheet, pink sheet,
well, I guess it's yellow in
your book, but, um, basically
what it has before you, we've
added a column here for each
agency that is the FY 24 actual
expenditures so you can see the
actuals for both the revenue.
And for the expenditures, so
revenue typically, you know, per
house bill too is broken out
into general fund, other
transfers, other sorts of
revenue, other state funds, and
then federal funds and then the
expenditures, of course, are
broken into 4 categories,
personal services and employee
benefits contractual services,
the other cost category, which
is like other operating and then
for some agencies.
Not all agencies, the what we
call the other finding with
transfers to other agencies.
So we have that across.
Your actual year, so what was
actually expended and the
revenue that was actually
received, then we have your FY
25 operating budget.
In this column here and then
this.
part of the different sheet up
here at the top part is
actually.
What was uh recommended by both
the LSC and the executive, and
then there's another portion
here for expansion, this agency
didn't have expansion, and then
the summary of what those
differences were. So basically,
as we talk about the
differences, we're gonna be
going looking at this far.
Right hand, that gives you the
quick look at what the numbers
are, what the differences are.
So with that sort of background,
I'll go ahead and this agency
basically has one major
difference, so it it's.
Somewhat, um.
Easy to get a snapshot, so if
you look, as I said at that far
right hand, you'll see there's a
difference of um 50.
2.8, is that right?
I'm like
Maybe, maybe you have to start
using glasses, um, oh my gosh,
OK, so, uh, $52,800 in really in
fun balance, so you see that the
LSC um.
As a little bit uh lower in
general fun here by the
52.8,000.
And then you see that the LFC is
higher in fund balance right
here by 50,000, so that's really
our difference here, I'm not
even gonna really go cuz it's so
minor in the expenditure columns
here, it's just $1000. That's,
that's really not relevant, so
what the main differences
between the LFC and the
executive for the commission for
the Deaf and hard of hearing is
really in the use of fund
balance in general fun by
50,000. So that's really the
difference.
difference, um.
It's not even relevant in the
expenditure portion, it's really
just a revenue difference, so
the agency is does have a fun
balance of almost 3 million.
Yeah, I think it's about 32
point pushing 3 million, um,
there's a reason we have wanted
that and and I'm sure the
director will speak to this
summit just in a very quick
nutshell to give you the more
salient information is, um, so
this agency commission for Deaf
and hard of hearing and director
Gong will speak about their
mission and the things they do,
but just from a revenue side,
the agency was um set up to be
primarily funded with with fees,
fees that are generated.
On our, um, from
telecommunications usage, we
get, get them in our bills from
our cell phone usage.
Unfortunately, when these these
were.
Set up and the rates were
increased some years ago, the
projection for how much would be
generated, never really realized
it didn't come to fruition. So
as a result, they used to be
kind of the the thought was
they'd be self sustaining with
these telecommunication relay
service fund fees that hasn't
really happened and so over past
several years, the legislature
has had to increasingly add
additional general funds
substantial increases, 50%.
He says 30% increases, 40%
increases year over year to make
the budget whole because those
revenues were not.
Not being realized.
So back to the fun balance
issues, so as a result, over the
last 2 years, the agency has
built up somewhat of a fun
balance, but they're using that
some as a cushion because these
revenues have been volatile
somewhat and they haven't been.
Being generated to the level we
expected, so that's sort of why
you see us maintaining a bit of
a fun balance there, but in the
LSC recommendation the committee
recommended using an additional
50,000 over what the executive
recommended.
So I think that gives you kind
of a very quick snapshot in and
overview of the main difference,
and with that I'm gonna turn it
over to my two colleagues here,
um, I, I don't know, um, are the
analysts from DFA uh is not able
to be here, she's in
subcommittee A, so to her
credit, you know, Mary Beth, um,
Desmore did this budget for
years and so she's here to pinch
it. I don't know if she wants to
add anything, and we also have
our director of.
The commission for deaf and hard
of hearing persons, uh, Mr.
Nathan Gom here.
Did you Mary Beth?
No, thank you, um, Madam Chair,
committee members, I don't have
anything to add, uh, Ruby An did
a wonderful job, I think.
Um, laying out the difference
for you. So thank you very much.
Madam Chair, members Committee,
thank you for your time.
Um
Ruby did a wonderful job of
encapsulating everything that
we've been addressing, um, in
the request we asked for a
number of things trying to
address this declining revenue,
one of the things that we asked
for wasundane to do an intensive
audit, uh, not just on the state
local level but would they
vendor that can look at uh
federal records to ensure that
we've been receiving all the
funding that we're supposed to
be receiving with all the
information that we have
provided in the past, um.
Other states, Pennsylvania and
Colorado have done the same
thing.
Uh, Pennsylvania was able to
secure an additional $1.3
million that they had not.
Received in that funding, um, so
we looked at it as a very
Good possibility that we're
experiencing the same thing and
wanted to address that first.
Nobody wants to really talk
about like a tax increase or a
surcharge increase. So we really
want to do our due diligence to
make sure that we have all the
right information, but the, the
reality is we're seeing a
decline in that surcharge and
that decline.
Year after year has um created
this kind of
If we spend all the money.
Then we won't have the money for
an FCC required service, which
is the relay services that we
provide to the state of New
Mexico residents.
Um, that service has been
evolving. I've talked about it
before. I'll talk about it
again. Um.
The analog services that we know
and love from years past has
evolved to digital services, and
when it does that, um, people
switched to what we call
internet-based uh protocol
services like caption telephone
services.
That's been happening over the
years. The
FCCU has said this is what
you're going to do has not
changed what we're going to do,
so we have to continue
supporting those individuals who
are analog services, um, the
caption telephone services, for
example, on analog.
base lines legacy carriers, for
example, um, has over the years
just kind of morph into a mobile
telephone.
Uh, industry and the problem is
when it does that, it's no
longer uh something that we see
on our records and until the
FCC.
Allows us to see every part of
that record. We don't know how
many people we would quote
unquote be.
Harming if we took away the
service. So that's put us on a
kind of weird spot where we have
to continue supporting it some
mandate, we have to continue,
uh, making sure that all these
services are available, but
That probably hurt you more than
me.
The hearing loss but
Sorry.
Um,
But, um, the reality is the
technology is changing and we
have to change with it.
Um, the other thing I would
highlight is that we have a
communication facilitator
program and the annual report,
uh, page 19 and 20, there's a
kind of heavy emphasis on that
program. The program is we're
one of 4 or 5 states in the
entire nation that's providing
communication facilitators to
highlight what that is, we are
giving people who have dexterity
and low vision, no vision, uh,
access to telecommunication
services and what that means is
somebody who wants to make.
FaceTime call to their sister
and.
California or in Missouri or
West Virginia is able to do that
now because they have somebody
who's in person with that person
who may be deaf blind and using
tactile sign language and able
to facilitate the communication
between those two individuals.
It's a great program, we're one
of the few states who's doing
this, we're investing it and
we're making sure that our
community is getting access, and
that's definitely something that
should be considered and that's
part of why
the funal request was the way it
was.
Because the special purpose in
last year of $200,000 is already
being expended and we know we're
not going to be able to continue
supporting that unless we have
funding for, um, and that brings
me to this.
Really important topic, which is
our support service program. As
many of you know Paul Highland
opened up, uh, over the year
we've seen this tremendous
growth and people coming to our
state for our SSP program.
And the problem when you see the
growth is if you appropriate a
certain amount of money, you can
only work within that budget.
And right now we've grown from
A a population of 59 people and
23 to 89 last year or this this
prior year and then uh we're
looking at 94 currently that
growth is not what we expected.
So when we made our
recommendation, we were looking
at what we had and the
information we had prior to
this. The reality is there's not
enough funding even in what we
requested. So the general phone
request of 4,564,400 is not
gonna be enough to really make
an impact.
With signing, I would understand
that.
Um, it's not gonna be enough to
support the community as it
continues to grow. The service
is supposed to be covering the
entire state of Namaska.
When we started the conversation
2 years ago, we were at 59
people and then it went up to
89, you'll see the, the money,
the general fund that was
appropriated in that section was
expended in full, and we were
able to support this community,
but because it was funded and it
keeps growing, we're now having
to look at limitations, so that
means caps on how many hours of
service each person gets. That
means caps on how many people we
can serve and that it was not
the intent of this funding. So
So my request right now is to
reconsider and look at um either
considering a general fund
increase to about 456, 400 line
or
Look at my phone balance because
as we are articulated, this is
something that we can manage
right now, but we need to
increase it and my
recommendation is another
$200,000 for that 456 400 line.
Um, that's in addition to the
200,000 that we're doing for the
communication facilitator. So as
a whole, when everything's
considered, we're investing
about $856,400 and to our deli
deaf seniors and deaf with
additional disabilities
community.
Because they're growing
population and part of that has
to do with the influx of people
from Ba Island.
It's a good problem to have,
that we have all these people
who think that we have this
great service. I think it's
fantastic speaks to the services
themselves, speak to the people
who are working on this, but in
reality is I have to look at
the, the figures and try to
figure out how to make this work
where we're not capping.
Our most underserved community
at all.
Uh, when I, uh
answer any questions.
Yes, go ahead.
I just wanted to clarify some
comments that director Gong made
when he was, um, cuz you can't
see it here on the on the
different sheets when um
director Go was referring to the
456,400. It's actually an amount
that's included in your language
in both the LFC and the
executive recommendation, so we
didn't highlight it, but it's um
money that's listed funding
that's listed in language that
specifically says this supports,
um, you know, the.
Deafblind program and you can
see that in your volume 2 on
page 243.
In addition, um, Madam Chair
director Gom had mentioned, um,
the audit and I, I purposely
waited to talk about this sheet
to let him discuss this, so now
I'll direct your attention to
this, the different sheet and
the specials.
looks like this.
OK.
So, um
What this is, it's showing you
here that, um.
There's an amount in special
appropriations that's in both
the LSC and the executive, um,
for an audit of revenue
collection for the
telecommunication relay Service
Fund and in the LSC language, it
says in collaboration with the
taxation revenue Department TRD
and the executive language is
just somewhat different, it just
says to contract for an audit,
but it's.
same thing, the LFC just said in
collaboration with TRD. So, um,
you do see funding there are
100,000 in general fund and, um,
both, um, you know, the DFA
analysts and myself had
discussions with the agency and
so, um, this was added to the um
special appropriations to try
and audit to actually go and see
if we're collecting all the
revenue we should be for this
agency because we've.
We've worked with TRD over the
years, but we really needed to
do an audit and this um new
audit from where where where was
it New Jersey, right?
Is that where it was
in Pennsylvania and the audit in
Colorado.
OK, yeah. So yeah, I couldn't
quite remember, yeah, so that
they proved very effective,
those audits in garnering um
that that appropriate revenue.
So you will see that in the
special appropriations for this
agency, and lastly, Madam Chair,
um, there's an additional piece
that the LFC recommended that
the executive did not recommend
for 132,000 in general fund
revenue, a special appropriation
to replace information
technology equipment at the
agency and, um, it's not in the
executive and it's in the LFC.
Thank you so much, Madam Chair.
With that we have.
If I may, Madam Chair, I'd like
to introduce, um.
Inertia Lopez, who, who was one
of the people who informed me of
a recent town hall at Island
discussing this very issue with
um the services that um.
I was referring to with the SSP
services and also my board chair
and my uh CFO here.
I apologize.
Thank you, Mary Beth. Do you
have anything else you'd like?
Thank you, Madam Chair. Um, no,
I don't, um.
I think
Yeah, we can stand for
questions. Thank you.
All right, thank you. We'll go
to the committee for questions.
I first see uh Representative
Little, followed by
Representative DanA.
Thank you, madam, this
afternoon.
Um, I am wondering it's a
You mentioned that the decline
in the revenue, uh, being the
surcharge was because of the uh
analog lines.
Uh, they're not being as many as
there were before. I'm
wondering, Madam Chair, uh,
whether there is a surcharge,
it's moved to digital. And is
there a surcharge on digital
since it's web-based?
Thank you.
Um
I'd be happy to explain, Madam
Chair. um,
it was added and the language
that we amended the uh.
The structure of how the
surcharge
was initially implemented so I
had originally and this was, uh,
thanks to Senator Rodriguez
originally intended to look at
the transition, uh, many years
ago.
The
as I see it is uh it is specific
to the phone service itself.
Now many of the carriers and the
companies for um our
telecommunications industries
bundle a lot of these services.
So when they do that, they uh
essentially you pay for the
phone like a new iPhone, a new
Android phone, whatever it is,
um, and you pay for this bundle
of services, but the phone
services itself is a minuscule.
Amount of that total dollar
amount. So for example, on my
own phone bill uh through
Verizon, I.
I contribute every month 3 sons,
that's it.
So if
You have even cheaper phone plan
or you don't have all that
bundled, it's maybe a son.
So that application of how we
have it currently, which is a
percentage
means that it's a percentage of
just the phone service itself
and because the evolution of the
telecom industry has been so.
Um
Substantive with how they set
their sons up, it's not
necessarily clear like we've
actually received it and there
is a possibility that some of
these companies get just 1% of a
percentage, so it's not even a
cent. and therefore they don't
put it in the information for
the collection, uh, and that's
part of what this audit is going
to look at is, is that really
what's happening? Are we not
even seeing one cent materialize
because there's so in the school
and and really you dress up.
Thank you. I appreciate that
information.
Uh, one follow-up question that
I have then is what you're
describing as I too have rice
and and I see down there, um,
and I'm wondering then your
description included that, uh,
that.
In which
Um
They're being more web-based
now.
So if it's web based.
Are there, is there a surcharge
there or was there ever any
consideration for that. Thank
you. So, Madam Chair, members
committee, um.
So the internet as it stands is
not technically.
A service that we can collect
from.
According to the FCC.
Um
So we, when
Years ago I'm, I'm trying to
remember exact date.
They
discuss if the internet services
could be considered a utility.
The first subject to space and
the answer was no.
So if you are, um,
Using a Zoom call, for example,
or a soft phone on, on a on a
computer, it is not contributing
to this, uh, surcharge. It's not
actually being elected from. So
if you pay $80 for your
internet, there's no line there.
Now if you have phone service on
there, so if you want the phone
service, for example.
There may be some.
But it really depends on how
much the phone services office.
Thank you, Madam Chair, for my
question.
Thank you, Representative
Little. We'll go to
Representative Duncan.
Thank you, Madam Chair. I think,
uh, going first gets all the
answers.
Rep Little uh got got most of
my, I think.
And so
First question is when somebody
comes to us and says they're
like a 12% increase in their
budget.
You know as a
As a homeowner, um, I look at
that and go, my budget's never
increased 12 years and at my
home.
So what was your budget request
last year, if you remember.
think maybe I'll, yeah.
Madam Chair, representative,
that's a good question. You got
us all a little perplexed there,
um, it's.
Actually, the request from last
year, I think was probably a
little higher than what you're
seeing in the operating budget
because I think that the agency,
um, asked.
Well, actually, it's a little
more nuanced question it might
have been a little, um.
higher, but then they got a
special appropriation last year
for 200,000 for that, um, the,
the deaf blind support service
program, so that increased the
budgets that made the operating
budget look a little bit higher,
but I think to your point, um,
Madam Chairs representative
Duncan.
You're, you're, I think the
point you're getting to is that
they're.
It's been requests for
increasing general fund revenue
over the years and you would be
very much correct in that and
largely in part due to the
issues that we're pointing out
with the revenue is.
Lack of collections for revenue,
but you are indeed correct, um,
that the request and the funding
for general fund has increased
substantially and in some years
we had.
Actually, a 50% increase for
this agency and a 40% increase
when you're oh I'm just
remembering these off at the top
of my head.
Yeah, we had some very large
increases for this agency, to
your point.
Um, all right, we have the
request, um, Madam Chair, thanks
Allegra, um, so lot of the
request for last year for just
general if I was 2,141 um
300,000.
So that was that request last
year. Thank you, Madam Chair,
and if you put that in a
percentage, would you say that
was probably in the 20.
3 25% range.
Um, Madam Chair, I'm just
eyeballing this over the op bed
for for for last year, right?
Um, Madam Chair Representative
Duncan, that's looking about
like a 40% increase just off the
top of my head. Yeah, thank you.
All right. Um,
I think we've got a problem
here. um
uh
Madam Chair, I think we have a
problem here and, and I don't
know that it's a problem that is
your problem.
Um, I think we have a problem
with, uh, perhaps technology.
So,
and I think rep Little got the.
I asked the question, I wrote
the question down. Why haven't
we seen the revenue
telecommunications and obviously
we answered that with, with the
internet.
Even, even if we upgraded all of
our
Technology, we still wouldn't
have the revenue coming in in
any way, shape or form. Is that
correct?
Madam Chair
Man,
the current language how it's
written, we wouldn't have
enough.
Right
OK. All right. So, Madam Chair,
thank you. So there's
I guess, I guess my question,
since we can't bring newer
technology to.
Um, to the forefront here and
help out.
Have you explored every option
with every communication out
there.
To see if there isn't I'm, I'm,
I'm one manager. I'm one for
when I buy a car, I want that
tax to go into the road fund
when I buy gas, I wanted to go
on the road fun.
If we're using a phone or if
we're using any technology at
all.
Is there a way that that can
Have you explored that to find
out if there's other options uh
in funding there.
Man, thank you. Madam chair, um,
represented Duncan, that's a
good question, so you basically
pointing out that this isn't
sustainable over time.
So in the LFC recommendation for
several years now in um volume 2
for this agency we've been
recommending for several years
that we look at opening up the
the statute and looking at the
revenue and increasing the
surcharge there's.
There's a more even nuanced
discussion here, there's for the
the revenue that's peeled off
for the telecommunications relay
a portion of that goes to the E
911, the emergency 911. Well,
guess what? E 911 is doing all
right. The revenue's good and
it's kind of counterintuitive
because they have a a set amount
versus a volume amount, but the
set amount is proving effective
for them. So there's been a a
recommendation for several years
in the Lellow Sea, and I think
the executive as well.
to really
Perhaps look at opening up this,
um, enabling statute on this
revenue and changing the revenue
structure. Um, that has not
occurred to today.
Thank you, Madam Chair, I
I'm probably the, the guy on
this committee that will
recommend no tax at all.
Um, uh, no tax hike, I should
say, but for this.
Department, we've got to do
something.
And it, and uh we're, we're
riding a dead horse.
And, and I would recommend Madam
Chair, that during the interim
that we, we look at anything and
everything we can.
To just give you a stable fund,
and if that, if, if, you know,
if our, our population is
decreasing.
Um, that's one thing, but I, I,
I think people are still having
kids and, and those children.
may fall under this umbrella.
Thank you, Madam Chair. That's
all I have.
Thank you, Representative
Duncan. We'll go to
Representative Luhan followed by
Representative Dowd.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Thank
you for the presentation today.
You know, I'm.
I'm glad that we're, we're
looking, um, on the budget side,
Madam Chair, uh, on this.
The special appropriations, I, I
do support those. I know we're
not there in the budget process
yet, but I think that this is a
really.
It's a good position for us to
be in.
Um
And I support those, those um
those additions we have an LFC
recommendation.
Um, in changing the revenue
structure as we're getting into.
What, um,
And maybe we should have this
conversation.
You all to see what that looks
like because we are in the
process now during the session
where we can look at.
If need be changes.
Statutory
changes
Um, so I'd like to have that,
that discussion, Madam Chair, I,
I'm not sure that's.
Where we need to go, um, but I'd
like to entertain the the
conversation.
With you all to have that.
And um
And to really support the
continued where we are now, I
think you're in a hard place.
I think we need to figure this
out and maybe we can.
We can look at that, uh, that
dynamic right now so that we can
make sure that nobody is losing
any of their services.
Or there isn't any
Um
There isn't any chance of that,
and that's exactly what I heard
you say today. We need to make
those assured.
You need to walk away knowing we
support.
So Madam Chair, um, yeah.
wanted to reiterate that and and
and show my support for what LFC
budget is doing.
I think there's more
Thank you, Representative Luhan.
We'll go to Representative Dow
now, followed by Representative
Dixon.
Thank you, Madam Chair, and
thank you for the presentation.
I'm, I'm trying to understand.
The difference between the
mission and purpose and
statutory mandate of this.
Commission versus the school of
the Death and hard of hearing
persons. Where are you located?
Oh, I'm
chair members committee. I, I'm
located in Albuquerque. Um, I'm
not, um.
Currently affiliated with the
school for enough at all. I, I
was in the past part of their on
the board. So I think that may
that
Thank you, Madam Chair and thank
you. So none of the dollars are
co mingled, and this is
something completely separate.
It's full of separate, yes OK,
so thank you, Madam Chair and
thank you. On page 604, when I
was reading about, I thought the
increase was also high, um, but
it says that the agencies met 2.
Of its of its 6 performance
targets. Could you tell us?
I'm looking at the performance
targets.
Right, um, so we were at 99% of
one of them and 99% is a
failure. So that's just the way
it is and uh I, I accept that,
um, we, we have already, um,
hired a full-time staff
employees to offset some of
those issues we're looking at a
professional development number
that's one of the last ones, um,
the relay is not something I can
control, uh, and I've had this
conversation a few times. I
can't tell Bob to make a phone
call.
on his TTY today, um, even
though that would definitely
help my number and in achieving
that goal. What I, what I have
to do is make sure that we have
at least those minutes available
in terms of funding to make sure
that anyone in this state to
make a phone call uh through
relay services and emergency in
any other situation as possible.
Um, and then I, I think that
kind of ties in uh.
with representative Duncan's
question, um, technology is
changing.
So it's hard to say.
I, I'm gonna satisfy that 10,000
number because in reality it's
not gonna happen.
We have a declining community
who's using analog services in a
declining revenue, but a growing
community of people who are
using all different types of
technology.
And that is the dilemma that we
face every day.
Our EDP, our equipment
distribution program, we've
shifted to modern technology
already.
We we're continuing to support
technology
folks who, the people who live
in uh angel Fire, for example,
who don't have the necessary
broadband internet access to
actually use the technology, we
continue to support them, but
just like in anything else, when
you have old technology it
becomes more expensive to
maintain and that equipment that
we're using is
starting to become more and more
discontinued. So we are trying
to shift people over, we are
working with our relay provider
to ascertain who
And where those people are so we
can give them the necessary
resources, but at this time,
according to the rules provided
by the FCC, we are not allowed
to see that data specifically.
We can only estimate where those
people are.
Um, so that's part of the other
part of it is um.
When we started doing
presentations, a lot of the
presentations and the outreach
that we were doing was virtual
and it shifted, um, we didn't
have a person that was covering
that until last year January and
now we have a full-time
employees doing all the work
we're not just kind of saddling
on someone else to do, so we're
filling those uh vacant
positions and we have them
almost all filled. So I don't
anticipate we're gonna see two
only satisfied, even if it is
99%.
goal, my intent is to make sure
that we're 100%, 100% what we
have with the funding we're
spending it, uh where it needs
to be and we're serving those
people that we say we're gonna
serve on the legislative
measures.
Thank you. Thank you, Madam
Chair, and so I'm, I'm looking
at the mission and purpose, and
it's much broader than
technology.
So I'm
I, I guess the report seems
narrow. I, I thought we were
gonna hear about all the cool
stuff that you guys do, dynamic
resources, enhance the quality
of life, deaf and hard of
hearing residents, but those
things are self-sustaining and
what you're really asking for
help with this technology.
Uh, part of the technology
request is AI is gonna become
something that we have to look
at we're currently using AI for
captioning in this uh session.
For the SSR um.
Those technologies are where
we're going to see the benefit
to our community.
Um, when we're talking about our
technology, we are looking at
our technology in a 65 years
old, we came to support the
technology to show our community
what this looks like. So for
example, if you have a Windows
10 computer, it doesn't have
copilot, doesn't have any of the
ASR features and I can't run it
very well. That's part of the
conversation of technology, um,
the
If you look at our statues and
the rules, it talks a lot about
the equipment distribution
program, it talks a lot about
really.
What we've done is expand to
more of those things that you
mentioned with the SSP program,
which is actually touching the
lives of the individual through
those services and we tried to
run that and not only just focus
on technology, which is why the
annual report you see a lot of
conversation about what's
happened with our community and
how we've served them and how uh
these programs have benefited
the community.
But when you look at how we
originally came about is really.
It's, it's all about relay.
So we really grown and supported
this in different ways, but at
the end of the day, we started
with.
OK. Thank you, Madam Chair. And
then I'm looking at your fund
balance and are you able to
transfer any of your fund
balances?
Well, that, that's the
conversation that I'm hoping to
have with the SSP program is to
look at.
Either er from what you've
already um touched on, um, or
using that fundal to support
this community because the
community is growing and we have
a project and a program that's
really effective, and we can use
that, but the, the catches and
and you you.
Representative Duncan's already
mentioned is uh we have a
declining revenue. So if I don't
have the safety net, so to
speak, then when I do have to
provide these mandatory services
in 2-3 years and we don't have
any funds there.
We're not going to be able to
and then we're going to be in
violation of federal law.
Thank you. Thank you, Madam
Chair, and this is just my last
quote. Well, I, I guess there's
two parts to the last question,
but you had mentioned people
coming from out of state. Is
this something unique to New
Mexico and, and in all of these
outputs.
Number of workshops and
trainings conducted, number of
outreach events coordinated,
number of average relay minutes
per month. That's only for New
Mexico residents.
New Mexico residents, the people
who moved
the people who moved um to New
Mexico, moved to Paul Island
because it's one of the few
apartments that provides an
apartment complex that is
accessible to people with a
hearing loss.
That blind who are deaf with
additional disabilities, etc.
and they have a set number of
apartments that are designed
specifically for them.
Um, these people move because
they're living in California and
Minnesota.
etc. and they moved and they
became new exo residents. Part
of that was because we're one of
the few states that has an
apartment complex set up that
way, which is uh a testament to
um the legislative bodies's work
to make that happen and then the
second part is where one of the
states that has one of the best
SSP programs in the nations and
now with the communication
facilitator program word gets
out.
People move here and they're
like this is the state we want
to live in, we get the sport we
need.
Thank you, thank you, Madam
Chair, but those states provide
any resources to help those
folks.
I mean, I know we see transfers
of funds.
I am not comparing this, I'm,
it's just an example I know of
like juvenile services or
behavioral health treatment or
I mean, is there any sort of
assistance from those states
that were providing we're
meeting a need for folks that
they don't.
Uh, no, um, it is all state, uh.
Raised as funding from the state
to residents of the state.
Um, when people do move here.
The
My hope is that they become the
Mexican residents and they get
involved with New Mexico, um,
but I can tell you one way or
another if they do stay here for
the welcome.
Those people who are who are
moved from.
state for behavioral health
services for, for example, yes,
OK, thank you, Madam Chair.
Thank you, Representative Dell.
We'll move to Representative
Dixon.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Um,
thank you for the presentation.
I'm just a few, uh, questions,
um, number one, I just wanna
say, um, I'm really pleased with
the funding for the audit.
Uh, that's a recommendation in
this special appropriations very
much appreciate um measures that
we do to ensure we are
collecting all of the revenue
possible, so thank you for
including that.
And then, um.
Miss Esquibel, just to confirm.
We, the LFC recommendation for
this agency includes it not just
general fund transfer. But there
is a transfer of 1 million, a
little bit over a million from
other.
And 550,000 from the fund
balance. Is that correct?
Madam Chair represented Dixon,
that's correct, the general.
I can't see that.
Um, the general fund revenues
straight at that and then the
fund balance is indicated there
in the LSC recommendation, it's
550,000 and then you are correct
madam representative Dixon, the
other transfers is the
telecommunication relay service
fund revenue.
Yes. Thank you, thank you, Madam
Chair. Thank you, Ruben. Um, uh,
last point that I want to make
is I believe last year when we
talked about the statutory, the
proposed statutory change, um,
there was drafted legislation
and I believe a senator was
going to introduce it, is that
correct?
Or do we have legislation
prepared for this year.
The legislation would be to make
it like you never one,
I proposed it last year, um.
There's some concern about
proposing that during that
session, um.
I would do the same again, um,
uh, what both my executive and
IC is recommending is exactly
what I've been talking about for
several years, which is
We see E91 is OK.
I do want to ensure that we're
not.
Uh, jumping ahead too much.
I know was a representative
offices I mentioned.
We're not always fans of tax
increases.
The reality is, is you're
absolutely right, we're kicking
the can. We're trying to offset
something that's declining, as
I've said, um, the only way to
Actually address it is to.
equate what we're doing with
E911 and fund it that way
without a percentage of a
persona.
It needs to be just a flat rate
and that flat rate will enable
us to succeed a lot better.
There'll be less general phone
conversations, etc. so the
language I propose is just the
same, make it the same way.
Thank you, Madam Chariot. Thank
you, director. Um, I would very
much like to support that
legislation, so if you could
please have that drafted, um,
you know, I wonder if, um,
Senator Sio Lopez would uh be
willing to help with that
endeavor, I think, um.
You know, I, I did get my volume
2 from last year because I
remember this issue, um, you
know, that we've talked about it
for a number of years, so I'd
really like for us to get that
resolved. Thank you, Madam
Chair.
Thank you, Representative Dixon.
Uh, I don't have anyone else on
the list for questions.
So what we're going to do is we
will be taking the Lord General
Fund recommendation for today,
knowing that we are constrained.
Uh, in recurring general fund
dollars.
But to make sure that we have
room to adjust the budgets in
HAFC.
So we know that there will be
some budgets that need further
uh fun fund adjustments, and we
will be working with staff to
look at those proposals
throughout the next couple of
weeks. So we'll give LFC and
HAFC staff specific directions
to bring back to us a budget
adjustments.
And with that, I'll accept a
motion.
Madam Chair, I would move the
the subcommittee.
Recommend the LFC
recommendation.
It's been moved by
Representative Dixon and second
by Representative Silva, to
accept the LFC. Oh, I'm sorry,
little, thank you very much. Um,
the LFC recommendation, uh, are
there any objections?
none
Thank you, Madam Chair and
committee for your time and your
questions.
Thank you.
All right, we are now moving on
to rate agency code 603, the
African-American Affairs.
And um
Kelly
But I'm sorry.
OK. Thank you very much. Well,
you'll introduce your uh
counterpart and
Please proceed. OK, great. Thank
you, Madam's committee, Kelly
Cle, you can just call me Kelly.
We are on agency code 603
offsite day is the director
Charles Riaddo.
And Loriaca from Department of
Finance Administration, um, this
is gonna be a quick presentation
as there are no LFC and
executive recommendations, and
we have come to consensus on
performance measures with that,
I will turn it over to my DFA
counterpart for any comment and
then we'll turn it over to the.
Is this better?
Good afternoon, Madam Chair
Representatives Kelly did a
wonderful job of.
summarizing our lack of
differences, and with that, I
will pass it over to director
Rito for additional comment.
Thank you.
Good afternoon, madam chair and
subcommittee members, um.
So
I know you guys have in front of
you my
21 page
Our presentation, but I'm sure
you had time to review it, so I
won't bore you with it.
Um, but I do have a couple of
comments that would sort of like
just a moment.
OK, you can proceed.
So the
Mexico State Office of African
American Affairs was enacted by
the forty-fourth on the Mexico
legislature in 1999 under House
Bill 909.
And under the administration of
Gary Governor Gary Johnson,
although the official operation
of OAAA started with state
legislation, the hearts of old
AAA lies with the many New
Mexican residents statewide who
felt that there was a need to
address issues specific to the
African American community.
Pardon me.
Can you hear me now?
So the impetus for the movement
that led to the creation of old
AAA was designed.
By community leaders who focused
on the need to improve.
And promote the economic
development, education.
Health and political well-being.
Of the African American
community throughout the Mexico.
through their efforts that
included advocacy, information
sharing, cultural awareness.
Community networking and
influencing legislation, this
group of dedicated citizens went
to work on establishing a venue
that would allow the support of
African Americans throughout New
Mexico.
So fast forward the state office
of African American Affairs will
be celebrating its 25th year of
public service to the black
community to the black
communities of New Mexico. My
office will be celebrating.
Uh, celebrating old AAA's past.
Present and future by honoring
its founders and leaders at the
2025 African-American Day at the
Legislature, but we still
recognize that there's work that
still needs to be done for the
African American communities in
the Mexico to show up resources
and advocacy.
The African American communities
continue to experience
challenges achieving home
ownership due to lack of
affordable housing and achieving
higher education opportunities
associated with ongoing school
dropouts among African American
students. The goal of the state
Office of African American
Affairs again is to improve the
quality of life for all African
Americans in New Mexico. We
accomplished this task by
ensuring that all African
Americans in New Mexico are
aware of the resources.
Programs and opportunities
available to them through state
or government programs and
services.
So what I did, as I said, you
have the presentation in front
of you, um, I just wanted to
highlight just a few, um,
Of the
Slides, and I apologize because
you
slides don't have page numbers
on. I apologize for that.
So
I apologize.
So again, the mission remains
the same. The mission for the
Office of African American
Affairs is to study identifying
find solutions to issues of
concerns, um, for the
African-American communities,
and we do these in the, the same
5.
I'm focus areas which is health,
education.
Um, economics and community
development.
It's all about
awareness because we do provide
these services statewide and the
um the request for fiscal year
26 was intended to be, and it
has been only $30,000 because
we, we, I felt that the fiscal
year 25 budget. I know you
probably hear this often was
adequate, but with the two
additional positions, I felt
that in order for us to be able
to um sustain
Our outreach in the rural
communities that we needed to
be.
The additional $30,000 to extend
our outward.
Our engagement and community
outreach and one additional, um,
State leased vehicle for the
transportation.
And
Of the questions.
Thank you veryigaka.
Do you have anything additional
that you'd like to add?
I'm gonna try this one, Madam
Chair.
Hopefully this
I don't know if it's working.
OK. Um, Madam Chair
Representatives, I, I don't
exactly have anything further to
add except for the fact that.
You know, both.
the LFC and the executive do
feel that the Office of African
American Affairs is doing
phenomenal work and we both
sides agree that the $30,000 for
them to continue to do
phenomenal work and reach more
individuals throughout the state
was worth the investment.
Thank you.
Thank you.
I'll go to the committee if we
have any questions.
Uh, Representative Duncan, and
then we'll go to Representative
to Lujan.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Just,
just one quick question for you.
You talked about education. Can
you tell me what you do as far
as education and how do you
measure that success.
What we do for
for education, we have a
dedicated education coordinator
that does outreach and community
engagement around the state. So
what he or she would do is we
would do town halls or listening
sessions around the state and
individual counties to basically
give them an opportunity to
share with us, for instance, in
education, what challenges do
you have? What are your needs
and based on that information,
then we could either reach out.
To current, um,
Vendors that are in the area
that might be of some assistance
and sometimes what the issue is,
it might be a funding issue that
they have. They might need to
hire a more mentors, you know,
for the schools, and then we can
work with them and collaborate
them to see if we can assist
them and maintaining and or
reaching out to some additional
resources for that.
Thank you, Madam Chair. So how
do you measure that success
then.
Is there a
A bar you go from or how many
people do you impact a year? So
what Mr. Riddle, please go
through the chair when you're.
I'm sorry, um, Madam Chair, um,
and Representative Duncan.
Um, what we would normally do.
we have a couple of options. We
can do a pre and post surveys
where we would survey the
individuals.
To any type of services or
workshops to see where they are
and then after we provide that
training or in service, we do a
post survey to see how we have
or how they have uh gained
additional knowledge.
Thank you, Madam Chair.
I would love to see what that is
at 20%. So if you don't have
those numbers now, I'd love to
hear what those numbers might be
and as far as your success and
and how many um individuals or
students you're impacting. Thank
you, Madam Chair.
Thank you, Representative
Duncan. Representative Lujan.
If we have no further questions
from the committee, then I, I
will accept a motion, we will be
looking to uh accept the law.
Recommendation for general
funding and looking into your
request for additional funding.
Thank you. May I have a motion?
So move down to
It's been moved by
Representative Luhan, seconded
by Representative Dixon. Is
there any opposition to the
motion?
It's not
You have a
I'm sorry.
OK. Thank you, thank you very
much, all of you for your
presentation.
Oh, I'm sorry. OK.
OK, thank you, for here we will
be accepting the executive
agency since they're both the
same. Thank you Madam Chair, you
may need to make a new motion.
Uh
Yes, please make a new motion.
I'm here, I, I make the motion
that the committee accept the
executives uh recommendation or.
Um, the office uh African
American.
And
It's been moved by
Representative Lujan, seconded
by Representative Dixon, that we
accept the executive's
recommendation. Is there any
objection?
Seeing none, uh, you have a.
Executive recommendation. Thank
you.
So what I'm finding is that you
don't actually in this room have
to lean into the microphone. You
can sit back a little bit and it
will pick you up just as well
and that's what's causing some
of the
static
Thank you, Madam Chair,
membership committee.
Onto agency code 605.
MLK Junior Commission.
Um, with me today is the
director of Beverly Gaines, and
we still have my DFA Catholic
lint again.
Um, I'll just go over the
differences quickly and then
I'll let my counterpart make any
comment.
So you can see that there is a
$101,000 difference in general
fund revenue with the LFC being
um, below the executive, meaning
the executive has a higher fun
recommendation.
Those differences are laid out
as you can see in the
categories, 23.5,000 extra for
personnel, and that's for
compensation, um, 44,000, 44.3
1000 or some coordination
contractual services and um
33.2,000 for the to expand the
commission's annual con uh
conference. Um, I will note that
um the director is newer to.
the commission and she did send
a letter to LFC amending the
commission's request. It was uh
past the LFC recommendations, so
we weren't able to fully
consider that at the time, so
the current leadership's request
for um vision for funding is not
necessarily aligned with what
the LFC was a ball, and I just
wanted to recognize that
difference and so the committee
can think about that and with
that, I will turn it over to my
counterpart.
for any comment.
Is this working better?
Yeah, OK. Um, thank you, Kelly.
I as Kelly mentioned the
executive recommendation the
revised.
request submitted by Miss
commission.
Um, so what you're going to see
here is the executive
as needed, if needed requested.
with that, I will turn it over
to.
Director games.
Thank you, Miss Gaines. Um,
thank you, Miss.
Madam Chair, um, members of the
committee, I am Beverly Gaines
the new acting executive
director for the Martin Luther
King Commission as of October
18th of 2024. I'm here with me,
of course, um, have Miss Laurie
and Miss Kelly also our mobile
CFO um Miss Lisa Jennings, who
has been working um diligently
with us, um, at the Martin
Luther King Commission, also
with our new administration,
there's also been um new.
commission, um, we have with us,
um, our chair of the new chair
of the MLK commission, uh, Mr.
Little V West. We also have with
us our vice chair, um,
commissioner Constance Williams
from Clovis, and we also have
our um secretary of the
commission, um, commissioner
Adoni Ruthini, um, and so I
wanna just say that the mission
for the MLK commission.
to promote Doctor King's
philosophy on human rights.
On equality or nonviolence, on
social social change and unity
interconnectedness throughout
for the people of New Mexico
through remembrance, through
celebration and through action,
and so we have two of our
signature.
Um, programs, which is the
Martin Luther King march, um,
that we do throughout the state
um of New Mexico this year, we
were able to um have 13
counties um to participate um in
the Martin Luther King
commission, um, weekends, um,
for 2025, which has been higher
than what we have had in the
past, um, we have had, we
roughly have about 3500 people
who have been attending those
particular
events, um, also we also um have
what we call our Martin Luther
King Youth Leadership Conference
and that conference is a
conference that we uh work with
middle um middle and high school
students, um, and we have a, a
youth conference, um for the
weekend, we're teaching them
leadership skills, um, as well
as other skills and other um
inter inter um self-reflections
for themselves.
Um, we normally have those every
year. We normally have at least
150 students that participate
from across the state of New
Mexico, um, and so.
Um, our request
Um, for additional funding is is
for us to number one, be able to
increase our programmatic
functions that we have, um,
through the commission. I'm not
only are we doing those
particular programs, but we're
also um collaborating, we have
increased our collaboration um
with state entities um to be
able to do additional
programming um for our, um,
youth, um, also, uh, the
Other
Reason why we are asking for
funding is um because in order
for us to do this work, we need
to be able to travel across the
state, so we are asking for
additional funding for state
vehicle, um, so that, um, myself
and the commissioners as well as
hopefully additional staffing
that we may have can be able to
work across the state to be able
um to continue the um message
that Doctor King has around
nonviolence, um, so that is the
other reason.
Um, one of the, the third reason
is also because we want to be
able to get the message out
through the technology
programming, um, right now we do
have a website, um, but we are
wanting to expand that through
um social media platforms
through Constant Contact as well
as having um our our equipment
to be able to have commission
meetings, um, so that we can be
able to include um people from
across the
to participate um with the
Martin Luther King Commission,
um, and so we're asking um for
this um particular um um funding
because we have not, um, really
had increase um as it pertains
to what we've been doing, but
this is new administration, um,
this is a new day at MLK. We
have new commissioners, and
we're already doing, um, more
work, um, with what we what what
we have already and so we are
hoping.
Um, that you will, um, consider,
um, our request. Thank you.
Thank you very much.
Are there any other uh comments
before we move to the committee?
Right, we'll move to the
committee for any questions, uh,
Representative Duncan, you go
first. Thank you, Madam Chair.
Um,
I look at 26% and uh.
That's, that's tough for anybody
to to look at and say that's,
that's a great number. Let's do
it.
follow up on that would be um
you've had
Some problems with audits. Are
we up to date and current with
our audits?
Madam Chair,
Madam Chair, Representative
Duncan, we are up to date, um,
with all of the um um previous
audits. We had two deficiencies,
one was um late um for being
late and the other one, if I'm
not mistaken, um.
Was
Let's see.
Timely reversion.
So, um, those, um, we are up to
date and current with our
audits. Thank you. I think
that's a great thing, Madam
Chair, that uh you're up to
date, um, with that. Uh, I just
have a hard time swallowing that
26%. Thank you, Madam Chair.
Thank you, Representative
Duncan. If I have a couple of
questions I'd like to ask you.
So it's impressive um
Madam executive director, that
you are looking for developing a
leadership program for youth. So
tell me through this leadership
program, what students are doing
and, and then how do you measure
the success of that leadership
program.
Thank you Madam Chair, members
of the committee with the Martin
Luther King Youth Leadership
program. We have different
workshop classes that are
available to all students, we
work with expert, um, in their
field to be able to teach the
classes on leadership skills,
um, enter um self-reflection as
well as um networking, um, with
other, um, students and other
peers and then how we measure
that is through um both posts
and
pre-surveys, um, and then we
also try to do a report after
that so that we can get the
information out to let people
know exactly and the, you know,
the community as well as the
state know exactly um what um
affect the leadership program is
having on those youth we just
recently had um one of our
youth, um, who, um
Transitioned um last month who
was a part of the youth
leadership program and one of
the, one of the things that they
put in the program was, um, what
he, um, how he was affected by
the youth leadership program
that uh in terms of his learning
to the point that we had several
of our youth who were, who
traveled down to.
Thank you. And does your
leadership program also provide
internships for the students?
Madam Chair, members of the
committee, uh, we have been
working on, on trying to um do
the internship program we have
been doing a um
program in the schools, um, but
we are still trying to make sure
that before we put anything out
that we have everything in place
um for internship program.
You, and you mentioned that you
collaborating with other
organizations and you travel
across the state to make sure
people know about the work of
the commission. So would you
tell us a little bit about some
of the those organizations that
you collaborate with.
Madam Chair, members of the
committee, um, we are, we're
collaborating with the Office of
African American Affairs. We are
also collaborating with the
commission of the Status of
Women. We're also collaborating
with the department, um, the
Economic department for the
state, um, we're also
collaborating with PED with the
Black Education Act, um, we're
also, um, working with uh Asian
family, um, committee, um, there
at UNM.
Um, and so those are a few of
the collaborations that we're
working with presently, Madam
Chair. Thank you, and you
mentioned that you are traveling
across the state. Are you
looking to have sub offices in
other parts of the state other
than in Albuquerque.
Madam Chair, members of the
commu of the committee, um, yes,
we would, that would be our
ultimate dream and goal is that
we could have sub offices
throughout the state of New
Mexico. Um, I will be going to
Farmington on Sunday, um, to
have a meeting um with that
particular group of people who
have been doing the MLK um
events and programming for
several years, um, I also will
be traveling to Los Alamos, um,
week after next, um, because
they are.
are interested in wanting to um
have more information and want
to start something there um for
the Martin Luther King
commission, and so, um, we are
looking to make sure right now,
like I said, we have been in 13
counties, um, the goal is to
expand that and we need fun.
Thank you very much. I see we
will now go to Representative
Brown for some further
questions.
Thank you, Madam Chair, and
thank you for
Um, part of the purpose of the
commission, a couple of things
are mentioned here in our
materials. One of them is the
reduction of youth violence in
our communities, and just
curious.
Um
What in particular the
commission is doing to
reduce you violence and
How much of your budget is
devoted to that, Madam Chair,
Representative Brown, um, we
have been working um with the
city of Albuquerque with their
non-violence program, um, so
that we can be able to help
reduce, um, nonviolence um in
that way, um, we also have been
looking at our statistics
because um gun violence rose
25.7% nationally, um, um, and,
and that's in 2024 and in 2022
is 2.
7.4, so about um 30% of our
budget is going to that right
now, um, we are hoping that we
can be able to increase that
because uh because of the fact
that Dr. King stood for
nonviolence, that was his
message, um, and that is our
message as well, and we want to
be able um to reach our young
people, um, so that we can let
them know that there's a a
better way and that now um and
that violence is not the answer,
but nonviolence is the answer.
So we are hoping that that will
increase through our
collaborative partners as well
as our funding.
Thank you, um, for that, Madam
Chair. So getting down to more
specifics, are you?
Doing uh say counseling, are you
a youth centers?
Um, churches, schools.
what venues are you getting the
message out, cause it's a good
message. I'm sure.
Madam Chair, Representative
Brown, we are working with um
the faith-based communities. We
are working with our community,
um.
Um, the cities, um, like their
community programs that they
have for their for their youth.
We're also in the schools
working with the Black Student
Unions, um, trying to make sure
that we get this message set
across and we're looking to work
um with other youth groups as
well.
Thank you. I don't see any
further questions. I'll uh go to
the
Is there
So
Is there a recommendation?
Madam Chair, I would uh
recommend that the committee
adopt the LFC recommendation and
ask that staff, LFC staff work
with DFA to see if adjustments
should be made, uh, in line with
the additional request that was
received. Thank you. Is there a
second?
It's been moved by
Representative Dixon and
seconded by Representative Silva
that we accept the LFC
recommendation, we'll look
further into other requests for
extending your funding.
Um
Is there any
Is there any objection to the
motion? Hearing none, the motion
passes.
You know
Um
Thank you. Um, we are gonna, uh,
at the moment, be in, we're
gonna move to a little bit of a
sub subcommittee, um, as we
begin the presentations, um, and
then we'll be back in our
official subcommittee capacity
for the vote.
Um
Uh, Ms. Escobel, would you like
to um share with us, I think
this is the agency 606. Is that
correct? Yes, Madam Chair,
members of the
subcommittee, yeah, this is
agency code 606 in your binders,
commission for the blind. Excuse
me.
Pardon me, you're, you don't
have to lean into that. It's
really does pick up, yeah, thank
you so much. Um, so 606
commission for the blind and my
colleagues uh with us today, um,
are the director and that is um
Mr. Greg Trap here and then also
my colleague with the Department
of Finance and Administration
again, Miss Laurie Saka and I'm
Ruby Anna Ski again. Thank you.
um.
All righty, madam chair for
commission for the blind.
Uh, really two differences that
we would point out here, one in
the revenues and then ensuing
the commensurate difference in
expenditures. So if you look to
the far right, you'll see that
the LSC recommendation for
General Fund is that $2,885,800
in the executive, uh, and that's
a 3.6% increase for the
legislative Finance Committee
and General Fund and the
executive is at the request.
level which, um, was 3164.3, um,
was 3164.3 $3,164,300 and that's
a 13.6% increase, so between
those two, that's that
difference you see of the
$278,000,500 so the LFC is lower
by 278.5,000 in general fund and
that really just flows pretty
much directly. We have a little
slight.
Difference in contractual
services of 7000, but it really
is all bundled there in that
other category. There's a
difference with LFC lower and by
271,000 in the other category,
and that's primarily tied to um
uh where that falls out is an
additional services for the
independent living program, um,
so that is overall the summary
and we didn't have any
differences.
Madam Chair in language, there
were some differences in
performance measures, we fixed
all of that for you and this
agency does not have any special
appropriations, any
non-recurring in either the
executive or the LFC, so that's
not in the packet.
And I think with that I'm gonna
turn it over to my counterpart.
remember that any better.
Perfect. Madam Chair, members of
the committee, um.
Ban, thank you. She did a great
job summarizing the differences,
the majority of it in the other
category are due to operational
and consumer costs that.
That the agents.
Um, with that, the key
difference.
Um
And I can let director trap
elaborate a little bit more on
that. So with that.
Director Trout.
Thank you very much.
And I'm sure members of the
committee, I
Kind of afraid of the microphone
here. I hope it doesn't uh
attack me here. I'd like to
introduce my team with me here
today. We have Mr. Kevin Romero,
our deputy director for Finance
Administration.
Mr. Jimmsalis, our deputy
director for our vocational
rehabilitation and independent
living program.
Miss Daphne Mitchell, our
vocational habilitation program
manager.
Ms. Kelly Burma, our skills
center coordinator.
We also are very happy here to
have with us today Miss Erel
Lansing, who is the chair of our
commission for the blind.
We also have Mr. Frank Maestus,
who is a member of our state
rehabilitation council.
And I'm extremely pleased to say
that we have Carra Chavez.
Who is the president of the
National Federation of the
Blind.
We have additional members of
the National Federation of Blind
Present, um, Miss Janet Mooya,
Ms. Janet Maestus, uh, Mr. Mike
Jay, we're all here today. I
hope I haven't left anyone out
there.
Um
So I want to begin by saying
that the chemist strip line.
And our audit just released
within audited by the Office of
the state auditor, as you know,
they do audit state agencies
directly as a part of their own
fundraising activities.
revenue generating activities
and I'm pleased to say that we
had no findings.
That is the 3rd year in a row
that we've had no findings there
especially thorough and our
finances also are extremely
complicated because of our
federal grants.
And the very, very complex
fiscal rules that we operate
under.
So in your materials, you have a
pair of consumer satisfaction
surveys.
Those were conducted by research
and polling, which is the
company operated by Mr. Brian
Sandoff.
And you'll see that for our
vocational rehabilitation
program.
91%.
Of the respondents were either
very satisfied or satisfied with
our services, the majority being
very satisfied.
Those are great numbers. I want
to talk to you a little bit
about that program or a vocation
or rehabilitation program.
And I want to begin with our
youngest individuals that we
serve.
And
We serve individuals starting at
age 14.
Uh, through 21 who are students
and that's called our
pre-employment transition
services.
We have a federal mandate to
reserve and spend.
15% of our vocational
rehabilitation grant.
Which is restricted to
employment outcomes.
On what are called priet
services to students.
And we had 41 participants this
last summer, blind students who
we placed in jobs throughout the
state.
Uh, in Albuquerque at our skill
center in Alamoordo where we
have our residential orientation
center.
Uh, normally we're providing uh
blindness skills training to
adults, helping them to learn
how to function as an individual
who is blind.
Um
We had 9 students there over the
summer at our orientation center
were preet students.
We give them a job, um, if
you're an individual who is not
blind, you likely had jobs in
high school and in college, but
that's an opportunity that most
individuals who are blind or low
vision don't have.
And it really is one of those
formulative life experiences. I
can remember working at
McDonald's as a teenager.
sighed the teenager.
And the lessons you learned
there are critical, so we help
those blind students learn those
lessons.
Our vocational rehabilitation
program also includes news line
for the blind.
Which is a newspaper reading
service that people can access
24/7.
We have volunteer readers who
read about 6 New Mexico
publications, we provide access
to over 500 national
publications.
We also have our Randolph
Shepherd program.
That's a vending program that's
a federal law. We operate
vending facilities throughout
New Mexico.
We provide the troop dining, for
example, at Carland Air Force
Base.
We also provide the cafeteria
services at the Federal law
enforcement Training Center in
Artesia. We have blind vendors
who operate both those programs
and we have others to operate
vending programs at the post
offices, uh.
Uh, city buildings, state
buildings throughout the state.
In addition
Um, we have, of course, our
vocational rehabilitation
program that takes blind
individuals.
helps them to become
successfully employed.
This last year we assisted 21
individuals to become employed,
that is, they were successfully
closed.
We had about another 50
individuals who were employed
during the year for a total of
about 70.
Individuals
Those are persons who are able
to.
Go off benefits, we were able to
become taxpayers.
We're able to
Um
Really raise a family to do
everything else that we all
aspire to.
Now, when we do that,
We generate something called
program income.
That is when our services enable
one of our consumers to go off
of Social Security benefits, we
get an estimated.
Orion
Of the savings to the Social
Security Trust Fund.
And we use that for independent
living program, which I'm going
to take you to here next.
So we also had our independent
living.
consumer satisfaction survey.
That survey showed that 85%.
Of our independent living
consumers.
We're satisfied with the
services that they receive.
And I'll start with the
youngest.
Part of those services.
We have a program that we call
Technology for Children.
That program we operate in
partnership with the New Mexico
Department of Health.
They give us an $80,000
appropriation.
We use that appropriation to buy
assistive technology for blind
children.
That technology during the
pandemic was so critical because
that enabled them to study from
home.
So our emphasis is to provide
technology that complements
what's taking place at the local
schools.
Uh, the blindness technology
that we provide, I'm sure Ellie
has her rail device there she
can hang up, hold up there, dip
it typically cost about 56
$7000.
We provide a lot of what are
called video magnifiers for
children.
It helps them to become
literate, helps them to
participate in their school
training up to do their homework
because all too often they can't
take the technology that they
use at school, at home.
The main thing that our, and we
do that with what are called
Part B funds, and I'll get to
that here a little bit later.
The main thing that we do
through our independent living
program.
is to serve adults.
We have our federal.
Older blind programs. So we get
$225,000 from the Department of
Education.
To meet the needs of newly
blinded individuals for 55 and
older.
So our services help those
individuals to.
Avoid going into the nursing
home.
One of the things that our
consumer satisfaction survey
showed was that 80% of
respondents said that our
services helped them to delay or
avoid going into a nursing home.
So just like our VR program,
vocational rehabilitation
program.
It helps take people off of
Medicaid.
And supplemental security income
and Social Security disability
insurance.
Our older blind program helps
people to avoid going into a
Medicaid supported.
Nursing home. It helps them to
become care providers, even for
other family members for their
children, for their
grandchildren.
Really critical program.
We have our Part B.
Independent living program.
We've been getting those funds
for about.
5 decades or more.
Just recently,
The state Independent Living
council.
Acted
To
Take away those funds from us.
It totals $62,651.
But we use those funds.
To leverage our program income.
And we've been doing that for
about
20 years
And what that means is that when
Our
Independent living employees are
working with people, they're
being paid using state general
funds.
When we get a
Reimbursement from the Social
Security Administration.
We're able to take that
reimbursement and relieve.
The funding that was used to
A for their salary.
That then allows us to take that
relief money and use it as a
source of match.
For our vocational
rehabilitation program.
So
Over the last 20 or so years.
We've helped to generate both
directly through the commission
for the blind.
And in partnership with the
division of vocational
rehabilitation where we have a
$200,000 program income
transfer.
Anywhere between 20 to $30
million between both agencies.
The division, vocational
habilitation began to do as we
do back in 2017.
When they had a need to
Expend some of their program
income.
At the time
We also recognize that we could.
Help them in that process, so we
said, hey, let's take $200,000
of your program income.
We'll give you back $100,000 of
general fund.
You can use that $100,000 to
match $370,000 of vocational
rehabilitation funds.
We'll keep the other $100,000
and we'll use it for ourselves
to match another $370,000 of
vocation rehabilitation funds.
The tremendous way.
The leverage available state and
federal resources.
Now
What do we do with some of that
money? Well, through our
independent living program, we
provide a range of assistive
technology we provide.
A handheld video magnifiers and
more recently.
We think we've begun to provide
desktop video magnifiers, which
have a large
Monitor, there's something that
people are able to use to pay
their bills, to read, it helped
them to become more independent.
Uh, those cost about $3000 but
we buy them in bulk, and of
course we deliver those.
Or great.
So the funding issue that Laurie
spoke of.
It's really twofold.
One
is if we're not able to retrieve
at least some.
Of that part B program income.
Then we'll lose about 20 to 25%.
Of our ability to leverage.
The programming. So we're
needing to
To be able to reinstate some of
the Part B funds, and we're
working with the state
Independent Living council and
hoping that we'll be able to get
that accomplished working in
partnership with the office of
the governor.
Now
The other thing that
is an issue for us is that we've
seen now for the 2nd year in a
row.
Not
A cost of living increase being
added with the Federal
vocational rehabilitation grant.
We historically have had.
A CPIU uh increase consumer
price index urban.
But with the continuing
resolutions that we've seen.
Uh, we're not getting that cost
of living adjustment anymore.
At the same time, the cost for
providing our vocational
rehabilitation services have
really gone up dramatically.
So that's creating an issue for
us where we're needing to.
Um, obtain additional funding.
To compensate. We're also
seeing.
A less program income.
Coming in that we've seen
historically.
So some of that leveraging that
we've been able to do, we're not
able to do as well. And if we're
not able to get that part B
funding reinstated.
And we'll have even greater
difficulty.
So our request for the executive
appropriation which we of course
are supporting will help us to
be able to continue to provide.
The excellent services that you
can read about in those consumer
satisfaction surveys.
So, Madam Chairman of the
committee, I'd be happy to take
any questions unless either of
my colleagues here have anything
they wish to ask, answer.
Yeah
Thank you, uh, director, that
was wonderful. Uh, we, I am
pleased to announce our back
into subcommittee formation. Um,
and so, um, we do have some
questions from the committee
members starting with
Representative Duncan.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Thank
you for that presentation. Um,
I've got just some clarifying
questions for you and, and I'd
love to hear.
Um
Uh, the answers on this, um.
Online too, it says the
independent living services, can
you elaborate on those a little
bit, uh, the request uh for
general fund increase was for
independent living services. Can
you elaborate on that a little
bit and, and what are those?
Uh, Madam Charis of Duncan,
thank you very much.
So we have what we call
blindness skills instructors who
go.
Uh, throughout the state to most
individuals' homes.
And mostly they're seniors.
So we'll help them.
Uh, when they have conditions
like age-related macular
degeneration.
Which is increasing in huge
proportion because of the aging
of the population.
Um
Glaucoma
Uh, diabetic retinopathy or huge
causes of blindness. So when
An individual loses her vision.
So, for example, if you had a
sighted person who.
Went to bed
Wake up in the morning and
they're totally blind.
They're not going to be able to
function as they did before.
Getting dressed becomes
difficult.
Shaving
Looking
Reading the paper.
Going out to the car.
Taking their car to work.
Those things are things that
they cannot do anymore.
On the independent living side.
Just being able to get around to
go shopping to kick in their
home to cook in their homes.
So we provide teachers who go
into their homes and train those
individuals we teach can travel,
we teach assists of technology.
We teach raille, we marked their
appliances, show them how to
cook using what we call
alternative techniques.
Uh, we provide the technology I
talked about, the handheld video
magnifiers, because they usually
have some residual vision.
If they don't, there are other
kinds of devices that we can
provide.
We now also providing more and
more training on smartphones,
uh, apps like I, I have my.
My iPhone here.
Which
As a program called Voiceover.
So
the
So
Uh, we show people how to use
technology like that.
Uh, also screen notification
systems. So basically how to
function as a blind person.
Thank you, Madam Chair. I, I
appreciate that. um.
My wife probably wonders who
dresses me someday so I can, I
can appreciate that, um, and on
the same line it says leverage
more federal income and you
touched on that a couple of
different times. Percentage
wise, can you tell me, are we
able to 3 to 1 match or?
Or is it lower than that?
I'm, I'm sorry, we, are we, are
we able to leverage that federal
money? Is it a 3 to 1 or uh
great question. Thank you, ma'am
Chaps Duncan. So the vocational
rehabilitation program.
As a 21.3% state match.
So, um,
78.7% of our vocational
habilitation.
Um
Funds are federal.
And the leveraging that we take
place occurs when.
We
are able to free up money that
was spent on our independent
living program.
And that freed up money.
Then becomes that 21.3% state
match.
So that's why when we have
$100,000 of program income.
It basically turns into
$370,000.
match.
OK. Thank you, ma'am. I
appreciate that. And then one
other question, um.
Um, under blind services social
equality so that they can have
independent independence based
on their personal interests and
abilities, can you explain what
that means to me.
And ma'am chair of Duncan that
that's a fantastic question
because.
Under our vocational
rehabilitation program.
We are providing individuals who
who are blind.
Jobs that are consistent with
their strengths, interests,
priorities, capabilities.
Uh, and informed choice.
So really
We help individuals who are
blinded and low vision to set
and achieve goals that are
appropriate for their abilities.
Um
The commission for the blind
many years ago helped me become
a lawyer. I hope that doesn't
hurt my funding request here.
Um, but we have lots of teachers
and people actually contribute
to society that are very, very
meaningful. And uh if somebody
wants to become a social worker,
as my wife is also blind.
Or whatever goal they set.
Those are the priorities and for
choice, the interest, drinks,
capabilities, priorities, and we
provide services for.
Thank you, Madam Chair. You are
extremely well spoken. We should
have known that you were an
attorney.
Thank you Madam Chair, that's
all I have.
Thank you, Representative, uh,
Representative Silva.
Thank you, Madam Chair, uh,
thank you, presenters and for
all the work you do, um, really
appreciated the presentation,
um, in terms of the revenue
narrative, I am seeing um.
The recommendation that LFC has
to.
Um
Leverage federal matching funds
and I'm wondering if your agency
is anticipating or has been
impacted yet by the funding
freeze, uh, that the Trump
administration has communicated.
Um, now I'm sure I
representative Silva. We are
like everyone else, really
eagerly waiting to see what's
going to happen here, um.
Mr. Amero and our fiscal unit.
Today I've taken steps to make
sure that our federal draws are
as current as they possibly can.
Kevin, can you update us on
that? Madam Chair.
National staff for the
commission of a job prior to the
deadline that takes um, so we
have drawn every, however,
depending on the length of the
federal funds, um, we have to.
Basically, at this point,
operate until we hear otherwise
that we do not have federal
funds available to draw.
Which is gonna rely
On balance we have left, but we
did draw down about $116,000.
That's great to hear that you're
ahead of that deadline. And um
my, do you believe that your
agency may have to request
supplemental funding if the
funding freeze goes, um, beyond
the 116,000 that you are able
to uh to to request.
I'm sure represents Silva.
We just do not know, um.
We will definitely keep a close
watch on developments, um.
We're doing that. I am also the
president-elect of the National
Council of State agencies for
the blind.
Uh, at the national level, we're
working very closely.
Watching us very closely.
Um
What we know is that there are
already some federal agencies
that have been.
Given approval
To spend federal funds?
Uh, we're hoping that the
rehabilitation services
Administration.
Which is within the US
Department of Education.
will be given those
That authority
Um
Certainly the vocation of both
station.
The vocational rehabilitation
program has historically had
broad bipartisan support.
Um, you know, we're all about
helping people with
disabilities, achieve their full
potential to become employed.
Uh,
We can all support that no
matter what our our.
Party affiliation might be so
I'm, I'm hoping we'll see that
come through. But if it doesn't,
we'll definitely be coming back
if needed to get a supplemental
or whatever we need to do.
Thank you. Um
Madam chair, yes, I'm, I'm
sorry, Madam Chair
Representative, I was just
informed that a federal judge
did block the freeze on the
federal funding, so oh, it may
not be all but some. Thank you.
Great, thank you. I appreciate
that update, manager.
Thank you, Representative and,
uh, thank you, Ms Saka for the
uh update there. I know that uh
we're all watching to see how
some of the federal changes will
affect um.
You know, uh, state, um, funding
and and whatnot, uh, any other
questions from the committee,
otherwise, um, I would entertain
emotion to um adopt the LFC
recommendation, uh, with the
request that are um.
DFA and.
LFC analysts.
Uh, just coordinate to make sure
that, uh, we're doing, you know.
Providing the the necessary
support, um, if there are any
adjustments.
I'll make that.
Thank you.
OK, so we have a motion, uh,
from Representative Duncan and a
second from Representative
Little. Any objection?
No, seeing no objection, uh,
that.
Emotion is adopted.
Um
Thank you thank you thank you.
Great. And while we are still in
our subcommittee.
Um, why don't we proceed to our
final, um, hearing of the day,
which is the miner's hospital,
and that is agency code 662.
Um, and let's see.
For this, um, so members, if you
wanna.
Go ahead and uh make sure that
you've got the difference sheet,
um, agency 662.
And then, uh,
Uh, Miss Hernandez. OK,
excellent. Um, so when, when
we're ready, would you, uh, make
sure to introduce your DFA
counterpart and um your
presenters.
Wonderful, thank you, and just
as a reminder, we think that you
don't have to lose microphones
in this room, uh, might be
different in a different room,
but.
We're doing pretty well here.
Thank you.
Madam Chair members of the
committee, my name is Doctor
Hernandez, Alongside me is my
DFA counterpart, Miss Mary Beth
Dinsmore and the CEO of Miner's
Hospital, Brian Roland.
If you look at the different
sheet which the business unit is
662.
You will see that miner's
hospitals funded through the
land grant permanent fund,
meaning that it does not draw
down from general fund revenue.
The LFC recommendation aligns
with the exec with the
executive, with the exception of
two pieces.
First the LFC recommendation
aligns with the executive in
both the personnel and other
categories. There is a $44.3,000
difference in the contractual
services category due to the LFC
recommendation, which assumed a
3% in medical inflation costs,
whereas the where is the
executive recommendation assumed
a 4% medical inflation cost.
Additionally, because of the
enactment of the healthcare
delivery and Access Act, the
hospital no longer needs either
the language listed in the LFC
recommendation or the 675,000
listed in the other financing
uses. I will now turn it over to
Miss Dinsworth.
Thank you so much, um, Madam
Chairman of the committee, um, I
don't have really anything else
to add. These are pretty close
with just those couple small
exceptions, so I'll turn it over
to the new CEO, um, of the
hospital.
Madam Chair, committee.
Um, I'm excited to be here in
front of you. I've been
In Colfax County for 3 weeks
now.
Um, still trying to find my way
around, uh, with me here. I have
the hospital CFO.
Um, I do want to make sure that
you are aware that we are a full
service hospital.
We service the area of Northeast
New Mexico.
Um, we
do OB
to long term care.
Uh, one of the only hospitals
that do, uh, OB services within
120 square miles, um, rural
health care is a challenge.
Regardless of what state you're
in, um, what political
affiliation you deal with, but
I, I will tell you, um, our
facility works very hard to be
cost conscious.
To spend our money wisely and
make sure that we're able to
take care of all of our patients
regardless of age or any other
factors that we deal with in uh
that location where we are, and
I'll be more than happy to
answer any questions.
Thank you. Um,
Do members have questions? I
certainly have one. I'm happy to
take it off if folks need to.
Ah
Representative Silva and then
Representative Duncan.
Thank you so much, presenters,
Madam Chair, thank you. Um, I am
on um in volume 2.
Uh, on page 315.
Uh, in that the description set,
and I know you're new, but um,
it said importantly for fiscal
year 25, the hospital received
3.6 million special
appropriation to eliminate debt
service.
However, the hospital did not
eliminate its debt service and
instead spent 550,000 of the
special appropriation to buy
into the IGT.
The hospital must make a minimum
payment of 1.2 million by May
2025. Do you have an update on
that?
Um, Madam Chair Representative
Silva, I know the hospital will
be making that payment of that
by the time frame that's due.
Excellent.
Um,
I'm Lonnie Medina. I'm the CFO.
Um
did receive $3.6 million to
eliminate debt and support
operations.
Um, last year at this time we
were having trouble with our
finances, and we asked for
money.
giving the um.
What we said we need to
Some for operations as well.
And to support our 1.2 million
in May. That's um.
But
Or HDAA purposes budgeting to
receive $6 million.
Or fiscal year 25, we're only
going to be receiving about 3
point.
2
Or somewhere in there.
Um, if the money is available to
pay more than the $1.2 million
that's what we're we're planning
on.
And Madam Chair, um,
Presenters, can you tell me um
what IGT is the buying into the
IGT.
Um, yeah, ma'am, yes, Madam
Chair, um, community members,
that stands for
intergovernmental transfers, um,
I believe that that uh money uh
is was specifically to send to
the healthcare authority, so the
agency could receive the
Medicaid match.
Um, and that would allow them to
keep operating, um, especially
the, uh, OB services, which
were, um, as you may know, uh,
in, in a bit of trouble. So, uh,
so that funding assisted, uh,
the hospital with that and now
they are running the OB program.
Absolutely
with the IT or the governmental
transfer, it was
to be used.
Our OB department, ROE
department.
Has low volume
But were required to have 2
full-time positions and round
the clock 24/7, uh, RN staff as
well. So we don't have the
volume in northern New Mexico to
pay for all that, and we lose
about 2 minutes so.
That being said, the $2 million
that we received last year was a
one time thing, um, and we did
pay 550,000 last year, not this
year for the IGT.
So we received about 1.8 million
for last year.
This year again, we were hoping
to as much as we were hoping. So
it was a wonderful Madam Chair,
thank you, presenters.
So you might still be in a
pickle for this year, it's what
I'm hearing.
Again, if uh.
We don't have enough money to
with the 3.6 million special
appropriation, we will only pay
the $1.2 million.
Uh, no payment and Understood.
Thank you, Representative
Duncan.
Thank you, Madam Chair, um.
Uh, my first question was,
You, what's the big town you
guys in your county, for
example.
Or
Any of the towns that you that
you service uh serve in that
northeast section of our state,
Madam Chair Representative Dunn
is the largest city. OK. OK.
Um
I wondered when we were, I was
looking at this, the 1910 Act,
Madam Chair, 1910 Act, um.
Uh
How many miners can get
pregnant.
1910
Um, and so I understand now
we're, you, you, you brought in
that, uh, there, um.
Are, are there any ways that OB
programs
Just incredibly expensive and
you're gonna lose money and lose
money in it, um.
Are there any ways that you can
Or would it take um?
By the medical board, would it
take an act there to say we can
have one doctor and one.
Um
RN or midwife.
Instead of two physicians.
Is Madam Chair, is that a
possibility?
So, Madam Chair, Representative
Duncan, um, I've been working in
rural health for a long time,
and this is a question that
comes up.
Every year when, when we talk
about OB and healthcare.
The challenge is, um, until the
legislative folks lower the
recommendations of what we have
to have and how we have to treat
the OB patients, um, we're stuck
with the guidelines we have to
have because on, on top of the
physicians that are available
for OB, you also have to be
prepared in the event and, and
those things, so it's, it's a
trickle down effect when you
look at the big picture and, and
this is why most rural hospitals
are getting out of the OB
business.
Because a liability for, for
doctors when you're out in the
middle of nowhere and there's a
snowstorm and you have an issue
or a windstorm in Texas or, or
whatever the situation may be.
So until the leg you can do more
with less.
Or
people have more babies.
And you get paid for them.
Like you should get paid.
Um
You're, you're never
Thank you, Madam Chair. So, um,
Would it be safe to say that the
amount of babies that your
hospital is delivering is
20 per year.
Oh
Do you have a number on that
Representative Duncan, I know
last year we did 700, OK, that's
been 5 years.
Thank you, Ma, and of that 70.
How many of them had insurance?
Uh, Madam Chair Representative
Duncan, I do not have that
number in front of me. Um, if I
look at what the national
average is, not just New Mexico
where we are.
Um, I, I know in the state of
Texas where I came from, it was
28% that had insurance, uh,
another 40% was Medicaid or
state driven and then you still
had 20%.
I don't know what the.
80% are Medicaid patients. OK.
Thank you, Madam Chair, and
that's what I was wondering
about just exactly how lopsided
that was.
We certainly have a problem with
that, and, uh, I hope we can
find a solution. Thank you,
ma'am.
Thank you, Representative
Duncan. We'll now go to
Representative Small.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Thank
you, presenters. Uh,
Doctor Hernandez, the um
The higher other revenues
recommended in the LFC
recommendation.
I think I, I heard you say that
that was no longer necessary.
Yes, um, so that was a one year
batch uh with the healthcare
authority to buy into that IGT
and so it was a mistake, um, in
the choice of the committee
chooses. Got it.
OK, um,
Would you please come to the to
the microphone assessments or
access assessments that are
really.
to even for this year, we're
paying $270,000 in March.
To leverage the money that's
coming through the HDAA as well.
We're gonna have that for this
year and next year and for the
foreseeable future. So the
675,000 that's on this request
is accurate.
Um, however, Madam Chair, if I
may, um, so the problem is that
the HCA won't be matching it,
and so that's why it shouldn't.
Oh, OK.
OK, Madam Chair, members of the
committee, um.
I will just tell you uh what I
learned in developing, uh,
helping to develop the executive
recommendation for the hospital.
Um, I did, uh, DFA we did work
with HCA.
And that money from Minor's
Hospital is not included in what
HCA is expecting to receive from
other agencies. I'm not entirely
positive of how the mechanism
works, but they have the
hospital included in the
healthcare delivery and Access
Act assessments, um, but I did
check with them and they said
they did not have that.
As coming into their budget. Um,
I will say, um, if I may, that.
Um, while I am defending the
executive recommendation,
obviously, um, I do wanna say
that money in the 500 category,
which is where this funding is
cannot be used for any other
purpose. So if the committee did
choose to leave the $675,000 in,
um, and it turns out that they
didn't.
need it or they didn't need the
full amount.
Then it's just gonna sit there
as vacant budget authority, but
it isn't particularly concerning
budget authority because
agencies cannot just use that
other financing uses category
for whatever they want. So just
know that while I
Support the executive at 675,000
is probably not going to cause a
problem.
Um, in their budget if it is
left in.
All right, thank you very much.
Or head representative, thank
you very much, ma'am. Thank,
thank you for the answer. It
sounds like we can adopt the
executive, um.
Keep an eye, although perhaps
understand more closely to make
sure there's a very close staff
understanding.
Or uh this new piece of
legislation.
Last year and to make sure that
the miners has what you all need
to access.
Great. Thank you, Madam Chair.
Thank you represent a smile.
Let's go now to Representative
Dixon.
Thank you, Madam Chair. I was
curious um about the LFC
recommendation based on a 3% uh
medical inflation rate, uh,
versus DFA using a 4%. Uh what
goes into that? Uh, so Madam, so
the LFC used um a federal
Inflation, medical rate, and
that's how we derived the 3%,
the 4%, uh, was like minors
hospital requested.
Thank you. Uh, last question,
um.
There, there's policy
discussion, um, around nurse
staffing ratios. And the reason
that I ask
What seems to be a policy
question is because I'm
wondering about, um, if there
are any financial implications
for the miner's hospital. If
something like um.
Mandated nurse staffing ratios
were to pass.
Madam Chair,
Um, there's multiple channel
force us to require 10 number of
nurses based on the number of.
Thank you, thank you for sharing
that, um, that's helpful
information and uh good for um
for us to pay attention to and
follow along, uh, that was uh
all that I had, uh, Madam Chair.
All right, thank you. We'll go
to Representative Lujan.
Thank you, um.
The command chair and, and thank
you for the, I didn't get to.
hear the full presentation I
read through.
Your budget before I left and
then had to come back, um.
But uh
Can you explain to us what the
cost is on your, your nursing
staff right now when you have to
uh budget higher for.
For um agency type positions,
madam Chair. Madam Chair.
Representative across the board
the list that I looked at this
more RN.
Um, I know our our whole OB
department, um, our surgery is
all agency staffing.
Along with our long term care.
So if I look at our cost.
for an agency nurse versus a, a,
a nurse that we currently can
hire ourselves, we're looking at
an increase of minimally some
simple dollars.
Thank you chair, and are those
agency nurses, you know, from
the surrounding area from the
community, are they?
Travelling nurses from all over.
I'm
Madam Chair, Representative
Linn, um, realistically right
now you get the state of Texas
or New Mexico and, and find
housing in our area.
We bring them in. I mean, there
are strict guidelines we have to
follow the licensure and all
that.
But
Madam Chair.
I understand your perspective.
But I, I, I take
Concern
that statement, I just have to
be quite honest, I come from a.
A mother who is an RN.
And who is a community based
nurse here in Santa.
And I, and in my district I
have.
Vincent's Hospital.
So I understand the concerns and
the needs.
But I'd also say that if we
don't invest in our community
and educating from the, from our
high school like we're looking
at, you'll see through our
budget reflecting that we're
trying to do those sorts of
things for our care providers.
But we do have better outcome.
When we have a community-based.
Professional
Healthcare.
in place, so I would just say
that.
Um, making those types of
investments and helping us move
to in those directions as we're
looking into, you know, these
are other parts of our budget
and working with us to do those
sorts of things, we are going to
have better outcomes and better
healthcare outcomes in our
community knows our community.
That's what happened.
So, traveling nurses and having
nurses, the nurses and nurse is
not a nurse is not just, um, I
just say that we, the more we
can do to help you.
put that 48% down so that you
have your community based
nurses, the better outcomes
you're gonna.
Thank you.
Oh, yes. I think one of the
challenges we run into.
Um, we're limited to go through
that whole program and then all
$3 more an hour.
It's, it's sometimes hard to
keep them and and that's
happened since COVID started
with the whole traveling nurses
thing where you, you sit there
and you spend the time, you
know, you try to lock.
But at the end of the day those
are really not forcible and so I
agree community nurse that that
grew up and whether it's a
nurse, whether it's a doctor,
cause I've done Grow Your Own
with physicians, PAs and things
along those lines. But, but how
do you get them?
fully commit when
These other hospitals are are
poaching these these staffs and
and paying them more than were
allotted because we're a state
agent Madam Chair, if I may.
Thank you.
Thank you, Madam Chair. I would
say that that's that's exactly,
that's what we have to face when
we're looking at a compact.
And we're looking at legislation
right now where we're looking to
expand contracts for medical
professional providers is that
that is a consequence to that.
