Representative Hernon
Representative Here a.
Representative Little.
Representative Luhan.
Representative Luhan,
Representative Pettigrew.
Representative Pettigrew,
Representative Sanchez.
Representative Sariana.
Representative Silva.
Representative Silva,
Representative Vincent.
Vice Chair Dixon.
Chas small.
Uh, I'm here. Uh, great, OK,
members, we're gonna get
started. We might jump around a
little bit, but since, uh,
partic our Senate colleagues are
still on the floor. Um, but with
that, we'll go, thank you for
being here Samoa, uh, to all the
presenters, I mean, please be as
brief as you can. I see there's
many questions, we'll go through
those. If there aren't, that's
OK too. Uh, go ahead,
representative Zamora on Senate
Bill 220.
Thank you, Mr. Chair, members of
the committee, we're in front of
you today to present Senate Bill
220 relating to risk management,
requiring the publication of
terms of legal settlement
agreements, providing for loss
prevention, revenue teams.
Review teams and requiring
reports, and with me today, I
have Mikaela Fisher, LFC Deputy
Director, and with that, we
stand for questions, Mr.
Chairman.
Excellent. Thank you very much
forenomora. Is there anybody
who'd like to uh speak on Senate
Bill 220 as amended?
Please come on up.
Thank you, Mr. Chair, members of
the committee. My name is Naomi
Valdez. I'm a registered
lobbyist for the New Mexico
Trailers Association, and we
stand in support of this
legislation. Um, it will help us
bring transparency, mitigate
harm, and thereby reduce
lawsuits. Thank you.
Thank you very much. OK, I don't
see anybody online, um, we'll go
to the committee. Are there any
questions? I don't see any
questions. We'll go to the
ranking number for a motion, Mr.
Chair, I move it fast. OK, it's
been moved by ranking member
Chatfield saying by
Representative Sanchez and
others in the opposition to that
motion, seeing none.
We'll do that. Uh, OK, we have a
due pass on Centerville 220. Uh,
again, members, I think we're
gonna, I want to jump to the
prote uh to Senate Bill 481, uh,
just so that uh we can let them
go back down to the floor.
Um
Thank you so much, Mr. Chairman,
I will try to be brief.
Thank you very much.
481.
Proposes to do kind of a
marshall plan about the middle
of Albuquerque.
Oh, we want to reinvigorate that
whole area, the general services
department has already sent out
an RFP so we can look at a
master plan.
Uh, you're, you're familiar with
Tids and pits. Uh, this is
similar, but because it's all
state-owned property, but it's
not exactly like the tip.
So, uh, Texans increment
development district as a
vehicle to capture gross
receipts and then keep them
where they are. Um, this will
work with the state fair because
at this point we have about $12
million a year from the gaming
tax and from GRT there.
So the spill would create a
state fairgrounds district over
the existing state fairgrounds,
governed by a body of elected
officials.
Governor, the mayor and the 4
elected state State Senator
County commissioner and city
councilor, with one member from
the community. Uh, the
boundaries of the district are
already outlined. Uh, the bill
does allow for contiguous land
to be part of it. We have one
square on the southwest part of
the state fair.
That we're in the process of
buying the stats, that would be
part of it. Currently there are
no, there's no one that lives in
that area. So usually you do a,
you, um, you have elect you have
um you have an electorate that
you can go to for taxes. We
don't have that at this point.
So, unlike the state fair
commission, there's no imminent
domain.
At all allowed, um,
So that's really fast. I could
keep talking, but I know you're
in a hurry and so am I. I think
that's good for right now. Um,
let's go, uh, to, is there
anybody in the audience who
would like to speak on Senate
bill uh 481.
Great, come on up.
Good evening, Mr. Chair, members
of the committee, Jessica
Martinez with Albuquerque Public
Schools, APS standard support of
Senate Bill 481, the
revitalization of the
International District under
this bill includes significant
benefits to students and
families in Albuquerque public
schools. Senate Bill 481 will
generate opportunities to
enhance public school
facilities, enrich our
educational programs and create
a more vibrant learning
environment that will lead to
improved student outcomes. We
urge the committee to pass
Senate Bill 481. Thank you.
you, Mr. Chair.
Thank you very much.
Mr. Chair, members of the
committee, Roger Valdez with the
Center for Housing Economics, we
are working with the community,
uh, to build housing in the
international district. Many of
you were good enough to
contribute to our capital
outlay, uh, the cottages at 161
trauma. We, we support this
because it includes community
benefits so that whatever
happens at the state fair, the,
the benefit of that can be put
into affordable housing, uh,
education and health and other
things that the community is
looking for the
composition of the board is made
up of elected officials that are
accountable to the community and
uh this also captures the gaming
and GRT from the casino, which
is a a welcome change to see
that resource also being
directed back to the to the
community, which has been um
struggling with homelessness,
addiction, and a variety of
other issues, and we think this
is a great vehicle to both
improve and better utilize the
fairgrounds, but also to uh.
Improve the, the surrounding
area as well, and we hope that
you'll support this. Thank you.
Marcos Gonzalez, the executive
development officer for Berlio
County. uh, Mr. Chair and
members of the committee were
very excited to see this type of
redevelopment in the uh a metro
area and excited for new
infrastructure and new job
growth, and of course excited to
see the community involvement, I
want to see more community
involvement in how this is
actually shaped and what will
happen in the fair, so thank
you.
Great. Thank you very much. OK,
we have two folks online, uh,
we'll first go to uh Carlos
Santag.
Mr. Chairman, I'm here to speak
in opposition. Do you want me to
wait or speak now? Uh, let's go
ahead and, uh, go ahead, Carla,
uh, go ahead Munte.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman, members
of the committee. I'm Carlos
Sontag, president and CEO of the
New Mexico Business Coalition. I
am deeply concerned about this.
Uh, there has not been public
input. I know this has gone
through a process, but this type
of situation was looked at
years ago and the public was
adamantly opposed to it.
And what we are seeing right now
is there are no, uh, people in
the area that live in the
surrounding area that support
this, people who support the
fair are not in support of this.
The ag community is not this,
um,
If you look at the committee
involvement, there is only one
person from the public that's
going to be involved. And so you
are not getting a good
representation of how people
feel about this. If you were to
move that.
I urge you to take your time on
this and get the public
involved. I don't think the
public wants this. Thank you for
your consideration.
OK, and we'll conclude public
comment with Terry Cole.
Good evening, Mr. Chair and
members of the committee. I'm
Terry Cole, president and CEO of
the Greater Albuquerque Chamber
of Commerce, appearing in
support of SB 481. I'd like to
make two points that are very
important to understanding the
value of this bill. Many people
who live in the area support
this bill. Many young families
own a home in the area around
the fairgrounds, because it's
affordable and a place they can
get
starter home. If we revitalize
this area, it will make their
neighborhood safer with
increased home value. Moreover,
the revitalization will attract
more retail stores back to the
area and also construction of
more affordable housing. There
are safeguards in the bill
against conflict of interest,
the board consists of mostly
elected officials, and all
proceedings of the board are
done in open, including written
documents.
supports.
Finally, before, um, well, let
me conclude by saying the
chamber has been involved in
this issue for many years, and I
can tell you from personal
experience, this is the most
well conceived and credible of
all the attempts made. We urge
you to support SB 481. Thank
you, Mr. Chair. Great. Thank you
very much. OK, uh, we'll, um,
uh, we're through public
comment, we'll go to any
committee questions. We'll start
with Representative Vincent and
then go to
Lohan and keep going from there
for Satin. Thank you, Mr. Chair
and thank you, Madam Prote. So,
What I heard a while ago was
there was no public comment on,
on this.
Um, Mr. Chairman, we've had a
lot of public comment. We've had
so much public comment that we
wrote community benefits into
this plan.
Um, so, uh, you heard from Mr.
Roger Valdez. He's a
representative of the
International District and has
been my liaison with them. I
think he sent you all a letter
with all the communities
signatures, so
There's always going to be some
people who are afraid of change,
and my constituents are no
different, um, but we, we are
required to have public comment
and public input. We have a
public member, and we've been
doing that for months, if not
years. Uh, this was brought to
me last year by the governor and
the mayor, um, as an attempt to
try to, you know, change that
part of Albuquerque. I don't
know if you've been in
Albuquerque, but
is an area that just needs a lot
of help with the homelessness
and the issues, the crime
issues. We try to do a good job
with our police and state police
and the sheriff, um, if it was
just able to make everything
better, it would be done by now.
Um, but we've, we've had
tremendous public input, and we
are gonna continue to have
public input.
Thank you, Mr. Chair and Madam
Protem and where, where, where
will the fair go?
So Mr. Chairman, that of course
is not decided. We have an RFP
out for a master plan.
Uh, we put $500,000 into it last
year from the legislature.
So it could stay there, and we
could just redevelop it. It
could move to other areas, um,
that will be options that will
have to deal with, um, through
the elected board and through
that community input, so, uh,
we've thrown out uh Mesa del
Sol, the South Valley, Balloon
Fiesta, I forget somewhere else,
but, but it's really not
decided. None of this is
decided. This is an attempt to
try to do.
And we have safeguards in here
or if it doesn't work, we give
the money back to the state and
we stop. Uh, there's lots of
guardrails and protections for
our state state effort. And last
thing, Mr. Chair and Madam
Protem, I probably will not
support this because I know if
we get rid of a rodeo arena or
if we get rid of a fair grounds,
it's not gonna be put back
together.
And Mr. Chairman, that is not
the intention the RFP says,
should we move the fare, and if
so, where?
Should we keep it there? Uh,
Think about if you actually had
a state fair in an area where
horses were, it was easier for
everyone, and the community was
involved. I mean, we want to
think this. I mean, a Marshall
plan is what shall we do with
the state fair? Where could we
move it so it would be better.
It used to be the 3rd largest in
in the country, but it's really
declined from that.
Mr. Chair.
If you had a guarantee that
you're gonna put that rodeo
arena back up, I might be with
you,
but cowboys, cowboys get
forgotten a whole lot and I just
don't want to see that happen.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Thank you
very much Vincent. Next, we're
gonna go to represent Bohan.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Um,
And thank you, I hear you're
enthusiasm as you wanna do
something so good for your
community. And Mr. Chair, I used
to live right there in the
corner of uh Louisiana and
Central as a college student
and.
So, um, I understand and I and I
frequent the area still today
and.
The changes that you're talking
about are very real.
It's um
It's in dire need of a I don't
know if you want to call a face
lift, but it's dire need of some
serious attention, Mister,
Mister, um, Mister Chair and in
public, I think that.
Um, I, I'm just gonna ask you a
couple questions. As you put
this, uh, this, it's not quite a
tip, is it a tit or how you
identifying the so Mr. Chair,
it's, it's a brand new kid
because it's state-owned
property. And so we don't, we
don't have the city and the
county. Now they're both
supportive. The mayor Berncoe,
um, they want to help do it. We
started with the burn code did
and it didn't work because this
is state owned land. So it's
this
Structure with the guardrails
and the taxing procedure, we'll
have bonding authority up to a
half a billion dollars, um, as I
said before, if we don't get it
in place within 4 years, then we
stop, uh, so,
Those are, those are some
guardrails, Mr. Mr. Terror. I'm,
that's what I'm hearing. And
that's, and so my next question
just lends to the reason, the,
the, the structure of the the
district board is constructed
the way it is because it's state
property. Is that correct?
That's correct. So it's the
governor, the mayor, and the 4
elected, uh, city councilor,
county commissioner, the state
rep, sitting right there, state
senator and one community
member.
Thank you so much and one, do
you think
would, um, uh, well, uh, is this
open to open meeting app the
when they there you go,
that's my follow up question,
Mr. Chad, that's all I have.
Thank you. Great, thank you very
much Representative Lujan. Uh,
next, we're gonna go to
representative Duncan.
In Mon chair and senator, I've
got a quick question for you.
Where will the racetrack be
going?
So Mr. Chair, right now the
racetrack and casino are gonna
stay there.
The casino has a 25 year lease
at this point, the racetrack is
attached to that with the
Rossino.
There has been talk of moving
the race track if we find a
different place for the state
fair, that would be better for
the racetrack. Uh, but at this
point, uh,
The uh the casino and the
racetrack will remain.
Thank you, Mr. Chair and
Senator. So, um, have you, I
assume you've had discussions
with the uh the racetrack.
Oh yes, the, the, the owner of
the racetrack casino is all on
board. In fact, he talked to me
two years ago about this. OK.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. One last
question, um,
Talked about, um, property taxes
on there.
So, you, you're gonna have
elected officials from the state
governor and others, um, walk me
through that, how they're going
to be able to impose.
Uh, property tax on this county
commission would do that. So
would they go to the county then
and ask them to do that? How
would they do that?
You know, Mr. Chairman, I'm
gonna let my two experts earn
their money here. I've got an
economist and a bond attorney
who wants to do it.
OK,
Justin Horwitz from the Roaddy
Law Firm
Representative, uh, to see
Justin Horowitz, happy to be
here. Uh, we represent, uh, GSD
who was the owner of the
property.
So the, and if you could pull
that, yes, thank you very much,
Mr. Yes, so the, so the act lays
out essentially a process for
the district, um, to call for an
election, um, the election would
be among residents uh of the uh
district property, um, the
property tax would be in place
for a 4-year term, um, 5 mils
offhand, um, but it
is, um, not a central part of
the plan of finance for the, for
the district, it's essentially a
tool of of getting in the weeds
and you'll tell me to stop, um,
but essentially a tool to permit
um tax-free financing for, um,
the, the district essentially to
have taxing power.
Thank you let me add something
if I could,
so no one lives there now.
So we're talking years from now,
until we can do that.
You know, we're going to have to
rely on what we have right now
in the beginning, uh, and of
course, you know, we can also
start bonding authority, but
the, the, the property tax is
allowed through a tid, but we're
not gonna be able to do it for a
while cause there's no one
living there that would have
that would vote on.
Thank you, Mr. Chair, and I
understand that part, but that's
the county commission's.
Um, job to do in any county is
to set the tax rate for that
county, so I'm just trying to
figure out what you're gonna
have to change in state law that
would allow that to happen.
And Mr. Chairman, that's the
purpose of the TED. So it's a
state ed because it's all state
land.
So it's not the Berlio County
taxation, it will be the state
fair district.
Thank you, um.
This
this chairman and and senator,
but when you start um adding a
retail shop on there or property
on there, does that fall into
the same thing? It's still under
the TI.
Yes.
OK.
Thank you. That's all I had.
Great. Thank you very much,
Representative Duncan. Uh, next,
we're gonna go to Representative
Garrett, and Representative
Herndon.
Thanks, Mr. Chair. The blessing
of 3-hour debates on the floor
as you can read these things,
so.
for 3 hour debates. Yeah, I have
some questions. Um, let's see.
Sorry, I actually read it the
whole thing. Um, so in 4C, it
talks about the board, and it
seemed a little bit messy to me.
Um, I'm gonna support this, but
I did feel a little bit of
messiness in it. Um, you have
the 7 people appointed, the
governor appoints somebody that
represents the district. I've
lived off of Zuni for 5 years
and
I visited about 500 homes, uh,
because my husband and me taught
in schools in Southeast, so I
know the area very, very well.
If anyone knows Tain, I
recommend it. It's a wonderful
store that to me is the hope,
the library, there's good things
happening, but there needs to be
a lot of clean up, but on 4C it
says at the end of 6 years, the
board may hold an election.
Well, the board members may not
be constant, the city councilor
may change, reps may change.
Um, and then it says, uh,
If there's no election, the
initial 7 members shall serve
another additional 6.
Terms, maybe I'm being picky,
but I just felt that part is a
little iffy.
And Mr. Chairman, it's the, it's
the tid language. I mean, we, we
just lifted this from the TI
requirements. Uh, so it's a
little messy. Everybody has said
that, um, but it's
You know
It's hard to do this because we
have no people there to
re-elect. Uh, we hope and I want
in 6 years. I want people living
there in 6 years, so that would
work, but in case we're not
there yet.
Uh, then it's a way to continue
the board.
Right, but Mr. Chair and and
center my issue is that there's
huge decisions being made by not
necessarily stable group of
people, so that it's just
observation. I realized that
there's a lot of stuff, um,
let's see, um,
The district development plan is
a lot of framework.
But has, has any
Is there any plan that's
actually been developed.
So Mr. Chairman, that's why what
we're calling the master plan,
the Marshall Plan. That's what
the RFP is out to do. We want to
have economic development, we
want to have growth, residential
and commercial, my constituents
want a livable, warm, inviting
neighborhood with walking paths
and bicycle paths and trees and
green and affordable housing and
mixed use housing, and we want
the grocery store.
the pharmacy fact. We don't have
grocery stores or pharmacies, so
the, the purpose of this is to
get a master plan that will help
us do that. I've heard the
governor talked about this. I've
heard other elected officials
talk about wanting to have this
be something really good,
something great, something that
people love, something that
people want to live in and
around. Uh so that's the purpose
of it, and, but we don't have a
plan.
Because we don't yet have a
master plan. So, Mr. Chair and
Senator, what, who pays for
that? How much does that cost?
And where is that money coming
from?
Mr. Chairman, we paid for it. We
put $500,000 into the budget
last year in the RFP is out
right now and it's due back any
day.
Uh, thank you very much. And
then, uh, Mr. Chan Senator,
well, if this passes, well then
that board of seven people be
the ones that choose.
Who's gonna do it?
So it'll be a combination
because the state fair
commission is still somewhat
active, so there they have uh a
a sway in it, but it's the
elected board that will make
that decision.
OK, can you explain what you
just said, um, Mr. Chair, the
State Fair mission is still,
because they're not in the bill
at all, so I just wondered, and
you don't have to go into depth,
just quickly.
So the RFP I had that wrong. The
RFP is gonna be selected by the
State Fair commission, not the
new elected ward.
OK.
Um, Mr. Chair, let's see,
Kingley Coliseum, I know that
um.
The racetrack is still there,
the casino is still there,
tingly.
That seemed to, I looked at the
map and that seemed to be out.
Is that, am I correctly
understanding that?
Mr. Chairman, it's hard to
answer these questions because
it has to go, it has to come
back to the master plan. The
master plan is supposed to give
us multiple options. Uh, so, uh,
Tinley either needs to be
severely upgraded and redone or
rebuilt or pesticides, so we're
looking to see what the master
plan says. Thank you, Mr. Chair
and Senator, the African
American Performing Arts Center
stays.
I think some of those buildings
will stay uh possibly that one
and possibly the fine arts
center that
Community wants to turn into a
partly museum and part community
center.
OK, um, and Mr. Chair are more
gaming related businesses
expected to possibly operate in
the business to pay for the
bonds, um, Mr. Chairman, I don't
think so.
I don't think that will come
back in the master plan.
OK, and then I understand, Mr.
Chair, that and Senator, that no
legislative approval of projects
is going to necessarily be
required.
No, we, we amended the bill to
add legislative approval, so it,
it's approved by the Board of
Finance, Mexico Finance
Authority and the legislature.
Thank you.
Um, I do believe that's all my
questions. The only thing I
would say is
I wish somebody would take
The um Walmart property on Zuni
and convert that into museums.
So I wish so too. Thank you very
much. Thank you very much,
Representative Garrett. Next
we'll go to Representative
Herndon and then Representative
Hernandez,
thank you, Mr. Chair and thank
you presenters and Madam Chair,
I mean, Mr. Chair and
presenters, you know, this is
actually a very exciting idea.
This is in the heart of the
international district that's
culturally rich and they filled
with lots and lots of
opportunities. I know that was a
question, madam, uh, Mr. Chair
and and presenters about the
African American performing Arts
Center and uh I, I heard a
comment about part community
center, part uh exhibit hall. I
just want to just emphasize that
when that performing arts center
was built, it was built to be a
performing arts center to bring
different cultural events that
normally are not brought here.
Originally it was focusing on um
working with Pope Joy Hall, and
that was
happening until uh a certain
number of things that occurred
in between and I hope that that
will still occur and Mr. Chair
and Representatives, one of the
things that is exciting about
what you are thinking about
doing is to have an, a, a
neighborhood that is growing
around a performing arts center
that people can walk to is
incredibly exciting. So I just
present that to you, and I know
there was some question about
retail shops, Mr. Chair,
presenters, retail shops
already.
on that, on that, um.
On that land, so that would not
be something new that would be
happening, so I want you to know
that uh I heard things about
unstable people who were
involved. The people who live in
the, in the International
District are not unstable and so
they are looking forward to
something wonderful that they
can embrace. So, Mr. Chair,
presenters, I just want to say
thank you for this bright and
wonderful idea and we look
forward to supporting you in any
way we can.
Thank you very much
Representative Ferndon. OK, uh,
we're gonna go to representative
Hernandez and then we'll go to
the vice chairs Hernandez.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I too
lived off of Catherine and San
Pedro. I got the San Pedro bus,
uh, the first two years I lived
in Albuquerque and uh Mr.
Chairman, my, my question is
that, um, there's a large uh
population of urban Native
American, and and it it it in
this community and um the uh
gathering of nations, you know,
is, is a vital, you know, it's,
it's, it's a big economic
impact, uh, um, you know, and
just hearing about the master
plan.
Um, just, you know, just wanting
to, um, you know, mention it out
there as, you know, if there's
any uh thoughts about moving
the, the tingly Colosseum or or
or getting rid of the the
coliseum of how vital, you know,
um, that venue is especially,
um, you know, when, when
everybody looks forward, uh,
towards that and, uh, just, uh,
Mr. Chairman, um, um.
Um, Madam prote, uh, um.
Uh, is that of, of, of, is, is
that of any concern or I mean,
uh, just trying to see like if
if this is also a part of the,
the big master plan, you know,
taking that into consideration.
Um, Mr. Chairman, and, uh,
representative.
It, it is. I mean, it's on the
state fair, so the master plan
is supposed to come back with
how we redevelop the state fair.
How we make it into a living
community. You know, Albuquerque
needs 50,000 housing starts
we're getting new people coming
in to Kirkland Air Force Base,
and there is no homes for them,
so, um, it's, you know, I, I
think we want a lot out of this
mash.
Marshall Plan, but the, what we
do is tingly will be important
and I just don't know the answer
to it yet. It's an incredible uh
nation gathering there. Uh,
they've been in the pit once. I
was there when they were in the
pit. We know about it, we're,
we're, we're taking it into
consideration.
Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Thank you very much,
Representative Hernandez. We'll
go to the vice chair Dixon.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Um, thank
you. This is uh really quite
exciting, uh, Madam Prote. Um, I
drive from um central and
tramway all the way down to uh
Central and Wellesley on a daily
basis to go to work, um, and so
I will very much appreciate
having more residential feel,
uh, for some of that, that
portion of Central. I do have
some questions. um, Mr. Chair
and Madam Purtem about
The impact, uh, having the, the
racetrack and casino remaining
there, um, for a number of years
and how that will work with the
community. And so I'm wondering
if, are there other cities or
examples of.
Having a Raino.
In the middle of.
Um, a master planned community.
Mr. Chairman, that, that's a
good question, and there are
several examples, Kentucky and
New York, um, have race tracks
right in the middle of
residential areas, so there is
some talk about um even from the
owner of the casino to looking
into moving the race track.
Uh, to a place that would be
more suitable. I mean that
anybody tried to get into the
state fair lately. I mean the
trafic and um so it's, it's not
that great of a place for
horses. Uh, so there's talk of
moving that, but we have the
compact, the Rossino compact to
look at, uh, the casino has a 25
year lease, um, but there is
talk of separating that and
moving away from having it be a
Rossino, but that's in the
future. It's not immediate, but
we're all talking about it.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Um, thank
you, Madam Purte. Are there any
concerns about adverse impacts
on the folks living near.
Uh, the race, you know, and with
gambling or other issues. You
know, a, a, a lot of people want
the casino racetrack gone.
Um
It it's just not viable, and um
and we can't do that right now.
Um
But certainly the idea with this
is that the neighborhoods around
the state fair would greatly
benefit from this kind of
economic development. And in
fact, so there's no imminent
domain, uh, but there's the
ability to get contiguous land.
Uh, that's how we're doing the
north uh southwest corner of it.
Uh, so, and also we've put in
here specifically that their
community benefits for the areas
around.
the state fair, uh, including
the schools to have them be part
of the revitalization so those
those neighborhoods need to be
listened to and be part of the
plan and be excited about this,
and, and that's where we've
started with the International
District in particular.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. um, thank
you. um, just a few more quick
questions. Um,
Is one public member sufficient,
do you feel? It struck me as
Slim, but
So Mr. Chairman, I, I felt the
same way, but when you do
something like this, you have to
have elected officials, you
know, we're open meetings at
we're all part of the
governmental conduct Act, in
fact, any members on that board
that are not elected also have
to be part of the governmental
conduct Act, so we're all it's
open meetings. I mean, we have
to do this right, and it has to
be public and it has the
meetings have to be public, the
the
meeting minutes have to be
public, so the idea all of us
are community people. I mean,
it's the city councilor is
Nicole Rogers, she, she's just,
she's everything community,
Adrian Barboa, the county
commissioner.
Annel on Nornu and myself, I, I
really like that group.
So we, we all listen to the
community, all of us, probably
more than the governor and the
mayor. Oops, shouldn't have said
that.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Thank you,
Madam Purte. Well, you guys are,
uh, in much more frequent and
regular contact uh with the
constituents. So, so I do see
that um as an extension of of
the public, um, so, thank you.
Last question, uh, which is, uh,
just a question, um,
You know, asked
Of me is, uh, are there any
concerns from the community
about gentrification?
Mr. Chairman, yes, absolutely.
Um, that's why when I talk about
this, I talk about affordable
housing, mixed-use housing.
Commercial
Uh, walking paths, green spaces,
bicycle paths, uh, let's have a
livable community. Let's let's
make this a gem. Let's make this
something that Albuquerque can
be proud of, and by extension
those neighborhoods around it,
we, we have our community
benefit part of this is to
helping the public schools that
are around this area. Um, it's
something that the owner of the
casino has done along with me,
uh, for, for several years.
So, uh, there is that worry, um,
and I'm hoping that we can.
Balance it, so this is will be
home for everybody.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Thank you
so much.
Thank you very much Vice Chair
Dixon, ranking member Chatfield.
Thank you, Mr. Chair.
My, my question is, why are we
redeveloping the old fairgrounds
before we build.
A new fairground.
And Mr. Chairman, we're trying
to do it all at the same time.
We can't really, if, if we
decide to move the fare, um, the
mass master plan will have uh.
what they think we should do
with it, and then the fair
commission will be part of it,
so kind of have to do it all at
the same time. It's part of the
state fair.
So
It's probably not a good answer
for you. It's the best I can do.
Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Thank you very much uh ranking
member Chatfield. OK, uh, we're
gonna go to uh the vice chair
for the motion and
Representative Herndon for the
2nd.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Um, I
would move a do pass on Senate
tax business and Transportation
Committee substitute for Senate
Bill 481 as amended.
And I second it, OK, uh, great.
Uh, we've got a motion in a
second. Can we go ahead and
quickly call the roll, please.
Representative Baca. No.
Representative Brown. No.
Representative Chatfield.
Representative Dell, no.
Representative Duncan.
Representative Garrett.
Representative Hernandez. Yes.
Representative Herndon, yes.
Representative Herrera.
An enthusiastic, yes.
Representative Little. Yes.
Representative Luhan, another
enthusiastic, yes.
Representative Pettigrew.
fun.
Representative Sanchez.
Representative Sareana.
Excused.
Representative Silva, yes.
Representative Vincent? No.
Vice Chair Dixon, yes.
Cheers mom.
Yes.
We have 10 in the affirmative.
6 in the negative.
Great. Thank you very much. Uh
thank you members for a great
conversation, uh. Thank you, Mr.
Chair. We're gonna go um.
Next
To, um,
OK, so we're on Senate Bill 401.
As amended and representative
Garrett will present that.
All right. uh, great to see you,
Mr. Lovelace, and uh Garrett, go
ahead and start us off, please.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. I am very
enthusiastic about this spill.
Um, it's something that the
Office of Broadband Access.
An expansion has really been
hoping to see.
Um, Senate Bill 401 is amended.
Introduces significant
amendments to our broadband and
educational technology
infrastructure framework. The
bill makes several changes to
existing laws, and it
establishes some new provisions
that will enhance our
educational technology
infrastructure. One thing that
uh they've been working on for a
long time as a public school
capital outlay amendments to
bill transfer.
The functions related to
broadband access and technology
infrastructure from the public
school capital outlay Council
and the public schools
facilities Authority to the
Office of Broadband, um, access
and expansion because they're
the ones supervising like the
state educational network, many
projects, the staff is working
with Drew. Uh, they've been
working on uh MOU and this would
really permanently move them.
In recognition of where they're
really working, uh, creates
educational technology
infrastructure fund. It has
several tax bonding amendments,
rulemaking, um, and then there's
a sunset clause 10 years from
now, and I'll ask um Drew just
to add a couple of key points
before we go to questions.
Great.
Uh, thank you, Chair. I'll be
very brief here. Uh, quite
literally, this takes the
functions of the state education
network, which is with PSFA and
transfers it to the Office of
Broadband. The benefits there is
the, is Representative Garrett
uh mentioned is that we now
would have it all under one
house. Uh, we currently have
paid for assets out of uh
federal funds the last couple of
years to launch the network. And
so we have assets on two
agencies sides, and we've been
doing this through an MOU for
the last couple of years, so
making sure that we bring
everything together into
one house, so this is really
about governmental efficiency
and making sure we have kind of
one agency in charge of this.
Great. Thank you very much. OK,
is there anybody here who would
like to speak on Centinel 401?
OK, uh, anybody online?
Are there any committee
questions. We'll go to the vice
chair for the motion.
Or
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Um, I
moved the, uh, I move a due pass
on Senate Bill 401 as amended.
Second.
been moved by Vitradison saying
by ranking member Chatfield and
Representative Lohan. Is there
any opposition to that, seeing
none.
Thank you very much. Thank you.
Uh, and we'll ask you to stay up
there, Representative, uh, just
so that we can break catch by
the vice chair, uh, go straight
to Senate Bill 387.
Community schools.
Yeah.
Uh, thank you. Uh, what's the
number again? 387 OK.
387, uh, does two things. It
changes the community school
allocation, it used to say that
each, uh,
School application get 150,000.
Now this is up to 150,000, which
means it can spread further, uh,
schools don't always need that
amount and then the fund is
renamed as Doctor Jeannie Oakes,
who was an instrumental.
For of nature in helping us
really establish our community
school network and with I'll
send for questions. Great. Uh
thank you very much. Is there
anybody here who would like to
speak on Senate bill 387.
Or Senate Education Committee
substitute for 10 bills 387.
Is there anybody online? and
nobody is there, are there any
questions from the committee?
OK, we'll go to Representative
Herndon for a question, and
Representative Lujan. Represent
Hendon, please. Thank you, thank
you, Mr. Chair and Madam
Presenter, do you know with
respect to this community school
fund, are we then gonna be
guaranteeing funding for
community school coordinators
who are an incredible, uh,
important part of the school
community. Mr. Chair and
Representative, the community
schools themselves get the
grants, and this is one source
of pain for those coordinators.
It is the, the first thing
that they use. Some schools use
their discretionary funding, uh,
their newly chosen increased
unit value for the secondary
schools. They, they can use
different pots of money, but
yes, that will be there. Thank
you, Mr. Chair. Thank you
presenter. I know that in the
past there had been some concern
about how they were going to be
paid, but I have watched them
over the years and how they
indelibly plant themselves
within families. So thank you
for that, uh, answer. Thank you,
Mr. Chair. Great. Thank you very
much.
representative Ferndon next, uh,
representative Lujan.
Thank you, uh, Mr. Chair, uh,
So with
So as you said this would allow
for
Possibly more funding for our
community schools, but they're
still not part of the SCG. Is
that correct, Mr. Chair?
Um, Mr. Chair and
Representative, it's not an SCG,
uh, am I correct with that, uh,
representative Baca. It's not an
SCG function, not every school
has this model that, yeah, thank
you, ma'am. Thank you, Mr.
Chair. Uh, thank you. I, I, I
like that we're moving towards
helping and getting more funding
for our community schools, um,
as a model to, um, and I think
Representative Herndon covered
with another thing.
I was thinking about too, but uh
so then school districts will
still be responsible for
covering additional fees out of
their own budget, Mr. Chair, Mr.
Chair Representative, yes. And,
and Mr. Chair, uh, and I'm sorry
to put you on the spot real
fast, but what is, what is that
funding look like, Mister.
Uh, Mr. Chair, do you have the
Never mind, Mr. Chair, that's
right. Yeah, I'm sorry. I'll
just keep with the general
questions. I just wanna, I just
want to kind of emphasize that
we need to do more. Thank you,
ma'am, Mr. Chair.
Thank you very much Lohan, uh,
ranking member Chatfield do
pass.
OK, uh, we have a due pass for
the Senate Education Committee
substitute for Senate Bill 387,
seconded by Representative
Sanchez, uh, motion from ranking
member Chatfield. There any
opposition from that, then then
uh.
Thank you.
Uh, great, um,
let's
See
Um,
Senator, uh, vice chair.
Can we go ahead and ask you to
do uh Senate Bill 13.
Chairman, I believe you have a
substitute or amendment.
We do. Um, let's go ahead and
get to
The uh bill and then if you
could read out the amendment
number, please. OK.
OK, uh thank you again, Mr.
Chairman, members of the Finance
Committee, uh, Senate Bill 13,
got the wrong one.
Um
Bill 13 is the uh
Uh, creates the, uh, compact,
um,
School, act, which allows
tribes.
They are interested in pursuing
language immersion and cultural
schools to be able to develop as
part of a compact between the
PED and the
In, in the tribe.
The tribe has to pass a
resolution.
And then go through the
application process, which are
all uh stated in in the uh in
the plan.
Uh, there's
That, uh, and can you read out
the uh amendment uh.
The, the, the, uh, uh, amendment
to uh this is uh 2.
32102.2.
OK, great. We've got that. Can
we have a motion a second for
discussion? OK, it's been moved
by Representative Sanchez,
seconded by Representative
Duncan, uh, vice chair, can you
explain, uh, the amendment,
please? OK, but the amendment
does, uh, that I committed to
the House education was that,
that we would uh do 5 pilot
schools.
As opposed to just open it up
because there was a lot of uh uh
uncertainty of what it all
means, but then, of course,
there's a lot of uh interest in
seeing how this will play out
and so it gives us an
opportunity to uh pilot 5 of
these tribal compact schools.
And then the other is to um
is to uh provide the um, oh, and
the other one is uh
Prioritizing, you know, the uh
distinct language groups of uh
Tiwa, Tewa, Toa, Charis, Apache,
Zuni, and, and Dena as part of
that. And then the, the, the
other piece is the reporting uh
that was asked of the chairman
as well in the committee is to
report its status to East State
Tribal Education Compact to
report its status and progress
to the legislative education
Study Committee and the
Legislative Finance Committee by
November of each year, so that
we'll see how things are
progressing. So that's
excellent.
Thank you very much, Vice Chair.
Are there any questions on the
amendment?
From Sam Chair and
and Senator, I think you really,
um.
did exactly what the House
Education Committee.
felt was appropriate, so thank
you.
OK.
Uh, great, OK. Uh, any other
questions, seeing none, can we
have a motion to adopt the
house. So, OK, it's been moved
by uh Little by Representative
Duncan and Representative
Vincent, is there any opposition
to that?
then
OK, um,
OK. Uh, now, let's go to public
comment. Is there anybody here
who would like to speak on uh
Senate Bill 13 as amended.
Great, come on up.
Yeah,
Arta Chavis in a chef, but
initially Kisani Bashachi Nakai
Yeah,
Arta Chavis in a chef, but
initially Kisani Bashachi
Nakaikisanne deanella
go at seehopakiwaota
Sonahanaiani.
Mr. Chair remembers, I'm Otta
Chavez, a Navajo woman born
forua Pueblo, introducing myself
and Karis and Navajo is a
privilege that I was taught by
my grandparents in our home.
The way I grew up is no longer
the norm, as many of us have
moved for our jobs and home, and
due to COVID, we've lost a
member of our elders. Our
worldview is linked to our
language and place. Without our
languages, our culture,
teachings and ways of life are
being forgotten. We need these
compacts, in particular, because
PED and the federal education
systems are based on English as
the first and only language.
That's the only way you get
funding.
That framework is about
assimilation and the depth of
our languages. This bill,
however, is contrary, um, I'm
sorry, that is contrary to our
wishes. We want to revitalize
and teach what is needed to
ensure our survival as
indigenous speakers in our own
languages. This committee, I'm
sorry, um.
Uh, sorry, I'm so tired.
This bill is about equity. It's
about doing the right thing.
It's about being in solidarity
with our communities. They're
all under attack. We must all
band together. We urge you to
pass SB 13, yeah, thank you.
Great, thank you very much.
Uh, go see him at all hope, uh,
Alicia Chrismatic on my assay,
uh, ubosota
and I need to vote alsoan
Uh, go see him at all hope, uh,
Alicia Chrismatic on my assay,
uh, ubosota
and I need to also touch
um
this exclus to pass the Senate
Bill 13 on education. It it was
not that that's called work.
Good evening, Chair and
committee members. My name is
Alicia Carris. I'm a proud
member of the San Pablo Santo
Domingo and I'm a lobbyist with
NM need Devo and I'm here today
for support for SB 13.
The only reason why I'm able to
speak to you tonight, um, in the
Kari language is because that I
was supported not only
culturally but linguistically in
my community, you know, our
unique culture and language is
integral to our our identity,
and it creates the foundations
of our values.
Personally learning my language
and culture has instilled the
confidence in me to be able to
stand before you all today.
Today I'm not only here to speak
in support for this bill, but
I'm speaking for the language
learners and second language
learners like myself who want
better for our children and for
the future generations to come,
for them not to struggle with
the sacrifice of selecting
westernized education before our
cultural education or being
forced to practice on the
weekends or outside of our
classrooms.
We can have both of those, and
then, you know, as uh before I
got into the business of our
politics and political science.
I was invested in our languages
and from my our research and
understanding our languages have
strength and culture.
That,
you know, our immersion classes
have the statistics and they do
have, um, for example, the
Nawahi schools in Hawaii. They
have over 100% graduation or a
100% graduation rate and
and 80% um rate of students
going on to college, so these
schools have been proven to
work, and I urge your support
tonight. Thank you so much and
have some strength tonight to
keep going. I appreciate it.
Thank you very much.
Good evening, Mr. Chairman and
members of the committee. My
name is Conroy Chino.
And I represent the Pueblos of
Akima and Tao and also the
center of long poverty.
We ask you to support Senate
Bill 13 for a number of reasons,
um, it incorporates indigenous
languages and culture.
Um, into academic settings, and
we believe that doing so, um,
not only reinforces a sense of
self-esteem and self identity,
but also
It allows children.
To continue to speak our
language, uh, to maintain it, to
preserve it, something that's
being lost among our our young
uh in many tribal communities.
But send it 13 also effectuates.
And puts into place.
Uh, uh, this very bold and
unique.
And refreshing approach to
educating native children.
And finally, Mr. Chairman, it
allows uh tribes.
To fully control uh the destiny
of their children, and for these
reasons, Mr. Chairman and
members of the committee, we ask
for your support, uh, in one
Senate Bill 13. Thank you.
Thank you very much.
Yeah, it's Mr. Chairman, members
of the committee, I'm sure grown
horse and I'm standing here as a
uh education leader. I've served
several years, over 10 years on
the school board for the naval
preparatory school and in my
role, we made language and
culture a priority for our
school, um, and I don't speak
for all schools, but I could
just only, you know, talk about
the work that we did, um, we
prioritize our language and
culture. We made a lot of
headway, and I think, you know,
I
I believe that this bill is
going in the right direction and
I applaud the work of the
sponsor as well as those who
have helped put this bill
forward. It is important. It
provides flexibility to tribes
to do what they know that they
best can do to prioritize our
language and culture, thank you.
Thank you very much.
Good evening, Mr. Chairman,
members of the committee. My
name is Preston Sanchez. I'm an
attorney at the ACLU of New
Mexico. I'm also an attorney on
the Yazi Martinez litigation,
representing the Yazi
plaintiffs, standing here in
full support on behalf of the
ACLU uh for SB 13, uh, SB 13.
is a bill that directly responds
to what we consider to be some
of the major systemic issues
affecting Native American
students in public schools
today, uh, as you've heard some
of my colleagues and as you'll
hear from uh the presenters that
there's a large disconnect that
is the result of, you know, long
standing uh history of
assimilation in the boarding
school era that's carried its
way into current times. And so
we want to see greater
opportunities for Native
American students and we want to
ensure that they're successful
in school and so for those
reasons and many more, we fully
support.
For SB 13, thank you. Thank you.
Good evening, Mr. Chair, members
of the committee and special
thanks to the sponsor. I'm
Camilla Feibelman with the
Sierra Club. Why would we be
standing in support of this
bill, our landscapes are
integral to the way we see our
world and our language is the
first way we describe what we
see, where we live and how we
interact with our natural
resources.
Our native languages are the
first ways New Mexico's
landscapes were ever described.
and our children learning that
language is key, my own son has
a chance to learn his father's
first language in a school
setting, and I hope for that for
all kids. Thank you. Great.
Thank you very much. OK, we're
gonna go to two folks online.
We'll go to uh Melania or uh Ms.
Ortiz, and then uh
Go from there. Go ahead, uh Miss
Ortiz.
Good evening, chair and members
of the committee. My name is
Malena Ortiz, and I am the
registered lobbyist for the
Pueblos of Zuni, Isleta, San
Felipe, Owinga and Santa Clara,
and for the reasons stated
earlier, we urge your support
and a deep pass. Thank you.
Thank you very much. Uh, we'll
go to Melissa Candelaria,
Melissa.
Yes, good evening, Mr. Chair and
members of the committee. My
name is Melissa Candelaria um
the
education director and attorney
with the New Mexico Center of
Law and Poverty and a member of
the legal team representing the
Yazi plaintiffs and the Yazi
Martinez lawsuit. We stand in
full support of Senate Bill 13
and thank Senator Sendo and
Senator Charlie for putting
forth this creative uh proposal
that strengthens tribal
sovereignty in the education.
of young native students who
will become the future leaders
of their communities and the
state and uh for this reason and
all the reasons already uh
provided, uh, we urge you to uh
vote to pass. Thank you. Great.
Thank you very much. And then
who's on the iPhone?
And then uh
New Yorkie onto it a melo all
the time who would think like
the fun.
Good evening. I'm Kevin Sendo,
education director for the
public of Hamas, and we stand in
full support, um, our Pueblo has
invested resources and funds in
over 20 years of effort in
developing our language
immersion based program starting
at the early childhood level and
building up to 8th grade, um, we
have worked to look at language
learning uh as a strength rather
than a deficit and creating
multilingual, multicultural
learning.
environments for our children
and so we stand in full support
of Senate Bill 13 and we ask
that you do support and pass it
as well. Thank you. Thank you
very much. OK, uh, we're gonna
go to the committee, uh, we're
gonna start with ranking member
Chatfield of Silvas Bohan.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Mr. Chair,
I've been in this
Legislature for 7 years, the
longest debate that I've ever
been through is 4.5 hours and
that was on this bill in the
education committee. And I will
tell you these guys started with
100% no votes, which is unusual.
I, I usually, it's kind of split
down the middle or maybe the not
the middle it's kind of split on
the 2/3 to 1/3 side where I, I'm
around. They fought their way
through it and, and came out
and.
took a compromise in a, in an
amendment.
And they, they got a
They all 100% do pass when they,
when they walked out and, and I,
I appreciate you all being
willing to make an amendment and
to uh
Right? And uh I urge everybody
to
Pass this bill.
Excellent. Thank you very much,
ranking member Chatfield. We'll
go to represent Silva, then
represent Wuhan.
Thank you, Chair. Thank you, um.
Chair and sponsor, um, I just
have a couple of questions and
uh I wanna thank the House
Education Committee members for
the rigor that he showed on
this. I watched as much of the
committee, uh, webcast as I
could and so I appreciate the
questions and the answers that
you all were able to surface.
Um
And I think I might have missed
some of these questions, but I'm
wondering, um, the public school
Capital Outlay Act, um, doesn't
allocate funding and I'd love to
know how um you're gonna
determine local share
requirement for the schools, uh
Mr. Chair.
Uh, Mr. Chair, and, uh,
Representative Silva, thank you
for that question, you know, for
many years I served on the
public school at Capitol Alley
Task Force, um, as a, uh, what
we call it a
Impact school, uh,
representative, and so, uh,
As, as the bill is written, you
know, these schools will be part
of the public school framework
eligible for all sources
available public schools, and
many of these schools will be on
tribal lands that are not
taxable, just like for service,
BLM and other federal lands. And
so most of the um a lot of
those, those are waived as part
of the uh.
contribution.
Thank you, Mr. Chair and thank
you sponsor, um, and so.
Then with with the public school
capital outlay.
Then with that.
Um
Uh, with all that funding then
come from uh the state of New
Mexico then, Mr. Chair and
sponsor.
You know, uh, Mr. Chair, uh,
Representative Silva, it, it
just depends, you know, uh.
Because tribes are different uh
stages, you know, like, if
you're gonna convert a school
that's already ongoing, you
know, the buildings are probably
there, uh, if you're gonna start
new, you may need some
investment, uh, in fact, the one
in Hamus right now that's
piloting the language, you know,
they're sharing space with the
the charter school, uh, in
several of the uh classrooms
that they have or, or portables
and so forth. So it just depends
on, on uh, on the, I guess the
uh the situation for each tribe,
which would be very difficult.
Thank you, Mr. Chair and thank
you, Senator, um, and then my
other question, the House
Appropriations and Finance
Committee, the House Bill 2
doesn't have dedicated funds,
um, how, how are, how are we
gonna fund this bill if we, if
we vote to approve it, Mr.
Chair, Senator.
Mr. Chair and Representative. My
name is Terre Via from the
public of Heuser's tech
technical expert. You asked a
question of how, uh, well the,
how will this impact the the
physical bill. There's not going
to be an immediate impact to the
existing budget and planning
negotiating on the state tribal
Compacting Act will require time
and go into effect and estimated
in fiscal year 27 and uh
basically,
During that time and planning
process, there will be student
account numbers being reported
to NMPD and to the legislature.
Thank you.
OK, thank you. That's helpful.
And then my final question, um,
will, when you do the government
to government, um, meetings will
those be subject to the Open
Meetings Act, um, Mr. Chair and
Senator.
Um, you know, I never, nobody's
ever asked me that.
get a new one out.
Good.
Uh, I, I would think so. I mean,
these are, uh, public, you know,
dollars are being negotiated or
at least talked about, so I
assume that would be the case. I
think that's the same thing when
we uh first uh started our
charter school back in 1999. He
was the first charter school to
expand under the new law that
was, uh, I think passed in
19908.
For the first year, we had the
first charter school in Hami and
then the other ones came on
board afterwards and so forth,
so I'm sure it's gonna be the
same process, Mr. Chair, and the
Representative Silva. Excellent.
Thank you. I appreciate that,
Mr. Chair. Thank you, uh,
Senator, and, uh, the amendment
did, um.
Uh, cover a lot of my concerns,
so I appreciate that. Thank you,
Chair. Thank you very much,
Representative Silva. Next we
have, uh, Representative Lu
Hunt.
Thank you, Mr. uh Mr. Chair.
Thank you.
Senator, for bringing this
legislation forward and and
yeah, a lot of my questions have
been asked, but I just um
I'm just very supportive of
this, you and I went to.
Same Native American Catholic
school.
And from that I feel like I got
this unique and different
education from many, but it
still wasn't.
What you're envisioning here,
which
We tried to capture their at
Saint Catherine's, but it.
Even though at their at the best
of what they could do, um, this
is, this is holistic. This is,
this is a vision that um.
Needs to come to fruition. So
thank you for your vision, and I
see all those that are here that
have worked towards that
governor.
Thank you for being here for
your continued vision on this.
Um, and I just want to say, you
know, this is, this is beautiful
and this is, this is how we, um.
We can build upon and really,
um.
I hope for the future uh reshape
um our public schools as well
based on what we can do here and
really capture the the the the
significance of what is
happening here and and I just
say, you know, thank you, um.
I get a little choked up because
it's, it's really, it's really
something, um.
Very, very special and holistic,
Mr. Chair. So again, I, I
support this. Thank you for
working with our
um
education uh committee, they,
they're getting quite the
reputation of really like
grinding. It's a really good
policy. So thank you to um to
them as well for like, you know,
completing this, the, the, the
phase of this, um, Mr. Chair,
I've learned a a bit more. I do
have a compact school in my
district, which is SFIS, I
believe that's a.
compact school, Mister Tay, or,
uh, please, that's a uh
No
It's funded by the BIA, but it's
a a is it grand?
It's called tribally controlled.
So, but, but the medium is still
English, so it's not a compact
school. So there's BIE schools
that are controlled by the
Bureau of Indian Affairs out of
Washington and then there's uh
what we call the tribic control
which the tribe, you know, like,
uh, Santa Clara and a few of the
tribes that have taken ownership
of those, but still it's the
instrument.
The media destruction is still
English. Thank you. I say I
learned something.
Again, I thought I, I knew, OK,
that, that's not my perception
was off, but thank you for that.
I, you know, so whatever, um, as
we build this board, like we
said, we don't have the the full
funding, but.
This is, this is one step
closer. Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Thank you very much. We're going
to go to Representative Garrett.
Thanks, Mr. Chair. Um, the open
meetings Act is Section 8 on
page 8 and 9. It, it details
that I just have a minor
question. um, Mr. Chairman
Representative, you exhausted
all your questions at the last
committee
that took 4.5 hours just joking.
We need to wake up the charisma,
Mr. Chair, just on the
amendment, um, I'm just
I just want to make sure we have
it right cause it lists a
distinct language groups. But do
we need to put hieria Apache,
and Mescalera Apache or is
Apache just by itself acceptable
to those two tribes,
I don't know if you know, so
since you like Tawa, you know,
there's 6 villages that speak
various dialect of Tawa. So we
didn't, you know, split them all
up, like name all the tribes,
you know, and so forth. So
Hickory.
Mes Apaches similar language in
the language is the same
somewhat, but maybe a little
change in dialect, but just like
just like carrots, you know go T
San Felipe, they all speak
little variation of dialect, but
under the same mother language.
OK, I just wanna make sure, make
sure about that. OK, thank you.
Great. Thank you very much,
Representative Little. We're
gonna go uh to uh
representative,
sorry, thank you, Garrett we're
gonna go to Representative
Little and then Representatives.
Uh, for the motion in the
second.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I am
honored to move a due pass on
Senate Bill 13.
It
has amended. Thank you.
Mr. Chairman, I second.
Great. We have a motion from
Representative Little 2 from
Representative Hernandez do pass
on Senate Bill 13 as amended. Is
there any opposition to that
motion, saying none.
We have a do pass. Thank you
very much. Thank you, Mr.
Chairman and members of the
committee. I'm also here to
present uh can, can we, we're
gonna, I know we're, yeah, we're
sort of cycling through time,
um, that's fine. I'll be out
here, so when you're ready for
it, OK, apologies, but it's um
it'll be sort of our uh members
these last few, uh, for the most
part should go very quickly, um,
we're gonna ask the vice, well,
uh.
Senator Trujillo, can you go
ahead and do uh Senate Bill 290
as amended really quickly.
Yes, Mr. Chair, and thank you
members for having me here. I
apologize for not being here
last night. I was beyond my
limit. It hit the wall of
exhaustion. Um, as you heard,
this bill, um, just literally in
um makes the county general fund
$15. Children's Trust Fund 20
and gives County clerks 20. I
understand that there was some
questions about the children's
trust fund. I do want to relay
that I've spoken with the CYFD
secretary this morning as well
as the
aging in long-term services
secretary, and they both
indicated that the children's
Trust Fund will be a perfect
partner for the kinship, um,
pilot program that we just
passed out of Senate Finance
this um this afternoon. And with
that we stand for questions. OK,
great. Uh, we've had a
discussion on this, uh, are
there uh any committee
questions?
Uh, can I have a motion for a
due pass on Senate Bill 290 as
amended.
OK. OK. Uh, it's been moved by,
by Cha Dixon, seconded by
representative.
Yeah, is there any opposition to
that, OK? Uh, great. Please show
the uh Republican in opposition.
We
Uh, of course, it, uh, yeah, I
think we, uh, if you could
explain on behalf of
Yeah, we, we don't, we take no
offense or yeah. Thank you,
thank you very much, Mr. Chair.
Just 30 seconds.
Um, I'm of the opinion, Mr.
Chair, that we ought to just
waive the license fee for
getting people getting married
uh as as good public policy and
find other ways to fund uh what
needs to get done. So that's the
only reason. Thank you.
Uh, great. Thank you very much
and I appreciate that. I think
we very much appreciate that.
OK, thank you very much. Thank
you. Great, uh, we're gonna go,
um, uh, uh, vice chair Dixon,
can you do, uh, Senate Bill 142
as amended, please.
And we may ask you to do Senate
Bill 126.
OK, thank you very much, Vice
Chair and thanks members as we
work through 142.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Thank you,
members. Um, Senate Bill 142 is
uh the grid grid modernization
roadmap, um, and it
Directs emner to coordinate with
the PRC to develop a road map
for grid modernization. And I
think the key there is
connecting M nerd and the PRC to
do this.
Um, it adds language to consider
the speed of project deployment
when considering applications,
establishes school districts and
charter schools as eligible
locations to apply for the grant
program, and amends the
definition of grid modernization
to better reflect the true scope
of necessary modernization
efforts. With that, Mr. Chair,
I'll stand for. Fantastic. Thank
you. Is there anybody here who'd
like to speak on Center Bill 142
as amended. Great, come on up.
Uh, good evening, um.
Charming small.
Members of the committee, Carlos
Lucero with the Public Service
company in New Mexico.
And Senate Bill 142 will expand
the previous grid modernization
projects to include projects
that increase distribution or
transmission capacity and the
artificial intelligence is um is
a key part as well that with
this policy, PNM can support.
Thank you.
Thank you very much.
Mr. Chairman, members Committee,
Bernard Treat, XL Energy, to be
brief, uh, we are here in
support of the bill tonight.
Thank you. Thank you.
Thank you, Mr. Chair, members of
the committee, Camila with the
Sierra Club just wanting to
support this bill for all the
aforementioned reasons, but
having schools to the grid
modernization grant program is
just such a cool idea with all
the opportunities for schools to
get panels on their roofs and
bring school buses along maybe
one day even being backup energy
for the schools, it's a great
opportunity, so thanks for the
support for the bill.
Excellent. Thank you very much.
OK, uh, I don't see anybody
online, uh, are there any
committee questions?
Rehan please.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Thank you,
um.
Uh representative just a quick
question, and it's just in
relation to, um, um.
In the definition of or um
Adding school districts, uh
eligible locations is that, um,
kind of in tandem or as we are
looking for like electric school
buses to be part of like the.
The system of all of this too
and electrification, as it is
the grid moth.
Mr. Chair.
Thank you, Mr. Chair, uh, and
representative, um, I think, you
know, if you're considering
school bus, electric school
buses as a potential storage.
Um
Battery storage
Uh, component, then yes, would
certainly qualify Mr. Chair, I
think that's so awesome.
And thank you and thank you for
the, thank you. Great, thank you
very much, Representative Mohan.
OK, I don't see any other
questions. We'll go to the
ranking member for the motion.
Mr. Chair, now moved the Senate
Bill 142 as amended, do now
pass.
OK, we've got a motion from
ranking member Chatfield, 2 from
Representative Garrett. Is there
any opposition to that motion
saying none.
Got to do pass there, um,
Can we go ahead and uh dive
right into the Senate Bill 126,
please.
Yes.
Uh, Mr. Chair, can I grab my,
uh, summary sheet. Yes.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Um, my
expert, uh, will provide the
overview for us. OK, more
efficient. Thank you, Mr.
Santana.
Mr. Chair, members of the
committee, uh, Jay Santiannis,
registered lobbyist for the New
Mexico Exchange carrier Group.
Um, I wanna thank, uh, uh,
Senator Padilla for bringing
this forward and Vice Chair
Dixon for helping with this.
Uh, this bill.
Increases the SRSF cap from 30
million.
To 40 million. The SRUSF is a
state uh
Rural universal service fund. It
seemed roll out and um
The purpose of the increase is
to provide additional PRC
broadband grants, grant funds,
uh, very good program for the
most rural areas in New Mexico.
The grant requires a 25% match
that each applicant must include
uh grants opened all
telecommunication companies,
fiber telecom companies, fixed
wireless and cell providers as
long as they are certified as an
eligible telecommun
communication carrier as
certified by the PRC. Great. OK,
thank you.
for that. Is there anybody here
who would like to speak on
Senate Bill 126.
Please, um,
Mr. Chair members of the
committee on behalf of Smith
Bagley, I respectfully ask for
your support of Senate Bill 126.
Smith Bagley plays a vital role
in providing essential
telecommunication services to
San Juan and McKinley counties,
including the Navajo Nation, our
ability to invest in
infrastructure and expand
services to some of the most
remote areas of the state has
been made possible through the
matching grants of the universal
Service Fund. Thank you. Thank
you very much.
Mr. Chairman, members of the
committee, Matea Sanian
executive director for the New
Mexico Exchange carrier Group,
the enemy CG is a group of 10
telephone and broadband
companies serving rural areas of
New Mexico, um, 5 of our
companies are um cooperative
companies. We fully support uh
Senate Bill 126. Uh, we thank
Vice Chair Dixon, um, for
presenting.
Legislation, um.
We also thank Senator Padilla.
Like the expert witness said,
um, to save time for the
committee. I agree with
everything that the expert
witness said, and also the
comments from Smith Bagley, the
bill just increases the current
fund, which is a public
regulation, um, broadband fund
from 30 million to 40 million,
so it's a $10 million increase,
um, something important to note
is all the companies um any
company that has el
telecommunications, um, step
carrier status.
Is able to apply, and there's
also a buy-in, so any company
that does apply um for the fund,
um, matches it with 25%, so we
ask for your favorable vote, and
thank you for your time. Great.
Thank you very much. OK, uh,
there's one person online. We'll
go to Jeremy Crandall.
Yes, hi, Mr. Chair. Can you hear
me OK? We sure can.
Great. Uh, I'll keep this very
brief. I know you've all had a
long day. My name is Jeremy
Crandall. I'm here on behalf of
CTIA where the wireless industry
trade association. We do have
some concerns about the upward
pressure the bill may create on
fees for consumers. Um, as you
all know, when it comes to
universal service funding in
telecom. One unfortunate
consequence is the added burden
on wireless consumer
specifically in New Mexico,
these surcharges can make, can
be up to 10 to 15% of an average
monthly wires wireless.
bill. So to address the bill
itself and conclude my
testimony, um, given that the
state hasn't exhausted its
broadband grant funding and that
there are other bills in motion
in this session that would
combine boost fees on wireless
as much as 800%. We do fear that
uh Senate Bill 126 would
inevitably create inherent
pressure to raise fees even even
higher for wireless consumers.
That's why um we would uh
respectfully oppose the bill.
Thank you very much. Thank you
very much.
OK, that's gonna conclude the
public comment. Uh, we'll go to
committee questions, we'll go to
Representative Duncan, please.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Um.
out of my shirt just one quick
question for you.
Who controls the money and how
is it distributed?
Mr. Chair, and Representative
Duncan, the, the money is a
surcharge on your, on all phone
bills.
Uh, the PRC controls that. They
have an administrative agency
that controls the funds.
And disperses it. They actually
set the uh surcharge rate, uh,
the current rate is 79 cents.
Oh
But uh this change, um, well,
over the last 5 years, the rates
averaged about 98 cents
per
line per month.
With this change, we're looking
at uh
Probably 15 to 20 cents increase
of the per month, just so, so
not, not a percentage increase.
It's, it's just
A flat 15 cents.
So, um, and the PRC does control
it. Great. OK, thank you very
much, Representative Duncan. OK,
I don't see any other questions
ask for a motion for a d, OK, we
got a motion to pass from
ranking member Chatfield, uh,
second from Representative Silva
on Senate Bill 126. Is there any
opposition to that,
seeing that you gotta do pass
there, uh, Senator Berger, oh, I
just want to express my
appreciation for Mr. Santana for
stepping in as a pinch hitter
expert witness. We agree.
OK, uh, Senator Bergman, if we
can do the uh uh Senate Bill 236
is amended quickly, and then,
uh, thank you, Vice Chairendo,
and we appreciate and we'll go
to you for, uh,
Committee substitute for Senate
Bill 35. Senator Bergmans.
Thank you, Mr. Chair, members of
the committee. I'm excited to be
here at midnight. Um.
Sunnyville 236.
I think that's the number is a
very simple license plate bill.
And it is unlike every other
license plate bill. In 2023, the
legislature adopt the look twice
for motorcycle safety license
plate, which is what this is.
But unfortunately, the
motorcycle community who is very
eager to adopt to put this
license plate on their bikes is
not able to because we, the MBD
cannot create the motorcycle
size plate.
Which will look like this. If we
pass and adopt this bill. So all
this bill is doing is allowing
for this size license plate
with that I'll stand for
questions the best use of props
that we have seen in this
country,
so
it was
great, is there anybody who
wishes to speak on Senate Bill
236.
Like twice as you get up to go,
yeah, OK, uh, yeah, I don't see
anybody online, we'll go for a
DuP pass
pass.
Great, it's been moved by, uh,
Representative Lahan seconded by
Representative Vincent and uh
who, as I believe as an avid,
uh, uh, user may end up with one
of these. Uh, is there any
opposition to that motion,
seeing no.
Thank you very much.
OK, great and so and we're gonna
go now to
Centiel 35.
5:35.
Um
OK. All right. Thank you, Mr.
Chairman of the committee.
The Senate Finance Committee
substitute uh for Senate Bill
535 increases workers'
compensation fees and the
telecommunications re service
surcharge, creates a
non-reverting of fund to support
the 988 crisis intervention
hotline and ensures the
increased revenue from the
telecommunications uh relay
service Surcharge, go to the new
fund to fund the 988 on a
recurring basis.
Uh, it also addresses budgetary
concerns for the commission for
the Deaf and Hard of Hearing
Persons.
Uh, the posts amendment also
addresses two other essential uh
things, one related to PRC's
inspection and supervision fee,
and there's uh utility
inspection fee. The second is
for the 911 emergency surcharge.
Great. OK, uh, can you read that
238 or 232 number, please.
Uh, 2320.
8 to
Um
0.2. Great. OK. Can we have a
motion a second for discussion.
OK, it's been moved by Vincent
or Representative Garrett,
seconded by Clinton Brown. Uh, I
think you explained the
amendment, uh, any other details
on the amendment, uh, Mr. Vice
Chair or experts.
You wanna play?
Um, I'm gonna go ahead and, uh,
I have here, um,
Heather Jordan, uh, with the
A workman's comp and then uh PRC
Miranda Mascaranes with a PAC
and then also uh Nick with the
help.
Was it Lucas, uh, with the
healthcare authority, so.
Go ahead.
Uh, Mr. Chair, uh, the amendment
as it relates to the public
regulation commission, uh, this
would increase the fee for
inspection and supervision, uh,
this is a fee that is already
charged to our our utilities,
uh, this fee has not been
changed since 2003, so we're
just increasing it uh as a
result of inflation, the
increase that we're requesting
is 590,000%. Uh, and that is an
increase from 5006,000%.
OK, um,
Uh, so this sort of an, as we're
looking through it, um, uh,
yeah, a few the different fees
that are addressed in our, in
the bill and in the amendment.
Are there any questions on the
amendments?
Representative, please.
I'm getting tired to you guys,
so, um, the first of the First
Amendment that you're putting on
here on page 1 line 13, you also
Increasing the 911 emergency
surcharge along.
Inserting there so it's both the
911 and 9988 that will be.
Um, increased in feed. OK,
that's all I'm asking. OK, no,
that's great. Thank you for
that.
Uh, OK. Any other
questionpresentative Brown,
please? Sure.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and,
uh, thank you, Senator and
panel.
Um, I just wanted to go through
the amendments just a little
more uh detail.
It looks like um there would be
a limit on any kind of uh
Annual adjustments by the PRC,
um, that occurs in a couple
places here. I just wanna
confirm that that's part of
what's here um for those who
haven't had a chance to read it,
um, I take, is that correct?
Uh, Mr. Chair Representative,
that is correct. It's up to the
um employee cost index from the
previous year.
Thank you. And um a couple of
little date changes it looks
like, so going from um these
fees being collected in April to
now July. Is that correct?
Mr. Chair representative, that
is correct.
And then just to um clarify, Mr.
Chairman and Senator, um, the
911, uh, fee surcharge would be
going from, I believe it's
currently 51 cents, and that's
billed monthly to $1 billed
monthly. Is that correct?
Mr. Cha and Representative, yes.
Those are my questions. Thank
you. Excellent. Thank you very
much for observe Brown and thank
you for the detailed reading.
OK, well, uh, back to the
amendment
on um.
Section 3
Uh, on your, um,
Subsection B.
The final each application,
petition or complaint, $25. Is
that already in practice or is
that Mr. Chair.
Um, Mr. Chair Representative,
um, you're referring to section
B, subsection B, yes, Mr. Chair.
Uh, Mr. Chair Representative,
yes, that is already in
practice. OK, thank you. Great.
OK, great questions. OK, uh, uh,
any, I don't see any other
questions. Can I have a motion
to adopt House appropriations
and Finance Committee, Amendment
1 to Senate Finance Committee
substitute for Senate Bill 535.
So
they've been moved by
Representative uh Luhans.
taken by Representative Brown in
the opposition to adopting the
amendment, seeing none, we've
adopted the amendment. Anybody
who would like to speak on this
bill, right.
Wow.
Champs for sticking it out here
with all of us, uh, please come
on up.
Mr. Chairman, members of the
committee may take a Sanian
executive director of the New
Mexico Exchange carrier Group,
I'm also a registered lobbyist,
could be members and sponsor,
thank you so much for bringing
this bill forward. The New
Mexico exchange carrier Group
fully supports the 911, um,
surcharge and also the 988.
These are two very important
pieces, um, that not only are
needed in the most rural areas,
but of course all across.
the state, and we ask for your
support. Thank you.
Thank you very much.
Good morning, Mr. Chair and
committee members. My names are
all right, uh, I'm a recent
retiree, um, from Santa Fe
County. I was the GIS manager
there.
Um
The surcharge increase for the
911 is, is absolutely critical
to the state. Um, it hasn't
increased in 36 years. It was a
revenues created, a revenue
stream created to support having
A 911 system statewide. Without
the surcharge increase some of
our smaller municipalities and
counties aren't going to be able
to implement this technology
across the board. It's
absolutely critical. So thank
you for support of that
amendment. Thank you very much.
Good evening or morning, Mr.
Chair, Joyous Parson, executive
director for New Mexico
counties, um, as Mr. Wright
mentioned, this has not been
increased since 1989. Um, that
is a long time in technology has
changed significantly. This has
been a priority for many years
for us to get this increase. It
matters to our PSA and 911, it
matters to GIS and to rule
addressing. This would help us
build out infrastructure for new
cybersecurity changes as well as
next generation technology with
that, thank you for considering
this. Great. Thank you very
much.
go to Eric Masterson online.
Good evening, Mr. Chair, members
of the committee. My name is
Eric Masterson. I'm the fire
chief for Sandoval County and a
member of several of the fire
chiefs associations throughout
the state of New Mexico. The
fire chiefs of New Mexico
strongly support the 911
surcharge increase. We want to
ensure that our 911 partners are
adequately funded throughout the
state of New Mexico and can act
as the 1st 1st responders to
emergencies. Thank you for your
support. Thank you very much.
And we're gonna conclude with
Nicole Brown.
Good evening, Mr. Chair and
committee. I am, and the
director here in Salmon County
of the 911 Center, and I'm also
the vice chair of the 911
affiliate through New Mexico
counties, and I just want to
thank you for the support of the
amendment for the increase for
the 911 surcharge like many have
said before me, it hasn't been
increased since 1989, and we've
really done all we could with
it, and the increase is long
overdue and we appreciate the
support. Thank you. Fantastic.
Thank you. OK, that concludes
public comment.
There any questions from the
committee?
Uh, see, oh yes, Brown, please
and then represent
represent Brown. I'm kind of
chatty this evening, Mr. Chair,
so you're detail we appreciate
very much, Mr. Chairman and
Senator
I like this bill. I, I, I
believe the amendment added to
that part about the um 911
surcharge very much needed. I,
I'm convinced of that, but I
don't like the workers' comp
piece of the bill.
Uh, seeing fee increases there,
so for that reason alone, I will
not be able to vote for the bill
tonight, and I kind of wish we'd
had it all pieced out so we
could vote on those things we
really like. Thank you.
Thank you very much for Duncan.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. I visited
with my county manager and uh.
He is for the 911. I am not for
the uh workers' comp, but just a
question on that senator. So we
started out at 2, now it's gonna
be 2:30.
And the next year it will be 2.
255. Is that correct?
Or am I
I on the wrong thing.
Yeah
Mr. Chair, uh, Representative.
The
Recommended increases are going
to be spread out over a 9 year
period. And so the first
increase would be July 1st of
this year.
The employee contribution will
go up to $2.25 and the employer
contribution will go up to $2.22
dollars 55 cents.
And then in 29, it will go up
we're all tired. I'm very, very
sorry. Um, $2.38 for the
employee to 68 for the employer.
And then in 2034.
Up to 250 for the employee and
280 for the employer.
The assessment fee is not
increased in 35 years.
Um, and
Our agency is not making enough
revenue to support our operating
budget. Uh, we're about.
1.5 million shorts every fiscal
year now, so.
We thought it was time.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Thank you.
So can you tell me what it is
currently then?
The current assessment fee is
$2.
He employee and 2:30 for.
The employer contribution. OK.
You know, we, we, uh, Mr. Chair,
we do enough to small
businesses, and I think we have
money elsewhere, we should have
done this and taken this from,
so.
Thank you.
Great. Thank you very much for
Duncan. OK, I don't see any
other questions. Uh, we'll go to
the vice chair.
For the motion. Thank you, Mr.
Chair. I am so excited that we
are doing this bill because
every time we've had the
commission, uh, for deaf and
hard of hearing, the issue of
the
Fixing this problem comes up,
and I'm so glad that we're
addressing it. So with that, I
move a do pass on Senate Finance
Committee substitute for Senate
Bill 535 as amended. Second, OK,
uh, there's a motion from Vice
Chair Dixon, a second from uh
Representative Hernandez. Uh, is
there any opposition to that
motion?
OK. Uh, please show
representative Baca,
Representative, um.
Duncan represented Brown and
Representative Chatfield in
opposition.
Great
OK.
Uh, all right, members, thanks
so much. Members, we're gonna,
uh, meet tomorrow, I think
probably at 10:30. It'll be our
final meeting, Mr. Chairman, uh,
I just heard that Senator Woods
is coming up for
We're,
we're this is our we are good.
OK, yeah, we, we're, we're all
good.
uh, we, we have a couple other
uh very small priorities, um,
we'll have to do those during
the day. How do folks feel about
10 is 10:30 workable
figure, we're, we're due on the
floor at 9:30. Yeah, it's gonna
be a fluid sort of a floor
session. So I think we'll,
we'll, what we'll do is we'll
work.
it out and I'll, we'll text
folks in the morning. We'll try
to, we'll do it after ideally
after the floor starts so that
we're not getting everybody
here. All right. OK, yeah.
We'll, we'll, we'll work with
everybody's schedule. Thank you
very much. Good night. Good
