and youth conservation Corps.
If that's not why you're here,
you probably belong in 315.
Just to give you a heads up.
So we will start today with the
public regulation commission if
the
Um, analysts and public
regulation commission selected
people to be at the table will
come forward.
And with that, we'll start with
Ms. Rodriguez and Miss Vil.
Uh, good afternoon, members,
Madam Chair and members of the
committee, um, we are going to
get started with the public
regulation commission, uh, the
package should be in your binder
behind tab 4 and it's agency
code 430.
You should have a different
sheet as well as some bullets on
the differences.
So why you all look for that, I
am joined today by Choya Curry.
She's the chief of staff of the
PRC, um, as well as Ariana B.
Hill, the DFA budget analyst for
the PRC.
OK, so if everyone has their
documents. I'm going to get
started, so Ariana and I are
going to do a quick overview of
the differences between the LFC
and the executive
recommendations. Uh, she's also
going to mention some of the
differences between the special
appropriations, um, and then
we're going to pass it over to
the chief of staff for her
remarks.
OK
So if we're all ready, um, so
There's not a huge difference
between the um LFC in the
executive's recommendation for
the agency, um, you're going to
see that the executive
recommended 200.
21,000 more general fund than
the LFC, um, that's roughly a
difference between the executive
recommending a 4.8% increase and
the LFC recommending a 3.1%
increases. Um, some of the
similarities in the other
revenue, um, were both
recommending roughly a 15%
increase for the pipeline safety
fund, um, as well as a small
increase in federal revenue.
Um, as far as the differences,
the differences mostly uh
residing personnel costs, uh,
the executive recommended
168,000 more for personnel, um,
and that's because they are
funding um more FTE than the
LFC.
And then we were both doing
small increases for um vacancies
and general like insurance and
benefit increases.
Um, and then in the other cost
category, that's the other
difference, uh, you'll see that
the DFA recommended 52.88,000
more than the LFC, um, and those
are for kind of day to day
operations. Think of like
regulatory um data regulatory
data platforms, IT services, and
office supplies.
And those are the main
differences within the
reoccurring budget. I'm going to
pass it over to Ariana to talk
about the differences in the
specials, um, and before she
does just a reminder that we are
only doing talking about
specials and informational
purpose.
Good afternoon, Madam Chair,
members of the council. Uh, as
for the special executive and
LFC were in agreement.
For uh two of the specials.
However, there was a discrepancy
on the IT modernization. As uh
the executive recommended 1
million.
Analysy recommended 500,000.
That was the only difference,
um, and with that I will pass it
over to chief of staff.
Good afternoon, Madam Chair,
members of the committee, thank
you so much for the opportunity
to be here and chat with you,
um, I want to introduce some of
our team members who are here
with us real quickly, first and
foremost, our new commissioner,
commissioner Neibert joins us
today.
Also with us are uh our
executive team, and if they just
want to stand so you can see
faces. I want to express our
gratitude because this is the
team that uh helps us pull
together the vision and this,
you know, turning the ship that
we've been working on over the
last 3 years. So thank you all.
Oh
There we go.
So
Our request doesn't look
anything like uh either of the
recommendations, and here's why,
when we met in front of the the
full uh committee in the
interim. Chairman Munoz took our
official request that we
submitted in September.
threw it out, told us to throw
it out, and come back with a
vision that would allow us to do
everything that the PRC is
currently doing, doing that
well, and do all the things that
we're being asked to do, that's
swirling around in this session.
And I just want to help.
Us all understand the things
that are coming to the PRC, the
issues that we're touching. I
just off the top of my head,
created a list and it's economic
development, it's
decarbonization, it's energy
transition, it's grid hardening
and cybersecurity. It's trade
ports, it's rural development,
it's energy affordability, it's
consumer protection, it's
wildfires, and it's electric
vehicles. Those are just off the
top of my head. I'm sure if I
spent a little bit of time
thinking about it, I could add
more.
The point being is we are facing
a precipice in energy regulation
right now and all roads are
leading to the PRC. So when we
took Chairman uh Munoz's advice
and went back to show you what a
vision would be this, that
you're looking at is the vision.
The 20.1 million uh overall,
that's uh both general fund and
other state revenues federal
funds. So our
ask includes 16.3 million in uh
general funded recurring
expenses. We also have a uh
special appropriation
non-recurring request that we
will cover in just a second. Um,
this will allow us to grow at
the appropriate rate and also
provide the services to the
state in an efficient manner
that we have been striving to
do.
So what does that number
include? Well, it includes 17
new FTEs.
That's a lot, I understand, uh,
for that number and for the
number of cases that we hear,
I'm very proud of that number
because last year we saw almost
400 cases. So value per case is
really high with the PRC and
these 17 new FTEs will help us
move those cases through with
better and more scrutiny, uh,
faster, that means more people
means more hands to help with
the work, um, and it also allows
us to take
on the new tasks and the asks
that we have been talking with
all of you and members in this
house about. So, uh, those 17
new FTEs include 5 for a
community solar division, that
is approximately $700,000 and
it's interesting when we saw,
you'll see in our special
appropriation request, $700,000
is what it would take us to
extend our third party
administrator for one year,
$700,000 is also what it would
take.
For us to in-house it and do the
community solar program with our
own staff.
We've asked for 2, positions to
grow our commissioner technical
advisory division, as you've
heard me talk about before, our
agency is essentially split down
the middle. Half of our staff
act as advocacy staff, making
the record in front of the
commission, half of our staff
act as advisory staff, helping
the commission dig through the
thousands, tens of thousands of
pages of record and get to uh
that balancing of the public
interest, so this new division
is really
important to that. The rest of
these these positions of the 17
include a targeted increases in
the Office of General Counsel,
hearing examiners, legal
division, and in the chief of
staff's office so that we can be
efficient so that we can make
sure the assignments are
appropriate given the tasks that
each of us have to do and help
move this agency through those
400 pieces, and by the way, we
do expect an increase in those
cases. We expect to see more.
this year. Uh, it's been, it's
been increasing over the past
several years, the number of
cases we've seen and if even a
fraction of the legislation we
are seeing this year gets
through that number is going to
continue to go up.
The other thing that is in this
vision request that we are
making is $200,000 in the 400
categories to um help us with
additional lease space, as some
of you know, we are currently
housed in a building that is far
too small for us. We couldn't do
a full return to the office,
even if we wanted to, because we
have
Significantly insufficient
square footage to house
everyone. It's also insufficient
as far as our hearing room goes,
so those 400 cases that were
charged with hearing. We don't
really have a place to hear
those matters. We're forced to
do it remotely right now. Um, so
this $200,000 is to assist with
that.
Our special appropriation
non-recurring request, the big
one is IT modernization, and
you've heard me talk about this
now for several years, uh, right
now, our filing system, if you
want to file one of those 400
cases or into one of those 400
cases in front of us. You have
to email one of our staff
members and they download and
then they have to upload it and
that takes time. It's
inefficient and frankly it it
lends itself to human error. So
we have
started the process of replacing
that. We went through the RFP
process. We just selected a
vendor for that and we are ready
to rock and roll.
on a request for information
that we did the previous year to
understand exactly how much it
was gonna take us, and we
weren't far off, uh, the
contract after the RFP and all
of the due diligence turns out
it's gonna need about 2.8
million, um, so what we've done
is come back, uh, we had to
submit our request and still as
we're doing this, um, we thought
a million is the right number
for that special non-recurring
appropriation. And then as it
says, uh, we've had an
Experience going through the
Department of Information
Technology,
uh process to to work through,
uh, what we needed to do to get
this implemented and we were
informed that we need uh an
IBNB, which is a
Something verification, anyway,
we have to have an additional
contract that's going to cost
additional monies on that.
The last piece of this, and you,
you heard me talk about it, the
insufficiency of our current
building. We just met with GSD,
uh, well, over the course of
this week and as late as last
Friday and as early as just a
couple of hours ago and the
building that was selected for
us to move into, not only is it
a um
Less than the full square
footage that we need, it also
Right now, the GST is telling us
there's no money to renovate it,
so we would have to move into it
exactly as it is. It is
currently not a building that is
set up for professionals and not
a building of, excuse me,
professionals like lawyers and
engineers that we have many of
in our agency. It's also not set
up for hearings, so that is a
continuing saga. I mean, new
information comes in almost
moment by moment, so it's been
hard to kind of pinpoint this to
give you the best view of it,
but that's where we're at right
now with our.
building.
So I um am very excited to be
here and talk to you, and I am
happy to stand for questions.
Thank you so much.
Thank you, thank you very much.
We'll go to our panel.
Representative Chatfield.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Welcome
today. Uh, I just wanted to kind
of understand that my, my memory
of the PRC is that it lived
across the parking lot over
here.
And then, uh
You guys were
Moved, I guess, and, and I
thought you were snugly safe and
sound inside of a new building,
uh, provided by the governor.
Uh, did that never happen or is
the new building too little now?
Uh, what just
Because
You know, there's a lot of
things happened since then.
What, what, what happened is,
did you never make it to the new
spot place or is the new place
too little? It's not new.
Absolutely, Madam Chair,
Representative, uh, so the, the
history, the PRC was moved out
of the building across the
street during the pandemic. It
found a lease space in the
Bochum building, which is a
historic building over off of
the plaza, um, we are still
there and that is the place that
we've been, uh, calling home for
the last several years. In 2023,
there was a bill passed to
purchase
GSD purchase a new building for
specifically for the PRC. So
since then, several things have
happened. One, the purchase is
not yet complete, so that has
taken
All these years, uh, the second
is
When that purchase was made in
with the PRC in mind, the PRC
was losing duties. It was losing
staff. We were running at about
a 27, 28% vacancy rate, so size
was much more manageable. Since
then, in those two years since
that bill is passed and that
building was identified, we
gained 13 new positions last
year and we're no longer running
at a 27% vacancy rate. In fact,
uh, as of this week, we're down
to an 8.
8.5% vacancy rate. Last year we
got down to a 3% vacancy rate.
We need people in these
positions to do the job, and we
are successfully filling the
positions to the job. So we've
also grown, so both of those
things, the, the building is uh
small and that's not the
building's fault, we've grown.
So, Madam Chair,
Uh
Is that 8.5% funded vacancy or
8.5% vacancy,
it's a fun vacancy. We have, we
have plans to fill those 8.5% as
soon as, I mean, I mean, my
staff is doing interviews this
week, next week we will be
filling them.
Madam Chair, you're looking for
a, a new home, not to make the,
the one you're looking in now
bigger, you're looking for a new
home.
Madam Chair representative,
that's correct.
Thank you, ma'am.
Representative Fernandez.
Thank you, Madam Chair, and um,
Presenters, uh, first off,
congratulations. I'm really glad
that the governor was able to uh
to secure that, that uh
selection. I know it, it took a
while, but, um, uh, Madam Chair.
The public regulatory commission
was my first introduction to
state government.
Uh, Madam Chair, I, I live in
Northwestern New Mexico.
In my district, I got 2 power
plants. Well, one power plant
now, um, we, we have multiple
energy-related
transmission-related, um, aside
from all the other uh areas, you
know, that, that you mentioned,
uh, Madam Chair that presenters
have mentioned.
Um,
My um experience when, when I
first started, I did not have
internet at home, Madam Chair.
Well, I really appreciated what
the PRC was doing was they would
post their meetings on the
YouTube.
Platform.
That allowed me to go to the um
community college.
They had high-speed internet,
and I was able to download the
PRC hearings onto my device and
take it home and study and
listen and, and play it back
again, Madam Chair, I, I want to
encourage, uh, not only this,
um, uh, you know, body but other
bodies to, to continue that or
to
Uh
I want to encourage the PRC to
continue that. My question,
Madam Chair, is would you be
able to better enhance your
services on the YouTube
platform, um, by, um,
Um,
Chaptering the topics of
discussion to allow for
constituents to jump through
instead of playing a 4-hour,
5-hour YouTube channel and
trying to figure out where
they're gonna talk about the
electric vehicles, where they
can talk about energy
affordability.
So I could just
Find it on the recordings, Madam
Chair, that's my question.
Madam Chair representative, I
think that's a wonderful idea.
We are rethinking all things
technology related at the PRC,
and so I will ask my staff to
look at that and figure out if
that's possible.
Thank you, Madam Chair, the, the
uh role of, of the public
regulatory commission is, is
critical. Um, and so I wanna
make sure that that we uh ensure
that the public participates,
you know, in that, whether
that's in your uh rulemaking or
the other, uh, you know, uh,
Supreme Court cases that come up
because I know those, I know
that's, that's a big part of
that is that legal.
legal uh side of things and so,
um,
The, uh,
The, the area that I'm, I'm kind
of focused on, Madam Chair as a
community engagement. I, I feel
like, what, what are you got,
what is a public record, madam
chair, my, my question is.
How are you guys improving your
community engagement with
community stakeholders who are
impacted by these decisions.
Madam Chair Representative,
thank you for that question
because it's actually one of our
strategic goals at the PRC, uh,
we did a strategic plan last
year, improving those
communications and the
stakeholder engagement and what
we call demystifying what we do,
uh, is really, really important
to us. So one of the things that
we are doing is we, uh, we're
calling it a road show. We are
moving commission meetings
outside of the Santa Fe area.
Uh, our goal, we had
a little hiccup in the computer
last year. Our goal was 5 and
the computer generously doubled
that for us, so, uh, we have in
in the numbers we're we're
aiming to be outside of Santa Fe
10 times. Bud wasn't that era
didn't affect budget, so that
wasn't included, but at least 5
times this year and then we'll
take a hard look and see what
next year brings. That's fiscal
year. So that's one is being
outside of the area. In fact, we
were up in the Farmington area
with an open meeting this past
fall. I expect us to be up there
again.
But in the spring, the other
thing that we're doing one of
these new FTEs is a community
outreach and consumer advocate
position. It's kind of a slash
position, um, to help make sure
that
Our consumers know how to
navigate our processes, know
what the right words are to put
into the complaints that they
have because what we do is very,
very, very technical, and
sometimes that's not always
accessible to the public, so we
want to make sure that we are
accessible to the public. Um,
the other piece of it is we have
taken a hard look at our
website. There are plans to move
things around and make it easier
to find there, um.
And frankly,
We're all ears for any other
suggestions that would would
help us get out there because
that I know myself, the
commissioners and my staff would
love to hear more from the
public. Um, it's just a trial
and error thing until we get it
right.
Ma, um,
I have more questions, but I'm
gonna go offline and uh would
appreciate to uh engage further.
Thank you, manager.
Representative Sarana.
Thank you, Madam Chair and thank
you for your presentation. I
remember when sick um uh chair,
um, you know said to go to do
what you needed to do, so I, I'm
glad you're doing that,
especially in the IT area where
it just seemed kind of uh so
time consuming to do such a
little process, such a such a.
Yes, anyway, um, so I, I, I'm
hoping we can support everything
you're doing, um, because it's
because you are important
organization to us, um, and
actually I've heard this a
couple times, so I don't have
any questions. I just wanted to
make sure you understand that we
are going to try to support you
as much as we can.
Um, so I have a question. I just
want to make sure I understand.
In your current facility, which
is actually temporary. You need
a hearing room to expand,
correct?
Madam chair.
I'm sure we currently have a,
it's a hearing room. Uh, it's
not ideal. It's kind of an
L-shaped right now. We're not
asking for any changes to our
current facility. Um,
We're asking for help making the
building that was authorized to
be purchased in 2023. That's not
yet completed, uh, completely
purchased yet or asking for
money to make that happen, and
then because it is too small,
it's too small by about half.
We're also asking for the
additional recurring that
200,000 in the 400s so that we
can find a solution to house the
rest of our staff.
OK, so the hearing room is an
addition to the building
renovations of the ERB building,
Madam Chair, that is correct.
Thank you. And um I just want to
repeat for everybody's benefit
that we generally take.
Uh, the lower general fund
recommendation, knowing that
we're we're restrained in our
recurring general fund, um, and
we wanna do this to make sure we
can adjust budgets, uh, from
here on out. And obviously we
have to look at your budget.
And so we're flagging that for
our staff to look at.
Um, what you've contributed
today, and that's true of
everybody if there's some major
thing we'll recommend that we
revisit and look with our staff.
So with that said, I'd like to
ask our vice chair to make a
motion.
Adam Cherry moved the LFC
recommendation.
OK, we have a motion from Vice
Chair Soana, 2 from
Representative Hernandez. Is
there anybody who objects to
adopting the LFC budget.
Injections, that's what we will,
um, adopt it this time. Thank
you very much.
And I do want to say that we
miss uh representative.
I.
He stole me.
I told him I was gonna bring him
up and we were gonna really
roast him, but we aren't.
OK. And next we will have
Spaceport Authority come up.
Uh, Madam Chair, um, so now
we're moving over to the
Spaceport Authority. Um, it's
gonna be behind tab 4 in the
business unit is 495.
Um, the first page.
Shouldn't have
A breakdown of the um the two
requests, or sorry, the two
recommendations.
So if we're all there, um,
So the executive recommended uh
more general fun than the LFC,
roughly 82.8,000 more, um, the
difference is not significant
when we're talking about a
percentages to the executive
recommended a 2% increase in the
general fund revenue while the
LFC recommended a flat budget um
for the general fund.
Uh, you'll also see in the
revenue side that both
recommendations reflect a
decrease in other revenues of
roughly 900,000, and that's due
to um a reduction in user fees
primarily from Virgin Galactic.
Uh, you'll also see that there's
a difference between the
recommendations for the fundal,
um, as you recommended 500,000
while the executive recommended
1.2 million, so roughly a
difference of 670,000 and that's
to offset decreased revenue that
or the anticipated decrease
revenue for FY 26.
Um, as far as the actual uses,
the main differences are in
personnel and in the other cost
category, with the executive
recommending slightly more in
personnel. Um, I will note that
the agency requested uh overall
decrease in personnel and so the
difference is that the executive
recommended 11 additional FTE
while the LFC just took the
agency's request, um, so if
you're looking at the numbers
and wondering why that's what's
going on there, um, and then the
other cost category.
The LSC's recommendation took
the what the agency requested,
which was a overall decrease in
the other cost category, um, and
you'll see that the executive
recommended a slight increase,
um, to get them up to the FY 25
operating numbers.
Um, and those are the main
differences between the two
recommendations.
Um, and now I'll pass it over to
Monica to talk about the
differences between these
specials.
Madam Chair, members of the
committee.
Um
Both the executive and the LFC
recommended the deficiency and
supplemental requests to come
from.
I'll now pass it over to
director Pick Lotley.
Excuse me, Madam Chair and
representatives, if, if you, uh,
if I can give a short
presentation, if that'd be loud.
OK. And I don't know if it's on
the screen yet, um.
OK, looks like, so I just
prepared a very short slide, and
then I'd be happy to take some
questions.
So, um,
So I wanted, I wanted to zoom
out for a while. I think unlike
a lot of state agencies, you
can't understand the spaceport
unless you understand what's
going on in the space community,
um, we're really unique project.
We're really neat um asset to
the state.
And uh so I wanted to zoom out
and kind of tell you what some
of the current thinking is of
what's going on in space right
now. So, on page 2, I've got
something I called space ages,
and if you look at this, this is
kind of what the current
thinking is in the aerospace
community right now. Um, Space
10 1.0 was us going to space for
the very first time, it was a
Saturn 5, it was, it was, uh,
um, it was a race to the moon.
It was uh done in, in with uh
NASA who was a civil agency, but
they were kind of a military.
sort of side of it, we wanted to
beat the Russians, and we made
it to the moon and believe it or
not, that's almost 60 years ago,
um, and after that, we went to
the moon a few more times and
then we took all the technology
and we kind of threw it away,
uh, which was kind of sad. And
then we moved on to space 2.0,
which is the space shuttle,
which was this attempt at reuse,
and instead of fighting with the
Russians, we started depending
on the Russians together. So
that picture you see right there
is taken from the Mir space
station, if you remember the
Russian space station, and it's
taking a picture of
another space station with the
US space shuttle. And during
that era, it was still pretty
much all government. There was a
lot of cooperation between us
and, and the Soviet Union. Uh,
and we began to be very reliant
on space. We, we started with
the GPS. So that was when GPS
started, this idea that we could
um do what's called um precision
navigation and timing from space
and and uh and that was a new
thing, and now we all have it on
our phones, we have it in our
cars, and every financial
system.
in um in the in the world uses
GPS and uses precision
navigation and timing, our, our
financial system would not work
without a GPS systems.
And then what happened in the
80s, the federal government
allowed for there to be
commercial space, and that, and
that's what I'm calling Space
3.0, and that is what allowed
Spaceport America exists, so a
federal rule that allowed people
to build rockets that allowed a
state like New Mexico to build a
spaceport, and that created, um,
allowing private industry and to
do things and what I'm showing
there with all those pictures,
those are all current launch
systems that are now available
to the United States. That
includes vir
galactin origin with some of
their um suborbital, but if you
look at the other, other things
that are going on, um, it's just
amazing what we can do as a
country right now, and we are
the leader, the United States is
the leader in space, but just
like the transcontinental
Railroad just like whenever
transportation becomes cheaper,
it opens up an incredible amount
of new activity, and this space
3.0 is uh the amount of money
that's being put in, the amount
of things that are going on is
incredible. And the other thing
that's changed is we're no
longer just reliant on space. A
few years ago, we created the
Space Force, and part of the
reason we created the Space
Force is because you can no
longer win on the ground unless
you can win in space. Um, it is
now a warfighting domain. It's
considered one of the top
priorities of the Department of
Defense. They're concerned about
launch sites, they're concerned
about satellites, they're the
space force is concerned about
shipping cargo all across the
world quickly and, and that's
on, that's on the DOD side,
right? But on the other side,
we're also going back to the
moon, and there's a
company that we just talked
about um in the news just a few
weeks ago about the asteroid
they've selected to do their
first fly by so they can start
working on asteroid mining. So
that's the, the zoom out. And if
you look in the lower right,
there's a recent Wall Street
Journal article about how
there's not enough spaceports in
the country, and um that's
because the amount of launches
that are occurring at the Cape
right now is about 1 every 3
days. So I just wanted to zoom
out so you could sort of get a
sense for where the spaceports
fit fits in. Um.
So, if we go on to the next
page,
Um, page 3, these are recent
titles, um, out of articles
online in newspapers about the
other states. Probably the
biggest one is that Texas set up
something called the Texas Space
Commission, and they put about
350 million in it. This is more
money than the state of New
Mexico even put into the
spaceport. Um, they're doing
things with their university,
and then they have all kinds of
grants they're doing for all
around the country for either
spaceports or aerospace, um, for
universities, for um a
spaceport. If you look kind of
in the lower right
or in the middle of the right,
the Texas Space Commission
awards $19 million to the
Borderplex Alliance to look at
aerospace development in a
corridor between El Paso and um
and the Midland, Texas. So all
these are just to demonstrate
what I just said on the previous
page is what is happening in
space.
And it's continuing, so.
Um,
So what are we doing? What are
we doing at the spaceport and
how are we progressing? So, of
course, moving on in the future,
our biggest thing is to see
Virgin Galactic fly. They,
they're working on their two new
spaceships, and they should be
back later on this year to do
testing and we expect them to be
back in operations in 2026. Um,
we are, we have increased
significantly our, our outreach
to economic development
organizations, whether it's the
Middle Rio Grande or in El Paso
or area in Albuquerque, and
we're working very hard to build
up what
we're trying to call Space
Valley several officer calling
it Space Valley now between El
Paso and Los Amos are even
bigger. Um, one of the things
we're working on right now, we
hope to sign very soon as a new
40-year lease with the state
land office. Um, we have 3 or 4
customers right now that want to
sign 30 or 40 year leases, are
current lease with the state
land office expires in 7 years,
and so they're unwilling to
commit the money until they know
they can lease the land for that
long. So that's a good thing.
The other thing we're working on
is orbital entry license, so a
lot of what's going up, um, some
of it's gonna
come back down again, so we're
working on an ability to land uh
both capsules and other winged
vehicles at the spaceport, that
license was submitted to the FAA
in September and we're working
through environmental things
right now.
We are continuing to build
infrastructure that's important
to be site ready, even at the
spaceport. um, and that means a
lot when we can have someone
come in and use a hanger right
away.
And the other things that we're
really trying to do is to be
more of a leader in terms of the
strategic direction for the
state. There's a lot of
uncoordination or barely
coordination, you know, all the
way from El Paso to Albuquerque
and trying to get us all working
together, um, and I'll give you
an example like the Huntsville,
the US Air Force headquarters
being in Huntsville, Alabama as
opposed to Colorado Springs or
Albuquerque who tried for that
several years. The only way
we're going to bring in those
sort of things is if we work
together, and it's important
that we start
Doing that. So the spaceport
we're trying to take a bigger
lead in trying to do that
because we understand what's
going on in the market, probably
more than most people, although
we do have really good partners,
um, on North and South.
So, uh, just again, uh, moving
forward on page 5, I have the
budget there in case we have any
questions, but, uh, Julia
already uh talked about that,
um, Mariant already talked
about, so, so I'm happy to take
any questions as, as she noted,
I was looking for a STEM
workforce coordinator, um, to
add to our staff, I think that's
really important, so I still
would like to see if that can be
worked out. And then on the last
page, uh,
I want to share the capital
project status, um, you all
allowed for a full-time
equivalent for me to have a
capital projects manager, uh, a
couple of years ago, that has
made a huge difference. We're
now um moving very quickly,
our analysis of where we are
right now is we have 67% of
everything that's been allocated
to us, um, committed, and we
will have the remainder of that
committed in the next, um,
several months to a year and a
half or some of the smaller
projects, but we're able to move
much quicker now because of
having a full-time person to
work.
Um capital projects and that
chart is kind of a I chart, but
the colors uh demonstrate where
we are in some of those uh
projects if you want to talk
about it. And the very last page
is just we, we had our first
open house in several years. So
that's one of the pictures of
the open house. It was very well
attended. We had about 2000
people. We're going to continue
to do that every year if the
weather holds, and we can do it
with the customer and uh with
our customers with Virgin
Galactic who partnered with us
on, on that. Um, so we hope to
do that every year and we're
going to try and advertise it a
little more.
so people know to come down and
visit the spaceport. So, all
right, thank you very much and
I'll be happy to have any
questions.
00, excuse me, one more thing is
we put our 2nd annual report on
your desk, so this gives you a
much broader view of many of the
things we're working on and
we're trying to get that out
once a year, and if there's
anything more that you'd like to
see in that, or have any
questions, please let me know.
Thank you very much.
OK, thank you, Mr. McLaughlin.
Representative Baca.
Thank you, Madam Chair and thank
you for your presentation. I'd
really like to ask about Rosal
fact or fiction, but we'll save
that for another time.
Um, I'm sure.
Uh, one of the things that I was
look at this, the, the revenues.
Can you tell me as far as the
decrease in activity, as you
said at the Cape there launching
one every 3 days or so.
Tell me what's going on with you
guys as far as
Uh,
the launches or where we are
with that because obviously, I
mean, I, I would assume or maybe
you can just tell me.
The decrease in revenues
expenditure.
Some Adam chair and
representative Baca, the, the
decrease in revenues are
primarily from Virgin Galactic
that they just, they're building
two new brands, brand new
spaceships, so they've launched,
uh, I think 7 times in the last
year and a half where it's
almost the last 2 years now,
they put about 30/30 new people
in the space. Um, but the
spaceship that they took to
space takes time to reprocess
that vehicle when it comes back
down and, and to call it a
prototype, I think is probably
too strong of a word, but it
was the first article type of
approach to operations, and so
what Virgin Galactic did is they
pulled back and they worked on
designing a spaceship that um
can be maintained easier, can be
turned around easier. So as part
of that, they paused the
operations at the spaceport and
with our agreement with them,
they're able to pause some of
the payments on the user fees
that they would have normally
paid to be able to go to space.
So that is the main drop. Other
forms of revenue from other
customers is actually going up,
but that's
such a key part of the revenue
um that that was what dropped
for us. The other part of your
question is that what's going on
at the Cape is, of course, is
getting to go to orbit, and
that's the most important thing,
and so that's something we're
working very closely on with
several partners we've had to
visits by DOD folks who are
starting to look at the
spaceport as a possible orbital
launch site, that means that an
orbital vehicle would have to be
safer, you know, normally when a
vehicle goes to space now, it
might just blow up. They'll blow
it up if something happens, or
they can turn.
innate thrust and it falls into
the ocean. Well, you can't do
that if it's gonna fly over the
continental US, you've got to be
able to do things. So that's our
approach to trying to bring them
in is, is to show them that um
that those views, something will
have to happen in terms of the
technology for the vehicles to
be safer and people are starting
to look at that, but because of
the congestion at those other
spaceports, they're starting to
look at New Mexico as a possible
place to launch, but in that
other page that I showed you
from all the other states, the
other states are also pursuing
space.
reports and getting involved in
that business too. But we should
see revenue go up in 2026 or
sometime in 2025 when Virgin
Galactic starts, um,
Finding him, and the other part
of that piece of the revenue is
Virgin Galactic announced that
they're going to build a launch
hangar at the spaceport and
there are lease fees associated
with that that we should see
sometime later this year.
Oh, Madam Chair, thank you.
Thank you, Madam Chair. My last
question is just a very simple
question. How many launches did
we have in this last calendar
year of 24.
Or if any
So Madam Chair and
Representative, I can get you
the number. I think it was 2
from urging lay in terms of
going to space, and we've also
had uh two launches from another
customer suborbital launches.
The forecast for Virgin Galactic
with the new spaceships is in
that 2026 sometime they will
start launching approximately
twice a week or more, so their
goal is 125 launches a year.
Thank you, Madam Chair.
Representative Little.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Thank
you so much for the presentation
this afternoon. Um, I'd like to,
uh, explore if you would please
elaborate, Madam Chair, on the,
uh, on page 4,
would you elaborate on the third
bullet, the 40 year lease with
the state land office to provide
stability for customers. Would
you elaborate on what that is,
please.
So Madam Chair and
Representative Little, so the
spaceport is built on
approximately 18,000 acres of
state trust land. Um, that was a
very fortuitous thing that that
large tract of land existed
where it did and which is
underneath the US Army White
Sands missile range airspace,
which gives us a distinct
advantage and, and in terms of
our operations over other
customers, that lease was a 25
year lease that was signed, um.
Um, approximately 18 years ago.
So we're reaching the end of
that lease since then, a couple
of things have happened. One is
that uh by statute, there are
now 40 year economic leases that
are no longer 25 year economic
leases. So we've been in
negotiations with the state land
office to uh convert that 25
year lease, we could have waited
a few more years for it to
expire, but we have uh a couple
of customers, Virgin Galacti
being one of them and another
one that wants to be on site for
a data server farm and another.
the one that that is already on
site, um, as a satellite uh uh
reception site. They want longer
leases, they want to sign 30 or
40 year leases for that tract of
land. So this is something we
needed to work out with the
state land office, so we'd have
that ability, so I'm hoping that
we sign literally any day now
and uh we've been working on
this for quite a long time, so
I'm happy to have any other and
giving you more details. So
thank you.
Thank you very much, Madam
Chair. Uh, this is a very clear
cause I, I
When I hear of the state land
office, I'm usually thinking of
other uses for it, not.
Specifically, the customers, so.
I'm not sure why, but I was
thinking animals grazing, maybe
some other, some other uses, so
this makes it very clear. Thank
you. Um, and, uh, this is my
second question is on the
orbital re-entry license. So,
um, are those established
because apparently it looks like
uh.
You're planning for those uh
licenses, Madam Chair, to be
issued.
In 2020 this year, later this
year or in 2026. So is that, I
guess the second part of my
question would be, is that in
part to make up for the
difference of the Virgin
Galactic uh pause.
Oh, it's a man of chair and
represented Little so it's, it's
interesting the way the FA
licenses things, but when the
spaceport was originally
created, we had to go through a
a large environmental impact
statement and many other things
to get, uh, to satisfy the FAA
in terms of having what is
called a launch site operator
license, and that allows us to
launch horizontally and
vertically, um, to suborbital or
orbital, and actually we're one
of the few commercial spaceports
that can do both, launch
vertically or launch horizon.
finally, um, in the last several
years though, we've realized
that there is a need for
capsules to come back to Earth,
and these are commercial
capsules, these aren't
government, although the Boeing
Starliner did land in the White
Sands twice in the last few
years, just literally over the
mountain from us. So what we're
doing is we're simply trying to
open up a new market for us that
we can accept vehicles at the
spaceport that have launched
from another location but can
land at um Spaceport and those
could be wing vehicles like the
Sierra.
Dream Chaser.
Who we've been, uh, we have an
MOU with them, uh, from a couple
of years ago. So this will be
the first winged vehicle since
the space shuttle that is gonna,
it's gonna actually launch
vertically. It's a small
relatively small vehicle, but
it's gonna land on wheels, it's
the only vehicle that's gonna
land on vehicles, and part of
what makes that really
interesting is uh there's
another company that has a
capsule who we've talked to.
They're manufacturing drugs in
space. And so these are drugs
that can only be mixed in
microgravity, you get a much
better result if you can mix
those in space, create them.
space, so they've they're
constructing factory capsule
spaceships, FDA certified,
believe it or not, that can go
to space and then they can land
after they've been up there for
a while doing what they're
doing. VAA, in fact, has already
announced that they're gonna
land on Australia,
unfortunately, so we're pursuing
customers like that, uh, Sierra
Space is interesting again
because they land on wheels,
they come down very softly, so
they're also pursuing markets
and manufacturing and also to be
an ambulance for those in space.
So it's really not as a result.
the Virgin Galactic's reduction
and, and lease or user fees is
simply us just pursuing another
market. And, and again, we have
to do the same kind of thing we
did with the launch license with
the FAA, we have to go to them,
we have to talk about
environmental concerns and
everything, so that's where we
are right now. We've submitted
the application, they've come
back with questions. We're doing
some environmental um assessment
updates. We hope to get all
those questions answered, even
if we have to do a few more
studies, and then we're hoping
to get a license for that either
later this year.
early next year.
They
Thank you, ma'am sure, that's
the last was my last question.
Thank you.
Thank you, Representative
Herndon.
Thank you, Madam Chair, and
thank you presenters. You know,
as we've been talking about
making sure
That we are growing our own in
this state. Do you have uh
interns in your facility?
Um, madam chair and
representative Herden right now
we do not. We have had some,
we've had high school interns
based on the summer intern
program, which was uh very good.
I appreciate that and we had a
couple of interns last year, um,
at the Spaceport, but we don't
have any right now. Um, it's
just a question of having uh
the, the bandwidth sort of to
deal with that, but we are
talking about them having some
for the summer.
Man. Oh, that's good to hear.
Thank you. Thank you, Madam
Chair.
Thank you. And, and Mr.
McLaughlin, I just have one
question. Is Virgin Galactic
still building their astronaut
uh facility that they've talked
about Mad Madam Chair, uh, the
astronaut training facility, I
think was, was slated to be up
in tier seat, I think that's
also on pause. I think they're,
their goal is to get the new
spaceships and the fly and
generate revenue. I think once
they're back in normal
operations, which will be a new
normal. It will be flying a
couple of times a week or more,
then I think they're
considering.
Other options for training
because the throughput,
literally will have 2 or 3
cohorts of future astronauts
running through the spaceport
doing their training. It's about
a 3 or 4 day training per
cohort, they'll have 2 or 3 of
those at the same time in the
region in Las Cruces TRC, so I'm
not sure exactly what their
plans are, but I think they are
looking at options to expand,
but I think for the moment that
that facility they were going to
build in TRC is on a pause.
But they are working with us,
and we expect to announce soon
the lease for the new launch
hanger, which is an approximate
$30 million project that will be
at the spaceport, the taxpayers
are not building that launch
hanger, that's going to be
Virgin Galactic building that
launch hanger and that allows
them to fuel the spaceship and
do everything they need to do to
the, the carrier aircraft and
the spaceship, um, outside of
the weather, normally they've
been doing that on the runway,
uh, right before they fly and
now they'll be able to do it in
this launch hanger, so we expect
them to be working on that
sometime when.
I hope the next 60 days.
Thank you. And as I recall,
there was one
Current company that was
considering manufacturing at
Spaceport. Has anything come of
that?
Madam Chair, that we have uh 3
high altitude platform system
companies that are working out
of the spaceport. These are 3
different vehicles that fly
between 60,000 ft and 80,000 ft.
Um, they're able to use our very
unique airspace. They, they fly
using batteries and solar power,
and they're designed to be up 60
days to 6 months at a time. One
of those companies has expressed
an interest in manufacturing
locally. Um, there are all three
of those companies are trying to
certify their vehicles with the
FAA and so they have not gotten
to that point, so we haven't
gotten to the point where we're
talking deeply about
manufacturing, but we are still
working with that, and we hope
that that will happen.
Thank you. Um, uh, one more
question, Representative Brown.
Thank you, Madam Chair, Mr.
McLaughlin. I have a question
for you regarding the road that
leads to spaceport that most
people travel, um.
question is, is that road in
good condition now, or is there
some maintenance work that's due
on that, and you.
The Madam Chair and
Representative Brown, I really
appreciate that question. Um,
that there's obviously two
routes to Spaceport, one from
the north, one from the south.
The one from the north has
previously existed um at the
spaceport, and it's in fairly
good shape, um, it doesn't have
a great shoulders, but it's in
OK shape. The road south of the
spaceport that leads from I-25
toward cruis to the spaceport is
not in very good shape. Um, it
wasn't really built to the spec
that it probably should have
been and so we've had lots of
water.
problems, um, bubbling literally
water sometimes bubbling up
through the pavement. We have
been working with the Department
of Transportation and Sierra
County and Donana County and the
state land Office in BLM to try
and get that road transferred to
the Department of Transportation
who said they would accept that
road, barring some trades with
other roads having to do with
Sierra County and Donana County.
Unfortunately, that's been
turning into a really long
process, like multi-year
process.
Um, Sierra County really doesn't
have the money to, to do all the
maintenance they need to do on
that road, just even mowing. So
if you drive on that road, you
will have uh mesquite and bushes
right next to you on the road,
and also some of the repairs for
the water issue are gonna, are
gonna have to take some more
re-engineering, so we're a
little worried about that road.
I'm still hoping that we can get
that transfer done in the
Department of Transportation can
start working on it, but again,
it's kind of bogged down, and I
don't have a good answer for you
where it is. I, I can try and
find
that for you if you'd like, I
I'm sure.
Go to Mr. Mc. I'm always
interested in having better
roads in New Mexico, so I think
I'm on transportation committee
as a few other members are, and
I think it'd be good for us to
have that information, so I'd
appreciate that.
Uh, do you have a, a madam
chair, Mr. McLaughlin, a dollar
figure in mind of what would be
needed to actually bring that
road up to snuff.
I'm Madam Chair and
Representative Brown, I don't
have a dollar figure, we thought
that that road would have been
transferred by now and that
Department of Transportation
would take over the maintenance
and in any rehab. So we have not
tried. The spaceboard doesn't
technically own the road even
though the money flew flowed
through us to get it built. So I
really don't have a number for
you on that. I don't even know
if I know how to calculate that
number, but sorry.
Thank you, Madam Chair.
And Representative for one
second question. Yes, thank you
so much, madam, for allowing me
to ask the second question. Um,
uh, my question is in relation
to uh the job opportunities that
have been uh created um at
Spaceport. Can you uh briefly
tell us how many jobs I'm
looking at the performance
measures summary here, and I'm
wondering how, how, um, that
effort is going.
And if you could give us like a
few brief uh points on markers
that you have and perhaps the
types of jobs since we're
talking locally. Thank you.
Yeah, I'm Adam chair and
represented little of the, we
did uh with the NMSU Center for
Border Economic Development, and
we did an economic impact, um,
report for 2022. I have a copy
if anybody wants a copy. Uh, we
are not working on one for 2023,
so I can't give you the 2023
numbers, but the 2022 numbers
were 811 jobs that were due to
the spaceport and that was uh
direct indirect and induced, and
that also brought in the
spaceport also brought in $60
million of new money.
To the area, and I think about
$13 million in generated tax
revenues. So we expect that to
go up for 2023, both in terms of
uh jobs and revenues on all
counts, it will probably go down
a little bit for 2024 because of
Virgin Galactic's pause, but
Virgin Galactic still has
approximately 180 employees just
by themselves that are living
and working in the area.
And the jobs that are there,
it's a mix of, you know, office
jobs and and things, but they
have a, a large number of uh
what they sometimes call space
wrenches, the, the technicians,
the high, the well, very well
trained technicians who work on
the spaceship and the
spacecraft, and then also a lot
of engineers who are doing the,
a lot of the operations and of
course pilots who I think so,
um, we haven't looked into
detail at at the kind of the
fingerprint of the jobs, but we,
we do categorize it in terms of
aerospace.
Which means there are a lot of
high paying jobs and a lot of
good support jobs. So we do
expect that to go up.
Unfortunately, a lot of our
other customers that you see,
even the ones who are leasing,
they come and they do tests and
then they go away and then they
come and do tests and then they
go away. So we're not generating
on those customers, the kind of
jobs I think we'd all like,
which is a permanent present. So
we're just continuing to push,
um, again, making our, our site
site ready, trying to get
companies to come in and move
and stay and we're very focused
on those kinds of customers, but
I do expect Virgin Galactic's,
uh, uh, payroll, so to speak,
the number of employees to start
creeping up as they bring in the
two new spaceships and they get
ready to go to operation.
And Representative Hernandez for
one more quick question.
Uh, thank you, Madam Chair.
What's your, your relationship
with our rural airports and I'm
Madam, I'm thinking about, um,
the airports in my, in, in
northwestern New Mexico, um,
seeing this is nice new
facility. You're gonna get more
new, new stuff, Madam Chair. I'm
just thinking, is there anything
that can be like a hand me down
to one of the rural airports.
Thank you, Madam Chair.
A man of chair and
Representative Hernandez, I
don't know exactly what the hand
me downs could be at this point.
I, I, I get the, the your
question though, um, we, uh, you
know, where, where it's
interesting that your question
that opens up another little can
of worms that, for example, in
Florida, the, the Florida,
what's called Space Florida,
which is their equivalent of
kind of what we do is actually
in the Department of
Transportation cause they
consider this a transportation
mode, um, and there's been some
talk about sometime in the
future that
The spaceport might might be
somewhere there because it is a
transportation mode. We are
focused on uh grants from the
government. There are grants in
the Department of Transportation
and, and hopefully through the
FAA we've been working through
that, but at the moment, I don't
know of anything we can hand
down, so sorry about that. I.
You know, further questions, I
can or vice chairs.
Thank you, Madam Chair. I move
the LFC recommendation.
Military 2nd
a motion from Vice Chairarana,
secondir representativeakca, at
there any objections to adopting
that.
I see, but
You know, objections, that's
what we'll adopt. Thank you very
much for the presentation.
Thank you.
Our next presentation is from
the livestock Board.
Um, and that will be agency 508.
Page 200.
And 9 in volume 2.
And we have um.
Mr. Sanchez and Miss Tavia.
Good afternoon, Madam Chair,
members of the committee. My
name is Scott Sanchez. I'm the
LFC analyst for public safety.
Uh, today we'll be looking at
the budget for the New Mexico
Livestock Board Agency code 508.
You can look in your volume 2s,
and you'll see this beginning on
page 210.
The LFC recommendation increases
general fund appropriations to
the Livestock Board by
$329.2,000 or 6.5% over FY 25,
whereas the executive increases
it by 2.7 million or 53.4%.
The LFC recommendation also
keeps the use of fund balance
flat with FY 25.
And brings in slightly higher
other revenue.
Where is the executive
recommendation omits the use of
fund balance.
I'll talk a little bit about the
livestock program before I hand
it over to Monica for the meat
inspection division, oh, and
sorry, I wanted to mention, I'm
here with Belinda Garland, the
director of the Livestock Board,
and Monica Tapia, my counterpart
from the Department of Finance
and Administration, also in the
audience, Deputy Director Sean
Davis and the new uh meat and
poultry inspection program
director Eddie Behrens.
Um, for the livestock inspection
program, the LFC recommends
adding $329.2,000. So all of the
new general fund money in the
budget, um, whereas the
executive ads approximately $2.1
million to this program.
The LFC recommendation includes
funding for equipment
replacement, audit services, and
other costs.
Where's the executive
recommendation adds
approximately 1.1 million per
personnel to the LFC's
recommendation did not support.
The executive also adds about
$8.4,000 to the contractual
services category and 241.7,000
to the other cost category.
With that, I'll hand it to
Monica to talk a little bit
about the executive's investment
in the meat inspection program.
Madam Chair and members of the
committee, uh, the meat
inspection is P 686. The meat
inspection program with the New
Mexico Livestock Board was
created in fiscal year 2022, and
is supported with a 100% general
funds as a service to consumers.
The Livestock Board is now ready
to reestablish the program after
needed changes were made in
legislation once the program is
established and staff is
trained, this program will
generate revenue and will be
eligible to receive federal
match funding.
Executive recommendation totals
1.6 million and increase of
594,000 or 5 56.5 over the FY 25
operating budget, all in general
fund. The executive recommends
the contractual services
category and the other services
category both flat to the FY 25
operating budget.
I will now pass it over to
director Garley.
Thank you, Scott, Monica, Madam
Chair, members of the committee,
I am Belinda Garland. I'm the
executive director for the New
Mexico Livestock Board. We do
have two divisions in our agency
now, uh, we have the livestock
inspection program, um, Mr.
Shawn Davis is our deputy
director. He is our chief law
enforcement officer. He oversees
all of that type of field
activity, um, those are the
inspectors that verify ownership
whenever they do inspection on
livestock, they also verify.
inspections when cattle and
livestock are being imported
into the state. We are a rare uh
breed within our nation, our
state veterinarian is housed in
our agency, which gives her
access to a whole staff of field
agents to help her in the event
of an outbreak. Um, this past
summer, we did have two task
force on the avian flu that out
broke in the dairy industry. Um,
we went door to door in the
eastern part of the state
canvas.
looking for any sick fowl that
was out there advising all of
the people who owned any type of
poultry and fowl, what to look
for and what to watch for in
their flocks and in order to
help control that outbreak. So
that was a very successful task
force that um actually helped
contain that outbreak. Um, it
was actually over in Texas and a
little bit in the eastern part
of the state, but we did contain
it, we did save that poultry
farm.
down there, which is vital to to
the poultry industry.
Um, so,
Just to talk about that portion
of portion of our agency. What I
was asking for on our um budget
increase was an increase of
salaries. We work closely with
uh state personnel over this
past year in order to do proper
placement of all of our staff.
We've worked to move some of
them, but we don't have enough
funding to change all of our
field staff to get them the
proper placement for this this
million dollars was to do that
proper placement to move them
off of the.
bottom of the pay schedules and
get them out of poverty level
because we feel that they are
experts in their field.
The other of the $25,200. We do,
we have inflation costs on our
contracts. We contract
inspectors for busy times of the
year, and maybe in the times
that we have somebody retire or
vacated position. Also, it's for
our IT. We're very proud of our
IT for our field inspection
processes were kind of envied
across the nation. Most of our
inspections are on IT on the
tough pads, and we still are
moving the sale barns to that
type of.
platform, but we're very close
to having that completed.
When the USB recommended and
required that new tags be placed
in livestock's ears instead of
the metal tags or the hi fi tags
that can be read now with wands,
um, we merged that into our
inspection program very
effectively, and it's working
quite well. It's working at the
sale barns, they're using it
very effectively.
The 304,000 is actually just
inflation costs for buying,
operating, and repairing
vehicles. We don't have a lot of
office space that we pay for. We
have about approximately 1516
people in our office. Our
offices are rolling down the
highway on tires. That's our
expense for office space. So,
um, and what used to cost us
30,000 for a pickup is now
costing us 55,000. So it's very
expensive to buy vehicles.
The other, um, division of our
agency began last year with the
good graces of all of the
legislators here and last year,
the ones that were present. We
had 100 100% support on both
houses to pass the new meat
inspection and poultry
inspection bill. So we're very
proud of that program after that
bill was passed, we were
fortunate enough to find Mr. Ay
Barons. He is our new director
for that program. We are, we are
moving that forward. He
immediately began.
To learn the regulatory side of
this program. He's working with
FSIS to get us compliant, which
is part of the requirement
within that statute that was
passed. Uh, we have just um come
over a big hurdle. It's called a
side by side comparison. We have
to be at least equal to in that
program, and we got to, to go on
that the other day, and we're
very proud of the hard work that
Mr. Barrons did on that.
So now we have a other
components that we have to work
through, um, we're moving
forward and all of that. We have
a deputy director hired, uh,
she's moving from another state
program, so she has a lot of
regulatory experience and we're
excited to get her on board.
She'll be here in about a month.
So we believe this program's
gonna stand up. Um, the
increases that I was have here
on the presentation is we have
about $400,000 to begin hiring
inspectors and.
them in the plants that want to
go under the in-state meat
inspection program.
125,000 to increase on um
contracts that really is
basically what we feel we need,
we needed the first year. We
have to set up our computer
programs to be read and comply
with FSIS. It has to go into
their program. So we're gonna
need some high tech people in
the IT field in order to get
this done for us. Um, the
475,000 will be also just um I
think the
first year will be a lot of
travel and training. They FSIS
requires that these inspectors
have lengthy training in order
to stand in these plants because
they're inspecting food that
will put safe products out there
for the consumers. That's
extremely important for this
program.
So if you would just give me the
honor, um, I wanna recognize the
New Mexico cattle birds are
here, Mr. Tom Patterson and
Michelle Pfeiffer, they're here
with the Mexico categories. This
is a very important program for
all the livestock producers,
they're here to support us for
the um request for increase in
our budget. We need to show FSIS
that the state has buy-in into
this program and that we're
willing to move forward with it.
So with that, I stand for
questions.
Thank you, and we'll start with
Representative Chatfield.
Thank you, Madam Chair. I
promise not to, um, tell my
story about the shipping the
corn out and the cattle out and
find it back then. I've told uh
uh before every agency that
comes up till, uh, she, she was
wanting to give it for me the
other day, I think.
But, but it is true.
Uh
So
This is not something that has
happened in a vacuum. First, we
established a
A uh position that New Mexico
State.
That would help people put in
packing houses.
In this state.
Uh,
Secondly,
We started to run the in-state
beef inspection. We, we funded
uh
We funded people that had
packing houses and they wanted
to increase the size of them.
6 years ago, we began to run
this bill to for in-state beef
inspections. I read it, I could
tell I read it representative
Armstrong read it. We hammered
on it. We, we chiseled on it. We
made it.
Uh, fit, and we made it where it
was good and now we have a
completely passed it. You all
have promulgated rules. We've
worked on this thing. We've got
it down. We, we understand what
we need to do, and we understand
how to do it.
Now, when we set it up and we
begin doing it, and we begin
doing it right in the feds are
gonna pay for it.
So
Um
You know, I think we need to
Get on down the road, it's
important to the economy of our
state.
It's important to the consumers
of our state.
And it's important to just the
American people that we'd be
able to produce our own food and
consume our own food, uh.
So much, I would, I
A lot of numbers floating around
here about different things that
are happening, I would ask that
we flag this agency and that we
set up a
A task force to discuss their
budget and come to a number
that's appropriate to get this
thing rolling.
Thank you, Madam Chair.
And thank you, Representative.
We're gonna flag that cause we
adopt the lower one, but then we
flag it. Um, next question is
representative Pettigrew.
I
Duly noted, uh, several members
of this subcommittee would like
to be on that, and I wanna do a
shout out to Representative
Chatfield because we came in 7
years ago, and he's been working
on this for 7 years, so it does
take time to get things done.
And I also want to thank the
cattle growers, um, they send
out invitations. I've never been
able to go. I know some of my
colleagues have been able to go,
um, it's on my mind but
something always comes up, but
thank you for reaching out to
our legislators to educate us.
can't get too much education,
and oh, representative Herndon
and Representative Brown. Thank
you, Madam Chair and thank you
presenters. You know, as I look
at, at the, the different seat
and the page that talks about
our performance measures. It
says here the number of stolen
or missing livestock recovered,
and every year it's been 850. So
how many have we lost?
And how is that 850 every year.
OK
Uh, Madam Chair Representative
Herndon, so if you look at the,
that page 4 under the kind of
different sheet packet that
you've got. It is a little bit
difficult to kind of suss out,
but if you look at most of their
performance measures fit that,
because the only one that
reports real data is that far
left column that talks about the
actuals during the FY 24 fiscal
year. So they're budget, that
means, you know, that second
column over is there uh what
their target is for the fiscal
year that we're currently in FY
25. We didn't feel like we
needed to move that DFA and I
it and we kind of held that
target constant. Um, the biggest
thing that you'll see is
starting probably next year,
we'll need to talk about what
kind of targets we want to put
in for the meat inspection
program, um, cause right now
that, because that agency lacked
statutory authority necessary to
conduct meat inspections. They
weren't able to do anything yet.
So beginning now with this next
fiscal year, um, they'll
actually be putting in some
work. We're working with Melinda
and her team to come up with
performance measures for that
group as well.
Madam chair, just excuse me, so
there are no missing livestock
definitely are and they recover
them, but I can let uh Director
Garland talk to that a little
bit more, but the target hasn't
changed, I guess it is. So your
target is to, to, uh, to recover
at 50. Well, how many are we
losing?
Some man uh representing her, so
that figure actually encompasses
stolen livestock. It could be
livestock that's wandered into
the neighbor's pasture and we
help move those back to the
owners. It could be a stray
cattle that ends up in the sale
barns, and we actually find the
actual owners for those, so
those numbers encompasses a lot
of different avenues of
recovering livestock.
It could be livestock that's on
the on the highways.
OK
Uh, thank you, Madam Chair, and
thank you Madam Presenter, and
just uh uh another question for
clarification under the personal
services and employee benefits,
there was a uh
A reduction by LFC.
It's like this is uh $1,676 but
then also a reduction in your
permanent and in your term
employees. Does that number
cover those two that are not
being allowed and I'm asking the
Alyst on this, Madam
Chairpresentative Her, uh, not
reductions, it's just the, that
far right column is the
difference between the executive
recommendation and the LFC
recommendation. So if you look,
for example, in the meat
inspection program, you'll see
that we held their budget flat.
There was no reduction in the
headcount or in the amount of
budget.
they got in PSEB, but we did not
raise it to the level of the
executive did.
And Madam Chair, and um
Madame presenter, how does that
hurt you if you don't have this,
these, uh,
Requests that were put in by the
executive.
So manager uh representing
Henan, the reason that we're
asking for this type of pay
increase is all of our
inspectors are entered at the
very bottom of the pay scale.
So it's harder for us to
compete, even ranch hands are
making more than our inspectors.
So it's, it makes it more
difficult for us to fill and
retain inspectors in these
positions. Um,
So most of our districts are one
inspector filled, they, they
cover one district, some of the
busier districts have multiple
inspectors in them like Roswell
Clovis, because they cover the
sale barns, the producers, the
dairies, there's a lot of
inspectors in those districts,
but anytime that we have a
vacancy, then let's just say
that the inspector for Torrance
County is gone, so the inspector
for maybe Valencia County has to
travel to Torrance County, so
that puts a strain on our
budget that we're running that
pickup from Valencia County to
Torrance County, so we try to
keep as many of our inspection
inspector positions filled as
possible. So what I'm looking
for is an increase to our
salaries in order to be
competitive without, with the
outside world and keep them in
their positions because it's
expensive to hire and train and
just get them moving along to
where they're operating on their
own.
OK, thank you very much for
that, um, response, you know,
that is an issue. I don't know
if you know that Madam Chair and
present us where we are looking
at a whole revamping of the uh
salary structures so that we can
bring our employees up to a a
better level. But thank you for
that explanation.
And Madam Chair Representative
Harlem, the only thing we we we
do want to make sure we flag is
that in line with the LFC budget
guidelines, uh, compensation was
not raised in individual agency
budgets, that's largely going to
be handled in Section 8 of the
budget bill, and so that's
something that they, you know,
as a result of that spo salary
study plan to work on in a
different part of the budget,
not in the section for recurring
budget.
OK, thank you very much.
Representative Brown.
Madam Chair, thank you. Um,
couple of questions uh for the
panel.
Probably more from Miss Garland,
um, I see from your letterhead
that you have a board vacancy
right now. Uh, my question,
Madam Chair, is, when did that
vacancy occur.
And from what I'm seeing for
where people are located who are
on the board right now. I don't
see anybody from Southeast New
Mexico. So the question is, are
you looking for geographic
representation on that board.
Um, how do you go about finding
a a new uh board member, Madam
Chair. So Madam Chair
represented a Brown right now,
um, that, uh, position was
vacated, I believe, in July. Um,
Molly Monzanares from Tierra
Maria was in that position, and
she resigned from the board. So
we try to work with the
governor's office on the filling
of these vacancies. It's not
maybe so much locations around
the state, but industry-driven.
We try to look for
producers and some of that is
mandated by statute, some of
them actually have to be
livestock producers, which would
be sheep and cattle. Some of
them we try to look from the,
the dairy industry, I think
there can be a member at large.
Um, we also trying to look
possibly like from the
veterinarian industry or from
the meat industry now that we
have that program. So, um, I try
to find people around the state
and recommend that they put in
their application, but the
vetting and
selection happens in the
governor's office.
So Madam Chair and Ms. Garland,
so, I hope the governor's
listening. I'd like to see
someone from southeast New
Mexico. We do a lot of ranching
there and I think it'd be nice
to have that. Um, Madam Chair,
my next question has to do with
The, uh, meat and poultry
inspection program and what
that's going to involve.
So will there need to be private
investment in getting facilities
where these inspections occur.
How does that work? Do you?
I mean, you're talking meat and
poultry, so it's already been
harvested, so to speak.
So where will those inspections
happen is my question, Madam
Chair.
Madam chair represented brown,
the requirement of the in-state
meat inspection as any meat
that's sold to the consumers by
retail must be inspected. So
they inspect the animal on hoof
for health, and then they
inspect all the way to the
packaging.
So, um,
For us to do private funding,
that's not what we're looking
for. We're on the regulatory
side. We're, we're making sure
that a safe meat product is put
out there on the retail sale
shelves. That's what we'll be
doing. Um, now, we're hoping,
our hope is with this program is
that it provides economic growth
to the state, that now that
there could be an in-state mean
inspection program, and then
we're not relying on FSIS for
the inspectors to be standing in
those plants, actually, you will
have control of how many
inspector.
s are available out there, as
I'm hoping as the economy grows,
and maybe more plants come in
for production, we come to you
and say, OK, now we have another
plant, we need another FTE to
stand in this plant. So that
really gives that that potential
put in your hands, and our hands
in order to be effective in that
program, but um there's also
other economic growth we're
hoping that maybe people the
livestock industry could look
into putting in feed yards where
the cattle are no longer shipped
to.
The panhandle and then shipped
back or even processed there and
the meat comes back that there
could be some feed yards put
into production, that, that
actually gives an avenue for New
Mexico growing grain to be fed
to New Mexico beef, um, that
puts New Mexico beef in our
schools or senior centers, any
other programs out there, the
homeless, so there's a lot of
potential if we can just get
this program stood up and we're
available to stand in these
plants.
Thank you. That was very
informative. Um, I guess.
Um, last question, um,
Well, let's see, how can I say?
I think I'm confusing something
in my own mind about I remember
hearing a couple of years ago,
we talked about field agents,
and maybe it was the veterinary
board. Someone was suggesting
that we don't need to have a
statute requires apparently
licensed veterans or not
veterans, excuse me,
veterinarians.
To do some function and the
suggestion was made, you need to
have a veterinarian doing
oversight, but you could send
people out into the field who
are not as qualified as, as that
level.
Am I, am I thinking?
Somehow, uh, crazy here. I'm not
sure how to phrase that question
except there was
Madam Chair's suggestion made
for some uh amendment to a
statute that would actually
Help us get work done that right
now is, it's kind of restricted
because it needs to be a
licensed veterinarian. That's my
question, and maybe you do know
or maybe you don't. So Madam
Chair Representative Brown, I
don't believe that was connected
to this bill. I, I will tell you
the part of the veterinarian
requirement for our bill, for
our meat inspection program, it
does require some veterinary
oversight. If there's some type
of disease or some type of pro
problem found in a carcass.
Then a veterinarian has to step
in and and help deal with that.
I do have down here just a
final.
question. Uh, is there a rule
over labeling meat as New Mexico
beef.
I'm sure.
So Madam Chair Representative
Brown, I, I might have to refer
to Mr. Barrons on that. I, the
labeling is a requirement that,
that I, we haven't really fully
delve into yet. Um, there is,
there are labeling requirements,
anything that's inspected has to
be stamped and labeled
correctly. Right now, the
Which department is it that
handles labeling? Environmental
department, excuse me, uh,
having bring laps there. So they
actually inspect labeling in
this, in this state right now,
and that'll be something that we
work with them on as to whether
they will continue to do it or
we'll take it over.
And one thing that we probably
will look into to see if we can
do some type of labeling for New
Mexico grown beef. I think that
would be important.
to make a motion. Madam Chair, I
move the LFC recommendation.
We've had vice chair Sarana
moved and
A ranking member Chatfield 2nd.
Are there any objections to
adopting the LFC budget?
OK
Um, that would be the budget,
but we have flagged it, um, for
further attention to the points
that have been raised.
Thank you. And yes, we do need
to say New Mexican grown beef.
Not Australian.
Yes, ma'am.
Our next presentation will come
from the Department of Game and
Fish.
Agency 516.
And for members, that's on page
213.
In volume 2.
And our two analysts. How do you
pronounce your name, last name.
last names.
Oh, I love it.
Analyst goes
wa and Tavia.
OK, thank you.
Um, can everybody please be
quiet as we enter our 4th of 5
presentations.
Good afternoon. I'm Helen Gois.
I'm the LFC analyst for the game
and fish department. Today with
me is uh Michael Sloan, director
of Game and Fish, and the DFA
analyst Monica Tapia.
Um, I, um,
I'm sorry, you were doing agency
516, which is behind tab 5. It
is on page.
I'm sorry I had this marked and
now I've I've done my marking.
Yes, 2:13 of the um volume 2,
and there is a chart on fund
balances in volume 3, and with
that, I'm going to turn it over
to Monica.
Good afternoon, Madam Chair,
members of the committee.
Um, as Helen said, I'm Monica
Tapia, DFA analyst for the
Department of Game and Fish.
The executive and LFC
recommendations total of 54.5
million, an increase of 70,000
or 0.1% over the FY 25 operating
budget.
The recommendations include 30.5
million, a decrease of 0.5% in
the personal services category,
5 million in the contractual
services category, an increase
of 70,000 or 1.4% over the FY 25
operating budget.
18.1 in the other category and
150,000 or 0.8% over the FY 25.
Operating budget.
The LFC and the executive and
LSC handles the revenue from the
land of enchantment Legacy Fund
differently. The executives 3.3
million of revenue in the other
state funds, while LFC
recommends $100 more in other
revenues.
For P 716 failed operations,
both the executive and the LFC
recommendations total 1.3
million flat with the FY 25
operating budget.
In P 717 Conservation Services,
the executive and LFC total 31.4
million.
565.5,000 or 1.8% over the FY 25
operating budget for the
personal services category, with
the LFC recommendation $100 over
the executive for Land of
Enchantment Legacy Fund.
4 P 718 wildlife, deportation
and nuisance abatement, the
executive and LLC
recommendations total 1.2
million.
70,000 over the FY 25 operating
budget and contractual services.
For P 719 program support, the
executive and LFC
recommendations total of 9.4
million, flat with the FY 25
operating budget.
I will now pass it back to Helen
for performance measures.
The consensus on the performance
measures was to raise 2 of the
measures that they are already
overperforming slightly and to
increase the percent of public
hunting licenses drawn by New
Mexico resident hunters
slightly, primarily because um
the the level is set in statute
at 84%, but that ends up being
diluted slightly by E+ and other
programs, and so we thought
maybe we could do that to bring
the total share of licenses up
to what the um legislature
seemed to have intended.
The, um, I will also cover the
differences and specials, uh,
the executive record the the
executive in the LFC match on a
1 million appropriation for um
bighorn sheep uh conservation,
and on the um additional funding
for um the more broad
conservation programs, the
executive puts that money and
takes it out in one time
appropriation this year of $10
million from the general fund
and the LFC recommendation.
pulls it puts, brings it from
the growth fund and would do it
in 3 tranches over 3 years, um,
and that's, that's pretty much
sums it up. I'm gonna turn it
over now to the director.
Pick one.
Madam chair, members of the
committee, and thank you for
hearing us today. I have with us
here in the audience,
commissioner Turzio Lopez and uh
division chief Stuart Lily and
Paul Varela.
Um, as you just heard, the, the
budgets are very close between
LFC and DFA. It's largely a
matter of accounting of the
legacy fund and and where that
number is put, um, so I don't
have a whole lot to say other
than that, I'm, I'm pleased that
we're matching. I would
reiterate as I always do, that
we're an enterprise agency, we
rely on the sale of fishing and
hunting licenses to support our
operations. We haven't had a fee
increase since about 2006.
And so we are very cost
conscious and maintaining a, a
flat budget, um, the legacy fund
money has allowed us to extend
that out, but in the near term,
we will need a a fee increase.
Um, I appreciate that our
special is matched up and look
forward to putting the uh the
grow money to good use as we
move forward.
Thank you,
members, anybody have a
question?
Representative Pettigrew.
Thank you, Madam Chair, and, uh,
thank you, Director Sloan, um,
presenters, um,
And one question for you. I
heard a comment earlier today
that one of the thieves were
looking to increase would be the
trapper fee that's by almost
400%. Can you talk to that?
Madam Chair Representative, that
fee is in a Senate Bill 5, which
is a bill by um
Representative McQueen, leader
Worth, Senator Campos, Senator
Brantley, and I believe now
Senator Ramos.
Um
I believe those are still in
negotiation and there have been
some commitments to evaluate
that, that that was not our
proposal, so.
That that we had a, if we
increased it, it was a very
modest increase back when we
tried to run a.
Representative Herndon.
Thank you, uh, Madam Chair, and
And Mr. presenter, I just have a
question that came from one of
my constituents so I'm asking
that question. So he is very
concerned about the numbers
that, that
Game and fish have put on, uh,
the black bear, and how many of
them can be killed in a year,
and that the number had
increased and why is that?
Madam Chair Representative, um,
Uh, I'll probably get this wrong
and I should probably ask Stuart
to to chime in, um, and we can
certainly talk to you offline,
but the, I don't believe that
the numbers have changed
significantly. We've been doing
some very intensive bear
studies, a marker capture kind
of work and have found that in
some places there are more bears
and some places are a little
less, and so we've adjusted
numbers according and we base
the number of animals that are
sustainable that can sustainably
be taken from the population on
research that's been done across
the West.
Um
And so, again, I think Stewart
and I would do a better job
explaining to you on the side
then.
Um, right here, but the gist of
it is I don't think bare numbers
have changed significantly.
Well, thank you, Mr. Presenter.
Thank you, Madam Chair. I, I
would appreciate it if we could
make an arrangement to meet with
him and that would work out
really well, OK.
We'll do that. Thank you.
Seemed no other questions. I
turned to Vice Chairar. Madam
chair, I moved the LFC
recommendation.
Um, vice chair Sarana has made
the motion. Ranking member
Chatfield is seconded. Is there
any objection?
You know, objection, we will go
with the LFC budget. Thank you.
Thank you. Thank you.
Our final presentation today,
yes, we have arrived at our
final presentation.
Is the youth conservation Corps.
Agency 522.
And members you've seen your
volume 2, that's
Page 227.
And we will have our
Um, analyst Davidson and Jessup.
Afternoon, Madam Chair, members
of the committee. My name is
Austin Davidson, the LFC's
natural resource analyst. I do
not see my DFA counterpart in
the crowd, I think.
I do.
Are you?
Well the Director Minor stepping
in the, the big guns, uh.
Uh, joining me today for our
conversation about um YCC is the
director of YCC, uh, Sarah
Woods, uh, turning to the
different sheet, the LFC's
recommendation increased other
revenues usage by 627.1,000 or
13%, the executive
recommendation increased other
revenues by 1.1 million or
23.8%. The difference is due to
the LFC recommendation, not
including the climate core
contract expansions, and the
complete personnel increases.
that the agency requested.
The recommendation increased the
personnel budget by 65,000 or
27.2% for the additional FTE at
the average of the agency's
salary, the executive
recommendation increased the
personal budget by 127.1,000 or
53.1% for an additional MTE.
Executive recommendation
increased the contract's budget
by 455,000 or 8.2% for increased
contract work and a new climate
core program, both of which were
not included in the LFC's
recommendation. I'll turn it
over to Doctor Minor.
Yeah, thank you. Good afternoon,
Madam Chair, members of the
committee, um, explanations were
are are the differences were
explained very well there. I
just like to point out, just
emphasize that youth
conservation Corps is not a
general fund funded agency.
These are the the owner, the
agency's own revenues that are
diversion from the governmental
grocery receipts tax. So with
that I'll turn over to Director
Wood.
Yeah, good afternoon, uh, Madam
Chair and members of the
committee. My name is Sarah
Wood, and I am the youth
Conservation Corps executive
director, uh, with me online is
Chair Amanda Goelll Stevenson
and also the other YCC staffer
Morgan Tolan. I want to, uh,
thank you all for supporting the
additional
Uh, personnel and also uh
purchasing a software program. I
believe both these initiatives
will help not only increase the
capacity of our agency, but also
increase the capacity of our
project managers. It will allow
them greater accessibility. It
will allow everything to
integrate from application to
project manager much more
project management much more
smoothly.
YCC has been in existence since
1992, so we're 33 years old this
year. I believe that makes us a
millennial, um, over 90% of our
budget goes to the projects in
the field.
And of that 70% goes to core
member wages and benefits.
So we, year after year, we have
a 97% positive approval rating
from the core members
themselves. And that is an
anonymous survey after they exit
the program. They also
consistently over half of them
remark.
How good it was to work in a cop
in a group, in a team. They
learn conflict resolution, they
interact and work with their
peers who they might not
otherwise have gotten to know it
all, and I think that's a, a
really
um strength of the program. And
they also work in a wide variety
of projects in their community,
and not only do they do forest
and rangeland conservation, but,
um, emergency
response and this summer, that
was floods in Mendanais and Ria
Reba County, uh, continuing fire
restoration efforts in San
Miguel, we have about 5 core
projects working up there on
the, the hermit calf Canyon fire
scar, also in Ruidoso, we have
our eco servants working on
recovery from the fires there
and that really gives the core
members a sense of agency in
their community to do something.
Um, there's also, uh, we fund
public art projects and
improvement of senior centers
and municipal parks and pretty,
pretty much we try to, you know,
find anything that helps the
public benefit. And
With that, I will stand for
questions.
Thank you, Representative Baca.
Thank you, Madam Chair and thank
you for your presentation.
Actually, I have experience with
the YCC, um, back when I first
started teaching in Rio, so back
in the early 90s uh during
summer I'd worked for the Forest
Service, and we had a YCC trout
crew attached to us at Smokey
Bear Ranger Station, so I can
tell you that the experience of
having young people out there
working in the forest, and
actually reopening some trails
that were that were
created after World War II,
after the conservation of Act,
it was, it was impressive. So I
I, I appreciate the opportunity.
I do think that what is done for
our youth and also for our, for
uh
Our forces and other projects
because as part of our job, we
did do.
Uh, some fire rehabilitation
after the fire in 2000 in Ridos
so so I think it's a great
program. I think that we need to
get more of our young people and
old people like myself out into
the forest again, but I just
wanted to say that I very much
appreciate and I support, uh,
what you guys are doing.
Representative Chatfield.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Madam
Chair, I just like to speak up
and say this is a great program,
you know that a few years back,
they're gonna build a rock fence
at, at one of our schools, and
they went out and, and got some
of the kids with this program
and they taught them how to lay
rock, you know, and uh whenever
you get a job, you learn more
than Adelaide Rock. You learn
how to get up, show up, and
work and get up, show up and
work, just get up and show up,
so a lot of it, right? And uh,
so I appreciate this program.
they work on trails, they work
on a variety of different
things, but they, they learn
responsibility and how to work.
And so I supported strongly, and
I thank you for your time, man.
Representative Brown.
Thank you, Madam Chair. I, I too
would like to um launch this
program. I know a young person
who uh took on a YCC job one
summer.
Uh, she was a grad or current
student I believe at New Mexico
Military Institute.
And she ran that crew like you
wouldn't believe, and they kept
completing projects ahead of
schedule and had to keep giving
them more to do. So it kind of
worked out pretty well that way,
but this is a great program, um,
my question, I guess, met up
here.
And uh Ms. Wood is, how do you
advertise the availability of
these job opportunities, are you
at least talking to high
schools, so they can get the
word out to their students. How
do you go about doing that?
I'm sure, Madam Chair, members
of the committee, Representative
Brown. So we give the funding to
the entities, whether it's a
nonprofit, or school district,
or a unit of government, and
then they are the ones that
advertise for jobs. So most of
them are advertising on social
media.
Uh, in the schools with flyers.
They have email blasts and they
probably the most effective is
word of mouth.
And core members who have gone
through the program in the
community who encourage others
to go into a project.
Thank you for that, and Madam
Chair, could you tell us how
much um a participant is paid
per hour.
Madam Chair, members of the
committee representative.
The requirement is at least
minimum wage in the area where
they are, but they are, they can
set the
Uh, amount to what is
competitive. So for instance,
during COVID, wages went up from
an average of about $13 an hour
for all projects to an average
of $14 per hour. Thank you.
Thank you, Madam Chair.
Representative Hernandez and
then Representative Herndon.
Thank you, Madam Chair, and
presenters, um, I too went
through a conservation program
like this in the Rocky
Mountains, but I didn't get
paid, Madam Chair
but, um, uh, and, and, and I
echo my colleagues, uh, in, in
the what we're doing and that
and how we can continue to
engage more of, of, of our youth
through these um
programs that are really, we
gotta think of this Madam Chair
as a prevention, you know, and,
and I'm just, uh, wanting to
know, um, question, Madam chair,
my question is, what more can we
do as a, as an appropriators.
Thank you, madam chair.
Madam Chair members of the
committee, well, first of all,
thank you for all the love.
That's very nice. Um, to have
all this support and as far as
appropriations go, I, I, I feel
good about this budget. I did do
a counter request for a little
bit more to fully fund the
additional position, however,
In practice, I think vacancy
savings will probably make the
LFC recommendation, uh, adequate
and we are fortunate it is a
non-reverting fund, so we can
bar in additional funds.
During the year to support
additional projects.
Representative Herndon.
Thank you, Madam Chair and Madam
Presenter, I just for
clarification for me, when you
say you give the money to the
agency and they do the hiring.
Who are the who's the agency?
Madam Chair Representative, so
That is the, the eligible entity
who has been awarded funds
through a competitive request
for proposal process, and it can
be any unit of government, so
municipality, school districts,
land grants,
um, as association.
Um, counties, nonprofits and
tribes.
So they write us a plan we ask
for a pretty detailed plan on
what projects the youth are
going to be doing, what their
budget is, we wanna make sure
that they've allocated their
budget so that 70% of it goes to
core member wages, and then
that, that is who gets the
funding, and it's a
reimbursement, so they have to
show us documentation of the
money they spent, and then we
reimburse them and just so you
know
this, the
On your handout, the last 3
pages are the list of projects
we had, uh, last year and also
the ones that we just awarded in
our starting up this spring.
So Madam Chair, Madam presenter,
so nonprofits aren't allowed to
participate in this, only
governmental entities.
Uh, Madam Chair Representative,
I must have misspoke. Yes,
nonprofits are eligible.
And Madam Chair and Madam
presenter, just another quick
question. It says here that the
number of youth employed
annually is 840. So how many are
not employed? How many
applications are you receiving?
Uh, Madam Chair Representative,
this year we received about 51
applications and 39 were funded
and that was through an
evaluation process. So the 840,
that's the target that was set
some years ago. That's the
performance evaluation target.
We haven't met that since 2016.
We don't have a lot of control
over how many core members are
hired, and it is a bit of a
heavy lift to hire young people
and supervise them and provide
training. So we've seen that the
entities were awarding funds to
our hiring smaller crews so that
they can manage them.
So we've actually introduced for
FY 26, a new performance measure
that compares how many
Everyone says they're gonna
hire.
And how many they actually do
hire, and I think that will
convey to all of you, um, it
will be a better measure of that
success because we really don't
have control over how many, how
many people are hired. We're
looking at the quality of the
project and we do require that
they hire a minimum of 5 core
members.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Thank
you, madam, um, madam presenter.
OK, see no further questions, I
will turn to Vice Chair Sarana.
Madam Cha move the LFC
recommendation?
OK, it's been moved by
Viana seconded by Representative
Little.
Madam, I would be remiss if I
didn't say that um the director
is going to be retiring. And so
this is actually her last
presentation before you.
Thank you for work, Madam Chair,
I'm gonna go work on trails
Need some help.
OK, it's been moved and seconded
uh by by Sarana and Rep Little
is there any objection to
adopting the LFC budget.
See no objection, that will be
the budget that we adopt.
That will turn over to public
comment.
Is there anybody in the audience
who is here to make a public
comment.
Set your hand up, OK just
checking. OK, is there anybody
online to make a public comment?
OK, uh, there are no public
comments. With that, we'll
adjourn till tomorrow morning at
9:00 a.m.
