Yes
introduced off to time.
Between
the questions today
medically
different mister
with regard to the fifteen
thousand that's been the
requested for the control
I have a little bit of update
from the last time I appeared
before they be a top of speed
that went back in the reason for
that is to find.
Our.
Contract
here from the
office.
This is.
And that was due to anticipated
increased work loads
effective
to the twenty twenty
responsibility of limitation a
lot of local ports throughout
the state of those cases
and alcohol too.
This is
increased in our case not about
the pretty three percent
we are already presently to stay
on top that it is getting more
more difficult to do so and the
additional offer
we would ask you before
you prove the executive.
It would be for that purpose
since
the big firm was at the city
would go out of the existence
that would probably double
architects
of the things will be that did
not.
Local board but we did
corporate over flavor matters in
the city rock down but
it's cool of talk most country
which is a major.
All of which is
I think that that is to keep
what I would need.
Quest I think covered things
most important in this
particular appropriation section
i'm happy to answer the
questions.
The.
Think teacher.
Thank you
director of the state of
personal office and are you
going to be a little bit part of
the planet and an administration
agency
component
if you
have
the top of the difference
cheaper you can see their stupid
difference doesn't revenue and
what is a hundred four thousand
dollars exactly
for general.
And the other is
other transfers where the
executive recognitions fifty
thousand dollars is more than
the left
for other transfers the sort of
repair was shared services
agreements
that agencies enter into with
the state person our office to
handle better a chart
at the expense time the table.
Instead of george of the
difference one hundred and forty
seven thousand dollars is in her
spinel
seat included twenty four
thousand dollars in priests
essentially if it's cost for the
employees currently working at
this point
exactly what recommends a one
hundred seventy two thousand
dollars increase to
benefits costs as well as the
positions and and.
Matters and artists
print opportunities be helpful
for any additional compliments.
Chairman of that committee my
pressure here
in front of your talk about
budget of course we would
recognize you executive budget
but it is close I just want to
highlight on the scared spirit
of this i'm not was cut of it
basically for one of our
service.
However that
person is what we do with
provide interest services for
ages to their produced small but
up on their own position so the
cost of a position for a chart
is about ninety thousand dollars
we have thirteen agencies
correctly that's been a
significant same thing.
So take on agencies all the time
so the material from use test
this well agency is we are now
taking on
day records and architects and
we will take them on as well
still
also agency department that you
want
by the service is for the
positions
we do to encourage due to
a little bit of difference that
we do have just because our
services is always
certainly
the state generally so
that's what I can stay
particular
you have the budget in front of
you you have the young recent
asian sticking office is is
committed to helping agencies
except and so we have a flat
budget basically for one of you
and I just like that to consider
that I took an internet at the
support our services as we
provide your services.
Thank you.
The.
I'm sorry i'm joined here by
time.
The report from delivery will
come out and he brought this
year and there will be prepared
from the boy and
fifteenth and so don't give you
up to I think it's going well we
are still bill
donald
actually done a division of what
they groups could look like I
can estate it and and just
yesterday and employees surprise
they went out to every state
employee to get their feedback
and so the feedback is going to
be really
at the time understand your
other preference
officers and I will promise you
for that although our budget
request just for that you're
based on the basis on the upper
report of this year we will be
asking probably for for more
money support so I think it's
going well and hopefully there's
some
really common creepy.
Representative month
in general based on the
well supposed to state
personal office we oversight
over over.
El act and so there are certain
actions that agencies are have
to get spolled approval for a
certain amount of raises certain
amount of reclass
a whole bunch of different
actions and so we have right now
is six to seven fte
kinda like a dfa analyst or an
lfc analysts that are aside
agencies to ensure that we are
supporting agencies either
growing divisions helping
helping that out so we were
staffed we can always be staffed
more I think you'll see it when
when the study comes out and
there was a time when spo had
sixty fd right now we currently
have forty four full time but
seven of those positions are not
funded by the budget so.
That the more we can grow the
more we can do because we also
do actions we also said the p
bands and classifications when
you think about they'll be a
presentation on vacancy rate on
on the nineteenth i'm just
telling you that the the other
presentations will be a part of
what will look at our vacancy
rates and and and what we can do
but we also in charge of looking
at minimum qualifications trying
to go see if we can look at a
classification and and try to
figure out if we should just be
focusing on the skills and not
necessarily the degree but so
there is we've been weep and
fortunate to be able to hire two
new people in our classification
and compensation divisions so we
are here to support agencies but
most of the time it it is really
the agency seeking our advice
and that's one of our goals and
are when one of our mean objects
is to continue to have strategic
meetings with agencies yearly
and as open as we can to see
what their goals are and how we
can support them
what and both pay their current
staff bring a new people and
also we've been really excited
to to offer rapid highers I
think you've been seeing how
successful those are and also
so supporting agencies and all
of that and quickly trying to
fill vacancy so how do we budget
for that we we we're we we under
the previous director to decide
a year and you know through that
through the guidance of the
governor we've had a spo's
really transformed into being
really responsive and so we just
want to keep it going so that's
why it's flat and if we need to
increase the the budget after
the april um.
Study results we will.
Yeah mr chair representative
month where it is it is dfa and
lfc's
they got the appropriation for
doing at their you really using
state personnels i'm know how
and data but it is really led by
lfc and dear.
And mister chairman if I might
add one of the issues that has
come up is.
We've had a competition in
classification system that has
had a lot of exceptions to it in
the past for a very long time we
have a very high number of
actual job types throughout the
state and not all of them have
been updated quickly so we've
seen the use of a lot of things
like alternative pay bands and
and things like that so the
study is trying to take a look
at everything going on and and
see.
How we need to modernise the
system to get it to reflect the
current labor needs of state.
Mistreats mister chair
vice your dickson no this is
something that we need you know
we we are small age and see and
so we've been spending their
money kind of on being a small
agency printers and everything
and so we need more money for
advertising it is really for
these rapid highers it's for our
own website to promote
working for the state government
generally we don't focus on a
particular agency so if you're
you know we we we if you want to
work for the state you come to
the personnel office's website
but it's also then you know what
we really needed to do is as his
focus on a pipeline from our
great universities right into
right into the state so it's
attending
job fair's career fairs and
advertising and those cars money
and I know that that other
agencies have a have a much more
funding in the in in that area
than we do and so we we try to
enter it to attend as many as we
can it's just the funds aren't
there as much as we'd like so we
try to.
Pick you back on other agencies
but we we represent that that
the entire state.
The.
Cher gracio vice are dickson yes
that's what we do when they come
to us we do we have rapid hires
we have in any posting you know
we we work with them we approve
them to try to get get as much
as we can we have our website
all state agency job postings
are on their website some
agencies post the job specific
to their agency on their website
but absolutely we're in
coordination
with their all with their hard
to make sure
that we're posing those
positions and then if you have
maybe you'll hear from other
agencies here today if you if
you'd like to have state
personal look at the pay band
look at the classification you
can make that request so if we
need to look at maybe minimum
qualifications of of nurses of
behavior a house scientists of
correctional officers right you
would make that request we study
and then it's approved by the
state per a personnel board.
Traverse representative brown I
will tell you that spo is really
in a in a support position for
these rapid hires right we don't
have rapid hires for spot
necessarily but we do for
instance for these larger
agencies and so their hr would
need to come to say personnel
after then say hey we want to do
a rapid higher we want to do a
speed recruiting event which is
all done online and so what is
the what these two with director
i'm approval they would allow
you to hire someone in a much
quicker time line than then then
following the state personnel
board rules which normally
require a posting to be posted
ten to fourteen days before you
close the great thing about the
rapid higher and and the speed
recruiting is that you said it
it is advertised unfortunately
it is determined by the agency
on on how much money they can
spend on on advertising if they
want so for instance of cyfid
you want to hire a bunch of
investigators they can have a
rapid higher event and the great
thing is people come with their
with their resumes and the
references and they're given an
interview that day right and so
that and they they and their
screens I guess not not everyone
gets interview i'm sorry they're
screened to make sure they meet
them in on qualifications
they're given an interview and
and many times an offer so that
is a really quick way if you
have an area that you would like
to fill somewhere like it
somewhere finance where there is
a concentrated um.
At work force there you come in
you interview these these
individuals you get i'm hired
and and you and you get going
and so this is this these are
two avenues that we help support
i'm agent season in making sure
that they are doing it because
it's state personnel officers
also you know we have the board
rules related to recruitment and
so we speed that process up.
Yeah.
Surgery see a representative
brown
I think you might hear when you
hear from the the larger
agencies that they are being
that they are successful they
are getting great candidates
right I think that I I think we
still need to.
Wait and see right what we are
excited about is and what what I
hear from other cabinet
secretaries and we see it in the
data too as we are right now
hiring more individual employees
from outside of the state system
than ever before and so these
aren't just
you also hear this a lot
poaching from other agencies
these are people from outside
the seat city and coming in I
really appreciating our our
our benefits and and and in the
mission really that that we're
all committed to working for for
state government and so I think
it's been positive mostly it's
been positive these are just
starting out so what will check
back in a year by but especially
in in in when you when you do
the time to find out who you're
trying to hire what positions
you're trying to hire you're
going to get great people and I
know that that public education
apartment just had a great you
know event where they were
getting hundreds of of
applications and I think once
you get more when when you're
not just interviewing based on a
list of three qualified
candidates and it's much higher
you're going to get stronger i'm
can it so I would imagine that
you'd hear from these agencies
that that they are.
Mister chair representative
brown I think part of your
analysis will be lfc's fourth
quarterly report that's one of
our metrics that that were that
we are assessed on is is time to
fill a position it used to
average a seventy two days to
philip position but with the
concentrated staff that we have
and the initiative of this
administration and really the
disposed staff that we've been
able to get it down to fifty
five days
to to hire a new employee you
you should understand that again
a standard posting as 10 14 days
and then the hr process happens
right where where you're
interviewing individuals there's
an offer letter that comes in
but we have gotten it down
that's a twenty four percent
drop front from last where it is
is something that we are
concerned about and we are
actively engaging with the
agency is trying to do this and
if you do a rapid higher if you
do have speed recruiting event
it's much much quicker i'd like
to say that at least at the
state personnel office we were
able to hire higher and
assistant general council and
twenty eight days and which is
great.
And we just hired a an hr
recruiting coordinator
in even less time
and so if you've you focus on it
and you're given the skills you
can do it is you know as quickly
as we can we are but we are
constantly working on trying to
make sure that we fill these
positions as as quick.
And representative brown just a
add on to that one of the
things.
Ah.
Reported was about it was it was
the hiring timeline.
So we used to break out
um from the time and agency
would submit and say hey I want
to fill this position how long
it took him to get it posted on
the website how long it had to
stay on the website then spo has
to look referral list to the
agency hiring managers and from
there the hiring managers would.
The interview candidates
ask for another list if they
didn't find anybody they wanted
historically what happened is it
when he looked at that timeline
that was the really long you
know it could be well over a
month in many cases that that
list would get to an agency
before.
Before a letter would go out and
and a higher would be made and
that's part of the reason the
rapid higher is because you're
essentially cutting that entire
month period down in doing it
same day.
Chergers the representative
brown no there is a general pay
band for most but then you're
you'll also see on our ls fourth
quarterly report we also have a
breakdown of maybe thirteen
other pay bands architecture
attorney business corrections
engineer health care health care
professional information on tech
social services and so each if
you fit into one of those
classifications you would like.
The.
Chair grocery i'm just trying to
find what their current vagency
rate is here on
what what it is I mean we we at
the state personnel office help
and support corrections in in
several ways where we we give
them they kind of have a blanket
waver to bring in new new
employees that they want I don't
know of the top of my head and I
can fault the follow up with you
if they've actually requested a
wrap at a higher event we're not
if they did that we are we are
in constant contact with the
corrections and trying to
support their vacancies you know
as best as we can I get we take
the leap from the agencies
though but we have tried to
quick speed up the process for
corrections particularly so if
they want to do
increases if they want to bring
in people at a higher way to pay
they wouldn't need spot approval
of their own hr can do that
because again the state
personnel is not hr for the
entire state what what we just
we just help support agencies
and and and insure that
equity is done by the board
rules so we are we are here and
and serving currently
corrections in in a in in a
bunch of different ways I don't
know if they've currently meet a
request for a rapid.
I appreciate you are.
The.
The.
The.
Yeah.
The.
Yeah.
Good afternoon.
Today here with us we have the
administrative.
Sir brian indense and and df
counterp.
This is agency three four zero
and you'll find th.
Page five of your member packet
also has the piece calk which is
all the information for
vacancies and personnel you
might be looking for
as well as a non her current.
Um i'll just go heading to kick
us off and then a merry bathwall
add any additional commentary
for the dfa side in the more
passed over to the.
So the main differences between
the recommendations was that the
lfc recommendation are included
forty three thousand in general
fund revenues where is the
executive recommendation has
seventy four point one thousand
increas.
This particular agency gets
revenues from hearings that they
do for other state agencies as
well as a funding through the
motor.
So both the elite and the
executive recommended to include
the agen.
Five thousand and other state
funds from the motor vehicle
suspense fund as well as a fifty
thousand dollar increase
in other transfers to account
for their additional revenue
that they've been making.
And the elipsi recommendation
includes an increase in the base
of eighty four point two
thousand for personnel and one
additional fte dfa recommended
double that a hundred and sixty
thousand point hundred and
sixty.
The lfc recommendation supports
hos request to reduce
contractual services are to be
more in the line with their
actual spending.
Uh the lfc rec also includes
forty five thousand above the
executive's recommendation for
other costs and that's just for
supplies and equipment for about
additional fte that the lfc
recommendation has
you'll noticed that there's some
bill language that references
the increases for the other
revenues and the analysts have
come to a consensus on all
targets.
Um there is also an expansion
request for this agency there's
actually too expansion requests
for this agency
because the administrative
hearings office they most
notably support other agencies
and every time there's new
legislation that comes through
they will end up having to do
more and more hearings for other
state agencies so most notably
that's been the state ethics
commission medicaid hearings was
one that's been added in recent
years the secretary of state has
them also doing hearings a
department of health and the
health care authority.
So they've had an increased work
load of approximately six
percent is what they were
reporting for fy twenty three
and are all of their
attorneys are just a acquiring
more hearings per attorney so
their agency requested two
personal expansions
which included targeted salary
increases the first expansion
was two hundred and forty point
two thousand and that was for
targeted salary increases for
attorney administrative larger
positions and the second
expansion was for a hundred and
fifty
hundred and fifty point eight
thousand and one additional fte
to conduct the hearings so the
lfc did not include the
expansions and the
recommendation
but had rather included that one
additional fte while the
executive had a recommended both
of the expansions
one of which was two hundred and
six point three thousand and the
other was a hundred and fifty
point eight the one fifty point
eight being for that attorney
law judge position
and just really briefly i'll
just run you guys through what
the non recurring spending
requests were for the agency.
The agency had requested two to
finish up a case management
system that project that it had
started as they'd requested
twenty nine point five thousand
in general fund the lsu
recommendation didn't include it
because they are also have a sea
to request in that twenty nine
point five thousand was it also
included in the suit you request
according to the agency but the
executive did recommend that
that special appropriation
there was also an appropriation
request for classification and
compensation changes to
implement a state personal
office recommendation so like a
a comp in class study
and elipsi didn't recommend it
because as I love see analyst
connor jorgenson just had
mentioned the lfc and yet
they're kind of completely
competing very completing a
similar study
but the executive did recommend
that special as well and with
that i'll hand it over to mary
beth.
What thank you very much.
Mr chair community members nice
to see you again I don't have
too much to add i'm pin **** for
the regular analyst here and see
it's not a wonderful job
explaining the differences so I
want money anything I did just
want to point out
it looks like the language is
calling out fifty thousand
dollars for the transfer from
hst your ha over two ho
and I it looks like we'll
probably need to do a technical
correction on that to increase
it to one hundred thousand which
is in both of the
recommendations so just wanted
to point that out for you
you're very welcome but without
mister chair.
Thank you mister chairman
members of the committee it's
good to see you again my name is
brian vindenson and the the
chief carrying officer where the
agency head of the
administrative hearings office
and you have a power point I
know you've had a long day so
i'm going to try to compress it
and go a little bit more quickly
I think many of you recently
heard my presentation to have
seat and page two I have an
agenda the only thing I want it
causing page to is just to
introduce my staff which is
might see a fear tonight in my
toyota remirres who you've
already seen today she's also
the cfo for the public employee
labor relation board and then
chris romero is our tax hearing
officer supervisor and you're
both here today and I did it
sort of fitting this is a little
bit of in it aside and tries to
microphone working
turn it down a little bit
okay
it's fitting we're on this this
agenda today because we did just
reach an agreement with the
public employee labor relation
with the first entity you heard
from today to do some of their
hearing work and the mister
paris after me the state ethics
commission is another agency we
do hearings for and the state
personnel office they I heard
them discussed their shared
services.
Were they provide hr services to
small agencies we are one of
those small agencies that the
state for snow office represents
so did just tie the threads
together I thought it would
take.
Page three is an overview of
what we do.
I'm going to do the swell
quickly were essentially a court
like entity in the executive
branch we conduct an adjudicated
administrative hearings
involving executive branch
agencies primarily tax and rev.
We do tax protesterings under
the tax administration act the
property tax code and we do
mvd hearings which really means
dwillis since replication
hearings we do hst hearings for
a medicated fraud in overbilling
and as i've already mentioned we
do other agency hearings and
miss anderson mentioned as well
for some examples are that the
state ethics commission the
secretary of state the early
childhood care and education
department we've done she weft
he hearings were doing the.
Or organization is made up a
seventeen employees including
ten attorney hearing officers or
administrative law judges.
Or sometimes use that term
interchangeably but all of our
judges are attorneys i'm gonna
skip slide for which talks about
are caseload I think miss
anderson indicated we had it's
six percent increase in our
cases just jumping to a slide
five I do briefly want to
address some of our challenges
cause they tie into our request
and why we do prefer the
executive recommendation we do
these other agency hearings of
because we think first while we
save money to the state because
it's it's we can be more cost
effective than if each agency
had hired their own al jay or
contract with the private
attorney to serve as a hearing
officer but more importantly in
it than that we do that we do
those hearings because we think
they're good government in that
you know there's a perception
sometimes shapes reality and if
you ever hearing where the the
judge is employed by the agency
that.
That your challenging the
egency's action and this is no
shot at any of those agencies no
matter how fair that hearing
officer a little chat can be
there's a perception that will
your boss is the agency had and
you're going to do whatever they
wanted.
If on the other hand you go to
an independent agency like a
child to provide aljays to
provide a fair hearing it
improves that perception in a
promotes public confidence in
the fairness of the hearing
process so that's part of the
reason why we do these hearings.
And also like many agencies
we've had act aggressively to
keep our valued employees on
board because we're legal
services agency and our people
are our product.
They're the ones who write the
decisions who schedule the
matters who handle the case and
so we fought hard to keep them
on board and we've had to do
aggressive actions in our
category two hundred and that's
why during the page six in our
appropriations request we did
ask for the hundred and eighteen
thousand dollars increase in
general fund to meet existing
payroll obligations and we did
seek the two
expansions miss anderson
mentioned totally three hundred
and twelve thousand in expert in
general funds to support those
expansions and slide seven in
eight touch on those expansions
and this is really going to be
the heart of my discussion here
today
we have noticed a growing salary
and classification competitive
gap we've talked to about it I
think for three years and row at
the first year there was a
request for more data so we went
and we got the data and the
chardon page seven of the
presentation is a quick summary
of that data some of it comes
from elipsi some of it comes
from other reports but I think
what the shows is that or
attorney aljays are paid less
than then relative comparators
and state government including
the tax and rebatories who
appear in front of us.
We're paid on average ten
percent more than
judges are magistrate judges
which is a little bit of an
important in perfect comparison
because they're a member of the
jittery but their caseload is
very similar to ours and they
don't necessarily have to be
attorneys unlike my staff who
have to be attorney's there paid
fifteen percent more.
A hearing officer in a
disrecording burning of county
is twenty two percent more a new
mexico attorney from a twenty
seventeen research and pulling
survey so now seven years ago
at that time they were paid
thirty three percent more than
what we're currently paid that
number obviously is only ground
in the last seven years and
experience private tax attorney
is paid seventy six percent more
why does this matter because
these are the entities number
one i'd have to recruit too to
fill my positions and number two
my current employees would have
opportunities to go to and
leave.
And although we're small agency
the hearings we do are have an
outside impact we do those tax
protesterings those involved
hundreds of millions five
hundred million almost a billion
dollars a year and refund claims
credit claims assessments that's
real money to you as
appropriators and that's real
money to businesses across the
state.
And then we do the dwi license
revolution.
So you want subject matter
experts to adjudicate these
cases and they need to be able
to control the room and have the
respective everyone involved
when they make the decision so
that's why we
we sought this expansion and
then last year I believe he was
chairman small
rightfully asked you have a
spoke classification recommend
study done and we got that done
this year I I understand there's
the left sea and dfa one
happening but we had one
specifically done in a attached
it to your.
Presentation here today that
supports that or a
classifications and salary
competitivenesses out of line
and in fact is even more
generous than what our expansion
request was for to get us where
we should be based on that's
well recommendation so I would
ask you all the consider that
sport recommendation
as a as it relates to our
expansion request.
And then unswite nine we also
did request an additional
expansion lj position to assist
with those other agency hearings
these are hst hearings which
were required to do and the
secretary there has told me that
they're ramping up their
recovery federally mandated
recovery audits and we're going
to get those hearings you also
are trading the health care
authority there's going to be
other hearings that are going to
flow through that to our agency
and we are just added our
staffing capacity to do more
hearings each session
very good bills from all of you
give us more and more potential
hearings to do last year of
deferred to the next agency but
there was a change to the state
ethics commission act that
increased our role in their
hearings which means more time
for my hearing officers to do
the work the year before there
was an effort to maybe give us a
role with freeway deep year
before that we got the HSD
hearings each year we get more
and more but we're up against
the limit of what we can do with
current s.
So tree to page ten comparing
the executive and lfc
recommendation
you know the executive
recommendation does give us the
money that we need to.
To finally tackle the salary
competitiveness gap.
They were been talking about for
three years and higher that alj
advanced position to assist i've
the lfc recommendation does some
of that but not enough I I don't
think to really address the
competitiveness gap despite this
post survey would currently have
work although the narrative
language suggests it supports
hiring a new a l j I don't see
how the math on the the actual
recommendation.
So.
Uh just one of the thing quickly
about the narrative causes came
up I believe from vice chair
dixon this summer at the LFC
presentation in some of your
briefing material there is a
reference that we generate over
two million dollars of revenue a
year and that's not correct we
generate last year fifty seven
thousand in revenue for
conducting other agency hearings
the rest of our budget comes
from general funds and their
motor vehicles suspens.
I just want to make sure that
doesn't linger because that was
a concerned this summer
there was also a reference to
having a larger reversion than
we actually did we had a small
reversion of thirty seven
thousand and that's partially
due to the timing of when we
bill
other agencies for the hearing
we just don't have time to
expand the money because if you
do hearings in the fourth order.
It's just not time to
expenditure so i've tried to go
relatively quickly so let me
just wrap up by saying.
If we are a small agency.
Three hundred in.
I forget the exact number but
three hundred and some thousand
is not in insignificant amount
of money we want to be good
stewards and we realize it's a
lot but in the grand scheme of
the state budget it is not that
much and so we would ask you
respectfully to consider the
executive recommendation or at
the very least criticism on a
list of working groups to
discuss and try to reconcile and
get some more funny involved and
for that amount of money you can
insure you have subject matter
experts in these important areas
that affect your budgeting that
affect businesses that affect
public safety and that promote
good governments and public c.
And without a stand for your
questions.
At mrperiod chair and
representative dicks and yes it
would allow us essentially fully
up implement the spell
recommendation for company
classification and most
certainly to get parody with tax
and revenue I think the spell
recommendation is even a bit
more.
Mister charion representative
dicks and I believe it's just
one one additional
administrative large.
Actually the sea.
Yeah mr chair up representative
my understanding is that the
executive and the lfc both
recommend the new fte but I
don't believe the lfc has the
additional funding for that fte
their wreck would
would have them i.
Without ability
and they've been to reiterate
that's current that all is
correct one ft slight increase
and other costs funding category
as well as a little bit of a
bump there in the personal
service.
The pres.
Good government.
Yes of course mister chair
representative the technical
correction would just change the
amount in the language from
fifty thousand dollars to one
hundred thousand dollars that
would then match the amount
that's in either recommendation.
The.
This
mister cherry representative
garrett we at this excuse me
at this point I say we are
predominantly zoom hearings or a
telephone insurance were
probably seventy percent remote
it depends on what people want
if they wanted in person hearing
we do provide in person hearings
and we do hearings all across
the state not just at those four
locations we go to the county of
where someone is arrested for
the dwiss of the tax during the
usually you're in santa fe
and they have by statute they're
permitted to request a video in
we do probably about fifty fifty
of the tax hearings are in
person versus on video or at
least having witnesses appear of
your video so they don't have to
drive to send.
Of the apply consent requires in
person hearings
but we we do ever regulation
where effectively people can
consent to telephonic and video
hearings before the pandemic no
one really like to do that since
the pandemic even people who are
skeptics of it initially for the
most part have accepted that
this is a good way to do
business.
So like you said it's probably
seventy thirty or maybe even a
little stronger maybe eighty
twenty.
Mister chair and representative
guarantee
with respect I think maybe the
narrative is a little off there
that is part of our need because
hst has informed us were about
and we have gotten many more
cases this fiscal year then we
had at that time and we're going
to get more I think starting in
september but it's not just hsd
it's the other agency hearings
that we do work for the early
childhood that education cares
become a big area where we do
hearings are the state ethics
commission the change of statute
last year gave the hearing
officer a much more active role
in the problem because
determination we're not their
exclusive agency that does their
hearings but when we do them it
takes more work.
And and just
event since we submitted this
budget i've had three other
agencies reach out and say can
we do hearings I think the state
broadband I don't know their
action in the infrastructure and
broadband agency the public
employee labor relation board in
a few other agencies said can
you do more and i'm getting
close to having to say no cause
I just there's no one else I can
send to do the work.
What we're going to do.
Thank you mister chair members
the committee.
Can I ask one clarification is
that appropriate
does the motion also have to
indicate refer to a working
group or that is something you
all know internally.
Okay thank you very much mister
chairman.
Yeah.
This.
Yeah.
Thank you mister chair i'm with
that open up my name is a
tourist on the fiscal analysts
for the olive seak i'm with me
today's.
Chairs turn me first sorry long
day my apologies
so what I would begin with the
different some presentation in
regards to keep this really
straight forward
the lsc and executive
recommendation across the board
is pretty aligned with
themselves except with the
acception of the five thousand
dollars additional reve.
And this essentially was for an
mo with a animal edge that
provides
that the senate are the ethics
commission provides attorneys
for a training and they get
money back from animats for that
so that's why the additional
revenue was included in the
executive recommendations I just
wanted to know that on both them
recommendations include the
additional attorney position and
then my DFA analysts and I were
able to reach consensus on all
measures and my apologies i'll
turn it over to my df
counterpart.
Thank you mister chair again i'm
very bad that's for the dfa
analyst and I am subbing for the
analyst who typically has this
agency
and so with that i've I truly
have.
Mister chair committee members
it's good to be with you jeremy
faras directors.
The ethics commission is three
main things.
We receive invest.
The ethics commission also.
File sub.
Advisory ab.
Since the time we've been here.
This morning you were briefed
on.
Um.
Hst.
On january thirtieth.
The.
Before we follow that lawsuit.
I think that's reflected.
The.
My counterparts were talking
about was just the five thousand
dollars of non general fund.
The.
I'm.
This request is recommendation.
We've had a summer associ.
The.
And we need an additional fte.
And the other the other.
The.
And so mister chair and.
I'd ask that go with you.
Of the other.
Thank you.
Those are provided by our
attorney.
Government.
The ones that we offer.
In the past year we.
Every year.
We're in this.
That's kind of where we sit.
The difference that.
That's a concern.
I'm still looking for.
Yeah.
The.
The.
Yeah.
Yeah.
Okay
mister chair members the
committee good afternoon my name
is julysa and I am the let's see
analysts for congress until tech
for this agency please refer to
documents under tab four and
that's agency code four nine
zero
you can also look at your volume
to page two thirteen for the
full lfc recommendation
and i'm joined today by.
General manager of the cumbers
and all text even butler as well
as do a budget analyst monica at
the bm.
So starting off with the revenue
over all the other seen the
executive recommendations were
identical they both decreased
general fine by seventeen point
two thousand and
decreased other revenue by five
hundred and six thousand.
The.
Going on to expenditures the
location the executive were
again identical
boat decrease contractual
services and that's for reward
railroad up reading expenditures
and also increase other services
by that seventeen point two
thousand and that's for
increased insurance cost.
And i'll now pass it over to the
fa analysts might not get the
fear for more insights.
Representatives we're here
essentially representing the the
coverage and told tack as as I
seem to all knows is jointly
owned by the two states
observed
III made bode i'm i'm government
relations person for the
railroad have been with them for
a number of years now my
colleague here is and boston
stephen butler use the recently
avoided general manager.
And a hill here as the questions
as well
just to introduce what we're
doing here
for over fifty years now the two
stores did two states of new
mexico and colorado jointly
owned the comparison to all take
cynic railroad.
And have her both jointly
supported the operations of it
the funding there were seeking
today is to support the
administrative part of
supporting the commission which
the states are point is duped to
provide the oversight for the
rare road itself and has as it
was introduced a but we've been
getting up i'm an amount of
three hundred and sixty one
point eight for for a number of
years unfortunately inflation is
caught up with us and we've
asking for a modest and
increased now of seventeen point
two thousand to offset part of
the insurance cost that it takes
to ensure that this property at
this time.
So that's our primary purpose
documents within within europe
material there point out how
that money is spent essentially
the the operation of the
commission represents relatively
small part of the economic
impact of of operating the
railroad
but it's very important to and
it's important that the
oversight provided by the
commission be supported.
And i'd be happy to entertain
questions if you have
understood.
Like to say anything.
It's a chair better members the
committee thank you
I moved to the rairroad.
The process is here and will
answer what a requestions I can.
The.
In your.
The.
I have a question how much
reven.
So two years ago or so mister
chairman members of the
committee two years ago we did
about economic inpact study
covering the five counties in
northern new mexico and southern
colorado and we bring in over
seventeen million dollars
between the rare road and all
the associated businesses the
help support it will in the
hotels restaurants gas stations
and.
Yeah.
The.
Mister
representative
over the years quite a few
movies have been filmed at the
rare road we presently are
working with a
two different ones for hopefully
the spring and our summer
last year we did a small past
day filming project with
kevin caster.
That we have to potential major
ones that.
Yeah.
Yeah.
Thank you very much.
The.
