For both the investment in the
accounting staff it is a very
challenging environment.
since there's a lot of upper
pressure on salaries which we're
working to address while hiring
and this results in some
adjustments that we're going to
have to make up for current
employees because we're having a
hiring people at salaries higher
than the existing employees by
the end of fiscal year twenty
four we are very likely to be at
the thirty one fill positions if
we receive the need funding for
the additional five that we
requested.
All the funding for the
operations and I think this was
mentioned earlier of the US I
see is from the land grant
permanent fund in the severance
tax permanent fund and this is
augmented by fees from clients
in the other funds that that we
manage you use of funding
amounts at the end of fiscal
year is reverted back to the
land grant permanent fund in the
severance tax permanent fund.
For fiscal year twenty three of
this is proving to be a very
challenging year in terms of
returns as well as fiscal year
twenty two with that said if
there is a positive regarding
this market is we're making up
for some of the market losses
with the increased inflows and
we have less budget pressure as
it relates to management fees as
of the management phase ties
with the asset growths that are
happening with that in mind the
most important thing in our
appropriation request is the
funding of the additional five
additional employees that we
requested and then finally I
just wanted to point out that
the fiscal year twenty to audit
was completed and submitted by
the November deadline in is
currently available on our
website there were no findings
and no on a proposed adjustments
and without that's all the
comments I have and we're happy
to entertain any questions that
you might have.
thank you for the presentation
of little question from
committee.
Representative the.
Thank you Mr chair.
First off I appreciate the work
that you guys do you live
fortunately
understand what you do maybe but
better than send some media I I
was with the tenant governor
Sanchez for a year so I was able
to see first hand.
some of the stuff that you were.
Doing I do have some questions
though I know that the
parameters and maybe for for the
folks who are.
Listening in and for those in
the room the parameters around.
Your investment guidelines what
best practices.
you have to observe to make sure
that.
Our dollars are safe when
they're invested could we Mr
chair could we briefly discussed
that.
Right yes.
I'd like to introduce if I may
Mister chairman David Smith who
is our chief investment officer.
Thank you Mr Chairman
representative Montoya so so we
we start with a with a robust
investment policy statement it's
is developed a in conjunction
with our consultant and approved
by our council so that that lays
out all the guidelines
you know as to how the money
will be invested.
In your areas we we can and
cannot invested in controls
around those things
from the secondary is we've got
an established investment
process that each of my asset
class directors as they go out
and try to fund managers and
funds to invest in the fall of
the false this specific product
process that as the investment
comes through our our analysis
system I I received the chief
investment officer in in third I
would say a prince got it got a
a robust accounting system
and a very good custodian
JPMorgan so there's controls
around the flow of money and and
and accounting for returns.
You Mr chairman and thanks for
that response maybe a little
more specifically I guess a.
I would like you to maybe talk
about what the quality or of
investments that you're required
to invest in I mean there there
I I know you're being asked to
be as aggressive as you possibly
can but at the same time.
Make sure that we're not overly
exposed or at risk with these
investments and that's maybe at
that that would be able to
better way to have you respond
sure sure Mr chairman and
representative for each of the
asset classes that we invest in
so an asset class would would be
upside domestic equities
international equities private
equity core fixed income those
those are those are some of the
asset classes we invested for
each of those we we do us with
what we call structure study so
we we designed the the portfolio
that will invest in
it's structure anyway
and revisit that about every two
to three years so we've got very
good parameters around how much
risk will take by asset class
and all that rolls up to the
risks that will take and the
total portfolio.
Thank you Mr chairman
Combined with that I know in the
last several years we've had a
maybe a push to have the
investment Council.
Invest in either some specific
items maybe some New Mexico
based businesses as well as
maybe renewable.
Type of of.
Investments
I guess my question is well
along with that.
I know that's a guidance but
there's not a percentage that's
required at this point that you
have to put in those is that is
that correct is that wrong.
Mr Chairman representative I had
yes with the council has
directed director specific funds
at in state investment.
Thank you Mr chairman I guess
the question is there is there a
percentage or is it just a
priority we want to do this or
is there a minimum out of
investments that have to be
directed either towards
renewable sources or to
New Mexico based businesses.
Mr chair Representative Montoya
I to introduce Charlie who is
our director of communications
and legislative affairs and I
think he has more.
Respond Mr chairman we are point
Mr Chairman representative about
twice so I believe what you're
referring to is is the New
Mexico private equity program
where we do invest in inventor
capital funds that in turn
invest in high quality New
Mexico companies by statute we
are limited to eleven percent of
the severance tax permanent fund
and not and by policy the
council targets nine percent of
that fund now that fund is grown
so actually we have a lot more
money to work with in deploying
that that said I think most of
the criticism we hear on that
front is we're too conservative
and we don't push out enough
money in that area and we're
working very hard to.
Make sure that we make very good
investments but these are risky
investments venture capital is
the most risky type of of of
strategy and when you limited to
being in New Mexico you
geographically confined that
you're also running into some
some issues with getting good
financial returns the council
demands that we get good
financial returns so in addition
to creating jobs and industry so
I think that that is what you're
talking about specifically thank
you Mr chairman and I thank you
for that response that is
specifically what I was looking
for I guess the big thing was
for me.
Unlike others who are
criticizing that maybe you're
not being risky enough for as
forward thinking enough I I
appreciate the fact that the
council is still trying to
remain within those safeguards
all investments that I don't
think we need to lower the bar.
So much in the effort to try and
invest in New Mexico.
businesses to the point that it.
That that next year's graph
doesn't look like the one you
gave me today the one and and
and Mr chairman just kind of for
the committee and for other
presenters and the audience I
generally have been voting
against.
All budgets that have come
before this this either this
subcommittee or the other one
that I serve on our on the.
For committee and I've and and
in general I'm gonna continue
doing that because first
concerned Mr Chairman that we
are.
then last four years we've grown
the budget from over just a
little over six billion dollars
to in four years over nine
billion dollars and and I just
don't see that a sustainable you
you you all our investment in
the business of investing and
I'm sure you don't expect.
The increases that we've had in
the last four years to continue
and and when we continue to
increase our budget year over
year not just in expenditures
for that year but we're
committing to future years that
increase the budget I I just I
have a hard time justifying that
so I will continue Mr chairman
to to vote against the majority
of the budget that is being
presented to us over the.
Next several days and previously
however I will say.
The best money that we can spend
right now is this investment and
particularly since we are have
we've taken the.
The specific extra effort to
give more to public schools and
we've gone after the fund I
think is that much more
important that you who are
managing the fund are prudent.
And if that means you need more
staff to manage what are more
dollars so this will be Mr
Chairman probably the only time
today I will vote to that with
with everyone else to pass the
budget but I just believe Mr
chairman and and.
Members investment counsel.
This import what you do.
And I don't think we can
highlight any more we we are but
we are fortunate as you said I
think it was stated
Unprecedented.
because of that I think it's
that much more important that we
don't risk our good fortune.
And as much as possible take
advantage of that good fortune
so Mr chairman that's really my
statement there but I I do
appreciate in the meantime since
you still since one of your
goals is to invest I want to
make sure that was a goal I was
just asked that by
Representative Allison
that you do invest in New Mexico
projects I believe Mr Allison
myself my yield protein you
later on about to see what the
parameters around that are but I
would just say.
I'm not going to encourage you
guys to be more risky even on
our behalf.
it is be prudent
we I don't know what's going to
come of us taking more money
out.
Year over year for for public
education I know that's a worth
while because.
Just concerned that the corpus
of the fund continues to grow
and I think that means your job
is more important than ever
thank you Mr chairman.
Thank you Representative Brown.
Thank you Mr chairman and the
panelists thank you for being
here so I looking at this page
assets under management have a
few questions.
So we have a listing of our
funds and their values and at
the present time of this release
perhaps Mr chair you could tell
us which of these funds reflects
in future from oil and gas
activity.
Representative Brown Mr chairman
it is the land grant permanent
fund the first line that you see
under funded valuations.
those are primarily royalties
from oil and gas that passed
through the State Land Office
and that to us.
it Mr chairman and and anybody
on the panel are any of these
others reflective of oil and gas
activity Mr chair.
Great sure so Mr Chairman
Representative Brown yes the
severance tax funds certainly
receives
Basically taxes that are not
used for severance tax bonding
whatever's left after the
bonding process is done we do
get a considerable amount of
money we did last year more than
a billion actually a little a
little bit more than a billion
dollars to the severance tax
fund last year also the tax
stabilization reserve I believe
that some of that money is going
to be source of oil and gas and
early childhood education and
care fund also.
Has some some appropriations
that I think.
You're going to see a pro rata
kind of forty percent number at
least is due to oil and gas
revenues.
Mr chairman and members of the
committee I I raise the question
because it's startling how much
money is actually most of the
money.
That is in being invested here
is sourced out of oil and gas
activity and I'm concerned Mr
chairman there so many efforts
it seems bombardment of bills to
basically strangle the industry
and the effect of that would be
to hurt their the whole state
because so much revenue is
coming out of our oil and gas
and we're fortunate is the state
to have those resources many
states are as fortunate as we
are so I I just want to point
that out are you could add up
the numbers Mr chair you know
twenty five point seven million
seven point six million two
point three million.
Three point four I think these
are billions excuse me.
Add it all up is staggering.
So
Mr chair and mysteries I want to
ask a little bit anybody on the
panel about the early childhood
education and care fund I am
just shocked at how much that
has grown in such a very short
period of time so the
legislature invested about three
hundred million in twenty twenty
at here in December of twenty
two it's already up to three
point four almost three point
five billion dollars.
Could could you just give us a
few thoughts on that if you
would please Mr chair.
Mr chair and representative I
think we are in the surprise
group as well
I I think the the expansion that
we have seen to the tax
stabilization reserve to the
early childhood education and
care fund was not protected that
is in fact one of the biggest
challenges we have is deploying
this money into the asset
allocation that we have that the
council has approved and and is
directing staff to to do it's
getting that money out of cash
and out of fixed income into
things that will earn more.
Proprio a
that that's one of the biggest
challenges that Vince has as our
as our CIO.
Mr chairman and general are you
Sir what's your name my name's
but Charles Waldmann okay thank
you so I guess this question is
directed at you
Okay this has so three point
five almost three point five
billion.
Are there are
Concerns that may be or if
somebody's we've heard some
people say they think we ought
to be taking out of that fund
because its growth brown so
significantly but if you're not
a rolling five year average that
applies to any distribution we
don't have five years under
bills yet so with the early
childhood education but it's
actually a three year rolling
average
and
so the first two years it it had
a floor of twenty million as far
as the distribution next year
was thirty million
this time because we got the
money basically before the end
of the calendar year the third
year a significant portion of
that this year's distribution
will will jump to twenty six
sixty eight million dollars next
year it's going to be
considerably more just because
you roll off one of the the low
valuation years and you add
something well you know more
than three billion is so that
number will go up.
What a bit in the coming years
if the fund is low allowed to
continue to grow that's kind of
how endowments work and
you grow something from very
small to deliver constant
benefits to the state and and we
we as a council very much
support that as a matter of
public policy we're not to the
policy makers however that's
your CA your job.
Thank you for that answer Mr
chairman and and panel so I'm of
the camp of the things that we
leave it alone and let it grow
that's what it down that funds
are meant for and don't violate
the corpus in any way and so
consistent at least with the
land grant permanent fund same
same thought there but my final
question Mr chair.
Has to do with the sovereign
wealth funds of various other
states or governments I believe
we are at forty two point one
eight billion we are among the
top how many would you say Mr
chair.
Hi Mr chair Representative
Brown.
We believe there are.
Thirteen or fourteen sovereign
wealth funds in this nation it's
a little bit hard to determine.
We've been working on.
Designing a group of all the U.
S. sovereign wealth funds to
come together quarterly to share
ideas which we do and the state
investment office coordinates
that we have for the last twelve
years we're the third largest in
the U. S..
Alaska is the largest Texas has
two permanent funds and their
second.
Wyoming and North Dakota also
oil and gas states are in the
top group.
September thirteen of this year
will be pulling all the
sovereign wealth fund leadership
together in Santa Fe.
We've never met in person and
they've asked if they could come
to Santa Fe who wouldn't want to
come to Santa Fe and so we're
looking forward to having them
here for a one day conference on
topics relevant to sovereign
wealth funds thank you yes thank
you I remember we were pretty
high up in terms of valuation so
Mister chair I just say let's
not kill the golden goose what's
let's feed a little bit and so
thank you very much for the time
Mr chair.
Thank you Representative well
they can.
Thank you Mr chair and thank you
for The presentation and your
wonderful stewardship of the
state money I wanted to follow
up on Representative Montoya is
question about investing in
venture capital and start up
companies here in New Mexico and
I was curious is there a list
somewhere or how does one find
out which companies have
received that.
So.
By your we do have quarterly
reporting and and so we can make
that available to you and and
Keep in mind we don't do direct
investments the state's efforts
in that area making direct
investments did not go well so
we tend to rely on the the the
expertise of of feces who are
working on creating deals here
in New Mexico
But
yeah I think I'd I'd rather get
you a copy rather than try to.
All of my memory how many
companies but we're we're
talking about essentially maybe
fifty companies that are still
active and that number grows all
the time there are different
levels of funding in different
ways that the money gets there
through through the funds that
we invest in
and it's it is not easy that
this is this is tough stuff for
you know with venture capital if
you get to good companies out of
ten.
You're doing very very well.
Thank you very much.
Thank you Representative
Representative Garrett.
Thank you Mr chair thank you
more if you like to take over my
personal finances.
just as a practical question I I
wanted vision so your twenty six
employees you're asking for I
and then you have additional
contracts for that.
How many more additional people
work on those contractors
consultants Mr Chairman.
Roughly
well I can tell you that how
many consultants we have we we
do you know where we are
allocators so we take the money
and we route it
into various strategies and we
use outside experts consultants
we have a general consultant we
have a private equity consultant
we have a real estate and real
return consultant real return
is.
Things like infrastructure
timber hard assets energy
what am I leaving out credit and
structured that is another
advisory firm that we use and
those firms have the.
Substantial resources many many
people work on our accounts and
we haven't even got to our our
list of managers or their so it
is a big process and we have
oversight from the council and
staff oversees the nuts and
bolts of day to day deployment.
So Mister chairman that the
twenty six current employees
well twenty four plus two and
plus I those are New Mexico
based people yes okay thank you
very much for that explanation
that's my question thank you
Representative Representative
functions thank you Mr chair.
But a few little questions.
your C. forty eight over forty
one billion dollars how much of
that is invested in New Mexico.
Directly Mr chair
We probably have five hundred
million through the New Mexico
venture program as far as total
assets there are other.
Is that are not specifically
targeted but funds that we
invest in have made investments
here and so it's not something
that we calculate because it
often times we don't know the
the the level of transparency
isn't always there if if you
have a for example of a company
that owns
a business
it lets a corporation a national
corporation with a a branch in
New Mexico and entail if you
will
that that's a New Mexico
investment but our exposure is
tough to break break that out.
Thank you Mr chair you set year
vestment to New Mexico is
limited to a certain percentage
did I get that right or am I
wrong there is a specific part
of statute the specific to the
severance tax fund severance tax
one is special in the in the the
effect that it can make
differential right investments
different rate means below
market so we're expecting
slightly lower financial returns
if there's an offset of job
creation industry creation and
that's essentially what
that is the the statute I
referred to earlier as nine
percent of the severance tax
fund severance tax fund is at
seven point six billion dollars
of time percent of that by
policy we're we're targeting
about seven hundred.
Million dollars or so so Mr
Chairman someone mentioned
recently that you guys have
invested over a hundred fifty
million in renewables in New
Mexico is that true.
We have probably invested in
in funds and that the commitment
to that fund and and there's
more than one fund that that is
to.
Looking for renewable
opportunities including here in
New Mexico
But the yes we are guided by by
a policy and one of the the
considerations we take whenever
we make a fund commitment is how
that fund is is operated whether
it's done ethically whether
there is good governance and
whether it's environmental
concerns are are a part of how
they do business so we're
picking good managers that do
take those considerations as
part of their but.
Mr chair I I just have a final
comment I just want to say I
know your job is probably the
bottom line is rate of return
but you guys should really look
at the the total.
Total picture I know under is
that your investment council
that dictates what's invested
in.
I guess you have board members
right in the chairman.
Right here Representative
signatures we have eleven
members of the state investment
council and they are the
oversight body of the state
investment office makes
recommendations to them
regarding our investments and
they photo whether vote on
whether or not to approve those
investments thank you Mr
chairman I guess the thing I ask
is
just know just because you don't
get a certain rate of return
sometimes if you invest in
something it creates jobs
there's all other outcomes and
other things that come out of
investing in New Mexico and I
for one I I wish you you have a
lot of money I wish you would
invest more money into our state
because I think that would help
grow our state I know Texas is
on
Colorado are kicking **** other
booming that business booming
that's because they have
investment into right here we
have a huge fund and I don't see
that we're investing our whole
state so I would ask that you
seriously consider looking at
thank you Mr chairman.
Thank you anymore questions the
committee.
Of thanks for the presentation I
have a few questions and
comments of what are your
vacancy rate right now you
should you want to get money for
five new employees what is your
vacancy rate.
Representative Garcia and other
members of the committee we
currently have two vacancies out
of twenty six it might have gone
up to three or four during the
course of the prior year but we
just have to to vacancies and
those vacancies recently
occurred because of retirements
we didn't have those retirement
would be a twenty six employees
right now I think that and
little funded vacancy rate yes
Sir would you the plans of the
vacancy rate if you the people
the what what world from.
pardon me I did not order the
funds.
On the vacancy there funded
vacancy rates right yes and
where does that money go to move
people are a little longer there
because you've been do you have
the money for that it's
Representative Garcia and other
members of the committee if if
there's vacancy savings as of
the end of a fiscal year those
monies are reverted back to the
original funding sources which
is the land grant permanent fund
in the severance tax permanent
fund.
Thank you for that oh oh that to
hear that your auditor good that
I heard that right your auto
good today okay with that
The other gentleman mentioned.
That the top states that have a
permanent fund for oil producing
states that I hear that right.
Correct.
Representative Garcia you did
hear that correctly includes
both Alaskan taxes the Colorado
make the you know New Mexico is
one of the top leaders and and
oil production yet this is Mike
my comment you know my concern
we have to use caution on what
we're doing.
The oil and gas bills away
everything but with that you
know everybody wants clean air
fresh water I wonder about is
everybody else does what we
really need to look at
renewables clitic over the gas
production.
Because I don't think no funding
in renewables to sustain the
loss will to from oil and gas
those are just my concerns and
in all of caution you know there
is a lot of money there want to
tap into your savings account
available we do so we need to be
real careful that Representative
Garcia your concerns are well
founded.
would no more questions for the
committee Mr Chairman legal for.
Mr chair the LFC recommendation.
Of the of the second.
I will have a proper first and
confront perspective before if
that we with that being said
the.
You do are you a new pass on the
this is not considered here is
not all set in stone.
On on your appropriation at the
end of the day one no we report
the main body they will make the
decision if you need more money
or not.
Could you ask for any opposition
to.
Any opposition of sorry.
Is this.
We have no opposition full thank
you for the presentation.
Will now move to of.
Number three forty.
Okay.
You know before before we start
you know I don't look at anybody
short you know you have a lot of
people have questions but this
keep the question and answer is
brief as possible now we we have
other presenters online thank
you for that.
But good afternoon Mr chairman
members of the committee today
we're going to be reviewing the
administrative hearings office
and they are agency code is
three four zero in volume two if
you're following along there on
page seventy four and seventy
five and that's the big Biggie
LFC shaped.
I'll just briefly give a run
through of the differences
between the executive and the
legislative recommendations for
the FY twenty four budget
then I'll hand it over to us our
DFA counterpart Cecilia.
so the LFC recommended to a
little over two million dollars
around two point two from the
general fund.
that's a two hundred and sixty
eight point eight thousand below
the executive recommendation the
LFC recommendation is three
point six increase above that
fly twenty three operating
budget
that this includes the transfer
of sixty seven point seven and
this is largely from the motor
vehicle suspend fund this also
includes a hundred and sixty
five thousand dollars in other
revenues and this is revenue is
that the agency receives from
the department of health for
doing Medicaid hearings.
that the executive me a sorry
excuse me the executive
recommendation includes a two
hundred and eleven thousand
dollar expansion which is from
the general fund and of the LFC
you wreck also has in the base
recommendation a two hundred and
fifty six point seven thousand
below the exec of for personal
services and employee benefits
the executive maintains the F.
T. count at seventeen OO with
one percent vacancy rate.
let's see here.
I wanted to mention also the the
difference in the personal
services employee benefits with
the exact they had a little bit
extra in there for pay
disparities
we were pretty much the same on
contractual which was largely
for increased protest hearings
and then we had a let's see the
twelve point one sorry this
whole point one in other was
largely for increased protest
hearings I wanted to also let
you guys know that in the pub
all U. shaped we have a like a
discrepancy because in the table
we have the LFC is actual budget
recommendation where is in the
narrative we have what was from
catch up cleanup because of when
at Mr vanden then came the for
the initial budget hearing LFC
staff believes that he gave a
very compelling presentation
regarding pay discrepancies for
lawyers so the LFC staff had
done some catch up cleanup for
an additional one percent
targeted salary increase for
lawyers but when this wreck went
through the LESC committee up
for another review the that was
not included they did not
include that they didn't take
that on and as a recommendation
so please refer to the numbers
and the volume for table one and
not for the narrative so just
wanted to point that out to you
and with that I'm gonna go ahead
and handed over to Cecilia.
Chairman members of the.
To performance the analysts have
come to consensus on important
targets and measures regarding
the expansion of the difference
between the recommendation is
for the LFC did not include
expansion request all the
executive recommendation fully
fund the expansion of the
expansion of the incredible to
address pay disparities between
administrative hearings officers
and from the other state
agencies with that I'd like to
pass on to executive director
for any additional information.
Thank you Mr chair members of
the committee my name is Brian
pendens and I'm the chief
hearing officers administrative
hearings office thank you for
this opportunity to address and
I want to take both the analysts
have been very helpful
throughout this process
communicating the basis of their
recommendations to the changes I
also briefly want to introduce
some of my support staff here
this is Tony Montoya refuse our
CFO and she's actually the CFO
to agencies another one you'll
hear later so she works really
hard she's done a great job for
us and I'm proud to say all of
our audits have including
including our most recent one I
know they came up and in the
last a presentation and then
also Mr Chris Romero he's our
tax hearing officer here as
well.
I do have a a power point attend
slide power point.
I run through it gives a little
bit of background of what we do
the basis of our request and why
I believe the executive
recommendation is what this
committee should adopt so
starting with the page two just
to give some context of the work
that we do in FY twenty two you
know the administrative hearings
offices sort of a generic name
it doesn't immediately tell you
what we do we we were not part
of the judiciary but we service
similar purpose in that we
conduct an educated
administrative of hearings for
the executive branch primarily
the taxation and revenue
department and M. B. D. which is
part of taxation and revenue
department and really that
breaks down to the and I'm sorry
we have at ten attorney hearing
officers that do that work in FY
twenty two they averaged.
Two hundred and eighty four
hearings each during the fiscal
year that breaks down into
really two main hearing types
the first is implied consent act
D. W. white license revocation
hearings again a whole bunch of
acronym so let me just tell you
what that means when someone is
arrested for a DUI W. Y.
obviously there's the criminal
prosecution that happens in the
courthouse but the motor vehicle
department which is part of
taxed rap also seeks to revoke
their driving privileges and put
them on a mission lock under the
implied consent act they're
entitled to have an
administrative hearing before
and he can do that we are the
agency that conducts those
hearings and in FY twenty two.
We conducted two thousand six
hundred and twenty four of those
hearings which is about a twenty
percent increase from the year
before and getting close to the
pre pandemic levels FOR D. W.
white license revocation
hearings and one of our core
performance measures is that we
we don't mess those up in terms
of the statutory ninety day
deadline and I'm proud to say
that we always have we we met
the performance measure in FY
twenty two.
Another hearing program that we
do a state tax protests under
the tax administration act in
the property tax code and we did
a hundred eighty for we received
a hundred eighty five new tax
hearings and in the fiscal year
and conducted to earn in two
hearings and we have mats of the
performance measure in that area
to comply with the statutory
time frame.
we also see it a ton of appeals
of those tax decisions that go
right to the court of appeals to
a quarter of our statute those
decisions go right to the court
of appeals and we've been
affirmed in approximately eighty
I think it's actually gone up
since I did this presentation
about eighty percent of the
cases the court of appeals is
affirming our tax protest
decisions and then another thing
that we've been doing that I
want to highlight because I
think it's a value added
savings to state government and
also good government is we've
been doing the other agency
hearings other executive branch
agency hearings and we in FY
twenty two we did nineteen of
those for oil four four agencies
the board of nursing the state
ethics commission CYFD and the
medical board
We continue to do these because
we it we can do them at a more
cost efficient and
you know we have expertise
administrative law then if these
agencies had to go out and
contract with private attorneys
to service hearing officers so
we think we're saving the state
money and we're doing a good job
being an independent curing
agency doing that we continue to
do that work in the current
fiscal year and we have added
The early childhood education
and care department I think I
got the record and correct to
that roster here in the current
fiscal year turning to page
three I wanted to talk about
challenges because they really
inform to both our appropriation
request and why we believe the
executive recommendation is more
appropriate and our challenges
aren't that different than what
I'm sure you're hearing from
every agency in the first
challenge is on anticipated
staffing losses and retention
challenges as an agency we
tragically lost one of our
employees in a car accident and
we we have another couple please
leave and we found out as every
other agencies told you in the
current labor market hiring new
positions what we have budgeted
for salaries does not match what
it takes to hire someone so we
to go through multiple hiring
cycles increase our pay
significantly in addition we had
employees entertaining
competitive offers from other
agencies and other entities and
you know our agency our focus is
our people and doing the work
and so we acted aggressively to
match those offers offers and as
a result of that we've increased
our category two hundred costs
quite significantly over what
was budgeted.
Also we did every version I know
it's a question that comes up
all the time it was a small
reversion but I just want to
point out that our reserve
reversion is largely attribute
the tribunal to two factors
outside of our control the first
is we do those do those other
agency hearings I don't want to
bore you with the details but
when we don't late in the fiscal
year particularly when we have
big cases like we did in FY
twenty two by the time we bill
the agency for the work get the
money back there is a budget
adjustment moratorium in place
and we can't move the money so
it's it's center account but
it's never there for us to spend
and then the end of the fiscal
year comes and gets reverted
back to the general fund.
Of and then we also had a a big
furniture order for remodeled
office space in Santa Fe with a
fender late in June said we
can't fill this and we don't
have time to spend it elsewhere.
Turning to page four our
appropriation request really the
story ties back to acting
aggressively to keep our
employees and fill positions of
we asked for a five percent
increase in our base budget to
meet our status quo payroll.
And then we also ask for
expansion request a significant
expansion request to address two
important issues that are going
to become problems in the future
if we don't do something about
it one of them is the tree
salary competitiveness in
another's court clerk staff
compaction in the next two
slides of a brief we cover that
funds on slide five as I
mentioned are I I think I
mentioned this and if I didn't
mention it now are hearing
officers have to be attorneys
under the structure of the
statute and regulations and the
work that we do and so we look
to the attorney market for a
salary comparisons and when you
when you do that we provide our
hearing officers are not there's
a a gap between what they're
paid and what the average
attorneys rate in New Mexico and
we can actually just start in
state government with tax and
Representative who is the agency
that appears in front of us most
frequently to do these tax
hearings to do the and we do
work are hearing officers on
average are paid ninety nine
thousand which we're super you
know in New Mexico that's a big
number we're super thankful that
we've been there but when you
compare it to relevant agencies
taxed revenues paid almost a
hundred and ten thousand so ten
thousand dollars or more more
than we are.
They show up they do the
hearings and we're the ones
tasked with deciding the case
and then if you look at in
twenty seventeen the state park
commission research and polling
which I think everyone can
probably agree is a pretty
reputable polling firm in the
state to do a survey of lawyers
and in twenty seventeen they
found the average lawyer salary
New Mexico is a hundred and
forty two thousand one out
twenty twenty three in the six
plugging labor market so we know
that number is much higher
probably than it was in twenty
seventeen.
And then if you look to a
private tax attorney with seven
years of experience in
Albuquerque there average pays a
hundred ninety eight thousand
twice that of the hearing
officer why is that relevant
because these again are the
people who are going to appear
in front of us to argue their
their tax issues they're gonna
have the same level of knowledge
and experiences the tax revenue
tourney's hopefully and also the
hearing officer deciding the
case and this would be the pool
if I had to hire a new hearing
officer at I'd have to turn to
to taxed wrap in the private tax
attorneys and I can imagine
someone might take less to come
work for a good agency like HL
but we are asking private tax
attorney to take a fifty percent
pay cut that's really not
realistic.
it's so we did an expansion
request in I'm sorry one other
thing you know we're a small
agency it's sort of easy to
overlook our role but what we do
has real consequences for you
and for business.
Each year on the tax protest
side we educate hundreds of
millions of dollars some years
half a billion up to a billion
dollars worth the tax protests
usually in business credits
rebates.
And those numbers matter to you
as appropriators what revenue
with the state have what do you
what can you spend and it
matters to the businesses as
well.
And they do their budgeting for
the year to they want to expand
in New Mexico to they want to
come to New Mexico and so the
work that the hearing officer's
D. was critically important and
then I think it probably goes
without saying but I'm gonna say
it anyway on the implied consent
D. W. I. side that affects
public safety the decisions the
hearing officer's make on
licenses so although we're a
small agency we have a big
impact in two important ways and
I submit to this committee into
the legislature that it is
important that you have subject
matter experts in both of these
fields and to ensure that you do
need to make sure one of the
things you need to do is check
the salary competitiveness and
as for starting to fall behind
this is an area our our budget
hope to address similar
similarly excuse me we have a
court class the court court
clerk staff forgive me that does
a lot of critical work there are
paralegals that help get these
cases scheduled LFC did report
in August on state personal
compensation and twice it noted
that H. show was one of those
agencies that it at least
appeared that during the last
compensation package of we
suffered from compaction and
really we can see this in our
court clerk staff these are long
time long serving dedicated
employees they create our files
they interact with police
officers and attorneys and
continuances they make very very
important legal decisions about
when cases should be scheduled
where they should be scheduled
who should appear and their
salaries just have not kept pace
with newer hires in state
government.
Prime example of this is our
lead our chief clerk she's been
with us for twenty years she
always has exemplary performance
evaluations that's the highest
level you can have in state
government and her efforts are
critical in us always meeting of
performance measures we pull the
for salary information despite
being with us for twenty years
she's in the bottom third of all
employees in for classification
and all of state government
including behind many newer
hires with lesser experience.
And so that's why we made the
recommendation are the request
excuse me that we did and that's
why today I ask you to consider
the executive budget
recommendations which does
provide an increase of the base
budget of five point seven
percent.
Which lets us meet our existing
status quo payroll and it also
provides for the expansion
funding up to address these two
a true the attorney's salary
competitiveness in court clerk
compaction issues and also just
real briefly and I I'm I'm about
to wrap up it also
provides special funding totally
forty seven point seven and
critically recommends language
to extend existing FY twenty
three funding for special I T.
project we're developing a case
management program in FY twenty
four I'll talk about that a
little bit more here in a moment
but I do want to compare the
executive recommendation to the
LFC recommendation on page eight
which I think you you are to get
a good summary of the LFC would.
You I have a great deal of
respect for the work that you
ought to do the tough choices
you have to make every agency is
needs and you have to see from a
statewide perspective and
frankly in watching your
hearings and the process over
the years and blown away about
the quality and seriousness of
your thought and your work but
in this particular case the
budget recommendation is is an
adequate to fund existing status
quo payroll in the category to
hundreds let alone a in fact
we've been the red by
approximately thirty thousand
dollars just to start the fiscal
year let alone address any of
those competitiveness issues and
LFC itself I think recognizes
that gap in volume three on page
seventy five at this age show
starting here and I had a
balance.
And so for that reason that's
why we do not prefer the LFC
recommendation.
And as the.
Miss Anderson referenced you
know after we give the last
presentation of there was an
narrative we're LFC staff
apparently tried to to indicate
another approximately ninety
thousand dollars or one percent
to address the salary
disparities it got into the
publication at least as an it's
available on the website but
apparently as she explained it
didn't make it through the catch
up and clean up process pro for
the legislation and it's not
before you today are not
reflected on your different
sheet but in wrapping up if you
are going to stick with the LFC
recommendation I at least ask
that you reconsider that staff
the LFC staff recommendation for
that additional one percent
ninety thousand that at least
gives us status quo payroll in
the category two hundred and a
little bit of a start towards
addressing the salary
disparities that said I still
think the executive
recommendation is the one that
this committee should adopt it
fully addresses this the status
quo payroll it fully addresses
the salary issues of RT talked
about in under either some
scenario I do ask that you
include language extending our
current special project funding
into FY twenty four we just
we're completing phase one of
our case management development
and we're about to transition
into phase two rollout it will
mostly hopefully mostly be done
in the current fiscal year you
need to Representative financial
this is my final point and but
it may roll over a little bit in
FY twenty four that's why we
need that language and with that
I stand for your questions thank
you Representative Dixon.
thank you Mr chair and and thank
you some analysts and director
of my question is actually to
miss Anderson and I'm wondering
If you could talk a little bit
more about.
What LFC or what we're doing to
sort of address the pay
disparity and the
competitiveness
Particularly in this agency but
you know it it does seem to be
an issue in other agencies as
well and so as just hoping you
could talk a little bit about
that.
I'm gonna feel have Joey Simon
R. so
So you're correct we've noted
multiple agencies have come to
you with pay disparity issues
that's one of the reason the LFC
recommendation includes one
point two million dollars the
special appropriation to LFC to
work with the department of
finance and administration to
look at this on a statewide
basis and come back to you with
recommendations for how we
address this assistance systemic
issue because you're correct
isn't just one agency you're
gonna hear this over and over
again.
Thank you Mr chair and Mr Simon
I appreciate that and I would
like to ask staff particularly
with this agency.
Talking about the private sector
salary verses a HMO I think
that's it it's an enormous gap
and you know it's not news to
any of us that you know we want
to make sure that we are hiring
competent
employee is that in compensating
appropriately so
if we could get a little bit
more information
after this on the discrepancy
that was noted and possible.
adjustments that could be looked
into that would I would
certainly appreciate that thank
you Mr chair thank you
Representative Brown.
Mr chair
And thank you to the panel so
Mister van Denison I believe it
is that's correct could you tell
us please help people hear about
the administrative
hearings office I I have been on
this committee for a while and
honestly I don't remember a
hearing maybe I was on a
different sub committee but
seems to be a rather obscure
agency in state government but
doing very important work so if
you could just tell us how
people find out about you Mr
chair.
Mr chair Representative Brown
thank you it and the name makes
it even more obscure is that's
pretty bureaucratic name
So.
We're not like in a agency that
goes out an advertiser selves we
have such a discreet role the
cases come to us under the tax
administration act by statute
lays out when we're involved in
the case.
The people do not come to us
usually to file a case with us
the file a protest with taxed
Representative first and then
the statutory requirements kick
in
that taxed rebel then refer the
case to us and we will set a
hearing a conduct hearing we do
have a website we do a one of
our core performance measures is
we have outreach with hearing
participants were we provide
trainings and we do a lot of
that is focused on the D. W. Y.
side where will train law
enforcement and defense bar in
everything better hearing
process but we of you know I've
talked to the New Mexico CPA
society I've talked to of the
Albuquerque chamber of commerce
Tax committee we will reach out
to the different agencies that
are involved in the tax world as
well and we'll do some trainings
and cover material with them I'm
not sure I'm completely
answering your your question but
it we we do have such a discreet
in their statutory role we're
not an agency that has a huge
footprint.
We only really exist when
there's a specific controversy
and then we get involved.
Mister chair Mister Clinton's
and thank you for that so I look
at the performance measures and
see that you aim to have.
Cases resolved or at least
hearings held within ninety days
and your success rate of doing
that is really high
Mister chair Mister equipment
and so with you're doing fine on
that without the extra.
Compensation for your employees
but I just wanna let you know
that's that's a pretty
commendable time frame for for
hearing the last thing I have
Mister chairman and Mr Denson
is.
I I heard you say a little bit
about tax protest could you tell
the committee what amount is in
controversy right now I think
you mentioned it but I didn't
catch it how much is in current
amount in controversy regarding
tax protest because until we
know that revenue is due to the
state of course it's not there
and it can't be used.
I think it's a rather large
number if I recall last time I
heard Mr chair.
Mr chair members of the
committee.
Forecheck KQV exact amounts but
what I can tell you.
Is in August of twenty twenty
two one LFC does it's a
consensus revenue forecast and
I'm sorry I have not checked the
most recent consensus revenue
forecast but the volume of tax
protest the number in dispute
was listed as one of the I think
the top five outsize risks to
the forecast is potentially
having the forecast come in much
lower up I think the last time
we had a a number somewhere
around one.
Well I should be careful even
speculating because I haven't
updated number recently and I
honestly can't remember now it's
somewhere in the neighborhood of
six hundred million to a billion
dollars.
Mr chairman I think that's
important for us to know and
then finally I just Mr Chairman
really sympathetic to the need
to make some adjustments you're
the budget and if we take the
LFC record I hope we'll take a
closer look later do what we can
thank you thank you
Representative all in requests
from committee.
Mr chair members the committee I
just want to point out one
involved with speaker of
secondary office sorry just one
small difference no in the base
that was provided on the
different sheet the base
difference between the executive
and the LFC recommending is
fifty seven point eight
overall from the base and the
remaining two hundred eleven is
from the expansion so those are
broken out into two different
things thank you.
A request.
Of the you know.
The question of the COVID.
The judge recommendations if
there's issues that we need to
address to make it whole well we
can work with staff on on
additional issues with.
Sometimes it doesn't matter what
we want to do or what you're
trying to ask for but if
possible there are the
possibilities are there that
this is not written in stone it
is recommendation okay.
Thank you for the Mr chair
buster Mr Chairman as you
mentioned earlier bit building a
base budget so we always start
with the lowest recommendation
and we'll talk later
but Mister chair I move the LFC
budget.
The the well public of the
second any opposition.
We have one in opposition.
Representative want to move on
to a so with that being said
For more for that on your on the
recommendations of the LFC thank
you thank you for your time.
Of the next presentation we're
going to morph the.
Is it three seventy eight to the
third spot and will continue off
from that that is the state
state personnel board.
This could be
the most people know more than
what.
The boss.
Yes.
Data.
Good afternoon Mister chairman
and I members of the committee
my name is just as Simon I am
your LFC analyst for the state
personnel board that's HSD three
seven eight in your packets and
with me today is today's a
Padilla who is the director of
the state personnel office as
well as Nicholas yes the DFA
analyst just very briefly I
wanted to point out to you there
are in your volumes a variety of
resources that deal with state
compensation and employment
issues including page eighty six
to ninety of volume one which
looks at the state employment
system this the state prison
officers report card is located
on page one fifty six of volume
one and the LESC recommendation
for this agency begins on page
one thirty three of volume to.
Mr chairman on just very quickly
the LFC and Executive
recommendations are have a have
a small difference of seven
point five thousand dollars
essentially the reason for this
is due to the agencies are a
revenue from HR shared services
basically the department
provides human resources
services to a number of small
agencies eleven I believe is the
number that they provided they
receive revenue from those
agencies
you know through memorandums of
understanding the LFC
recommendation was based on a
earlier projection of that from
from CPO the DFA are the
executive recommendation added a
little bit more based on updated
projections from the agency with
that I'll just handed over to Mr
season to see if she has any
anything to add on that.
Mr chair members of the
committee L. further adds to
this and I will serve for our
facility director for the F. for
purposes would just I real quick
Mr chairman I just want to know
we have come to consensus on
performance measures.
Director.
Thank you.
Good afternoon I'm tested but is
now director
I will schools in the interest
of time I will go quickly
through our our slide
presentation
pointing out the state personal
budget is just over.
Just over four million dollars
four point four point three
million dollars is our request.
Our budget is.
I merrily general funds and also
the other state transfers the
jury just alluded to for HR
shared services.
Our expenses are in the two
three and four hundred
categories.
In FY twenty three our FY twenty
three includes a hundred and
eighty two thousand dollars in
revenue for HR shared services
that wasn't included in house
bill two the we are working with
the executive to have board
language to be able to move that
money into our budget.
the R. increase for FY twenty
four is entirely that hundred
and eighty two thousand dollars
to be able to bring in the
revenue from our shared services
our shared services actually
Services fourteen different
agencies and what our shared
services does is it provides HR
services to the smaller agencies
so that they can utilize their
to hundreds money to fill
programmatic positions.
we have the average cost of
agencies using HR shared
services is about sixteen
sixteen thousand six hundred
with the lowest being two two
thousand five hundred a year and
the highest building thirty nine
thousand a year the average cost
of a nature are provide
professional for an agency the
size would be eighty thousand
dollars for for their salary
plus benefits which results in
a significant savings of
approximately seven hundred and
three thousand dollars to the
state for those fourteen
agencies across the state.
Of our changes to expenses our
personal services and benefits
of increased due to salary
increases over FY twenty two in
FY twenty three our FY twenty
four request contractual
services remained flat the
thirty three percent increase
in.
Our our contractual services
from FY twenty two to FY twenty
three was the need for
additional professional services
contracts including a contract
for social media advertisement
as well as training agency
training and mediation services
for education.
Division.
in FY twenty four or other
expenses category decreased by
eight percent due to a reduction
in employees travel both in
state and out of state as well
as a concerted effort to review
our R. T. and cell phone charges
and inactivate.
services that were no longer
being utilized.
In FY twenty three our
priorities are to continue to
expand training opportunities
for HSD provided by the state
personnel office to agencies
we're going to we are increasing
our impact talent and talent
acquisition working with
agencies to promote job
advertises dot job
advertisements through paid
marketing and.
social media.
continuing we continue to work
with agencies to provide
recruitment and retention tools
and address their critical
vacancies HSD specific needs.
We are in the process of
implementing an automated
process through which actions
will be submitted and routed
across agencies.
and we are also committed to
implement strategies that allow
first stakeholder feedback and
process improvement.
The next two pages on the.
On in the presentation last two
pages on our presentation our
our response to the.
The legislative the LFC.
We should program devaluation.
The program evaluation conducted
of the state personnel office
over the summer
Just a couple of highlights
The.
The.
Program evaluation staff.
Noted that there were problems
with the FY twenty three
increase in the way that that
was distributed across agencies
we feel that that increase was
actually successful and when it
was set out to accomplish
because we're trying to move
everybody up to a fifteen dollar
an hour minimum wage.
In order to do that we had to
adjust pay bands and we had to
adjust our.
Our strategy of of distributing
the the legislative increases
no employee received less than a
four percent increase in that.
another.
Another point in in the LFC
review was that
CPO should continue to expand
the delegation of HR approvals
the.
We have a pilot program with New
Mexico Environment Department
and none of their transactions
need to come to the state
personnel office for approval
and so
we've noted that that the pilot
program has not necessarily been
very successful it hasn't either
hurt or help the agencies
vacancy rate last year at this
time there vacancy rate is
almost exactly the same number
as it was prior to the
The.
Pilot project that was that was
implemented there that was
entered into with them we have
about ten percent of the
agency's transactions HR
transactions need to come to the
state personnel office it's
promotions less than five
percent over fifteen percent in
pay band adjustments
Typically not routine
transactions most of the routine
transactions are processed by
the agencies we read we review
about ten percent of their
actions and it takes it.
Increases processing time by an
average of about eleven days to
have an actual income through
the state personal office it in
July of twenty twenty two the
state personnel office worked
with our partners at DEFA and
revised Representative approval
authorities to decrease the
amount of transactions that then
have to also go to DFA for
approval and we've noticed that
that has made a significant
difference in the number of of
days that it takes us to approve
transactions
The state personnel office.
Implemented a.
Statewide an exit interview
survey system and we that
continues to.
That continues and we're sharing
those exit interviews surveys
with agency HR staff were then
able to address specific agency
issues
Think of final not there were
more than one recommendation I'm
doing this in the in the
interest of time
an additional recommendation but
the program review stuff is that
supposed to develop an action
plan to review classifications
and.
Re and reduce the number of
classifications that we have in
the system in December of twenty
twenty two we reviewed all of
our classifications and we
reduce the number of
classifications that we have by
two hundred and five
classifications that we're no
longer used currently we have
about a thousand ten
classifications and a hundred
and fourteen pay balance
With that I will stand for any
questions that you might have.
Thank you Mr chair and thank you
analysts and and director pia
for secretary I don't know act
correct okay
Thank you for I'm talking about
the
recommendation about the
reviewing classifications I
appreciate that because that was
one of my concerns and some
pleased to hear that you were
able to review all twelve
hundred classifications
eliminated two hundred.
Two fifty two hundred and five
and so that has been reduced.
Could you give me a sense of the
breakdown
of how much the
responsibilities for your office
are sort of H. our
responsibilities that some of
the other agencies do on their
own verses.
Unique
responsibilities that you guys
have.
Chair representative the state
personnel office only does.
Routine HR services for the
fourteen agencies that we that
we find shared services to
otherwise the state personnel
office reviews only
classifications and I mean
Re classifications of physicians
and promotion promotional
increases or increases that are
outside of the
Outside of the normal increases
so an increase over fifty
promotional increased over
fifteen percent on it in pay
band adjustment
Salary upon transfer over ten
percent so it's it's things that
are that are less routine most
of the H. R. transactions are
handled.
All of the HR transactions are
handled by the agencies but most
of the proposals for
compensation classification
are actually for compensation
are within the agencies with
only about ten percent of those
coming to the state personnel
office.
Mr chair and director Padilla
so.
Isn't trying to figure out.
What the bulk of responsibility
is so is it managing the the
classifications and pay bands.
So it is that chair
representative of a good portion
of our work is working directly
with the agencies to address
classifications com a
compensation we do a a number
of.
Classification studies
throughout the year for example
we had several agencies come to
us and ask us to review the
classifications that require a
peace officer certification so
we worked with several agencies
throughout the state that had
different classifications
employees into a number of
different classifications but
part of the requirements for
their agencies like I'll game
and fish was one part of the
requirements for their some of
their positions was having peace
officer certification and so we
worked with those agencies and
created a
peace officer classification and
the pay structure that went with
the peace officer classification
and then agencies are then able
to crosswalk their employees
into those classifications.
So a good portion of our work is
is.
Doing that and another portion
of our work is working with
agencies to help them.
Address their their compaction
issues their salary
you know their salary challenges
there we work with agencies to
help them implement and pay
bandage estimates for groups of
individuals we work with
agencies to help them adjust.
Temporary recruitment or
retention issues that they might
have
we do work with them on on
recruitment in trying to help
them we have a whole group we
have a a group of individuals
that work directly with agencies
to help them trying to reduce
the number of the amount of time
that it takes to fill positions
we support agencies in rapid
higher events we were very small
stuff I tell everybody we're
small but we're mighty we we
touch every agency and we you
know we're we work very very
closely with our agency
counterparts.
Thank you Mr chair thank you of.
So is one of the reasons to have
the state personnel board in
office so that the state
employees that are a moving
between agencies don't encounter
issue.
so you're sort of keeping
everything uniform.
Representative chair
representative yes that is that
is.
Part of the reason that we
review transactions is to make
sure that agencies are applying
compensation.
Uniformly across agencies thank
you and Mr chair it
and director I think what I'm
trying to figure out is the the
value add.
Because I'm some of the agencies
have their own HR component and
so I'm just trying to learn the
different pieces so thank you
very much for bearing with me
thank you Mr chair.
Your.
Thank you Mr chair thank you for
The presentation.
This fourteen agencies that you
work with what percentage of the
employees in teleworking to one
degree or the other.
Do you have any statistical of
the fourteen agencies.
Chair representative of the of
the fourteen agencies I don't
have a specific to those
agencies what percentage of
staff have been still working
but I do have I do have some
information on overall total
working we have about current
this is data as of the pay
period ending December of twenty
December twenty third of twenty
twenty two we had of the sixteen
thousand nine hundred and thirty
six employees we had employed we
have about five thousand eight
hundred and twenty seven of
those employees still working
with.
A smaller subset of about
thirteen hundred and thirty five
employees that we're full time
teleworking so of the employees
that.
That are teleworking most of
them are on a hybrid and some
type of a hybrid schedule okay
so Mister chair the five
thousand eight hundred twenty
seven as a hybrid with a subset
within that the thirteen hundred
correct okay.
Mr chairman and
our panel I'm concerned because
three hundred employees in the
state of Virginia immediately
left when the teleworking policy
was ended
so it's concerning okay but
thank you for having those
figures really appreciate it
thank you swelling question
ripping Representative Lujan
thank you Mr chair.
I have questions about the
diversity of our work.
And whether that helps to ensure
that each one of our departments
which is a state that is
utilized to.
urban and rural people do we
have of COVID adversity.
How effective is one.
The first officer but I do think
you know how.
That so that no one.
Alright without.
Chair representative thank you
for that question we we actually
received funding in last year's
budget appropriation for a.
A diversity officer we received
in our two hundred category for
for a diversity officer they
we're very very fortunate.
The end of the fall to bring on
a new staff person into that
she's an attorney with the a
great background in the issues
and she is in the process of.
Kind of putting her hands on all
of it so we are working in that
direction.
Thank you.
Thank you Representative
Anymore questions committee.
Displeasure very exec
recommendation.
Level of the first proper
second.
Okay Google first proper second
any opposition.
We have one of the nation's
Representative well.
I'm gonna tell you to call.
They're both the same image.
shoot I'm sorry of Mister chair
I remove my recommendation I
move the LFC.
Of of first published second
LOC.
Second.
For the opposition.
Well.
Yes
the.
With that being said we have one
opposition of.
We will accept the LFC
recommendation.
Thank you thank you.
So no it was just accidentally
looking at that.
We'll go ahead and order Agency
three forty two.
Public school insurance
authority.
So Mister chairman as you
mentioned this agency three
forty to the public school
insurance authority the LFC
recommendation you can find on
pages eighty seven in ninety one
in volume two.
Addition I want to point out in
volume three on page forty two
there is a table but we noticed
earlier and actually my the
account partners earlier today
there is an error in the formula
that agency calculates the
percentage I just want to flag
that for you so we'll have to
get you an updated table with
that formula corrected.
so Mister chairman the public
School Insurance Authority is
operated entirely from medical
and risk premiums that are
received from public schools
higher education institution
regional education cooperatives
and other entities that receive
a help or a risk benefits from
the from the agency
These coming into the agency in
the form of other state funds
however because of the funding
structure public schools in New
Mexico the state agency does
have a large general fund
impact.
There are three different
programs we're going to talk
about today the health benefits
program the risk program and the
program of support
program to just to start out
very quickly we have arrived at
consensus on performance
measures
and
With that moving moving on to
the budget program very quickly
the LFC recommendation in a for
public school support includes a
six percent increase in health
insurance premiums that's a
little bit below what the agency
requests but the LFC
recommendation includes a two
percent cost savings for the
agents for the agency through
plan design changes or other
agency initiatives to reduce
costs and reduce the agency's
reliance on fund balance of
seven did you want to make any
comments about the benefits
program a good afternoon Mister
chair members of the committee
my name is Simon Miller and I'm
an analyst with DFA I think it's
important to note that this
budget process doesn't have any
impact on the premium increases
for fiscal year twenty twenty
four the premium increases are
voted on by the New Mexico
Public School Insurance
Authority board and that'll take
place here in the next couple of
months so just just wanted to to
point that out that that
basically this budget process is
a projection of of health and
risk claims expenditures in the
following fiscal year.
Thank showing.
so Mr Chairman moving on to the
risk program which is on the
next page of the page three of
your LFC packet
the LFC recommendation includes
a six percent adjustment to the
risk program to account for the
increased claims activity
in that the Senate Joint talk
about the executive recurring
sketch for you okay sure Mr
chair members of the committee
both recommendations are really
close in the risk program in
terms of projected claims
expenditures next fiscal year.
And then finally in the agencies
programs support budget I'll
just refer you to the far right
column and you'll notice there's
no difference between the LFC
and executive recommendation
there's a little bit of a
difference on how we got there
the executive recommendation
includes an expansion whereas
the LFC recommendation funds
that expansion in the agency's
base budget but overall we get
there to the exact same number.
Senator chair members of the
committee no additional comments
from DFA on program support so
I'll pass it over to the
executive director Mister Santa
thank you Mr Miller thank you Mr
chair members of the committee
we did hand out a presentation
before the interest of time I
would just like to cover about
eight slides that go over our
appropriation request are
expenditures and are eradication
efforts and I would like to
introduce and staff that I have
with me today we have miss Lisa
Jennings who serves as our CFO
and miss NPR to let timeline
Maestas who serves as our budget
Madam.
So like I mentioned for the
interest of time starting on
page four.
Which displays are FY twenty
four appropriation request as
mentioned in his revenues are
derived from other state funds
which are funded through the
state equalization guarantee
appropriation to schools.
The impact on schools for budget
is nine point nine million and
five point three million for
risk APS will receive one fourth
of the total appropriation
increase due to the mechanism of
the funding formula.
And jumping to page seven.
For slide seven.
Slide seven displays are medical
and prescription costs spending
between FY twenty one in FY
twenty two we have a data
warehouse containing eighty
years of data with our budget
consulted with the ability to
drill down on the metrics for
the subset of names your
population we want to look at
such as analyzing information by
plan region condition and cost.
Approximately eighty five
percent of New Mexico members
reside in rural communities
outside of Albuquerque which
offers less provider and
hospital competition and higher
costs to recruit and retain
health care professionals.
Providers attempt to make up for
lower Medicare and Medicaid
reimbursement rates as well.
The authority also offers
behavioral health programs
through our medical care years
consisting of behavioral health
apps virtual video visits and
behavioral health providers
interactive video lessons one on
one coaching for depression and
anxiety to name a few.
Turning over to slide eight.
Slide eight displays are medical
and costs in relation to our
percentage of members by looking
at the illustration we can see
that five percent of men to
members Representative sixty two
per five point five percent of
medical spending and fifteen
percent a members Representative
eighty one point nine percent of
medical spending total.
Turning over to page ten.
Looking at our COVID expenses
for FY twenty through FY twenty
two.
This slide represents our COVID
nineteen costs so far NMPSIA has
occurred over forty million in
expenses the authority did
receive a fifteen million dollar
appropriation in the FY twenty
two legislative session I will
be asking for two more
appropriations this upcoming
session one appropriation for
twelve million sixty seven
thousand one hundred and sixty
three dollars to reimburse costs
prior to March third of twenty
twenty one in general fund and
one for twelve million nine
hundred and eighty six thousand
seven hundred and thirty five
dollars in either general fund
or arpa funds to reimburse costs
after March third of twenty
twenty one.
Looking at slide thirteen.
Slide thirteen displace some of
our benefit cost saving
measures.
NMPSIA has implemented next
generation transformation
diabetes care and hypertension
program through CVS for all
members which enables them
access to remote engagement
digital and virtual visits and
certified diabetes care nurses
to help manage their conditions
before they were sent.
In the near future NMPSIA will
be looking at offering a Moscow
musculoskeletal solution to help
members cope with me hip
shoulder and other joint
injuries.
The goal of trying to procure
bundled payment arrangements for
surgical services is to ensure a
high level of member engagement
using different tools to support
surgery selection member
satisfaction care coordination
and scheduling through the
selection of centers of
excellence networks that will be
easily assessable to members.
Staff will also be monitoring
the reporting that allows names
yet to monitor the program
including utilization engagement
and cost.
Skipping over to slide sixteen.
Slide sixteen displays rate and
reserve costs related to sexual
molestation and inappropriate
touching claims in policy years
twenty sixteen to twenty
seventeen and twenty eighteen to
twenty nineteen the authority
had cost exceeding twelve
million dollars.
Policy years twenty nineteen to
twenty twenty three are still
immature and we expect costs to
increase for the first seven
months in FY twenty three we
already have as many cases
reported as we did in all of
twenty twenty to twenty twenty
two.
The authority in coordination
with poms and associates has
completed training on sexual
molestation and house bill one
twenty eight which consists of
school personnel background
training vector solutions which
consists of great appropriate
short online courses concerning
child sexual abuse prevention
and professional boundaries in
schools.
NMPSIA general counsel will
conduct training for district
athletic directors and coaches
if also requested.
NMPSIA also has some examples of
social media policies that we
have distributed to member
districts who are interested NMC
has been having meetings on how
to mitigate sexual abuse and
molestation with the likes of
the NMAA BA the attorney
general's office the LFC NEA
themselves NMAA and
representatives from senator Ben
Ray Hans Office.
Turning over to page seventeen
our slide seventeen.
Slide seventeen displays rate in
reserve costs related to
property FY twenty two is going
to be the most expensive claim
here for losses over the last
ten year period some examples of
the losses we've experienced our
lightning damage for one point
eight million fire of one point
four million electrical fire of
one point three million and how
damage of thirty six point three
million for several claims we
also have one big smoke damage
claim in the amount of four
point two million to name a few.
And going over to slide twenty.
More risk cost saving measures
as mentioned.
Name is focusing on risk
mitigation measures meshed
measures such as working with
the attorney general's office to
emphasize training on sexual
abuse and molestation the
attorney general's office
already creates training for
students and communities are
will now how focus on sexual
abuse and molestation.
Nancy also issued an RFP to
procure anonymous reporting
system for all member schools
Nancy is working in
collaboration with PED PED has
committed to a position to
monitor the anonymous reporting
system unfortunately they may
lose their position due to
budget restraints so any help we
can get to make sure PED has
funding for their position would
be greatly appreciated.
Poms and associates will also
begin auditing schools for
compliance with house bill one
twenty eight in January of
twenty twenty three this month
the recommendation would be to
star on it in the top ten
schools using claims data over
the last ten years.
Pomp continues to work with
vector solutions to see what
districts have not completed
their online training if
districts prefer in person
training poms does provide
training on grooming and
identifying a predator for all
levels of staff and volunteers.
And that concludes the
presentation.
Mr chairman members of the
committee.
Thank you Mr chair thank you for
The presentation happy C. H. B.
one twenty it was taken
seriously.
Couple questions but Mr chair
when I talked about establishing
clinics for members
how much has that been done or
planned or in progress Mr chair
Representative Garrett right now
we are looking at that we're
looking at issuing an RFI after
we issued requests for
information the plan is to get
the information and analyze the
information and then go out to
our F. P. with that information
and then see if we're actually
going to be able to realize the
cost savings with implementing
clinics and as far as the
clinics go we would like to see
if we could implement clinics
which members can go into and
then also look at a virtual
component of the clinics as well
for members that may may not be
feasible to travel within sixty
miles to include thank you very
much Mr chair I one more
question right now the
governor's proposing a hundred
percent coverage of insurance of
up to ten thousand for
individual with the different
sliding scale for family members
how does that affect your
budget.
Mr chair representative Gary.
Your yes so
Mr chair.
So the governor's proposal would
look at essentially the subsidy
for the total cost that is of
Nipsey permanency plans right so
this is essentially a cost
shifting so in terms of Nipsey
is budget they get the one
hundred percent regardless of
how that breaks out what the
governor's proposal and then
there's in addition to that
there's an LFC find
recommendation in the public
school support budget to change
the percentage that's rate that
would adjust who pays and not
the total amount taken in by the
agency so in I'm not don't know
if you have anything to add to
that but no not really Mr chair
thank you Mr Simon
Representative Garrett like Mr
Simon mentioned
our budget will change what's
going to changes how the schools
are funded to fund their portion
of the premiums.
Okay so Mister chairman and and
team the figuring out of who
pays what would be done at the
district level like when we get
down to sixty percent sixty
forty for family members that
would all be figured out at the
school district level.
Mr chair members of the
committee so currently most
educational employees that
receiving insurance through PSA
of the employer covers sixty
percent of the premium the
employee covers forty percent of
the premium.
Under the governor's plan but
more of that cost would go to
the employer
it depends on the type of
coverage you have but basically
if you have single coverage than
the employer would pay one
hundred percent of the premium
cost.
And if you have to party
coverage the employer would pay
about eighty five percent and
then if you have family coverage
the employer would pay about
seventy five percent give give
or take a couple percentage
points based on the plan you
choose and some other factors
but but that's that's basically
how it would
how it would look if if it were
to to pass and be implemented.
And Mr chairman and
representative so
The the governor has proposed a
bill that would essentially set
that amount as what the employer
is required to pay so it
wouldn't be discretionary to the
district if I'm getting that
right.
Yes Mr chair that that's correct
think showing.
Okay.
Meaning you.
Thank you very much those are my
questions.
Thank you this year.
I'm going back I number sixteen.
This is.
So that they are.
Hello thank you Mr chair
representative Herndon I believe
this includes teacher to student
and student to student but
student to student is very rare
that makes up a very low
percentage it's mostly either
instructional staff to student I
don't want to see to teacher to
student because it could be
anyone we've had problems
anywhere from teachers to
coaches to support staff so it's
it's mostly just staff to
students.
Look at this this graph
particular.
The largest.
This represents.
Little bill in that Mr chair
representative her again that's
correct.
With respect to one of the of
the terms of the clinics in the
schools because there are so
many students reliable open
three hundred sixty five days a
year beyond the regular school.
Mr chair representative Herndon
the clinics that we mentioned
that we're talking about would
be for staff they wouldn't
necessarily be for students and
we're still in the process of
going through trying to get a
request for information so we'll
have more of that data available
hopefully in the near future.
Thank you Mr chairman and and
thank you just one quick
question.
But on page twenty one what you
get there
There's reference to safety and
security training active shooter
that kind of thing
Mr chairman and and Sir
Is there enough in the house
bill two budget as far as we
know it to be right now which is
still preliminary.
Where where did where let me ask
it this way Mr chair where with
the funding come from for this
training there is a need all
across the state.
First school safety security
training things like that this
is just one little piece that
correct and then the question I
have Mister chair is is this
enough.
Whatever you have in view here
Mr chair thank you Mr chair
representative so the training
of that is highlighted on the
slides is completed by poms and
associates there are
administrator who we contract
with to provide those trainings
and right now they have to
professionals that travel the
state and although there's just
two employees that they do have
hired they reach out to all over
the state and they're able to
provide that training so what
they do is they go out on site
and they do risk assessments so
it's not only active shooter but
it's how to prevent an active
shooter or how to prevent a
threat and right now we haven't
had any complaints that they're
not touching the amount of
school districts that they need
to touch if anything we get
the school districts
complementing their services.
Thank you.
They were pushing the committee
disclosure
a valid.
Public first but with a second.
Representative second any
opposition.
We are one opposition to
resemble well.
With that being said
We just sit down with you
recommendation thank you thank
you.
To check.
Well we're gonna go ahead and
move on to agency at three sixty
nine which commissioned the
public record.
Still.
Thank you Mr chair members of
the committee my name is Jessica
hits then I'm the LFC analyst
for the commission of public
records this is agency code
three six nine if you all are
following along with volume to
this is on page one twenty six
and one twenty seven of your
volumes I'm joined with me is
Cecilia Matt from Mattis from
DFA we also have the state
records administrator Dr Rick
Hendrix and the chief financial
officer of Ruben Rivera.
I'll go ahead and start with the
different shades some comments
on the agency's Revenue
the legislative recommendation
exceeds the executive by eighty
five thousand dollars in general
fund and is two hundred dollars
less than the executive and uses
a fund balance so there's a
total net difference of eighty
four point eight thousand
between the two recommendations
both recommendations support the
agency's request to cover rent
costs and Department of
information technology fees
using general fund revenues
rather than using fund balances
so both recommendations
supported a swap of revenues
again reducing the use of fund
balance from the prior year
increasing the general fund
revenue as the agency has seen a
decreased fund balance over time
however both recommendations to
maintain the use of revenues
from the agencies fund balances
at a small level for other
purposes but both
recommendations support equal
revenues from all other sources
and I'll go ahead and handed
over to Cecilia to discuss the
base expenditures.
I am the Good afternoon Mister
chair members of the committee I
am Cecilia mathematics nine to
DFA analysts for commission
public records for the base the
legislative recommendation
provides eighty four point eight
thousand above the executive
recommendation for person or a
five point five percent increase
over fiscal year twenty three
allowing the agency to fill
needed vacancies and support
additional recruitment and
retention for archivists the
executive recommendation
provides a two point three
percent increase in person both
recommendations support requests
expenditures in the contractual
services and other cost
categories.
and we will just know Mr chair
that the analysts have come to
consensus on all performance
measures and targets I will go
ahead and add it over to the
agency.
Mr Mr chair members of the
committee chair kindred some
state workers administrative the
state records center and
archives first I want to thank
the analyst they've been very
helpful in the whole process.
Should the opportunity to
percent the fiscal year twenty
twenty four budget appropriation
request.
and for your continued support
of our agency and like to make
some introductions by have
sitting behind me
Georgia Chavez deputy state
records administrator and to my
side years of Ruben Rivera chief
financial officer
they're part of our highly
qualified team which recently
completed the six consecutive.
Audit with no findings.
I'm proud of the work on behalf
of the people of New Mexico and
grateful for their tenants and
support today.
Mr chair members of the
committee you all appreciate the
importance of accurate record
keeping in providing access to
records or state government in
the interest of public awareness
and open government and I know
that you appreciate the
important records that
constitute the historical
patrimony of New Mexico which
we're privileged to safeguard
and make available to the
public.
Mr chair members of the
committee currently nearly all
this RCA operating expenditures
in the four hundred category are
being paid through the agencies
revolving fund due to
insufficient general fund budget
balance we have been able to
sustain our revenue in the
revolving fund and cover present
costs due to the large number of
emergency rule filings created
by COVID nineteen and cannabis
control division rules we
anticipate the number of
emergency filings to decrease as
the need lessons the resulting
reduction in revenue will
significantly impact our ability
to continue to pay the rent not
only in FY twenty four but in
years to come.
Therefore this RCA's first
practically requesting the shift
of one hundred and twenty three
thousand five hundred to the
general fund to cover the
Albuquerque records center.
Rent costs in addition our
agency is requesting eight
thousand dollars to pay for do
infrastructure to increase
internet speed in Albuquerque
and to provide offsite disaster
recovery we are so requesting an
increase of about two hundred
and five thousand and two
hundred category to fill
vacancies and for retention of
key positions in addition S. R.
CA has submitted a special
appropriation request in the
amount of sixty six thousand six
hundred and twelve dollars to
fund an upgrade of IT equipment.
we're committed to protecting
the integrity the
confidentiality and
accessibility of information
stored processed or transferred
to our agency due to the rise in
cyber security threats S. R. C.
A. has prioritized the upgrade
of its old hardware and software
in FY twenty four management and
staff will continue to cooperate
with the department of
information technology and its
contractors to rates
cybersecurity compliance through
identification of
vulnerabilities upgrade of
software and equipment managing
network security managing user
privileges and increasing
awareness of management staff.
Mr chair members of the
committee I think you'll be glad
to know this concludes our short
presentation.
We're happy to try to answer any
questions.
Second.
We need to go to
Nor did the.
Representative.
Public employees labor board.
Beijing three seventy nine.
So Mister chairman members me
this will be one of the smallest
agencies if not the smallest not
not quite the smallest but the
one of the smallest agencies you
here the public employee labor
relations board that agency co
three seven nine the LFC
recommendation and begins on
page one thirty six of volume
two
and just a very quickly the
amount of the difference between
the executive and the LESC
recommendation is two point nine
thousand
that it the LFC recommendation
included an additional five
thousand dollars in targeted pay
out for the agency the the board
has prioritized bringing the
salaries of their two FTE closer
to mid point and the LFC
recommendations point two
percent targeted pay increase
and the executive recommendation
I'll let Nicole talk about
briefly and.
Then on to the director.
Mr chair members of the
committee on the executive
recommendation we face
a lot.
The
and as far as performance.
One of
the.
That decision back over to.
Yeah.
Mr chairman I if you want we
steer brief comments from the
director I believe he has some
prepared.
Thank you chair Garcia members
of the committee I do have some
things I want to talk about
today first of all my thanks and
appreciation to both the LESC
and the executive analysis for
their hard work and their
understanding of what it is that
we were trying to accomplish
neither of their recommendations
get us to where the board just
ask for the LFC recommendation
gets us closer to our goal then
does the executive thanks to
both of them for their diligence
and hard work you do understand
what it is that the board is
trying to accomplish let me take
a quick moment to introduce our
CFO Tania Ramirez who you've
seen before she's also the CFO
for the administrative hearings
office that you heard from
earlier today it's done an
excellent job with our agency we
have at no
audit findings as a result since
twenty nineteen so we're proud
of that accomplishment I would
also like to introduce you to
one of our board members Mr mark
viruses behind me here former
the past immediate past chair of
the board and the member of our
three member board appointed on
the recommendation of public
employers Mr mark Myers will
the.
Speak briefly about the position
that I'm gonna take here I
appreciate this opportunity to
tell you a bit about what we've
been doing during the last year
of the important.
A work because it's being done
by this agency though we are
small only two FTE and the need
to for bringing staff to the mid
point of their pay ranges.
The plea bargaining Act.
Gives us our the P. E. R. be the
responsibility for.
oversights of the labor
relations between all public
employers whether there state
employees or the employees of
special districts municipalities
counties etcetera who have
otherwise not created their own
local boards now you may
remember that in twenty twenty
the legislature amended the
public employee bargaining Act.
To
make it easier for local
governments to come under the
umbrella of the PLR B. rather
than maintain their own local
boards and since that time.
We have been very busy
monitoring and taking care of
the statutory mandate from that
amendment to the act the net
result of all of that
it has been that thirty eight
local boards around the state
cease to exist and all of those
a public employers came under
our umbrella as the P. E. R. B..
Obviously probably goes without
saying we've had an increase in
representation petitions filed
with our agency since then we've
had a concurrent increase in the
number of prohibited labor
practice charges that have been
filed with us.
Just to let you know give you a
sense of some of the the
magnitude of the agencies that
have come under us since the
amendment of the act twenty
twenty.
We're looking at in addition to
various counties and disparities
around the state such important
to and large public employers as
central New Mexico community
college with fourteen hundred
seventy two employees city of
Los crucis six hundred fifty
eight public employees San Juan
community college with a hundred
forty six Sandoval County with a
hundred for the University of
New Mexico is under us now they
have eighteen hundred thirty
employees.
UNM hospitals with over four
thousand employees New Mexico
State University with eleven
hundred employees so it was a
significant changes significant
difference of the kind in the
amounts of work that we do now.
With all of that I've been with
the agency now for eleven years
and within that time period have
yet to reach the mid point of
the job experience in which my
position lives.
variety of reasons for that will
bore you with those kinds of
fiscal details suffice it to say
that the board has has
encouraged us to ask the
legislature to bring the
salaries up to the level so that
the two FTE that we do employ
are at least at the mid point of
the pairing you for testimony
from others before you this is
becoming an old story I guess to
you now because agency after
agency is asking for something
very similar from you.
I noted with interest the
presentation made by the H. O.
H. O. director recently about
the struggle to bring the
hearing officers in a
competitive wages with private
sector attorneys I will tell you
this as agency director I do not
make even as much as his
agencies hearing officers.
So that's how much make up my
agency is committed to trying to
to get so the on top of that
having been there now over ten
years the board has been
planning for my eventual
retirement and departure.
So it's a wise HSD allies board
that looks down the roads and
and looks at how are they going
to replace someone with my
experience my level of
institutional knowledge it's not
going to be easy.
it's in while being an attorney
is not the.
Job requirements it's certainly
highly recommended and that
certainly is going to be the
pool of potential employees from
which the board is going to be
looking for a new director
because as director I not only
administer the agency but I hold
the hearings on the public
because on the representation
disputes by conduct the hearings
and make recommended decisions
the board on prohibited labor
practice charges so someone with
a qualified judicial and legal
background is going to be
necessary and we're pulling from
that same labor pool that you
heard the H. O. director
testified about.
as I pointed out neither the
LESC or the Executive
recommendations get us quite
that far but on the risk of
repeating myself the.
the LFC recommendation does move
us further down the line I would
like at this time to I will
remain for any questions you may
have but I would like to turn
the table over if I may Mister
chair to board member.
Mark Myers to follow up the
comments that I've just made
from a board member's
perspective.
Yes Sir thank you Mr chair
members of the committee I will
I will be brief I just wanted to
Address this committee on on
behalf of the staff of the labor
board.
I have worked in city and state
government New Mexico for the
less well in the last twenty
seven years for about twenty
seven years of my career.
And served on several boards and
commissions over that time and
and I can tell you that this
board is the most professional
and efficient operation that
I've seen in my tenure in the
state of New Mexico.
And it's solely of based on the
shoulders of the director and as
executive assistant.
And.
You've heard there's haven't
been on a finding since two
thousand nineteen
the numbers and the amount of
hearings in the bottle work the
Head they've had to deal with
this increase drastically over
the last several years.
And.
This.
Or absolutely saves the state.
Money every year solely based on
their professionalism and
efficiency.
But it's not sustainable if we
if we can find salaries the are
commensurate with other
positions within the state.
And unfortunately Mr Griego will
not be here forever and the.
It's it'll be impossible for us
to
Re replace that level of
experience and and knowledge.
When a position is in the
payment point it might be hard
to replace at mid point but will
have a better shot at it.
And you know I wish we would put
a better case on for our
analysts and what and perhaps
would have a little bit more
support but but the bottom line
is if if if we can correct the
problem it's going to get much
worse and quite frankly it's a
disservice to the public
employers and the collective
bargaining units within the
state of New Mexico so I would
implore you to at least consider
it it's not a lot of money it's
more than the analysts of.
Of suggested but it.
It's it's not a lot of money for
the amount of work that they do
I appreciate you give me a few
minutes to speak thank you.
Mr.
Thank.
So Mr Chairman representative
Herndon the LFC recommendation
did include a small amount for
targeted pay in line with the
amount that the committee
provided for dust
Court staff and other offices
and other legal.
Legal professions is so that.
Centage increased was was tied
to that that was that was what
the committee recommended.
Yes so
madam chair and sorry Mr
chairman Madam representative
I believe the the increase we
had money was two percent I
think the point to might be a
typo so it was two percent.
One of the things here
Looking at the performance
measures.
This is.
so I guess.
To.
So you basically.
So so Mr Mr chair and
Representative Herndon so what
LFC but well see look that was
the current the current rate
plus a targeted increase and as
I say we tied those across.
The other legal types of
professions to find some
consistency across agencies as I
mentioned before when H. O. was
before you earlier today
you you're hearing this from a
number of different agencies
about at in adequacy of pay
level that's one of the reasons
the LFC recommendation also
includes a special appropriation
to conduct a study over all of
all of the classification and
compensation system across the
state and you know sort of bring
in regained contact human
resources professionals to
conduct that study to give you
all a better idea going down the
future how do we address the
needs of all agencies instead of
on a one on one one by one
basis.
Terrible question
So you see.
To see you Representative
Sweetser that's correct myself
an administrative assistant.
That is correct neither one of
the positions is that mid point.
Secretary of.
I've been in this position this
is my eleventh year.
This is who he's going on his
fourth year.
Thank you.
Mr chair I feel like I have to
add to this conversation from
the executive point of view
these two employees are above
exempt employees are not
classified employees so just
want to add that it's kind of
fishy you know and I'm sure Mr
Simon can clarify that the
salary kind of study that
they're doing is mostly for
classified employees so two
separate issues but this is for
at that exact apply.
Thank you thank you chair Garcia
it might be useful for the
committee to note that in
connection with our
appropriation request at the
direction of the board our staff
conducted the comparable wage
study that was provided to both
the executive LFC analysts and
I'm sure they'd be happy to make
that study available to you if
you thought it would be helpful
to.
Thank you for no questions from
committee
on on the COVID the
Representative heard and said
you know all you need to come in
front of us today.
Not enough money but you know
the just keep in mind leadership
recommendations.
This is not that the stone was
happened today here.
So if you need to work on more
funding for for your for any
agency of the you know all of
the staff to work on that we can
work on that try and make it for
but just keep that in mind it
just this is just a
recommendation.
Chair to see members of the
committee thank you for your
time and I thank you for your
commitment to continuing to work
on the this not just for our
agency but for all the agencies
in the state thank
Representative Representative
the budget chair Mister chairman
how executive recommendation of
a proper first the proper second
the proper second from the
opposition.
I see none.
We will except the executive
recommendation thank the
presentation thank you with that
being said we are done for the
day.
