So I am very pleased to have Mr
gray Mr Simic the closer to
ping pong back and forth between
district different District
Court we're going to
Go through the analysts then we
want to make sure in here from
our District Court judges and
officials will look to different
the members whose districts the
courts are in for any sort of
questions or comments and of
course try to roll on through
things
and with that let's go ahead
with members we're gonna start
it's going to go the first four
will be the fifth district the
six the third and the twelfth
also as a reminder we we will be
doing public comment an optional
public comment at the conclusion
of today's hearings regarding
the agencies that we're hearing
today with that Mr right can you
start us off thank you Mr chair
my name is Brandon right LFC
fiscal analyst I'm joined by
Mario cynically at DFA analyst.
today we'll be covering the
district courts and the
metropolitan court on the first
page your packet you should have
a high level that lists all of
the district courts the LFC and
Executive recommendations for
each of those.
If you'd like to follow along in
volume two you can turn to page
seventeen and that'll go through
page thirty two the following
there and if you at any point
like a map.
Of the judicial districts hi you
can turn the volume three page
forty three better have a map of
all the districts and will also
it right.
Emphasize what districts are in
county which encompass which
counties
Mr chair do we want to move
forward with that district I yes
please.
See so at.
The fifth judicial District
Court this will be in page nine
of your packets.
and paid twenty three in volume
two.
just just a quick second members
I might suggest grabbing the
volume two which I see is great
and I want to take this packet
out of the books so that you can
find uses for.
Okay I I apologize for that so
this is page nine in your
different C. packet page twenty
three and LESC going to
the fifth encompasses Lee Chavez
and Eddy county's.
And we're joined by the
honorable chief judge James
Houston and all now have Mister
cynically it presents some
comments about the
recommendations my name is mark
such as I said in order to focus
hi Mister Sanchez will go to Mr
that are executive analyst and
then go to you and to to.
Mr chairman Mr grandpa's as I
had of wrong see I knew that
scripts on the policies are also
for the fifth judicial district
the LFC recommendation increases
general fund revenue by five
point three percent well the
executive recommendation
increases general fund revenue
by three point nine percent.
The LFC recommendation includesd
eight percent compensation
increase for judges and two
percent compensation increase
for staff including compensation
LFC recommendations a hundred
and seven point four thousand
dollars less than the executive
recommendation the executive
recommendation the state
agencies request including the
fifty four thousand dollars for
training not include LFC to
imitation the LFC recommendation
funds training center centrally
through the administrative
office of the courts are not
enough to the chief judge.
Thank you Sir Mr chairman and
members of the committee thank
you for letting us appear today
if I may miss more order just
I'm chief judge of the fifty
additional district which
includes the counties of Eddie
Chavis of the I see that we have
to members are from my district
and so Representative Brown it's
good to see you Representative
Pettigrew it's good to see you
thank you for hearing us this
afternoon we're requesting that
you follow the recommendations
of the LFC with respect to our
funding
our our county has three of are
rather are district has three
are counties Chavis said in the
are in each of those our
districts or each of those
counties there are four district
judges there are nine master
judges and six court facilities
in that district as you may know
the
district is a very rural
district sparsely populated
however with some of some
Some seriously.
and so we ask that you fundus of
ten percent for a magistrate
judge of compensation of the
young I'm gonna hand it off to
my experts here of can clovers
to assist with.
Financial matters and so
I'm going to recognize that I
may not be as of.
Well informed as canyon who can
and is who works day to day with
these figures and so I want to
our defer to of I'm not an
adjuster who has greater
expertise and experience that I
do thank you chairman thank you
very much you just Mister and
Mister cannon croaker standing
Kroger's please and the CEO for
the fifth judicial District
Court as the judge said we would
like to request the committee
except the LFC recommendation we
understand that that will shift
the fifty four thousand dollar
request into the AOC budget for
judicial education in our
district we do agree with the
LFC recommendation for the
employee salary increases which
is greatly needed our district
has.
The in the oil and gas industry
we're I'll paste and salaries
it's very difficult for us to
attract workers we're struggling
with that and this would greatly
help plus what other other
compensation increases are
approved through the budget
process we also requesting the
hundred and forty eight thousand
dollars for the unfunded
magistrate court judges salaries
of from the previous session.
Thirty seven thousand two
hundred dollars for the and
funded judgeship positions
salaries we received a judgeship
but not all the of funding to
for the full salaries last year
and then our last request is the
two hundred and thirty three
thousand dollars for magistrate
court security that so I of
magistrates courts in our
district that need security at a
cost of forty six thousand six
hundred dollars each.
And what that will.
Thank you very much Mr Crowe has
covers thank you very much chief
judge Sanchez first go to
Representative Brown.
Thank you Mr chairman and the
chief judge to see you today
thank you to the panel I guess
the only question I have is Mr
chairman regarding I see in this
booklet that you gave us that
there is a construction site for
a whopping ten register for
thank you just tell us of what
you have in mind there Mr Mr
Chairman.
Thank you for the question
Representative all right
facility will be moved into this
week R. it's a magistrate
facility eleven to New Mexico
was badly needed our new judge
there is Keith Clayton of and so
he'll be are very that facility
the case numbers for that
particular facility here justify
for building a back to.
Facility and so would be
equipped with a very impressive
a security along with a blend of
fresh record of which will be up
to date so we thank you very
much for the funds that were
used to
bill that building.
Thank you Mr chairman thank you
chief judge Sanchez appreciate
it thank you very much
Representative Brown
Representative Pettigrew any
questions.
Thank you chair and Chief
Justice good to see you today.
I'm not there yet.
Maybe someday we'll probably
not.
He joins.
Thank you all right that's okay.
Got it chief judge.
No there's no disrespect.
Chairman and
To get.
I look at page eight of the hand
of to route with respect to the
caseload.
Can we talk a little bit about.
Your opinion what's the driving
force for that number continuing
to go down this.
Right is K. so to the in the
master courts.
Can.
Sort of.
Representative Pettigrew I
believe that most of our
downturn was twenty COVID
started we saw two right
downturn in ticket writing in
the magistrate courts as you can
see that continued throughout
that time period but I believe
as were ending now we have seen
a increase in citation writing
from all law enforcement
agencies and we'll probably see
that start to trend up again.
Mr Chairman if you don't mind Mr
chairman of that the decreases
began in fiscal year two
thousand twenty four so does
track with the COVID
Cursor concerns.
Thank you very much for that
On page eight.
Chairman.
We have a executive
recommendation includesd fifty
four thousand for training on
quality.
Session.
What I'd like to propose the
specific topics within side that
training.
We request to the.
For some Mr chair sorry
Representative Pettigrew we
requested training for
specifically for our District
Court judges to allow them to
attend the national type
trainings in subject matters no
specific subject matters with
subject matters that would help
them in their positions as a
district to.
There is a proposal is a rather
large proposal by the judiciary
Gen general education be
transferred to the judiciary
rather than to
trading at UNM three you in law
school and so this would involve
training the a district judge's
postmaster measure judges
there's also a consideration for
training of staff a lot of
training of staff goes on as it
is right now through the
internal processes of the a or
C. unit a judiciary so that's
the proposal that is being
maintenance rather a large
philosophical change
and so what you asked support
subject matters we consider and
so the subject matter that we
consider our.
Subjects that were tend to
improve our efficiency is judges
are to help us to behave
properly with litigants
By which I mean
To show
Respect for the claims of
litigants for the defenses of
litigants are court R. to make
sure they were sensitive
to their claims as people that
we respect some of those are the
kinds of things that we we deal
with it also helps us to learn
to deal with difficult litigants
are difficult with this is also
the whole panoply of of training
that we undertake in the
judiciary
thank you for the opportunity to
speak about the.
Chairman and.
Judge I appreciate the answer my
concern
just right we we listen to
several other departments within
the justice side of this and.
all right disagree with
everything several things to the
new initiatives that are coming
down from our Chief Justice
bring significant concern to me
and and so I wanted to ensure
the with respect to the money
that we're putting aside for
that that you have some state so
chief judge with respect with
that training as.
Mr chairman former respond
indeed we do that the
So the governance of the
judiciary lies with the Chief
Justice of of the state.
In court however there are
several committees so there's a
delegation of powers off and
also a listening process it
takes place and so we tell the
the Supreme Court what our needs
are
so how would we see our
deficiencies
we report the deficiencies of
the Supreme Court and then we
ask for training we also ask for
change or on occasion
as this committee probably knows
are going to be polemical public
this committee does it that we
have a new initiative are
probably three or four years old
with respect to pre trial
detention and so the theory for
the procedure that is non places
specter districts are pre trial
detention
was no required trade and so
Members of the committee Mr
chairman those are the kinds of
things that we consider our in
our trading also that we can
give affect property to the laws
enacted by the legislature.
Experts chairman and chief judge
I appreciate that and chairman
my last comment is the the new
facility a loving to looking
great
I'm so glad that we
we're able to support that and
that the that the funding is
there for that the facility was.
Danger for everybody so thank
you very much for for for
leading that charge as well
chairman I yield back thank you
very much for approved
Representative Pettigrew
Mr right just briefly the both
the AOC and some of the District
Court referred recommendations
from the LFC and the executive
include some of the security
upgrades that we've talked about
last year is that correct that's
correct Mr chair within the all
District Court at the base
budget the different need to
have in front of you today all
the security requests that were
made are fully funded by both
the LFC and executive
recommendation thank you very
much for that we heard some
pretty stark conversation during
LFC about security threats and
and just you know almost
catastrophes that happen the
district courts around the state
so it's great to see that both
of those are addressed as you
talked about compensation is
sort of the core difference as a
reminder to members the
compensation the LFC
recommendations built into our
budget framework in so if we
choose to go with the LFC we're
staying within our budget
framework which is one of the
important things for us and I
know it's been a priority for us
so thank you very much Mr
Grover's chief judge and we'll
go to the promotion of Mister
chair I would move the LFC
recommendation.
Great it's been moved by
Representative Dixon same by
Representative Lujan is there
any opposition to adopting the
LFC recommendation.
Seeing none that is adopted
unanimously thank you all.
Thank you Kate thank you for all
you do for the good of the state
thank you members we have I
believe twelve additional courts
And we're going to go next to
the six judicial district.
Mr chair committee members will
not presenting HSD two three six
the six judicial court Page ten
AM your pamphlet in page twenty
four and the LESC volume two the
six District Court contains the
counties of requests Luna and
Hidalgo and we're joined by the
honorable chief judge.
Jennifer Delaney I'll pass it
back to my fellow analyst.
And thank you Mario at Mr chair
the LFC recommendation increases
general fund revenue by twelve
point five percent of the
executive recommendation
increases general fund revenue
by five point one percent.
At the LFC recommendation
includes compensation for judges
and for staff excluding that
compensation the LFC
recommendation is two hundred
and nine thousand dollars more
than the executive
recommendation.
At the executive recommendation
includes less four percent now
at in the LFC recommendation
and at the executive
recommendation is less than the
policy recommendation to account
for the recommended funded
vacancy rate.
in addition the at executive
recommendation includes a
hundred and ninety four thousand
for in general fund revenue
increase for three new paralegal
FTE
and with that Mr chair turned
over HSD.
Thank.
Good afternoon Mister chair
members of the committee as you
heard I am chief judge Jennifer
dealing the six judicial
district I have here with me
today and with you know who is
my CEO along with Wendy Camacho
who is our newly hired CFO that
we are super excited to have on
board as you also heard we are
located in the counties of
requests Luna and health Dogo
which is Silver City Baird
damning Lordsburg and several
other small communities there
and we have for District Court
judges for magistrate court
judges and seven courthouses
total this six is asking this
committee to adopt the LFC
recommendations which includes
recommended compensation
increases for judges and staff
which is one of the judiciary's
main priorities again this year
however we do have some requests
that we would like for you to
consider putting back into our
budget when you get to catch up
cleanup we are asking for I'll
go through first the LFC
recommendations and talk about
the additions that we would like
for you all to consider putting
back into our budget we are
asking for the same ten percent
unfunded magistrate court
judicial compensation of fifty
point eight that is based on the
last sessions increase in
magistrate compensation that was
anticipated additionally we are
asking for a hundred eighty four
five for pre trial services
staff we were almost fully able
to fund our pre trial services
program after the legislative
session in twenty twenty and
then March twenty ten twenty
changed everyone's lives we came
back in the special session and
we lost the funding for pre
trial services staff the AOC has
supported the sixth wonderfully
in continuing our pre trial
services program but they would
like to be able to serve other
point and so we are asking for
you to give us the one eighty
four I in order to fund the
positions that we already have
there is one FTE that goes along
with that in terms of expansion
but this is already an
individual who is employed by
our court who is being supported
through a contract with the
administrative office of.
The courts are pre trial
services program does serve all
seven of our courts and for
stealing at the magistrate court
with criminal defendants and
then moving to the District
Court asked the defendants move
through the system we are also
asking for fifty five six for a
magistrate court clerk for one
of our for magistrate courts we
run two of the largest single
judge magistrate courts in the
state and clerks are greatly
needed in order to ensure that
case processing happens on an
expedited basis
I'm gonna come back and talk
about the paralegals but I want
to talk about security first I
appreciate the recommendation of
the three hundred from LFC for
security from our magistrate
court when we were here during
LESC I told you all about an
incident at our Baird magistrate
court where an individual
decided to smoke fennel in our
bathroom the court chair went to
investigate the funny smell that
she smells coming out of the
bathroom and then had fentanyl
exposure her and another
employee that to fully please
working there at the time both
had exposure both were given our
economic out with some of the
side effects from the fat now
are bared magistrate court has
had vandalism that's occurred
there as well as our Silvercity
magistrate court there is
currently nobody obligated in
the state of New Mexico to
provide security for magistrate
courts based on consolidation
with the district courts and the
magistrate court I have made it
my priority along with the other
chiefs to ensure that our
magistrates court staff and
judges feel state either Deming
magistrate court last Thursday
one of my clerks was trying to
assist a litigant significant
other over email and it was
clear to messages that his
hostility was rising and she
continued to try and provide him
with the necessary information
to ensure that his significant
other was able to move through
the justice system properly I'm
I'm going to redo the last line
of the email that he sent to our
late Thursday when all she was
trying to do is help and and
pardon my language but I'm.
A quote to you what he said I'm
going to get a gun or something
and murder the **** police right
now.
This is what my magistrate my
underplayed magistrate court
clerk had to deal with now can
you imagine the remainder for
afternoon speaking with police
reporting at and the next day
coming in to work and having to
be worried is this gentleman
gonna come into my court house
is he going to have a gun is he
going to shoot us it is
imperative that magistrate court
security be a priority for this
legislature it is unacceptable
that the same high risk
defendants that walk into the
district courts on a daily basis
walk into the magistrate courts
without any security and so we
are asking you to please give us
the three hundred that was
recommended in LFC is
recommendation to provide
security for each of our
magistrate courts not only have
I made it my obligation but I'm
asking for it to be your
obligation as well additionally
we had a capital request of.
To something to ninety one eight
and that is to upgrade security
systems including access control
for the staff and judges at the
bare magistrate courts over city
District Court Deming magistrate
court and the lord's for
District Court that did not make
it into any of the
recommendations but it is an
added security feature that is
necessary to ensure that her
staffer protected at our lord
for District Court we have one
employee it is the third floor
of a county building and
literally there is no security
there is no anything and we are
thankful every day but nothing
has happened yet but I don't
want to wait for something to
happen before we ensure that our
employees are safe.
now I will get off my high horse
him go back really fast to our
request for paralegals LFC did
grant has one FTE for our
requested paralegals but there
was no funding attached to that
we are asking you to put back in
one thirty nine three to give us
to paralegals down in
southwestern New Mexico we are a
legal desert the number of
attorneys in private practice
has diminished greatly in the
twenty years that I've lived in
that community literally we have
no attorneys in Lordsburg and we
have to attorneys left in Deming
in private practice and
Silvercity there is a small firm
a couple of other attorneys but
what we're legal desert and in
addition to being a legal desert
desert we are in impoverished
area people can't even afford
the attorneys that we have in
our area so currently we have a
contract with local attorneys to
run a very small limited self
Representative wholesaler four
hours a week in each one of the
Courts well recently both of the
attorneys running it went to go
one retired the other one went
to go work for the state so we
finally have been able to
contract for an attorney in one
of our areas who will give us
four hours a week to help them
numerous pro se parties that we
have and our other contract
remains open on our website if
you know anybody who wants to
apply but because we are such a
legal desert we decided that
because they're not giving legal
advice what they're doing is
assisting with filling out forms
that we could use paralegals to
be able to run a true self help
clinic and ensure not only are
litigants at the District Court
receiving the help that they
need but civil litigants at the
magistrate court who currently
have nowhere to turn could also
use the assistance of the self
help clinic but we need funding
and we need employees to be able
to do that so I'm asking you to
put the one thirty nine three
back into our budget in order to
give us the the self help clinic
that we need there a couple of
other small requests are
specials that I would ask you to
reconsider.
I think that I have highlighted
the major priorities for the six
and so at this time all I do
have one thing left to say and I
apologize after five years I am
stepping down as chief of the
six judge Jared hope FAQ it is
my successor and he will begin
may fifteenth we are throwing
media congradulations party and
have a condolence party on the
same day for those of you who
know him you know that he will
take the reins with as much
pride as I have and do an
incredible job for the six it's
been my honor to come here over
the past five years to work with
you all and to bring the
judiciary forward and so I also
want to thank you all for
everything that you do at this
time I stand for questions thank
you very much chief judge
we we don't have any members
representing those counties we
come closer in Sierra then chief
judge I guess first that we
thank you for your work
if I want to recognize former
representative Candie Sweetser
who did an incredible amount of
work and I think we see with a
number of of sort of the
investments and support that you
all received well I think we can
see and celebrate her leadership
in that
three thank you for detail and
some of the the challenges that
you face.
we did we we don't use fell yet
language in the court excuse me
in in in the committee but
appreciate that you're standing
up and sharing the the
challenges that your employees
face so I appreciate that
do members have any questions I
don't see.
We can yeah Mexico.
Thank you Mr chair I first want
to as echo what the chairman
said thank you for your service
and
former Representative Sweetser
spoke highly of the entire
district and you
I just wanted to flag the issue
of security is something that
I'd love for the committee to be
looking at comprehensively and
how we can
Support the judicial system and
and our courthouses particularly
in the rural communities
That that's all thank you very
much.
The motion.
except the LFC reputation the
motion save I. representative
Garcia is there any opposition
to adopting the LFC
recommendation saying thank you
very much and.
Okay we're gonna ask.
The third judicial district
judge of the at the.
Is to.
Work.
Mr Mr right please I thank you
Mr chair one thing I do want to
flag for the committee on the
topic of special appropriation
and security the LFC
recommendation and consolidates
all the special appropriation
requests made by district courts
into the administrative office
of the courts that's about two
million dollars total and in
addition to that the LESC
recognition also consolidates
all of the capital requests made
by district courts into the
administrative office of courts
others to special appropriations
made AOC out for the purpose as
as we heard security other
things like that
and happy to answer any
questions about those if we have
those I'm moving now to add the
third judicial District Court
this agency to three three
having page five of your packets
and at page twenty one and to
point to.
the district encompasses at Dona
Ana County
and I'm not have Mr Smith
represents the substance.
Mr chair committee members the
LFC recommendation increases
general fund revenue by eleven
point eight percent well the
executive recommendation
increases general fund by nine
point one percent the LFC
recommendation includes a
percent compensation increase
for judges and two percent
composition increase for staff
excluding compensation analyses
recommendation is twenty point
two thousand dollars less than
the executive recommendation the
executive recommendation
messages request including
twenty thousand for training not
including the LFC recommendation
as stated before the LFC
recommendation fund straining
centrally from the
administrative office of the
courts finally both
recommendations including
creation of a fund revenue
traditional security pre trial
services and veteran treatment
court of nodded off to chief
judge then what if.
Thank you madam.
Good afternoon the cures
Smalling Committee members I am
chief judge manual to get the
from the third judicial
district.
the judicial district is and
dynamic county which is one of
the I believe the second most
populated county in the state of
New Mexico we're also right next
to the border right next I'll
pass so and that gives us a few
different aspects and most of
the counties for other counties
in the state.
First thing is I want to thank
it H. A. F. C. for the support
that they provided for FY twenty
three last year as well as for
the support for the judges
salaries I can tell you the
increase in the salaries has
made a difference in the
qualifications of applicants
that we've received we've got
one open vacancy at this point.
Also what I'd like to point out
is we put out some hand out to
think it should be should have
handout that looks somewhat like
this this is a hand out that I
will review as I go through a
request.
with respect to the FY twenty
four budget we are requesting
that the committee go with the
LFC recommendation the LFC
recommendation as pointed out by
the atlas is higher than the
executive recommendation.
The LFC recommendation takes
into account the number of
issues that we need to dress
with respect to security and I
think share small is looted to
that whether the security issues
we've got is we need to
the magistrate court security
contract not only in our
magistrates court in Los crucis
but the wanted at the New
Mexico.
Our branch in Anthony New Mexico
if it was a standalone
magistrate court it would be one
of the largest courts in the
state.
With the L. the FY twenty four
general fund from the LFC we
would receive hundred thirteen
thousand plus for the Los crucis
magistrates security contract.
We would receive a hundred
thirty forty three thousand plus
for the after the magistrate
security contract.
We would also receive a twelve
thousand point twelve point six
of a amount for the Anthony med
District.
I'm sorry Los crucis magistrate
five percent annual increase.
We do the Los crucis magistrate
through a private company
they've added a five percent
increase because of inflation in
their own needs.
We would also from the LFC a
recommendation receive ninety
two thousand for the magistrate
court salaries that because the
governor did not sign the one
bill that on Google and
districts it would be shortfall.
And we would also receive eighty
two thousand point seven four
nine funded judicial specialist
magistrates court total of that
is for the four hundred sixty
four thousand point three.
What we would also get from the
LFC recommendation is funding
for expansions that we've
requested the past we would
receive three hundred ninety
seven thousand for pre trial
services that's going well in
Los crucis.
We would receive a hundred two
thousand for the contractual
services to our veterans
treatment court which a few
years ago we're proud to say
we instituted and died in the
county we would also Reese we
received twenty thousand four
judicial education or
traditional training.
In addition to these expansions
LFC would also cover the the
percent salary increase for
judges as well as the two
percent increase for staff.
Of that total being a hundred
I'm sorry one million three
hundred thirty thousand.
On the back page of the handout.
There's some additional requests
we're we're making.
There's some shortages from FY
twenty three these were FY
twenty three supplement requests
for the magistrate judge's
salary increase that was on
funded of ninety two thousand
point two we also had
magistrates security contractor
was on funded for sixty three
thousand point four.
Finally we're asking for special
requests are being funded.
we're asking for filing system
in the amount of one hundred
sixty thousand one hundred
dollars
we're running out of finding
space in our building and we
need and automotive the
filing system.
We're also asking for a hundred
twenty thousand four hundred
dollars in concrete C. bowlers
boards are those obstacles that
you see in front of some of the
federal courthouses to keep cars
from driving through I can tell
you that in the last couple
years we've had two attempted
drive-in's by individuals try to
drive their car in through the
front of the court.
One kind of succeeded the other
was stopped right at the
sidewalk
we definitely need security
bollards we as a district court
have the number one highest
incidence of security infants in
the state
I can tell you will be on the
security boulevards I had a
death threat in the last eight
months probably my second one in
the last five years security is
an issue in in the District
Court to dine in the county so
we would request those
additional amounts of
with that I'll stand for
questions thank you thank you
very much chief judge of the at
the good to see Mr Perrin the
Briefly just we can you give us
a little bit of a sense of
caseload and what you're seeing
is we're because that's one of
the an important thing for this
committee given the need to sort
of process cases quickly
effectively fairly as part of
the entire system sure thank you
chairs small and committee
members.
as with every other court COVID
has affected our findings you
know a person suppress the
pilings because people can get
to court.
Now that we're sort of opened up
in the courts there's more
filings and there's three main
dockets that we have won this is
civil docket I can tell you that
from twenty twenty one to that
this to the end of the calendar
year twenty twenty two.
We've had approximately five
hundred and fifty four more
filings
in our civil dockets with
respect to our domestic dockets
we have had twelve hundred more
filings from twenty twenty one
to twenty twenty two that's a
sixteen point four percent
increase.
A lot of it has to do with
domestic violence filings you
know we've been isolated during
the COVID some of that effective
Kerry down into twenty twenty
two.
I can also tell you that if you
look at our numbers the new
filings for criminal courts are
down about a five hundred and
fifty something maybe a little
bit less than that.
Part of the problem there is
comment the district local
district attorney has not found
a lot of cases because of COVID.
a lot has also has to do with
basically issues of the
administration with the district
attorney's office pre COVID.
The district attorney's office
had twenty two lawyers that
included the DA and the system
the.
As of my conversation with the
DA last week I believe it was
Monday of last week maybe you
want to be forced.
They are at eleven attorneys
that includes the D. A. and the
assistant DA and so they're
really operating at fifty
percent what I've been told by
the assistant they've got
something like fourteen hundred
cases that they're waiting to
file is that a grand jury
preliminary hearings their older
cases but.
It's not that the criminal cases
aren't there the are they're
growing it's just they have been
able to find it for one reason
or the other as explained thank
you very much need to next we're
gonna go to Representative
Garrett Garcia and then
Representative care of some
Garcia.
Thank you Mr chairman thanks for
the presentation I've noticed on
your hand out the.
Executive is two hundred eighty
seven less than the.
The LFC and but concern is the
an expansion you have funding
for veterans treatment court.
If you get the list of the two
what's gonna happen is from.
The veterans part of it Sir.
Sure
Chairman small a representative
Garcia the two hundred ninety
eight point seven difference
between LESC and the executive
is really the permit funding for
the eight percent increase in
judges salary in the two percent
for staff that I believe is in
some bill this coming up.
The expansion about that you've
talked about with regard to
contract for services for
veterans treatment court.
That is an amount that we're
seeking and LFC is funding and
their recommendation that's only
from contraction services that's
diagnostic that's testing
counseling those type things
fortunately we are getting
assist from the excise tax for
the rest of the doctor.
So if the LESC was not accepted
we got the executive we would
have to look at other areas to
build up that contractual cost
of one hundred two thousand
we'll figure it out we'll find
it
but delicacies would certainly
fund this type of field that
contracts requiring requirement
thank you for that answer Mr
chairman I know we
We have a roll we go on the
issue of the two.
But if we do what do we really
need to maybe a tech to clean up
I would this decision to there
is very important to my
me and in all of these
communities are trying to get
this program going or struggling
it is Mr chair and if we could
help with the thing on
constructing of really
appreciate that.
Thank you Mr thank you very much
for Senator you can thank you
Sir Representative Kerr thank
you Mr chair and my question
applies to all of the
presentations were hearing I
need clarity for example the
seventh District Court talked
about magistrate court scene
security Senator presenters and
I would assume future presenters
are talking about judicial
education of moving sensually
and and security costs so how
much would each District Court
is presenting its any of that
going to be covered by the AOC
security budget thank thank you
very much reserve your it's a
great question yes both in AOC
and in the specific district
courts they are the the security
requests are part of the budgets
and if you have particular
questions about the District
Court we will ask Mr grey to go
into that but those are
addressed in both the AOC and an
individual district courts so Mr
chair so we're adding for
example of the it was the budget
is two million we're going to
add the requests.
For the individual district
courts or will some of that
because heard by the AOC
allocation.
Great question I believe some
will be spread between the AOC
allocation and then some is
going directly to that district
court Mr gray if you want to
expand because it's a question
that sort of as you said covers
the previous and future.
Mr chair at thank you and
Representative thanks for the
question so within each district
court all districts requested
increases for security and those
are fully funded by both LFC and
the executive recommendation
such part point and into your
second point at all districts
also requested special
appropriation and capital
appropriation many of which were
put to press the committee
concerns so the LFC
recommendation funds those
special appropriations and
capital requests within a
consolidated appropriation with
in AOC so that they can
distribute that money to the
districts so within the base
their security funding panel for
special appropriations there's
also security fund thank you
very much thank you Mr chair
thank you very much okay I don't
see any other questions we'll go
to by Sarah Dixon.
You Mr chair I move the LFC
recommendation okay I will
second that motion is there any
opposition to adopting LESC
recommendations.
Thing thank you very much to the
idea thank the figures for.
K. A..
Members are going to go now to
the twelfth judicial district.
Two hundred.
Etcetera etcetera etcetera
thank.
Thank you.
This.
I like listed.
So Mister chair committee
members were not presenting
HSD two four two the twelfth
judicial District Court just
paid eighteen your pamphlet in
page thirty in the LFC volume to
the twelfth District Court Inc
includes the beautiful counties
of Ontario and Lincoln County
and we are joined today by the
honorable chief judge Angie
Snyder and I'll pass it back to
spending great first numbers.
Mr chair the LFC recommendation
increases general fund revenues
five nine point three percent
the executive recommendation
increase general fund revenues
by eight point five percent as
the primary difference is
compensation including the LFC
recommendation not including the
executive recommendation the
executive recommendation also
includes forty five thousand
dollars for training that is
funded in the LFC recommendation
through AOC.
I'll now have an agency present.
Good good afternoon Mr chair
members of the committee I'm
Angie Schneider and the chief
judge for the twelfth judicial
as was just stated that's
Lincoln and Otero counties we
have five District Court judges
and for magistrate judges and I
courthouses total in the two
counties and we're asking today
that you adopt the LFC
recommendation and we have got a
four main priority requests
the first is the magistrate
judge salary shortfall that
you've all heard about and for
our for magistrates in the
twelfth the amount that we're
requesting is a sixty five
thousand for that ten percent
not funded for FY.
Twenty four forward our second
request is for pre trial
services and AOC it has
identified the twelfth as the
next pre trial services rollout
location and so we are
requesting two hundred twenty
nine point three for that
program some of the funding for
FY twenty four will come from
AOC but going forward I want to
serve all five of our courts
with that pre trial services
service out will need that
additional funding our next and
that's four three staff members
and
I drew Carter CEO who is with me
I feel to introduce our
apologize to her for that she
can talk a little bit more about
that if you'd like
our next I funding request area
is the treatment court service
providers in the twelfth we have
and adult drug court program as
well as a veterans treatment
court program and both of those
programs service both Lincoln
and Otero counties and we have
had service providers pullout
and declined to renew their
contracts because there have
been no increases in those
contract amounts for
I don't believe ever since the
programs have been started and
so we need additional twenty
thousand to fully fund our
program and provide the services
that are needed for those robust
programs and
In I will stay at that our
veterans treatment court we've
had three graduates in the
program that's our newest
program since we began that and
we have a lot of veterans in our
area as I know we do across the
state and so it's something that
is incredibly needed to a unique
program distinct from the adult
drug court program due to the
again the unique needs of of of
of our veterans are were
I don't drug court program we
graduated six clients in
the in twenty twenty two that
program is incredibly robust
there's very often awaiting last
are set at capacity in the
Lincoln County program of ten
participants in an Otero of ten
and the that the program is
continuously fill to capacity.
And then the the last request is
again along with my colleagues
is that our court security for
magistrate courts and although
we haven't had the experience
outlined by by chief judge
Delaney I I think it's on the
menu of possibilities for all of
our magistrates point it's just
there are serious issues waiting
to happen for all of us were
requesting a hundred fifteen
thousand for the additional
services that we need opted to
secure the magistrates we are in
the process of building in I've
been read so a combined co
located magistrate qualitat
magistrate court that will have
services for District Court
which is to a great benefit to
the members of the committee
members of Lincoln County
because of the drive to get down
to care is also so this will
open up filings there will be
staffing there at all times so
we anticipate some robust
traffic in that new facility so
we need security services for
that and and then I'll also down
in Carrizozo and of course in
our magistrate court in
Alamogordo
lastly we are requesting for FY
twenty three a supplemental
request fifty one point seven to
fully fund our the magistrate
judge's compensation for for
magistrates in like you know
don't terrible and thank you Mr
chair members of the committee
and I will stand for any
questions you may have Sir thank
you very much chief judge
senator thank you for being here
we have a question for much of
the hunger.
Thank you Mr action have two
questions my first question.
Is going to go back to treatment
court service provider are we
just now instead using drug
quarter we call them treatment
courts this chart.
Is it the same as it is a
function of the chair okay so.
Right so and I want to thank you
for the addition I think we had
a question
I'd been yesterday before
regarding the veterans quarters
and and helping with them to so
thank you for that that's.
and here you're asking for an
additional twenty thousand
dollars and then if we're
looking backward to
What is recommended here from
LFC as opposed to the executive
there's of forty six point seven
thousand dollar difference so
with that.
That would you use that if we
were to go with the
recommendation from LFC than
with that cover that cost for
you is that we would prioritize
that costs Mr chair it would
cover the costs and all defer to
on our CEO do you carry on that
as well.
Many I believe that the
difference in the LFC and the
executive recommendation is for
staff and judge training okay
Particularly thank you madam
thank you Mr appreciate that
clarification
so brings four my second
question Mr chair is going to
the additional
Request for the cost of the
compensation for magistrate
judges so we were discussion mad
magistrate judges not being
included in the overall ask a
recommendation from.
The higher higher Courts AOC and
so forth and they said it was
because that they were already
compensated due to
a level funding and mechanism
can you comment on that and why
or if they were included in
garden increase already Mr chair
thank you.
That meant Mr chair
representative a little ahead
and get again defer to to Mr
Carter Mr gray.
I'll let you go first.
Right.
Mr chair representative you're
correct last year there was an
initiative to do Google
magistrates salaries from
district courts at magistrate
judge salaries from District
Court judge Schaller's the
proposed increase recommended
for District Court judges was
seventeen percent.
That was the right it was
included in H. B. two upon the
veto of Senate bill two last
year
fifty coupling did not happen as
there is a difference between
the amount of money and H. B.
two and the amount of money that
magistrate magistrate judges.
Were statutorily required to be
paid so they saw a seven percent
salary increase District Court
judge's order seventeen percent
salary increase so the ten
percent gap between those and so
across the board that's that ten
percent gaps included in the
base budget for both LFC and
executive recommendation and is
funded as a supplemental in both
LFC and executive
recommendation.
Thank you Mr chair so.
I guess I'm I just maybe off
what would leave them some more
clarification because they are
now kept out of the the previous
the budget request is this we're
going over those budget requests
for this you know the higher
courts so.
And now we're saying that they
need to be compensated and made
full here and this request so
that's and.
Mr chair the the reason that
there is still the requirement
to increase the magistrate judge
may is by statute magistrate
judges are tied to District
Court judges.
The answer and I'm understanding
it I just want to you know that
we're we're hearing two
different pieces of information
in your.
Where we had some question Mr
chair is wide magistrates to be
left out and maybe that.
We need to look at that a little
more closely thank you Mr chair
thank you Representative Garcia.
Thank you Mr chairman of thank
you judge thanks for bringing of
veterans again.
Very near and dear to me you
know.
If I can make a recommendation
which I can recommend the higher
the to the Veterans we have a
lot of interest in New Mexico
over a hundred forty thousand
of.
And Mr chair and a toddler
judges a lot of state well is
not feasible.
We have a caseload on backroom
with me one better in the lot of
interns.
You know thank you for bringing
that up and whatever comes out
of it maybe for the little money
we do a consisting of no big
left for that part of it thank
you Mr chairman thank you
representative Garcia and and to
the committee's credit we the
committee is going with the
higher LFC recommendation
because that's part of our our
budget framework so staying
within our budget framework in
large part for the salaries and
some of these expansion items
absolute measuring a
representative Montoya.
Thank you Mr chairman.
Of just to follow up on.
Representative on this question
about the magistrates I think
all of us might want to have a
little bit of clarity so it is
my understanding Mr chairman
that.
Send send a bill to.
Was vetoed last year.
The burden of the seventeen
percent.
Increase to magistrate.
Compensation will ended up being
an unfunded mandate in each of
the district districts is that
correct.
Mr chair representative that
that is correct so everyone is
asking for.
I've virtually everyone so far
and I would imagine everyone
will every every every one of
the district courts will be us
to cover that funded portion.
Is that going to continue to be
a problem going forward or is it
what that remedy no thank you
Representative Montoya and
appreciate the question from you
so move on I think to clarify
the the mandate in the increases
are covered in our base budget
so we're hearing from our
district courts that this was a
a requirement that was made
without funding last year
however Representative Montoya
we can be confident that those
increases are covered in the
budgets that are being brought
before us today in both the LESC
and the executive recommendation
thank you Mr chairman I I
understand that it's that we're
we're hearing it get covered I'm
just wondering if next year.
Is the remedy in place so that
you're not asking for are we
gonna be hearing that each year
for that unfunded portion or was
that fixed.
Mr chair it is fixed it's in the
base budget and then for the
remainder FY twenty three that
difference those are covered by
supplementals so it is fixed and
they should not be an issue next
year okay thank you Mr chairman.
Much for someone to okay I don't
see any other questions.
I apologize Representative
Sweetser researcher I was late I
have a question people with
substance abuse issues are you
guys ever refer them to a place
and a special called thirds
please.
Mr Chairman Representative
Sweetser dear and Durrance
placement will be trouble
hearing but it disagree with we
were for a different place yes
Sir very often they are Mr chair
so this is a huge concern of
mine because what happens is
these people get referred to
therein space and there's no
requirement for them to stay and
this is becoming a homeless
population.
So that has become a huge
concern Espanola so
I think Mr chair it you guys
need to look into that because
right now Espenilla
Representative are struggling
financially and they're bringing
the cost to our help these
people it's I I got the funding
for the homeless shelter three
years ago but there's only so
much we can do so just something
that you guys need to look into
and I hope you to consider thank
you Mr chair thank you very much
for funding that representative
on.
Representative Pettigrew please.
Thank you Mr chair and
Judge I think you just got the
short straw on this one because
we're gonna go back to the
magistrate discussion
Yes last year Senate bill two.
Senate Bill to
was passed and pocket vetoed but
it's also come for this year so
with respect respect to this but
Mr chair.
The the funding amount has been
asked for.
It to them up from last year
give them this year or what is
that funding amount with respect
to that because we're not
playing what happened last
year's budget we assumed one
thing and it didn't happen are
we just are are we are we as a
legislature gonna get stuck with
that again thank you
Representative Pettigrew the
supplemental fixes last year
and what's in the base budget so
this will be the base budget
moving forward covers this year
moving forward.
So we're covered last year and
we're cover moving forward Mr
grade you want to add anything
Mr chair representative I
apologize I may've been
misinterpreting the question
originally so the LFC
recommendation for FY twenty
four included eight percent
compensation increase for.
District Court judges judges
excluding magistrate court
judges so next year magistrate
court judges under the LESC
framework will see a five
percent
salary increase District Court
and I District Court for
specific thirteen percent salary
increase
This chair and presenters so.
If I understand what you just
said.
That goes off the assumption
that Senate bill two will pass
this year and if it doesn't then
once again we have a negative
impact on the magistrate.
Because who knows what the four
four Senator.
Is that a fair statement.
You Mr having.
Conversation.
You are very careful I have one.
Consider.
The special appropriation.
Six
years it's not in their.
In addition.
The what you have to echo the
registrations of the.
There are other ways to.
Thank you Representative.
Thank you chairman thank you
director for that and that's
ultimately my concern I don't
know that there's going to be as
much issue with Senate bill two
this year now that the budget
basically been taken out but.
That's just five point the Nokia
that thank you very much and
thank you for the suggestion
thank you for the questions okay
are there any other questions
okay just Senator thank you
thank you to you and your team
will by today some for
recommended I would move the Mr
chair move the LFC
recommendation.
There is a second.
K. in state members of Hotmail
is there any opposition to
adopting the LFC recommendations
saying none thank you very much
to.
Okay members we have nine
districts to go we're gonna go
to.
The
The line.
The seventh.
The tenth eleventh and
thirteenth.
Okay so as we get the ninth
judicial district up.
Community service.
Yeah.
Please go ahead Mr gray Mr chair
we have agency two three nine
the nineteenth judicial District
Court page fourteen in your
different she packets and page
twenty seven and going to.
At the north contains curry and
Roosevelt counties and all now
have Mister cynically
at
discussed the recommendations.
Mr chair committee members the
LESC recommendation for this
agency increases general fund
revenue by eight point four
percent all the executive
recommendation creases Jennifer
revenue by one point nine
percent the LFC recommendation
includes an eight percent
competition increase projections
and two percent increase for
staff excluding compensation the
LFC recommendations two hundred
thirteen point one thousand more
than the executive
recommendation the executive
recommendation includes lower
general fund revenue increases
in LFC recommendation because of
the funded vacancy rate and we
have chief judge don Lara here
to present for the agency so if
information of it.
To take just our place good
afternoon Mister chair
representative I am here on
behalf of the ninth judicial
district we have five judicial
district judges three magistrate
judges for courthouses in sixty
three total employees the one
thing I want to tell you about
our employees are each of them
are dedicated and really focus
on helping others you heard in
the state of the judiciary this
earlier this session about the
treatment court store in the
north two additional District
Court that was created by an
individual in our district and
we're hoping that that something
that can be rolled out to other
agencies or other districts
statewide we also as I said
focus on helping others we
started describing program
several years ago and as a
result of that scribing program
we were able to assist an
elderly grandmother and filling
out the paperwork for her
guardianship of her three
grandchildren and then the
following year was my pleasure
to preside over the adoption of
those three children so I'm
going to now what you here for
more court executive officer
Kevin spears thank.
Thank you Mr chairman and
committee members.
Just to catch more stated the
nineteen compasses current
Roosevelt counties
Representative Chatfield thank
you for your service to
Roosevelt County helping us in
the eastern part of the state I
would just like to add that we
feel that we are very for really
responsible with our money out
of the last six fiscal years
we've reverted a total of
eighteen hundred dollars only
including two hundred dollars
last year we keep a very very
low vacancy rate keep our
positions filled as judgment our
state of are very proud of our
pilots with fewer an innovative
court we piloted the eviction
diversion program as you
mentioned we piloted a school a
scribe programs statewide with
pilot the instant Gen S. program
we consider ourselves a court
that that others reach out to
see for for programs such as
that so we are proud of that the
main puts their budget request
truly encompasses needs of some
of our current staff running out
of funding in other areas the
department department health
contract security fund that we
have coming in that we would no
longer be getting all those
things are covered in the LFC
request
and and really we want to keep
it really brief we were looking
for LFC recommendation and I was
certainly stand for any
questions thank you very much
Mr.
Representative Chatfield.
Give us okay we'll go to you for
the motion.
Mr I move the executive for the
LFC Mr chair of the LFC even
better.
Representative okay it's been
second by move by Representative
Chatfield Representative a
second by Representative ranking
member Armstrong thirty adopt
objection to adopting the LFC
recommendation saying none thank
you very much to to our Mr
spears thank you Mr okay we're
gonna go now to the seventh
judicial district.
We're gonna.
Chairman committee members were
not presenting HSD two three
seven seven two additional
District Court just page twelve
your pamphlet in page twenty
five and the volume to the
seventh district contains
controlled Sierra Socorro and
Torrance counties and we're
joined by the honorable chief
judge receives Murphy in our
staff and I'll pass it to a
friend in person numbers.
Mr chair committee members the
LFC recommendation increases
general fund revenue by five
point two percent the executive
recommendation increases general
fund revenue by seven point
seven percent.
the LFC recommendation includesd
compensation not included in the
executive
And the executive recommendation
increases person category by
five point eight percent both
LFC recommendation increases by
three point two percent I'm on
I'll turn it over to the agency
for their presentation.
Good afternoon Mister chair
members of the committee my name
is versus Murphy I'm the chief
judge of the seventh judicial
district as you heard it
consists of Catherine's here us
to court and towards counties
with me today is our CEO CFO
Jason Jones
and.
We are asking for
It
funding for the magistrate
judges salary shortfall in the
amount of
fifty thousand seven hundred.
fifty thousand for the AOC
magistrates to carry out
reoccurring transfer of funds an
additional fifty thousand
dollars.
For magistrates acuity and
fifteen.
For training at for judges and
staff.
So Mister Jones is there
anything that I.
No I would just go with the
chief judge Mr chairman members
of the committee equities judge
Representative major very quick
a request is for magistrate
court it's for two security
officers and then the shortfall
that you've been hearing about
from all the other courts for
the it's about fifty thousand
dollars for the for magistrate
judges.
And we would ask that you
approved the LESC recommendation
you'll see that the LFC
recommendation is lower than the
DFA
and that was in part by a the
HSD error computation so kind
inflated before the
recommendations came out we did
catch it at times I apologize
for that but the LFC
recommendation is closer within
about sixteen thousand dollars
of our unified amount originally
so we would ask for you guys to
consider the LFC recommendation
of twenty so.
Thank you very much with that we
would stand for questions thank
you very much thank you turn
over the ranking member arms.
Thank you Mr chair chairman I
would move the LFC.
Hi second.
Okay it's been move I reckon
member Armstrong seconded by
Representative Hotmail to adopt
the LFC recommendation at the
request of the court is there
any opposition to that motion.
Seeing none is adapted thank you
all very much.
Okay now we're gonna ask.
And to diss thank you so much.
Mr chair up now we have or the
tenth judicial district this is
agency at two four zero page
fifteen in your packets and page
twenty eight and falling to.
At that tent contains Harding
quay and the Baca counties and
all now have Mister cynically at
discuss the recommendations.
Mr chair committee members the
LFC recommendation increases
general fund revenue by seven
point eight percent while the
executive recommendation
increases general fund revenue I
six point three percent stated
before the LFC recommendation
includesd of a percent
compensation increase for judges
and two percent composition
increase for staff including the
compensation case the LFC
recommendation is one point five
thousand dollars less than the
executive recommendation the
executive recommendation we see
agencies requests including
forty one thousand for training
on included in the LFC is
recommendations and for that
I'll pass it on to the honorable
chief judge Robert scooter
Mitchell.
Mr chair members of the
committee thank you very much
for your time my name's over J.
Mitchell junior I'm the chief
judge Leticia district I'm
joined by Amanda hammer my court
executive officer.
The first thing I really I'm
almost embarrassed to ask what
we messed up when we did our
budget initiatives for
supplementals and we didn't ask
for the thirty nine to forty
thousand dollars for a
magistrates this year.
Staff has been very helpful in
helping us get that fixed they
tell me it's taken care of.
But I still want to bring it up
but I want to apologize to the
committee and the staff for us
not doing our paperwork right we
will strive to do better it's
two percent of my budget so it's
really important that we get
that thirty nine forty thousand
dollars so I wanted thank you
all for your really for the
professionals professionalism of
the staff to help us with that.
We're asking for the LFC budget.
Recommendation it covers what
we're really meeting our staff
need compensation.
Of.
Last week I had to staff members
talking about going to executive
agencies.
Because they think they can work
less I'm not sure that's true
but they think that they know
they can get more money.
The executive has been able to
hand out a lot more money to
their staff we're a small town
everybody knows that.
And so I have staff they're
looking at that in that way
that's why that additional money
that you are putting in is
important.
The ten percent that there C.
ask for the supreme court's
still asking for would frankly
make a difference to percent
helps it every bit helps but the
ten percent would definitely
make my staff smiled a little
more often and I would
appreciate that the judicial
education money please funded
for the judiciary.
We haven't had a statewide.
Training of our court staff in
ten years.
And we've tried really hard
under the old system with
University of New Mexico it just
never got to their priority list
if we can bring that in house.
That we can get that funded we
need to teach our staff why
we're unified system why it's
important that we do things and
to compare the same way we do
them in Farmington.
And so that is a really
important initiative that the
supreme court's us.
With that I'll stand for
questions thank you very much
chief judgment so thank you miss
hammer did you want to add
anything Mr chair thank you the
thirty nine point six at thirty
nine thousand the chief judge
was mentioning has been included
in the revised special scenario
and staff is working very
closely with the folks who
present specials to you to make
sure that that's in there so
we'll be coordinated on that we
can discuss when we get to to
those thank you very much for
that and thank you chief judge
for recognizing the the
excellent staff that we have
been very good that they were
close with okay let's go to
Representative Chatfield.
Mr chair of the LFC.
Second okay it's been moved to
adopt the LFC recommendations
seconded by vice chair Dixon any
opposition seeing none thank you
all very much thank.
Is.
As we just the eleventh
district.
Mr chair committee members
without presenting HSD two for
one the eleventh judicial
District Court paticipate
sixteen their pamphlet and page
twenty nine and volume to the
eleventh district contains the
counties of San Juan McKinley
and we're joined by the
honorable judge chief judge
Curtis girly and I'll pass it to
Mr great to talk about the
actual numbers.
Mr chair the LFC recommendation
increases general fund revenue
by nine percent what the
executive recommendation
increases general fund revenue
by eight point three percent.
excluding compensation the LFC
recommendation is two hundred
forty seven thousand dollars
less than the executive
recommendation.
At the executive recommendation
includes part I training that's
recommended by AOC by LFC
centralized within AOC
the exact recognition also
includes funding to support
financial specialist and an IT
specialist not including the LFC
recommendation on I'll turn it
over to the agency for their
presentation.
Thank you Mr chair members of
the committee purchased early
you've heard on the chief judge
for the eleventh judicial
district we're the two counties
in the northwest corner of the
state
I'm not gonna go over many
numbers the our.
Colleagues here helping with
that I I just wanna talk a
little bit about our counties in
our district McKinley County has
a population of about seventy
three thousand people hope you
all have our handout.
That was that was given out of
San Juan county has a population
of about a hundred and twenty
five thousand people.
In serving that those two
populations what we're doing now
is cross training employees
between our district magistrate
court so that we have that type
of level of of the public's
service for the public we're
expanding our hours of operation
so that we can operate outside
of normal business hours right
now we close it for the
afternoon magister course I
think happens a lot around the
state we're trying to get that
is to five working over lunch
and one of the things that I'm
excited about is a some of our
outreach as you see on the back
of the handout we're in the for
the Chief Justice speak about
justice stations
we through our magistrates
courts have started the justice
station and the kabuto chapter
house
Some of the money we're asking
for some of the technology to
get those things done we're
trying to get that expanded but
we serve a native American
population in McKinley county of
seventy three percent of the
seventy four almost forty
percent and San Juan county so
that outreach the one of the
things that COVID taught us is
that we we need we need
different ways to deliver the
justice system to our population
with that I'll stand for any
questions I'm sorry I did
introduce Jody's will our CEO
and I also have the John going
to rob our deputy CEO with the
sorry sorry for the.
Thank you very much chief judge
girly thank you for being here
let's go to Representative
monthly and I want to hear from
you about this.
Thank you Mr chairman
A chief judge girly
Kind of a unique situation with
the eleventh judicial district
anyway we kind of separated into
a and B.
with the with the DA's offices
and and all that it's it's been
a.
I know there's been some
discussion about even separating
those but I'm and what I just
heard from you about this cross.
Coverage
might be a reason not to
separate districts in the future
if that today's office could do
something like that as well I I
do like that idea and I and I
know since a big portion of San
Juan County and that whole area
between San Juan County McKinley
County is Navajo reservation I I
like that
putting something there in the
closet though
kind of splitting that
differences of it's been
Very punitive to some degree
just because of how how much
more difficult it is for folks
to make it either to Gallup
courts or
that asked tackle for Farmington
courts so I I just think that's
a unique innovative way to add
to handle that I appreciate that
and
I just I was gonna have sure the
conversation we had in the
parking garage but we had that
conversation with the previous
on the on the covering the
magistrates are we're not gonna
do that but I I just did want to
say I think this putting a.
A a just a station there in the
reservation
is a good decision and that that
will that be covered both by
judges that are in McKinley
county or in.
And San Juan county or is that
gonna be a permanent someone is
stationed there or is that gonna
be covered.
Part time by both Mr chair
representative Montoya the
justice stations are the
technology driven so really it's
any judge that has a hearing so
what the idea is if you have if
you have a hearing in magistrate
court in Gallup.
and you asked if you could
appear virtually.
Then the population lives near
that chapter house and this is
just the first one we're we're
getting right expanded to other
chapter houses they can go the
the folks can go to the.
Chapterhouse and attend their
hearing even though the magister
might be and dial up for.
My court room as an Aztec I
might be in the courtroom as to
what the party is in his in the
chapter house it's it's a very
exciting thing and it's it's
I just give a little background
for me and I know you've got a
long day that I was a contract
public defender in the for a lot
of that about that too for about
fifteen years earlier in my
career
I had I had clients that
hitchhiked everywhere they
would.
And that could be from
well from anywhere Shiprock to
Aztec ship rocked hello
that's the only transportation
they had was was there if and
stranger's kindness so we're
it's exciting to me that these
things are appreciate your
comments thank you Mr chair and
I think of another some of these
other districts that are this is
a very rural state
this might be something that
could help.
With the other folks to make it
easier so specially folks
there's a lot of appropriations
this might be a of a way in the
future to even expand to other
areas to make it easier for
compliance I think a lot of
people fall out of compliance
just because it is so difficult
especially if there are multiple
courts so thank you Mr chairman.
Thank you very much
Representative Montoya we have
Representative Allison we also
question from representative
Garcia.
Thank you Mr chair.
A lot of what I was thinking
about Representative Montoya
that the words out of my mouth
and everything that he said is
true so I will just recap by
saying thank you judge purely
for doing what you did with the
public protector I think of I am
very glad to see that.
You did not get scared of the
word sovereignty.
All too often when we ask for
services or assistance we're
always blocked by the word
sovereignty I'm glad that did
not stop you so continue look at
other chapters four to establish
just to Senators so thanks for
that thank you thank you for
your thank you for thank you for
your comments sorry no thank you
very much Representative Allison
Representative Garcia thank you
Mr chairman to just thank you
for the presentation I also
representative of the rules
parts of the state of New Mexico
and you know I have to chapters
out there that they're only
transportation is.
I'm glad you brought this up on
on to chapter house are you
going own Mr chairman I got all
reach out to the chapter house
become aware of what you're
gonna do with the Mr chair
representative Garcia yes that
that's what we're in the process
of doing now this first this
first just a station in the
first chapter house was driven
by a magistrate court by the by
a judge that discussion is
ongoing and hopefully it's it's
spreading and spreading like
like wildfire and hoping it
we're we're reaching out also
through our county government as
well both I should say both
counties.
Thank you Mr needle it
thoughtful of born and then
rural New Mexico because what
happens is the the gentleman or
lady whatever can make it a
point.
Maybe Mr and then they will
issue a wire from a wind up
being in jail and that makes the
just compound the problem for
everybody in rural New Mexico
you know what my district is
more front to the rule just the
more but but you do not from
regional for these people thank
you thank you Mr thank you very
much representative Garcia.
thank you very much chief judge
thank you to your team thank you
to the members with that we'll
go to by artists.
Thank you Mr chair I move the
LFC recommendation.
K. to move and seconded to doubt
the LFC recommendation thanks to
the members from the region
thank you chief judge seeing no
objection to that motion we're
gonna end up that.
And continue on to the
thirteenth judicial district
thank you and travel that thank.
The state.
Is that correct.
We can.
In
the next.
Mr chair as we at now I have to
thirteenth judicial District
Court HSD two four three page
twenty in your different C.
packets page thirty one and LESC
going to.
The thirteenth includes a Santa
Cibola and Valencia counties
and all now have a Mr Smedley at
discussed the recommendations.
Mr chair committee members thank
you Mr right the LFC
recommendation for thirteenth
judicial district increases
general fund revenue by eleven
point eight percent all the
executive recommendation
increases general fund revenue
by nine point six percent the
LFC recommendation included
percent compensation increase
for judges to percent for staff
and excluding that number the
LFC recommendation is forty five
thousand dollars less and less
than the executive
recommendation we're joined
today by the honorable chief
judge George I cooled and pass
it on to him to present his
agency thank you.
Good afternoon Mister Mister
chair and members of of this of
this committee first want to
thank you for your service for
hearing our our request.
my name is George George I slow
and the chief judge for
thirteenth judicial district
with me is our CEO Philip Romero
and our CEO for Chris will serve
all is also present maybe
describe our district and the
reason I'm doing that just to
show how big our district is
geographically and also with
respect to population.
Our districts stretches from on
the west from the Arizona border
all the way to the side of the
Sandia mountains from the south
south of the land north two two
north of Cuba Cibola County has
two major municipalities also
have a number of other small
towns where those being grant in
Milan Valencia has well in Los
Lunas but also to a more rural
communities and a number of
other small communities within
that County Santa Fe County has
the committee to Cuba hema
springs Bernalillo proceed does
provide as a Rio Rancho in a
number of other small
communities within that county.
We also have ten sovereign
nations within our artists we
have ten pueblos we also have
part of two of the son of a
sovereign nation within our
district that being that
application and the hickory our
nation as as well goes to show
how big geographically and
divers are district is we also
are the largest not that I the
second largest district
population wise in the state
only being a second to for
Bernalillo county
we have Cibola County we have
one District Court the houses
one district judge.
Yeah we have one magistrate
court also Cibola County grant
has to magistrates Lester county
I have a District Court as three
district judges invalid to
county we have a magistrate
court in Berlin with one
magistrate another magistrate
court and the services to
magistrates in Santa Fe County
we have a District Court to has
I district judges we have a
magic according to what with one
judge one magistrate internally
we have
another magistrate court we to
judge you know we have seventeen
judges and we have a nine court
houses that we that we work
with.
Are requests to follow the LFC
recommendation.
What a what I want to highlight
our that our our priorities.
First of all and I'm not going
to be that added horses
discusses been taken has taken
place with respect to unfunded
magistrate compensation I think
Representative Montoya brought
up about brought that out it was
further vetted by Representative
benefited list of what needs to
happen with that we are
requesting that ten percent
which is a hundred and one
thousand five hundred dollars
for FY twenty four.
Our big us well the number of us
we have one of these asked we've
been asking for since since
actually two thousand nine is
for more G. judicial specialist
too and that's just the point
one occur for part we've been
asking for close is two thousand
nine we haven't received any
last year's session the did
create three positions for us
but they did not funding.
So
it's the.
LSU recommendation is that those
three positions be funded we
actually ask for I what we're
asking of gold go along with the
others he recommendations for a
total of one sixty seven one
hundred.
R. K. O. study that was that was
performance two thousand
nineteen actually showed a need
for eighteenth judicial
specialist in account in our in
our district I should say.
The other request is for our
foreclosure settlement program
to come out of general fund is
set of the mortgage regulatory
settlement that is two seventy
nine five hundred it's been a
very successful program
nearly ninety percent of all the
cases have been settled
aside from the thirteenth
judicial district we also serve
that the for the tenth and the
fist out of out of a negative
but the out of the fifth County.
We're also we're also requesting
that the salaries for pre trial
service officers come out of
general fund instead of of being
reimbursed from AOC.
that is three hundred three
thousand two hundred in the past
AOC has actually funded that
amount we're asking that the we
get out of out of
the general fund that way she
can get can go to start the
trial services in other parts of
the state an additional fifty
thousand dollars to replace
money that was previously given
to us by Santa Fe County.
Find the magistrate
the security ration for twenty
twenty five thousand that is to
then the equipment we already
have we're not asking for any
more equipment we're asking for
people to medical bills we
already have otherwise we do
have a.
The committee that this uses of
this city.
Those are our our request and we
stand for questions at this time
thank you very much to judge
I'm gonna go to Representative
Bach.
I thank you Mr chairman I move
the LFC recommendation.
There's three seconds the we
have.
move by Representative Baca
saying by both ranking member
Armstrong and others chief judge
thank you very much and without
objection we're going to add up
that motion.
Thank you thank you.
Okay now we have members will
finish up this portion knowing
that we have the Bernalillo
county metropolitan court
followed by the corrections
department our final four will
be the eighth judicial district
the fourth the second and then
the first.
Madam.
Yeah.
Chairman small committee members
we're not presenting agency to
create the eighth judicial
district page thirteen your
Pamplin page twenty six and LFC
volume to the district contains
the counties of tells you and
Colfax retained by honorable
chief judge of million Chavez
and staff and I'll pass it to
print in person numbers.
Mr chair the LFC recommendation
increases general fund revenue
by nine point two percent the
executive recommendation by six
point seven percent LFC includes
compensation and excluding
compensation LFC is just a bit
higher than DFA at five twenty
six thousand dollars
Mr chair all not have the HSD
made a presentation.
Thank you Mr chairman members of
the committee I I do thank you
for your time and attention and
and also as a special thank you
to our part to local our
representatives from the eighth
judicial district I'm sure all
of your warehouse Colfax in
Union County is essentially the
northeast corner of New Mexico
in speaking to to what we're
recommending I am sure all of
you heard yesterday we have in
the judiciary undergone a very
robust
Budgetary process of re looking
at our own budgetary committee
our review betting process so
what is so part of what you've
seen as all of our requests have
been really streamlined
thoroughly vetted before they
brought been brought to you as a
committee some important things
to know for towels Colfax and
union counties we had our core
was the the pro bono quarter of
the year in two thousand twenty
one we find very robust pro bono
services as we're seeing an
uptick in all of our litigation
where people are not able
especially in our rural
communities to find or afford
attorneys so we've expanded
those asked to our court our
district our our entire
magistrate and district courts
that can be co located are co
located in telescope Tax and
counties are I heard questions
earlier asked the the the change
in treatment courts rather than
just simply referencing drug
courts and that's because
there's an expansion of services
that not only addresses
addiction but mental health and
also addresses
addresses violence in in in the
context of domestic violence or
how it relates to abuse and
neglect cases houses look to
have better outcomes I know you
guys are gonna get confronted
with various litigation as it
involves crime our hope is what
we can do to give people the
tools are address the trauma
that brings them into the courts
so that they don't come back to
the court and so the eighth
judicial district has one of the
most robust treatment court
programs in that that we have
that overall umbrella that
doesn't only address substance
abuse but it also looks a mental
health and also violence that
brings individuals back into our
court system if I didn't mention
we were the first gold certified
drug court program in the state
of New Mexico our program.
Michael faxes likely to be
certified in the near future and
that's something that we're very
proud of the reason I bring that
up is that relates to it
significant portion of our
requests the reference our
treatment courts and address
part of the LFC recommendations
at all all I'll try to go into
detail or brief detail for you
the security issue I don't think
I need to relay any for a story
that you've already heard have
multiple if you do want to hear
I'm if you have any questions
as to that security piece as the
question that was asked AOC will
have a fund that hopefully you
guys will approve or have
approved that helps with
security for also looking at our
individual security are we do
need to provide for our
magistrates courts and that's
why you're seeing various
requests from the individual
districts and I believe ours is
is appropriate to protect are
various magistrates courts in
our contracts that that we're
trying to have I. T. just the
peace asked I. T. were one of
only two judicial districts that
don't have our own I. T.
technician we have somebody that
travels there that has to go to
our large geographic district
whether tiles Raton or Clayton
to service our various courts we
do hope that that position of
the fund I want to comment and
hi I understand the the nature
and I I'm very happy with the
LFC recommendation on how it'll
affect our districts the only
comment that I would hope that
this committee takes into
consideration is that that
recommendation is asking not to
fund a recurring position that
we got from junior bill funding
from Representative Ortez last
year I just want to put it brief
context into it in the reason a
relates to our treatment court
is just like anybody I was I
wasn't aware that the junior
bill funding to that position we
asked last year for that
position.
It was not approved by the
legislature then we received in
junior bill funding we waited we
confirm that it was reoccurring
we hired that position in
November so that is a real
position that if that.
Eighty thousand dollars that is
not recommended by LFC is not
given we would have it the
person that started that's
highly qualified fact over
qualified that we fortunately
higher from New York
That position would no longer be
funded and again that was a
recurring position that helps
with our our treatment courts I
think that's just the the basic
round up of what I'd like to
relay the magistrate funding I
think Representative Montoya
that's again now in our base
budget that was on funded if it
if it is approved by you an
alternately approved by the
governor we won't come back
again for that piece are because
that would be fully funded any
other pieces on our requests
I'm happy to answer the other
part or or large component of it
that I mention is a lot of pro
se litigants come in to either
the domestic violence side of
our court or the domestic
relations piece of our court and
again providing the most robust
services possible that some of
our request we have a paralegal
that's on contract we're trying
to bring her in full time so
that is part of our request
and I'm and just to to re
reemphasize outside of LFC not
recommending that reoccurring
funding from the junior bills
we're happy of if you guys so
deem it fit to approve the LFC
recommendation I sincerely
apologize I have my Swiss army
knife of seed CEO CFO I do it
all for our district and town is
also with us thank you very much
chief judge figure this thing
we're gonna go to represent
Lujan for question.
Mr chair just to clarify
Talk a lot about the the.
The junior funding you you
received was for a position for
it dropped for your treatment
court is that correct Mr Mr
chair representative yes so
again I I don't call for a drug
court is our overall treatment
court and essential was for a
program manager that helps con
you know organize those services
and ensure that that we're
providing the most about service
as possible have Mr Chairman E.
how many folks have you helped
through this model Mr chair and
that that's an excellent
question so you heard from some
of the other districts has to
their services house was one of
the first drug court programs
are starting with palace we have
a matrix of twenty people for
drug court I believe the matrix
for our our family violence
quarters fourteen people that
doesn't mean that's the only
amount of people we we help with
that we can have about that Max
at any one time in Colfax County
we have for our drug court
seventeen people we're starting
our mental health port that
hopefully I'll have in the
matrix of approximately ten
people
that we're we're going to sell
a significant people amount of
people for our small rural
community.
Thank you Mr chair and there's
rubber in this up is it in our
magistrate court in Santa Fe in
district one.
Is that we have a wellness
court.
Which encompasses a lot of
those.
This to those different types of
courts that you're addressing
into one type of unit one type
of model so I think that's a
type of discussion we we need to
start having and how we're.
I mean I don't want to
consolidate everything that
there looks like there's room
for that and if we're looking at
the pilot model that we did in
Santa Fe and the production the
outcomes which you're pretty
significant in in the best
outcomes I think we need to
start talking about that Mr
chair thank you I appreciate the
time thank you very much clearer
Representative senses for the
motion sick charm of the LFC.
A second second okay it's been
moved by Representative sciences
second by Representative
Chatfield and ranking member
Armstrong adult the LFC
recommendation saying no
objection we would up to the
LESC thank you thank you very
much chair members of the
committee.
Now we're gonna go to the fourth
judicial district and then the
secretary.
Right Mr chair committee members
were now on the fourth judicial
District Court two three four as
the agency number this is page
seven in your packets and page
twenty two and LESC going to add
that fourth contains more at San
Miguel and Guadalupe counties
and all now have a Mr Smedley
discussed recommendations.
Chairman committee members the
LFC recommendation for the for
judicial District Court
increases general fund by
fifteen point three percent all
the executive recommendation
increases it by ten point zero
percent the LFC recommendation
includes the compensation please
without about a percent for
judges to percent for staff
excluding compensation LFC
recommendation is twenty
thousand dollars less than the
executive recommendation the
executive recommendation
committee request including
twenty thousand dollars for
training that is not included in
LFC recommendation we're joined
today by the honorable chief
judge market calls who will
discuss her agencies Parities
thank you after the.
Good afternoon chair your small
and.
I'm sorry no no you're fine.
minus four guys on the chief
judge of the fourth judicial
district that encompasses more
San Miguel and what with the
county with me is Garcia open
and Murphy we are asking that
the you will approve the LFC is
recommendation for recurring
budget this this would allow us
to continue the current level of
operations are provided today as
well as enhanced our services to
the public as you all know our
district is quite rural we're
also aside from having to deal
with all the COVID restrictions
at all of the our other
districts have also dealt with
in the past year have also dealt
with and one of the largest
wildfires in the country all
along with flooding and water
security but through it all our
staff as well as our judges have
done a wonderful job of keeping
up with their cases on even
though many of them were
dispersed throughout the state
during those evacuations.
So what we're asking for is for
funding that would allow us to
fund our pre trial program
manager in a pretrial services
officers we just begun our
program
but needed meet the funding to
to and to actually make them
part of our core rather than
funding through the area they
AOC Ross also is known as the
other courts asking for
additional security we are
asking for a bailiff
So that we can provide a
security to our courts in Santa
Rosa about an hour away from our
Las Vegas court also it's much
more difficult for us to provide
those services when they're
needed and needed quickly so we
are asking for about we're also
asking for domestic relations
current officer or domestic
violence special commissioner of
the to be funded for our point
right now all three of our
district judges are general
jurisdiction judges also those
types of hearings are I are fit
in with all of our other types
of hearings so we would like to
be able to have a hearing
officer's those hearings on
could be scheduled.
Because it provides some sort of
finally not only for our
families are going through a
divorce but also in visitation
and custody issues so children
are have some fine now in
regards to where they're going
to be going into they're going
to spend time with.
As the others as the other
districts are also asking for
funding for magistrate court
judges.
And because of COVID as well as
the fires we lost our mediation
program the people who are
providing that retired we've
been unable to get that
restarted because honestly we
just do not have the funds to
attract someone to do that sort
of work so we're asking for
additional funding into that
program so that we can partner
with the first and they're
mediation program so that we can
continue to provide those sort
of services to the folks in our
district that are available in
the more urban districts.
We're also asking for some
additional funding for training
as well as technology services
but aside from within our LFC
and in the LFC recommendation we
are asking for some special
requests I'm part of that is
funding to fill in to microfilm
years of old case files that we
have in during the fires we have
to actually pack up almost eight
hundred boxes weighing about
forty pounds each of files to
move them someplace safer
because we were in the zone of a
possible evacuation so we are
asking that that be funded as
well.
Also right now wonder District
Court was created the idea was
to have two District Court
judges and one hearing officer
also want to register one of our
programs does not have a jury
room and we now have three
district judges so we are asking
for additional funding is to be
able to create a jury room so
that all three of our judges
have jury rooms and if necessary
we can actually hold on multiple
juries at a time.
but that's pretty much as my
presentation thank you all for
all the work that you all do not
only for the future but for the
state and Mister Murphy and I
stand for any question thank you
very much two judges are free
let's do a quick we'll go to a
question from Senator hill.
Yes Mr chair thank you.
on your hand out.
On the third hole this is a if
FY twenty two supplemental
request Mr chair this is
actually for LFC why did we
approved seventeen percent
raises but only fund seven
percent.
Mr chair representative and the
twenty twenty session hi there
was initiative to do Google
magistrates salaries from
District Court salaries the
budget that was approved by the
legislature included
There was a ten percent
difference between the budget
that was passed and the.
Out of money that was
appropriated for magistrates
And the supplementals to rectify
that.
And Mr chairman then the the
goal now is to rectify that
actual for.
Okay then I worked the.
Budget that does that.
Good thank you Representative
Trujillo will go to
Representative such as for the
motion chair of the LFC second
it's been moved by
Representative Sanchez second by
Representative Chatfield to
adopt the LFC budget
recommendations there any
opposition seeing now and that's
adopted thank you very much
chief judge.
Okay now we're gonna go to the
second judicial district.
Madam chair all have Mister
Smith make sense if that's
right.
Madam chair members of the
committee were not presenting
agency to agree to the second
judicial district which is page
three and your pamphlet page
twenty in the office LFC volume
too messy staff handing out
there and out now the second
district encompasses Bernalillo
county and we are joined by the
honorable chief judge Marie ward
and I'll pass it to Brandon to
talk about the numbers Madam
chair of the committee members
the LFC recommendation increases
general fund revenue by six
point three percent the
executive recommendation
increases it by five point nine
percent excluding of that
compensation recommended by LFC
that difference between the LFC
and executive recommendation is
seven hundred and thirty seven
thousand.
the executive recommendation
includes that amount of money to
swap out mortgage regulatory
funding with general fund for
the agencies foreclosure
settlement program the LFC
recommendation continues to
fund that program through
mortgage regulatory Fund
revenues.
and both recommendations include
funding for the judgeship
created in the twenty twenty to
session but on funded
and madam chair all now have
agency I present with a
presentation.
Good afternoon madam chair.
Committee members my name is
Marie ward on the chief judge of
the second judicial District
Court with me today and I have
my CEO Katina wants and our CFO.
Development hours also present
it is my honor and my privilege
to be in front of all of you
today representing the second
judicial District Court.
It is a extremely hard working
extremely busy court we have
thirty judges we have three
locations and approximately
three hundred ninety employees.
I stand before you pass that
you adopt the LFC
recommendations I want to know
that I really appreciate the
work analysts they have an
incredibly helpful incredibly
professional.
The second is also in strong
support of all of the statewide
initiatives so the judicial
compensation the relocation for
judicial education under either
excuse me AOC
and of course our employee
compensation and I want to take
a moment to address the employee
compensation.
I have been with on the second
judicial District Court.
Since two thousand four it has
been my privilege to serve as
their chief judge over the past
year and a half and watching
health hard and diligent these
employees work
it is a real challenge at this
time in terms of recruiting
retaining employees we have
employees that are working
second jobs I have employees
that are over driver's door dash
drivers custodians working
retail to make ends meet and so
I'm asking this committee to to
consider those statewide
initiatives as well and and the
request for the pay increases
for our employees I can't do my
job none of the judges can do
our job without our amazing
employee.
ask the analyst noted the LFC
recommendation does request the.
Foreclosure settlement program
not be in general fund but be
continue to be funded by the
mortgage regulatory fund.
I have pages and pages here of
the amazing work the foreclosure
settlement program
One of them that I was was
reading earlier reminded me of
a.
my own personal situation.
In this particular case we had a
young family with three children
they lost their grandfather that
was the homeowner and then
within weeks they lost another
young person within their
family.
they were really struggling they
were trying to figure out what
they were going to do without a
home they couldn't afford the
rental income in the community
and the FS P. program just
pulled in resources and
allocated and help them connect
to free legal services to grant
funding to probate court to try
to pull this all together and
they were able to save this
families home a generational
home and their story after story
like.
It cost me to reflect on my own
personal experience when I was a
teenager and my mom lost her
home to foreclosure and so
having a program like this to
assist families can really be
life altering and so if if not
this year I would ask that this
committee considered general
funding for this program that I
believe is here to stay and
concert all of your constituents
if there is a statewide program.
Finally I would just note that
we do believe we have we have
some capital a request we
believe our
construction renovation is in
the LFC recommendations I would
just point to our corporate
technology upgrades we're asking
for one point two four million
dollars for upgrading twenty
three court rooms at the second
judicial District Court that
would integrate the audio video
solutions and deliver digital
recording equipment
we have been working on a
patchwork in terms of what COVID
inspired us to do
but video and virtual hearings
are here to stay to be able to
provide access to the quality
access to justice to make sure
that attorney's in Albuquerque
and it can also serve outlying
communities where there is a
lack of attorneys to be able to
appear hybrid for hearings it's
really critical that we have
these upgrades and I would
respect the.
Iglesias concert the same
otherwise I stand for questions.
Thank you very much judge ward
and thank you CEO let's go to
Representative Lujan for
questions thank you Sir one
quick question a talking about
the in person hybrid
hearings do you currently have
in person hearings and.
The district Mr chair.
Mr chair Representative yes we
have in person hearings we have
virtual hearings and we have had
returned we do everything to
address what's appropriated
circumstance thank you Mr thank
thank thank you Representative
Lujan Representative said that
Chris please thank you Mr
chairman not so much a question
just to commend your for call
foreclosure settlement program
you know I can't speak for other
representatives but in my short
time as a representative I
received at least two calls from
families of some sort of help
around this specific issue.
And so I am very pleased that
you have this program it with
I'm sure it's something that's
needed statewide.
Thank you Mr chairman thank you
very much for that firsthand Mr
Representative Cruz.
Okay sing no further questions
let's go to Representative Dixon
for the motion Mr chairman of
the LFC recommendation that a
great spin move by
Representative Dixon second by
Representative accrues to adopt
the LFC recommendation thing
opposition thank you very much
to.
Now was the first judicial
district.
Thank you.
Trump.
Mr chair Mr chair we now have
the first judicial District
Court two three one to thirty
one is agency number H. two in
your packets and page nineteen
and LESC going to at the first
district contains Los Alamos Rio
Arriba and Santa Fe counties and
now have Mister Smith we had
discussed recommendations.
Mr chair committee members thank
you Brandon the LFC
recommendation will increase the
general fund for the first
additional District Court by
four point four percent while
the executive recommendation
increases general fund three
point seven percent LFC
recommendation includes a
percent compensation increase
from judges and two percent
compensation increase for staff
excluding the compensation piece
the LFC recommendation is one
hundred ninety six thousand
dollars last and executive
recommendation.
The executive recommendation
includes ninety thousand ninety
point one thousand for training
that's not included within the
LFC recommendation and we're
joined by the honorable chief
judge Brian Senator who will
give his.
It's not often I get to hear my
name pronounced correctly I
thank you very much.
Right it with me here today is
Kathleen hill she's our CEO and
for administrative wizardry that
really makes it happen at our
districts thank you very much.
So the first social district
extends roughly from Edgewood to
charm all and from tool say the
rate goes so it's a very large
diverse area in addition to
serving the needs of that
district is residence we also
the judicata Committee disputes
statewide brought because Santa
Fe is within our district and so
it's a very unique jurisdiction
in that fashion.
We have to district courts one
in T. R. Maria one in Santa Fe
and we have four magistrates
courts to in Rio Arriba county
one Los Alamos and one in Santa
Fe.
we support the LFC proposal hi
and I will also make an
additional ask on that please
strongly consider this and that
is in addition to all the
concerns you've heard from other
districts about the need for
staff raises of Santa Fe is
quite unique in that.
We have so many state positions
in different branches in our
city that while the additional
compensation that you are we
appreciate this very much
approved last year well that's
helping us attract new recruits
it is definitely like filling a
very leaky bucket because in
Santa Fe people will get trained
up and then they walk across the
street to a different branch and
so I waited no we are making
tremendous strides to increase
our retention increase our
number of staff fill vacancies
but without equalizing the
compensation of our staff with
that of the executive in Santa
Fe I don't know how long it will
take to accomplish that goal and
it's a much need to go so please
give that great consideration.
I also it speaking of the I'll
try to avoid any duplication and
focus on what you need to my
district.
One a it is true that in the LFC
proposal it omits a ninety
thousand dollar roughly increase
that was requested for training
for judges and staff that was a
request that came out of a
strategic planning retreat with
the entire judicial branch this
summer we respect the wisdom of
this body and that of the
leadership of our branch in
deciding that it's more
effective to Sir pool those
funds with other funds and move
that training in house to the
judiciary so please don't we
support that reduction of for
that reason and thank you for
guiding it in that way.
The other requests that I think
is special awards attention is
are very modest expansion
request that would take a three
quarter FTE eagle full time F.
T. and and I want to make sure
it's clear this is an example of
how great our staff is our
report Stevenstone who's the
domestic services supervisor
brought this idea to to me and
to others it's born out of staff
for acknowledgement that during
the pandemic in the use of
remote technology they have
developed expertise in doing
priority consultations and other
important family interactions
that used to require someone
traveling a great distance to
our court it now the learn
through the pandemic it's I'm
not glad the pandemic happened
but I'm grateful that the
expertise gained in that people
are thinking about how to use it
they are now providing those
services remotely Montoya is
decreasing no shows it's
increasing access to justice
decreasing the burden on the
participants that that take part
in those programs any ideas that
we were we are going to expand
it offer those services to other
districts that currently
contract for those services at
what we believe is a higher rate
and we can use our expertise to
provide better value so it's
just a quarter FTE but it's such
a big example of how our staff
is thinking about ways to really
improve services based on what
we've learned and and I do want
to say that that spirit I think
you'll find throughout the
magistrate and district court
houses are districts were very
fortunate that way
other than that I believe that
the LFC proposal tracks what
we've asked for you for that
knows him about the ten percent
on funded magistrate court
raises and how that came to be I
don't want to got a believer you
at this point that they do have
any questions I was certainly
stand for the thank you very
much chief judge.
As let's go to Representative
Lujan question.
Thank you Mr chair as you were
Senators you know a lot of
things across the board we're
some of the adults from the
districts so I'm gonna keep it
kind of simpler.
Mr chair argue with the
technology request to us are you
having in person hearings Mr
chair.
Yes so Mister chair
representative all it not only
at this point are we doing in
person and hybrid hearings in in
remote hearings but we are doing
jury trials at the moment that
pretty vastly see what we were
doing before the pandemic so I
just want to know that the.
We did fifteen jury trials in
the last quarter of twenty
twenty two that's compared to
eleven jury trials last quarter
two thousand nineteen with the
staffing we have I can not
looking tell you that that's the
pace that we can sustain without
additional staff and that goes
back to my earlier requests
urging but yes we have people in
the courthouse and we are
providing services that in some
ways a faster clip it is harder
because of space the limited
social distancing alike we have
to do more panels to get juries
and we have to overcome
obstacles but our staff our
judges are great and they're
doing.
Thank you Mr chair I'm just.
I want to talk to offline on
that I think that you some of
the feedback and even by
personal experience I think that
we are moving up you know
quantity over quality you know
it's and it's it's there's not
the quality there and I
understand the needs but
sometimes especially more
looking in our family courts and
the courts were there needs to
be a visual in place we're
missing that that proponents of
that component excuse me when
we're having our court cases and
and I just would like to maybe
talk to live with our more about
that the next thing I want to
talk about is
for your magistrate courts I
brought it up before Mr chair
your wellness for I don't see
anything in print in here and
expanding or increasing well
this court modeled Mr chair is
that something you're looking at
yes and the Mr chair and
representative are always
looking at ways to expand but I
to be perfectly candid we have
been very conservative in the
request that we're making in
terms of looking at what the
needs are as we come out of the
pandemic how numbers bounced
back and help quickly and so
that is not a request that is in
this budget but please know that
the fact that this budget
request is I think among the
smaller of the districts by
percentage anyway I don't think
that I'll always be here with
such a modest requests does the
numbers come back and we can
justify it will be asking for
greater I thank you Mr and I
again we just ask for you never
know we're all kind of concept
in model to be looking at that
because that's something
actually use my junior funding
for and it twice and so I think
that this is something that is a
better could be a better
investment for our court system
as it encompasses a lot of
things I just want to thank you
on the mediation as well and
then putting that into the
budget but I I really would like
to talk to off line and some
other things thank you Mr chair
and I appreciate the time
Representative I be a pleasure
to talk with the.
And I've to say this is for
everyone and it's open to the
public are quite often as well
to take advantage of it I hope
you will feedback is always
appreciated I'm happy to be here
because I don't get out log to
hear people's the thank you to
okay we're gonna go to
Representative such as for the
motion remove the LFC rate
motion for the LFC second by
Representative Garcia is there
any opposition to that motion.
Seeing none we would drive the
LFC chief judge thank you very
much thank you to your staff.
Okay that concludes the District
Court questions we're going to
go and just the metropolitan
court to come up
to all those from the district
courts from the committee and I
thank you for what you do please
travel back safely to wherever
you're headed back to and thank
you on behalf of the state.
The.
Right.
Mr chair committee members one
more we now present agency to
for for the Bernalillo metro
court page twenty one your
pamphlet in page thirty two of
the LFC volume two we're joined
by the honorable chief judge
Maria Dominguez and I will pass
it on to Mr branding grave for
cell numbers.
Mr chair the LFC recommendation
increases general fund revenue
for this agency by four point
nine percent the executive
recommendation increases it by
three point five percent
excluding compensation at the
difference between the
recommendations in training a
hundred fifty thousand dollars
training that was included in
the Executive recommendations
based budgets and funded
centrally to just see the LFC
recommendation on now have the
chief judge made a presentation.
Yes good good afternoon and I'll
keep this brief but before we
get started I wanted to
introduce our deputy CEO
ballistic Garcia who is here
with the B. also everybody I
think knows Rachel monarch our
CFO and then I wanted to take a
moment just to introduce our
newest metropolitan court judge
judge and that a strata I asked
her to join me I will be my term
will be done as chief judge me
first and it will be fifteen
years on the bench in metro and
I've loved every second of it
this summer and so I'm winding
down my judicial career so I
wanted to bring her on board so
she would have the institutional
knowledge so thank you and thank
you for having as well with that
said you do have fun handout I'm
not going to be labor it I will
go ahead and just hit on some of
the items that I've heard
questions on on and some of the
funding that we absolutely do
need I will tell you absolutely
we need everything but I'll go
ahead and hit on on the audio
equipment for recording cases.
We will we are we are a quarter
of record at metro
during the pandemic of course
we've been struggling with our
audio visual and we have
certainly seen the faults in our
audio equipment and quite
frankly were desperate for that
in addition to that of course ít
network system administrator we
do need that
We had a cyber attack in
Bernalillo county and because we
had such a strong I. T. support
in our own network at metro we
were able to sustain our court
hearings to continue agreements
without interruption in addition
to that we have several program
manager program court
coordinator and program
specialist that we are lapsing
federal funding for years we've
aggressively and continue to
aggressively pursue up federal
funding as well as funding from
the county in the sentencing
commission and
We continue that for years and
extend it for years but at this
point it is.
Done and we do need to have on
sustainability by the state so
those are the things that we're
asking for all stand for
questions if you have any.
Thank thank you very much
Going to go to Representative
care.
Thank you Mr chair thank you
judge I saw you in action at the
northwest Bernalillo county
public safety forum and your
innovation and your dedication
to problem solving and
preventative work it was amazing
so I hope your person here can
learn from that thank you for
being here today that's all I
really appreciate that thank you
thank you chairman thank you
Representative Garrett thank you
very much Representative care.
Okay let's uh I don't see any
other questions
we'll go to phase two addicts
and for the most.
Thank you Mr chairman of the LFC
recommendation Hey there's a
motion for the LFC.
Okay since I give by
Representative Garrett is there
any opposition to adopting that
motion.
Thing on that is adopted thank
and thank you and
congratulations the judge was
great to see you as well.
Or.
Okay nobody leave because we now
we're gonna ask
Our corrections department.
Not in the idea.
And ask Miss raven mystery
menace to come up with.
Mr chair all the sitting in for
miss right and she's out sick.
Okay that thanks to the staff
for getting us to the
presentations the survey can you
get a started please Mr chair we
now have agencies seven seven
zero Mexico corrections
department I'm joined by
secretary to foil the Cerro
if you like to follow along in
the LFC going to you can do so
by turning to pages three
hundred and sixty one through
three sixty nine.
The executive recommendation for
the HSD increases revenue by
zero point seven percent at the
LFC recommendation increases
revenue by one point five
percent.
LFC recommendation provides an
additional three point one
million to fund raises for
correctional officers in both
public and private facilities
That that is averaging at five
point nine percent rate
increases the LFC recommendation
also adds and that one million
dollars to expand evidence and
research based recidivism
reduction programming and five
hundred thousand dollars hi to
increase rental assistance for
offenders re entering the
community.
I'll turn it now briefly to the
nonrecurring recommendations
both recommendations include
support a thirty million dollar
nonrecurring appropriation to
continue to agencies hepatitis
C. treatment program and and
both recommendations support a
one million dollar general fund
appropriation to convert paper
offender files to electronic
records and with that I'll now
turn to that DFA analyst to add
any additional comments.
Credit repair members of the
committee I think a rounded to
the.
A good job of describing the
differences
One thing that he did not know
was that in the and may and
management control program.
The legislative recommendation
reduces the FTP account by three
hundred and nine positions the
executive.
Recommendation did not do that
and
The executive believe that that
would pose a number of issues
administratively and otherwise
for the department if if that
reduction in FTE was adopted
For one point it would only read
about a hundred making positions
in the and the program is
custody which is only about ten
to twelve positions per
facility.
also in the same program to in
more management control program.
A a.
Legislative recommendation
included some language.
Specifying at two point nine
million dollars was designated
for correctional officer pay
increases.
However the.
Executive recommendation.
For the person category is
actually larger than the
legislative recommendation was
and the executive recommendation
without including that language
leave the agency with a more
funding and more flexibility to
address compensation and
recruitment and the.
Retaining of a of correctional
officers as as they see fit.
Thank you Mr.
It's a great place Mr chair I I
apologize I've neglected to
raise one thing district and
specifically asked me to raise I
believe the committee may I need
to make a technical motion at
three two performance measures
that were discontinued and that
performance measure process this
summer were accidentally
included and so I believe a
motion to exclude those would be
appreciated I can find the
details of those on page six of
the difference in packet
other than that hi I have
nothing further thank you that
thank you very much for that
secretary please go ahead thank
you for being here and please
feel free to introduce members
of your team.
Right thank you Mr chair and
members of the committee my
name's Alicia to foil the Cerro
and I am the secretary of the
corrections department and with
me today I have Mister ed Smith
who is our administrative
services division director of
Carl Ortega who is his deputy
director Melanie Martinez are
director probation and parole
and Gary Masi L. R. director of
adult prisons division and
there's a couple other members
of our team that I asked to join
us just to get the experience of
sitting in the in the room and
watching these presentations
so what I'm gonna do to date is
share a little bit about myself
and then I will talk about the
HSD a little bit about what we
do and who we are and as I'm
doing that I will talk about the
differences in the executive and
the legislative recommendations
as I am here of course to seek
your support in moving the
executive recommendation so.
I started with the corrections
department in two thousand one I
started as a case worker at the
penitentiary in Santa Fe and
I've worked in a variety of
other positions at the agency I
worked as a unit manager in the
classification bureau as a
deputy warden and warden and a
couple of different locations
and then I had this insane and
still sometimes unbelievable
opportunity to be sitting in the
position of the secretary of
corrections in this agency that
I've dedicated myself to for all
these years and really where my
heart lies I am from Santa Fe
and New Mexican through and
through I graduated from Santa
Fe high school I went to college
at both NMSU and at UNM and I am
just I feel so very fortunate to
be able to serve the state I am
working in this agency of course
we touched lives all across the
state and I believe that it's
our responsibility to do things
to help improve the lives of
those people and thereby improve
the community at large in
general and
As I have entered into this role
one thing that has really struck
me as you know all those years
working in this agency you get
to make decisions on maybe
policy changes you get to make
suggestions and things like that
you can run the area that you're
in charge of but you don't get a
seat at the big table and now of
course I have the opportunity to
have the seat at the table and
one of the main goals that I've
had since I entered into this
role was to create equity fair
pay equal pay for equal work in
in this agency make sure that
our people are compensated
fairly that we can recruit and
be competitive with other law
enforcement entities and that
the work environments that our
people are coming into every day
be into office space a prison
institution of of probation and
parole field office that their
professional environments their
work is rewarding and that every
single day all of us have the
opportunity to make positive
changes for the people that we
serve so our agency we employ
about twenty three hundred
people and that is made up of
five probation parole region
offices throughout the state
which it is made up of forty six
district offices located
throughout your communities
across the state we have eight
public facilities and there's
two privately operated
facilities that we contract with
we supervise about fourteen
thousand people on probation or
parole and we have a present
that capacity of seven thousand
six hundred forty five budget of
which only fifty three of fifty
three hundred twenty three were
filled today which puts a sap
we're at seventy percent of our
capacity essentially
As of today we're also working
with the of vacancy rate
approximately can see rate of
about thirty percent so we're
looking at really a level spot
where we have about a thirty
percent vacancy in staff but we
also thirty percent vacancy in
our in may budget which really
levels us out and gives us the
ability to be flexible with
where we place our inmate
population to make sure that we
can account for the staffing
that's taking place in those
facilities so now one of the
things that was cited here by
the LFC was that they were
looking at cutting that the
positions right so three hundred
and nine positions and I think
that that's an important thing
to know because I want to be
clear that this past four years
in the first administration we
converted three out of five
private prison facilities into
public operations and in doing
the most recent ones we did a
takeover in Santa Rosa and a
takeover in the grants area we
did not go in and create brand
new FTEs to open those
facilities we recognize the same
thing that the legislative
finance committee recognize and
we took positions that were
vacant long time vacant
positions from other locations
and the majority of the
positions for those to take
overs were built using existing
position so we did not come and
ask for additional dollars are
additional funding to do that
with a couple of exceptions in
some of those administrative
ranks I'm I'm terribly concerned
that this loss of three hundred
nine positions would put us in a
situation where we would
essentially stop progressing at
this point forward right so what
we've done in our training
academy is we've changed the way
that we do recruitment and we're
actually starting to see bigger
losses there was a newspaper
article I think it was sometime
earlier this week or maybe late
last week talking about the
state police having the largest
class academy that had seen in
many years and likewise we.
Experiencing something very
similar we have about forty one
cadets in our current class
that's active right now for
correctional officers and
Excuse me.
In the past we were seen
graduating classes of fifteen
maybe twenty twenty three if we
were lucky and what we have done
is shift the recruitment to the
facilities where it's taking
place in the local communities
all of the screening is now
taking place at the institutions
where we're looking to fill
whereas at one point in time all
of that sort of took place at
the Santa Fe
training academy and it was not
as wide reaching as what it is
now and we have seen those
changes lead to larger groups of
people joining into art
Tadamichi which we hope will
equal larger numbers of people
working in our institutions and
lower vacancy rates for us
that's what our hope is but if
we were to take away these pages
positions now what that would
mean is that the facilities
where we have shifted
populations over to accommodate
the low inmate populations are
we have a facility housing unit
that's closed for repairs we
have that type of thing
happening right now in Santa
Rosa Klay in Santa Fe Springer
and the slowness where we have
different parts of the
institutions closed because of
staffing or we're doing
maintenance changes like that
but essentially we would have to
leave all of those areas close
and we would not be able to
accommodate the what we
anticipate seeing is an increase
in prosecutions and all of the
things that we heard to date
with the judiciary and how
they're looking at improving the
way that they're doing their
prosecution work and and things
of that nature so the sentencing
commission we work with them
they do a lot of work with us to
help us project our population
it's been very iffy we did start
to see a population decline
happen in twenty eighteen and it
just continued on and it goes
course continued on through the
pandemic but what we saw is that
much of that is driven by some
of the larger judicial districts
and the prosecution rates and we
know that and I I in looking at
the LFC recommendation they cite
the the dramatic.
Change it particularly in the
second judicial which primarily
feeds our institutions in New
Mexico you know creates the
number of intakes coming in but
I believe the LFC documentation
cited twenty six percent
prosecution in about twenty
eighteen and us somewhere in the
neighborhood of sixteen percent
of the new admissions are coming
from the second judicial
district so I would anticipate
that we will see a continued
increase in the number of people
that are entering into the
prison system and I want to make
sure that we're able to
accommodate that by having
enough staff in place at all of
our institutions so that if we
need to reopen one of those
wings that we're able to do that
now also a couple years back we
created with your support of
course a separate budget program
code for reentry and the reason
that I wanted to do that was to
make sure that agency this
agency the corrections
department now and well into the
future in different
administrations would be able to
make reentry and recidivism
reduction a priority and
something that was always going
to be important to the HSD and
so we had a little bit of
growing pains in doing that the
when we created that division we
didn't say we need a whole bunch
of new money for this place we
said let's take money that we
already have in Community fender
management and in in NMAA
management control let's move
that those dollars over to
recidivism reduction and then of
course we have had some of those
in in in that.
Category over the years but one
of the things that we did and we
got wrong was that we moved a
million dollars from right from
community offender management
into reentry and we realized
that we needed it in community
offender management to pay for
electronic monitoring so was
really just something that we
recognize that we have made an
error on and as I look through
the LFC recommendation they
referred to the language has
As well as cutting.
Dollars from reentry but that's
not what really happened what
happened was that we shifted it
inadvertently and we're looking
to create or to correct an error
that we made in this budget
change and that's one of the
things that we disagree with
their on the on the on the
changes so now one other thing
that I want to mention and I I
also believe that this is very
much where the LESC was headed
when they made their
recommendation and I think that
we actually just took care of it
before they suggested that we
take care of it and so what that
is is pay increases for our
staff members and we've been
doing that steadily since twenty
twenty so in twenty nineteen
when I entered into this
position our correctional
officer starting pay was
seventeen dollars and eighty six
cents now as of this month it
will be twenty two dollars and
fifty cents an hour which is an
increase of twenty six percent
over the three and a half years
that we've been able to do that
now what the way that we've done
that of course there have been
legislative appropriations and
suggestion of the legislature
the legislative finance
committee that allowed us to get
some of those rate increases but
where we were able to find the
remainder of those funds was in
using vacancy savings which is
really what the LFC has is
suggesting that we do it is
something that we have already
done and and have already
accomplished and so with that
number we're looking at
hopefully that four percent
across the board which would
increase correctional officer
pay essentially by thirty
percent from twenty nineteen to
twenty twenty three and to be
clear it hasn't just been for
correctional officers the
increases have been for
correctional officer Seery so
all of the positions in their
officer sergeant lieutenant
captain and all the various
ranks we've also been able to do
use the vacancy savings to get
pay increases to probation and
parole officers one into and
we're working right now on
making some pay increase my.
Education for our educators and
our behavioral health providers
so
The the final thing that the
LFC.
Recommends is a additional
amount to be given to a CPI for
our private facility operators
and this is something that
classically have been a problem
for the agency I mean there
would be there were times where
years went by ten plus years
went by where none of the
private facility operators got
any kind of per diem increases
but we have worked really hard
to remedy that issue and we've
made sure that we've been able
to give that forward so in the
LFC recommendations there is
money for us CPI increase but I
want everybody to know here that
the two contracts we have one of
them is in Otero county at the
met with the management training
corporation and in that location
we we rent a portion of one of
their facilities where they
house many of our sex offenders
they participated in treatment
at that location but in July of
twenty two they received a two
percent increase in their due
for an additional two percent
increase that will take effect
in July of this year and the geo
group which operates the
facility that we have in the
Hobbs area they received a three
point one percent increase in
twenty two and they are due to
receive an additional two
percent in January of this year
so I believe that we have
address the things that the LFC
found concerning and the thing
that I'm most concerned about
here is the loss of that of
those three hundred and nine F.
T. when we're finally starting
to see an increase in our
recruitment actually matter in
and also because we just I don't
believe at this point that we
can predict truly what will
happen with the size of the
prison population and I think
that we need to be prepared to
properly serve anybody comes
into our custody so the
executive recommendation for FY
twenty four it's in alignment
with our agency priorities it
totals to three hundred thirty
seven point six million the LFC
recommendation it is that three
hundred forty point.
Seven million which is a
difference of three point one
and I respectfully seek your
support in moving forward with
the executive recommendation
thank you Mr chairman members
thank you Secretary to foil to
settle let's go to questions of
for members.
we're gonna start with
Representative Baca than
Representative dealer Cruz.
Thank you Mr chairman and thank
you Secretary for your
presentation Representative
bless the county district eight
and as you know I have to
facilities in my County up by
any chance Mr chairman do you
know as far as the vacancy rate
within the two facilities in
Valencia County.
Mr chair and representative off
the we're talking central New
Mexico correctional facility
and.
The other facility your I think
you might be referring to a
county jail know what is the
lease agreement called the on
the farm but.
Level one.
All right Mr chair
Representative Baca yes so the
level one we consider it part of
central central New Mexico
correctional facility we closed
the farm that level one facility
in about twenty twenty I think
the reason we did that is that
we were experiencing some very
significant shortages it was
like mid COVID and we had a lot
of people who were how
quarantine and there were just
all sorts of issues we worked
with the union in the facility
to make some shifts in the way
that their schedules worked we
switch them over from eight hour
posted twelve hour opposed to
try to remedy some of that and
and that was what made our
decision to close that level one
facility so what we did was the
facility has a capacity of like
three hundred thirty two or
thirty four and we only had
about a hundred fifty inmates in
that facility so what we did was
we took them we put him into the
level two building which is the
same kind of campus there in
your area essential level two
facility on the main campus and
we said let's take all those
people and all those positions
that shift over into the main
and the level two to cover the
post that we knew we were able
to cover so the vacancy rate at
that facility right now in Los
Lunas twenty eight and a half
percent.
Of thank you for that and thank
you Mr chairman
I guess for my concern is like
it's just like myself like many
of our colleagues here we
support our first responders we
support our police and fire
personnel.
We also I think that you knows
the situation and in my district
has been this you know as a dire
for even a state of emergency so
I think that any measure to make
sure that we have the stuff in
there when you said about
closing certain parts of this
and even other areas of the
facility because of a lack of
stopping that that to me is a
concern because you know it's a
safety concern and so I don't
want to go what's into that but
just understand that that is a
for many of us that have
facilities in our is that is a
concern
And so
With that I'd like to just kind
of touch base with you as far as
all fine if I could just so we
can see what I can do thank you
Mr chairman thank you very much
for serve ox and next
Representative Cruz.
Thank you Mr chairman.
The secretary how do your pay
raise for officers compared to
other agencies.
Mr chair representative Dylan.
When we look at compare those
we're looking at jails and
police departments and things of
that nature when it comes to
jails and other.
Any type of like the Santa Fe
county detention facility you
know we always have competing
finds it up across the street
from each other there on highway
fourteen but we're just a little
bit above them the twenty two
point five percent puts us a
little bit about the Santa Fe
institution at this point I
believe that are starting rates
are better for our the
correctional officers than they
are in M. D. C. or any other
county jail that we would
consider to be a primary
competitor with
and then if we receive we see
that four percent and I believe
that will put us above you Mr
chair so that was a house going
to bring up because right now
Bernalillo county specifically.
Is having a tremendous problem
with the not having the staffing
levels of the desperately need
and so I was curious as to if
they have to be a competitive
situation all the time but you
guys are still above even NBC.
Mr chair and representative does
Cruz we are at the correctional
officer level I do think that
when we start to increase in
rank and we're looking at some
of those higher level positions
that we definitely are more
competitive with them for awhile
I I remember M. D. C. did a
bonus a signing bonus of a
thousand dollars or something
and if that was something that
we were approached with doing
but to be honest people who left
us to go to work there ended up
coming back and I believe ended
up forfeiting that bonus so I I
just I think it's a really
different environment working in
a prison is more of a stable
environment you know you see
primarily the same inmates and
you're working programs and
they're there for long periods
of time and a jail is a very
very complex situation so
I think that different people
choose different areas depending
on their preferences.
Thank you Mr chairman it it
seems to me that.
It's it's a it's a tough
business it's a tough job to
have to hold and and and I
totally respect the officers in
your system and of course all of
the others that deals as well
thank you Mr thank you very much
Representative Cruz Mexico
representative Garcia than
Representative Pettigrew.
Thank you Mr chairman.
Thanks for the presentation the.
Prisons are at seventy percent
capacity right now.
Mr chair representative Garcia
yes we are at set just about
seventy maybe a little bit lower
than seventy percent capacity
thank you Mr chairman of.
A couple years back the would
mention of the population going
down.
And and how much they would all
of the seventy percent water is
right now.
Mr chair and representative
Garcia.
Looking backwards for this is
pre pandemic level I think that
our numbers were about seventy
six to seventy eight percent of
the capacity and I I mean so
about eighty nine percent what
is what we've seen in the drop
between nineteen and now.
Thank you for that I'm sure
because you know they concerns
me because back then you guys
are cutting.
I think you said that the
population going down too much
and we did not need all these
guards but now Mr chair next
question.
I have three prisons in my in my
town.
And I don't know if you control
I serve on the board to I have
to state prisons you bought for
civic got a couple years ago.
Okay the vacancy rate what is
that and and will to preserve
requests.
Mr chair representative Garcia
grants is one of the facilities
where we have slightly elevated
vacancy rate so we're looking at
about a thirty five percent
vacancy rate in that location
right now and our population is
the of the facility is about
twenty two percent thank you
right now
Shares of.
Secretary Stewart why is.
Region using programs being so
high on a beacon street.
Mr chair representative Garcia
you know it's tough to say
because we see different
communities and it doesn't seem
to be steady and there seems to
be quite a lot of fluctuation in
it because about a year year and
a half ago we had requests all
the way down to seventeen
percent of the can see right and
then
it's so it's hard to say you
know why people choose to leave
it or or take a different path
or it could be that they're
looking to go back to the ice
facility that you mentioned the
the other facility CoreCivic
that's in your district I mean I
know they have options when it
comes to other law enforcement
positions in in your area and
it's hard to say why that has
happened but we are addressing
it by trying to increase the
number of on site local
academies that were holding in
your area of Mr Chairman knows
very concerning to me because
you know I talked to guard that
there.
These guys are saying their
merry to the present.
Their number is to the wife
anymore because of the workload
they have and it's very
concerning and your answer to
why is not very satisfactory to
me.
We don't we we don't know why.
We apparently there's something
going on with the system that
we're not progressing for that
many people for us to have a
high capacity vacancies in the
state.
That's not very good you know I
live there and and people are
working there are not very happy
with what's going on the.
Within that system you know.
People do not come up an
aggressive because they're
afraid of retaliation but I hear
war stories of what's happening
that facilities and then you
turn around and say well we
don't know why.
If you have an answer for that
yet Mr chair representative
Garcia I really disagree very
strongly with what you're saying
I know the warden who works out
there Jessica Biel Richards I
worked with her at the
penitentiary which she was a
unit manager she also has worked
in the private institutions in
in the Santa Rosa facility she
has a lot of experience vast
experience and she has made just
eight in balance of positive
differences and she's been at
that facility she has a strong
management team and when I visit
that facility I am not hearing
the types of things that you're
saying to me and I would love to
say maybe you and I can go there
together take a walk through and
see if there's somewhere where
we can reconcile those
differences because I just
absolutely cannot wrap my head
around the possibility that
that's accurate because the
staff I've I've seen nothing but
positive words from the staff
out there and and I know that
she's at a phenomenal leader so
I I would love to maybe go out
there with you sometime and talk
to some of the folks that you
that are expressing these
concerns to you doctor Schecter
Mr chair you know I'm not
disagreeing with you you're
listening to your staff for what
they've done you and I'm
listening to the people are
working there they're trying to
complete different stories.
And if you address of guard.
Donna you'll and and your Martin
and he goals and tell you some
the one here in their
retaliation there you know I've
been around seventy three years
old but our roots.
You know our state authorized
do to me to say that these
things are there and what I'm
getting that is the reality of
it why are we so understaffed
and to prisons in requests when
the a couple years ago we had a
discussion with you later bye in
the prison you promised that it
would be better it will be staff
and here we are with the worst
in the state.
You know what what how do you
actual question and you don't
have to answer but I'm just
telling you what we talked about
the prior Mr chair.
And and what we got what I
before it does but the president
and we're at now.
We appreciate we're in right now
the committee senator
undersecretary you know why
don't know why grants is the
worst.
No vacancies and.
Listen to a question but you
know we really need to go down
we'll have a tough for people I
guess I don't know.
The drug concerning to me the
wise requests.
New Mexico the worst in that
vacancy rates in the state of
New Mexico hospital prisons Mr
chair and representative Garcia
if I may that's it's actually
not as I said it had one of the
higher numbers of the the places
where we're seeing the highest
numbers of vacancy is inflated
in clay in and in Santa Rosa are
the two that have the highest
number of vacancies and in both
of those locations we have half
the building closed so that we
can safely staff the facilities.
Yeah Mr Chairman
maybe a one off on the wrong end
but you clearly said the system
to to put those in requests had
the highest vacancy rate and I
changed around to the Clovis is
one of the highest you know if
you have clarified that in
Russian.
Could you said it perfectly
clear.
So it is a requests have the
highest vacancy rate in the
state and not deprivations on
madam go Mr Chairman madam
secretary and said well now
closed one I.
Anyway I'm just repeating what
you said thank you Mr thank you
very much representative Garcia
listening Representative
Pettigrew then we're going to go
to Representative heard.
Thank you Mr chair and secretary
it's good to see you
I'm a pull from.
Some numbers together and but
I'm gonna turn it back over to
the chair and I'll just listen
to what you have to say okay.
a page one four sixty one.
This as we look at twenty one
and twenty two reversions and I
add this to
that actually.
More than half of the budget
you're requesting.
Chair and secretary this year
and so if we could talk about
that a little bit.
Also if we can talk about why we
took twenty almost twenty one
million dollars out of salaries
and benefits lived it to the
other category of what we spent
that money on.
And then if we flip over to page
forty seventy one.
I had a conversation with the
representative Garcia about
vacancy rate the looks like our
vacancy rate statewide averages
about twenty point four and I
had to step out for another
conversation so you may have
presented some of this in the in
the
in the part that I missed but if
you could briefly cover that
again and and what the
corrective actions are chairman
those are my questions and turn
it back to you the
representative group Mr chair of
Representative Pettigrew of the
vacancy rate overall is a it's
closer to thirty percent right
now but then for the technical
dollar questions I have my
experts here Mister ed Smith and
I will turn the microphone over
to them thank you
Mr chairman Representative
Pettigrew so those large
reversions are with the majority
of them were cares Act swap
around so the cares Act DFA was
allowed to use public safety
agencies health care workers so
over the last couple years us
the department health Human
Services there were large swaps
between general fund and federal
funds and we reverted that so
like here last year with twenty
one was a hundred and twenty
plus million dollars and in FY
twenty two it was forty one
point six million so overall
between twenty one and twenty
two just true general fund we
reverted about four million
dollars in FY twenty two which
was about one and a quarter
percent of our budget so we
spent almost all of it in in FY
twenty one it was four point
nine million.
So and then that large part we
did kind of ties to these
vacancy rates Mr Chairman
representative pedigree we we've
done a large bars the last two
years three four five years ago
you know we've always been short
with our medical contracts and
you know we have a large of
behavior health contract now
with you know services for women
at western in spring or we've
got a couple other facilities so
we've done these large bars one
to supplement the medical and
behavior health contracts to
about six million a year
our food costs we just found
renegotiate that this year is
you know going through the roof
now and we've also use that so a
lot of our money for a lot of
small capital projects you know
things that don't rise to the
occasion of eight or ten or
fifteen million dollar roof
project we've got a lot of small
you know adding housing is some
of the facilities to try to have
places for CEOs to stay we've
done a lot of small generator
projects you know refrigeration
projects you know small vehicle
equipment for property clean up
and stuff so as we've had these
vacancy savings we've tried to
reach director Mike said mainly
first and foremost is shoring up
the medical contracts and some
of our other costs and then to a
lot of smaller capital things
that we don't put.
Thank you Mr.
As a follow up to that
chairman and I I apologize I
really thought I was done by
your answer was was really good
Are we correcting that within
this budget or as a hopes still
to be able to to complete that
vacancy rate and for not able
to.
Let me again or we still have
the funded bacon's we still have
the funded full time employee
rate but we're correcting what
we need to on the medical the
food and all the other issues
thank you chair and I'm from so
so awesome thank you very much
Mr Chairman representative
Pettigrew in our requests were
one
Removing nine point two million
dollars from salaries and
benefits some long term vacancy
savings to six million two
contracts for are the medical
the behavior health services and
three point two million to our
other costs for the four percent
CPI's for the private facilities
and about a million dollars for
some of food contract and the
water reset PNM here at in Santa
Fe have gone through the roof so
about a half a million more so
we've permanently move that in
addition out of this large
vacancy savings as a secretary
mentioned we've in this fiscal
year we have kind of jumped
ahead of the LFC recommendation
with that two point nine million
you know we've dished out a lot
of vacancy savings between of
close to three million dollars
in salary increases this year so
we've already.
Tied up so to speak or re
directed at least twelve million
of that already so that other
eight million that we would have
moved we need as you know to
have some vacancy savings there
too as we continue to recruit to
fill these three hundred nine
positions that we want to keep
because of as a secretary
mentioned the cadet classes are
all of a sudden getting bigger
so we need so that additional
between what's already been
redirected we've given their
races they'll probably be paid a
tremendous amount last that we
would be moving in FY twenty
four thank you very much let's
move on I appreciate the
questions let's uh go to
representative please.
The panel so just two quick
questions for you one is I hear
you talk about the money that
was has been increase for
salaries one of the things that
I would like to know is that in
twenty thirteen a New Mexico
passed the fair pay for women
act and many of the women who
were working for the department
of corrections file lawsuits
because they were not being paid
fairly in terms of the the
funding that is been being used
now have you brought those women
up to parity.
Mr chair and representative
current and I I'm I'm not sure
that you recall my name but I
believe that I was the first
claim of to file under the fair
pay for women act when I was
experiencing an extreme
disparity in pay when I was
deputy warden at the
penitentiary of New Mexico and
you at the southwest women's Law
Center role in America's brief
on on my behalf and on behalf of
I believe some other women had
filed I believe with the same
attorney but yes I mean that's
one of the reasons that I'm so
just incorrect like that my mic
seeing I have to make sure that
people are being paid fairly
that when people are coming to
work and they're doing the same
job that they they feel the same
level of respect and that's
really what it was about for me
I mean the money's money right
but to walk into the job and
know that you're making such a
significant amount less than the
person doing the same work as
you so it's been a huge deal for
me it's been one of the things
that I've really championed from
day one and I'm I'm very proud
that we've been able to reach
the levels that we have and most
definitely we have Eckel paid
equitable pay across the board
thank you Mr chair and and the.
Madam secretary other questions
is looking at your performance
measures and the amount of of
your budget I can't tell how
this would fit in but if I look
at of the percent of
participating meant inmates who
have completed adult basic
education it says not
applicables so do we have
to positions where we are
helping these people who are
incarcerated to make sure that
their lives are better when they
get out.
I'm looking page fifteen of the
performance measures summary
madam chair.
Representative
what it says N. A. that's
probably because as an
explanatory measures for
explanatory measures we don't
set targets.
We'll find out across all the
different agencies
Generally that we we only set
targets for for the other types
of measures explanatory just
informational that we don't set
targets for them.
So is there program to help them
graduate Mister chair Mister
chair representative Herndon yes
most definitely all of our
facilities have educators we do
adult basic education and GED
preparation and everyone of our
institutions at this one of the
final question Mr chair and
madam secretary if I is he's
helped me with the LFC and the
executive recommendation and
looking at the percent of
eligible inmates earn a high
school equivalency credential so
the executive recommendation sit
ten percent but the
the budget said eighty percent
were you not able to get to help
people graduate.
That Madam chair of this
committee this.
Discrepancy is is largely due to
a.
Disagreement between the
executive policy in the agency
and how that measures should be
calculated.
Mr chair representative yes so
In the last couple of years and
and this actually something we
go back and forth with with the
LFC quite often we found that
there were several measures that
we're just being reported
strangely or in accurately and
so we went in and said we need
to make sure that what we're
giving to the legislature's
accurate and correct and that
has meant that we're not always
able to go as far back into the
past as our analysts would
prefer us to be able to in in
this situation there were two
they were doing some like of all
the people in roles in adult
basic education how many people
got
The diploma or the high school
equivalency and we didn't feel
like that told the story because
just because Arribo an adult
basic education doesn't mean
that you're in a place where
you're ready to take the test
and so it really was just a
matter of us saying we don't
agree with how you're measuring
that number that's why you see
those kind of wonky things what
we're hoping to do is to be able
to just have figure like a
number we want to achieve X.
number of GT's per year period
and I think that would just be
something that's more clear so
we're not trying to argue and
and.
He confused about what's the
numerator and with the
denominator so we've been
working with our analyst on that
and I do believe that we've done
a better job in cleaning up some
of those measures and how will
be able to report that moving
forward thank you thank you very
much of Madam Herndon next we're
going to go to Representative
sciences and Representative.
Mr chair quick question what are
your plans for the spring or
facility.
Mr chair and representative
Sanchez I haven't heard that one
in a little while but you know
for awhile there we had looked
at closing that institution
there were some issues with
deferred maintenance and costs
and things of that nature but
then we recognize that we would
still need to maintain the
campus because even if we were
going to utilize it has present
institution we knew that it
would either be some sort of a
behavioral health entity or even
possibly a training environment
and so well we we we've been
working with GST to try to make
sure that we have capital funds
to deal with some of the
maintenance issues that were
taking place there but at this
point in time we are actually
working real hard right now to
expand programming and various
things out there and I don't
expect to move away from that at
all any time I mean in fact we
just recently did a a simulator
program with heavy equipment and
we have the women out there
literally on the back co taking
the test to get their
certification in in that and
that's because of that campus
and the way that it's structured
and there's so much property
lands that we have the freedom
to do that so as as of now and I
think into the future I believe
that it will remain minimum
custody women's institution
thank you Mr thank you very much
Representative Sweetser next
Representative Montoya then
we're gonna go to budgetary
Dixon thank you Mr chairman I'd
like to revisit a kind of line
of questioning that
Representative Pettigrew we had
asked about through the
reversions but I understood the
the discussion there was that it
was kind of federal dollar.
replacing state dollars it so
could you explain that just all
the more that it.
Sure Mr Chairman representative
Montel yes so that first big
party cares Act I think it was
three or four hundred million
there were as the opportunity
for states to use walk out so to
speak for public safety salaries
and benefits health care workers
so I don't know what the full
complement was I believe it was
a children youth and families
basically I didn't close
basically that had twenty four
seven operation CYFD US
department health and so pretty
much all the prison facility
salaries and benefits in our
probation and parole since they
were officers was still out
there doing their jobs at the
end of the fiscal we reported
quarterly salaries and benefits
to DFA and then at the end of
the fiscal year there was a swap
between the part of federal
cares Act money in general fund
so that all that general fund
reverted to the state for the
next fiscal year okay thank you
Mr chairman so it was something
I wasn't a gimmick on our side
it was something.
That the federal government
actually was allowing us to do I
just I don't I was concerned
that we did something there and
then they could come back after
those dollars Mr Chairman
representative of Ontario we
were that thinking for FY twenty
two were it was such a small pop
up that forty one point six out
reverted I think we were the
last ones to use that out
because it was easier to focus
on one agency okay thank you Mr
chairman second question and
this is the the last one for me
message you're you're you're.
Using
unused FTA dollars.
To to bring salaries up there
that I can see how you're doing
that right now that's that's not
a long term answer what is your
plan to then make those salaries
whatever you get to that you
think that you're you're there
to then.
Set the new standard in what
what is your plan to do that
because I mean we can't.
Have it that the that that.
In our.
FTE handbook that we have that
being this dollar amount but we
were using the F. T. dollars
over here to increase it for
five dollars I don't know that
that's how much it is but it
seems like you to we went up
pretty dramatically there what
is the plan to then make that
the number of.
The salary Mr chair
representative Montoya I I
believe we actually have reached
that place and and not just to
be clear I mean yes much of it
came from vacancy savings but a
lot of it was provided
appropriation and sort of like
across the board.
increases for state employees I
believe there was one that gave
us the flexibility to apply it
appropriately and with that when
we were able to fix a lot of the
compaction issues that we had
among correctional officers
series probation officer
positions and I believe that we
hit that number really I mean at
this point we've created
alignment with in.
Every major classification
within our facilities and our
field offices and I do believe
at this point that we will just
we'll be looking at whatever the
legislative percent
appropriation is chairman and
madam secretary I I I would
suggest probably getting with Mr
Abbey at some point because
we're gonna do it just whatever
that New that that new Salop
those salaries are and the
number of FTEs because it
because if we don't we will
still continue to fund we will
continue to say this many FTEs
which obviously we're not using
and we will have increased
salaries which would be a
dramatic jump at that point so
I I don't know how to
necessarily ready that but I'll
get offline offline I almost
also stopped direct talks
director Avid about that as well
but the concern is.
We then settle in at a higher
salary across the board and have
the same number of FTEs even
though they're on funded and
that would make the entire
budget jump.
Dramatically so thank you Mr
chairman thank you very much for
someone twice by your Dixon
thank you Mr chair thank you
analysts and secretary for the
presentation I have five
questions I will try to be quick
if you can be quick in your
answers as well that be great
Could you tell me a little bit
about why the drug use rate
increased in fiscal year twenty
twenty two.
There are fit yen fiscal year
twenty to do you have some there
is.
Mr chair and Representative
Dixon in twenty two yes I I do
believe that that's when we
started to make changes with
respect to opening visitation
again so during pandemic we were
having no visitation taking
place whatsoever in person all
of that was taking place over
video of video screens and
computer screens and so forth
and then we started to make
changes and allowing people back
in our institutions and we
believe that's where we saw that
spike and it was it was really a
of minor spike really mean it
wasn't very significant that it
made us feel like we need to go
back to the drawing board.
Okay thank you we can just keep
an eye on that I think that's
that be great
what is in house parole
I I think I see the definition
being
The release eligible inmates who
are still in prison after their
release dates is that correct.
Mr chair representative a Dixon.
It I don't I don't think that
the term release eligible as an
appropriate term because if they
were eligible for release they
would be released what it really
comes down to is that they reach
their parole date eligibility
they could technically be
released if they had a safe and
viable place to go to and so the
people who are on in house
parole list are essentially
people that we're looking for
places to go to I and many of
them are just waiting for a bed
in a halfway house or the
location and Mr chair secretary
have we resolved the issue with
reporting of the LFC noted on
that Mr chair representative
Dixon we did go back and forth
and the disagreement with
significant and had a lot to do
with the whole numerator
denominator thing that I just
mentioned on the other measure
but I do believe that we
resulted in that we asked if we
could just report on number and
I feel like that's the cleanest
most agreeable way and I do
believe that our analysts agreed
with us on that so yes thank you
thank you Mr chair US secretary
regarding the full time
employees and the funded vacancy
rate.
By how many positions does the
executive recommendation reduce
funded vacancies.
Where does your does the
executive recommendation reduce
any positions no.
Okay so you would continue to
have four hundred and twenty
five funded vacancy positions Mr
chair representative Dixon F..
do you happen to know the Mr
chair secretary sorry do you
know the balance of the
penitentiary income income fund
I couldn't find it and our
volumes and and I don't know
what we're.
With the.
And potentially that's something
someone could just email later
okay I it's in the documents Mr
chair and and panel and so I
wasn't sure what the amount was
so later on would be just fine
and my last question Mr chair
thank you for bearing with me
is regarding the lower
classification levels
so if in some of the LFC and
sees we hear that you know
lowering the classification
levels would allow inmates both
a better reentry opportunity as
well as save the state money and
so I'm wondering how we're doing
on that and if LFC could get
some of that data.
offered to gnosis Mr chair
representative Dixon I sure will
send you the information that we
have and I do believe that they
made reference to some of the
changes that we made some policy
changes and things and it did
make some modifications in
particularly level to custody it
reduce the number of people that
were level for
I don't know that I would say
that they have
That they have better resources
I do believe that we put a lot
of effort into making sure that
reentry planning and resources
are available in all tested
levels.
But yes I'll send you
information excellent thank you
and thank you Mr chairman
secretary because that'll
affect.
The money that the states can
save that thank you very much
thank you Mr Dickson thank you
madam secretary briefly Mr gray
I think the number that were
shown as far as the recidivism
number is at forty four percent.
In our volume three is Mr at we
can pull it up the madam
secretary I think
It seems like risk recidivism is
been a core focus for LFC
obviously the core focus of
yours is the recidivism rate hi
right now in your opinion
and
What can we do to lower that
rate vice chair Dixon mentioned
the sort of the classification
which is been a several year
running issue it's a particular
focus in the LFC recommendation
with that two point five million
dollar difference that's the
land chair of the difference
between these two
recommendations.
love your thoughts on that Mr
chair do you know do I think
it's high I mean it's definitely
too high but it's a lot lower
than it's been and we've also
been able to get a better
numbers and I think I've
explained this before but just
so that you're well aware our
system is a capable yet but we
have people and we've been
digging into files and were able
to go back now I want to say two
three year periods because three
years is what it takes to get a
true and real recidivism number
and we should be able to
actually produce you some more
accurate up to date information
by the end of January which is
today so hopefully I'll be able
to give you something in the
next week I will show you more
accurate updated numbers where
we give you a break down of what
and why and how people are
turning to present and then what
can we do to change it you know
I do believe that we're making a
lot of strides in making changes
to it you know I mentioned
briefly one of the programs that
we have in our spring or prison
where we're focusing on making
sure that the people who are in
our custody have access to
programs that leads to real jobs
and not just a job that pays you
minimum wage but a job that pays
a real amount that you can live
on and I think that really is
the thing that will make the big
difference me we focused of
course on education and we will
work hard on increasing the
number of GT's we know that
something that reduces
recidivism is when a person have
a high school equivalency degree
and I do believe that what it
really comes down to is making
sure that people have job skills
and that we're addressing their
their their their counseling
needs and things of that nature
while they're incarcerated with
us and I've I've faced presented
to LFC and I talk to you guys a
lot about our peer mentorship
work and how we expanded that
throughout all of our prisons
we're doing it in the field now
and I do believe that that is
one of the key things that will
make a giant difference I mean
it's a big deal with somebody
who.
Wachter shoes news doing well
can help you through that
process so those are the things
that I that we're doing now and
I do believe that we will see
those numbers decrease as we
continue to log information on
what true recidivism rates look
like thank you very much and
secretary now it's been a long
hearing
V. it'll be great to see the
those updated recidivism numbers
and to be in conversation about
setting our goals obviously we
share the same goals of reducing
recidivism finding out ways to
approach those so and
You know of committee I know
ever.
In our differences we see
largest differences around the
recidivism programming there
madam secretary so I think what
we'll do will ask for the
executive recommendation which
is the lower recommendation
giving us flexibility we're
gonna ask our staff to work
closely because there's a few
questions we're only three
hundred thousand dollars
difference in the in the
management and control where the
three hundred plus position
differences large number
positions very low number of
dollars sentence been brought up
by a number of members I think
it's something we'd like to get
to know more but to give
ourselves or the flexibility and
to sort of feed your request as
an agency will ask for the
executive recommendation and go
from there.
Thank you thank you.
Mr chair I would move the
executive recommendation would.
Yes and do we need to remove
the.
to performance measures that
should be removed.
Yeah yes Mr chair I think of the
program thank you.
Okay.
Is there a second second thing
by Representative Trujillo
Representative Montoya
okay.
Scratch that okay it's been
moved by by your Dixon second by
Representative Trujillo is their
opposition to that motion.
Okay that so please show
Representative monthly in
opposition we're gonna close
that trips a month with thank
you Mr chairman I I do you get
there at the very end of your
call at your end of your
comments as my concern and that
is this budget is not really a
good budget because we are you
we're using the extra FTE
positions to.
To to cover what are pay
increases and I I.
Just a couple what's that that
that nobody else no other
business in this in the state
runs a business that way so I'm
just a cover with that and I
could go an entire day without
voting against someone budget
thank you Mr chairman.
Thank you very much thank you
Secretary thank you to the staff
will look forward to staying in
touch as we go through this
process thank you Mr chair thank
you okay members we're going to
so now before we go to public
comment just a quick note as
members as you all see were very
much deep in our budget hearings
so these are full day full
committee hearings tomorrow
we'll have lunch beginning at
twelve in room three oh five
this is being sponsored by the
council university presidents
this is a time where the
committee is going to be sort of
fully focused so very much
encourage you all the to join
that lunch tomorrow Wednesday
twelve the one fifteen we have a
number of university presidents
who will be there
so second is is there any public
comment on either the district
attorneys the corrections
department or the Bernalillo
county metropolitan court.
I don't see any but I very much
appreciate everybody tune in and
and going through today and now
I'm good will will close this
meeting we do have thank you Mr
Attorney General it's great to
see you and there will be the
Attorney General working group
meeting following this okay HSC
