HSD code three forty two.
Are with me is Mr Simon Miller
of the department of finance and
administration.
And the Mr Patrick Sandoval of
the acting director of the
authority.
so we're just gonna start from
from the roll up on page one so
the public school insurance
authority provides risk and
health benefits insurance
programs to school districts and
charter schools statewide
however they do not find a
better benefits to APS their
separate in addition Mexico
covers certain higher ed
institutions.
the next year board has the
authority to set any rates
assessed for health and risk
coverages I'm on districts but
also like to just say that but
nothing in either the LFC nor
the executive recommendation
Mandates changes for insurance
premiums for
For this upcoming year these
recommendations are essentially
expenditure authority and it's
based on how much Mexico
believes the expenses in the
health benefits and the risks
program will be.
It does not include our again
any adjustments to the actual
coverages that is the
prerogative of the New Mexico
border.
I'm.
And also note that the LFC and
exec analysts have come to a
consensus on performance
measures and targets so.
With that being said if we can
turn the page and look at the
benefits program
there's basically one large
differences in the in the
revenue.
And that difference is that
The LFC recommends about a ten
million dollar increase and
other revenue
wall the.
Executive recommends seventeen
million dollar increase from
fund balance.
For the purposes of the general
appropriations act both of these
are considered other state funds
so this is a little bit tomato
tomato so I think the the real.
Focus should be on that overall
difference of six point two
million dollars and so if you
look down you'll see that that
difference is in the contractual
services budget category.
And the reason for that is there
was a slight difference in the
way the LFC calculated the
Are projected FY twenty three
costs versus what the executive
that the LESC had to go back to
FY twenty that was the last year
of actual health care
expenditure data we had that was
unaffected by COVID so starting
from FY twenty base the LFC
recommendation.
assumed about four point six
percent increase annually that's
the increase that Mexico has
reported.
Over the past several fiscal
years and when you apply that
from FY twenty one twenty two
and twenty three you arrive at
the LFC is recommendation for
three hundred fifty four million
dollars in this program the
executive took a similar
approach but used five percent
so that accounts for the six
million dollar difference in
that program and again I just
like to stress that this is this
is budget authority
for Nancy others will not of
actual appropriation being made
from a fund right now what's
going to happen is Nexia we'll
go ahead and.
The OSS rates I'm all of the
participating entities that's
how they'll receive revenue so
it's pretty much built into the
public school support.
Budgets in the budget of any
participating entity.
That was the the majority of the
differences if you look at the
risk program that's on the very
next page you'll see the.
The recommendations are
identical again you have the the
issue and revenues where LFC
called.
recognize our revenue as other
revenue the executive recognizes
fund balance again this is both
gonna be other state funds so
for all intents and purposes
there's there's not really a
difference here both
recommendations assume a five
percent increase so that's
basically the account for cost
inflation in the next year.
And then finally on program
support
both the LESC and the Executive
recommendations fully funded be
agency requests and there is no
difference.
And the recommendation for
program support I'm not likely
to turn it over to Mr Miller for
any additional comments.
Thanks Connor good afternoon
madam chair members of the
committee Connor covered
everything for this agency so I
don't have any additional
comments so I'll turn it over to
director Santa thanks.
Thank you Mr Jorgensen and Mr
Miller good afternoon madam
chair and committee members with
me today is mark the coupon are
agency CFO.
The New Mexico public schools
insurance authority.
We go ahead and change that
slides sorry about that.
The New Mexico public school
insurance authority was created
by the New Mexico legislature in
nineteen eighty six to serve as
a purchasing agency for public
school districts postsecondary
educational entities and charter
schools.
Through names yeah member
schools are afforded the
opportunity to offer quality
employee benefit and risk
coverages.
Taking a look at names yet today
membership consists of eighty
eight mandatory school districts
excluding APS as Mister
Jorgensen stated ninety eight
mandatory charter schools twenty
six other educational entities
are monthly membership is
estimated at sixty nine thousand
nine hundred and twenty three
employee independence per month.
We are we do consistently staff
of eleven FTE and we are managed
by and eleven member board of
directors.
The board of directors consists
of governor appointees New
Mexico association of school
business officials.
Will Barton Association.
Public Education Commission and
you Mexico a if Teemu Mexico the
superintendents association and
other educational entities at
large.
Nancy is asking for an increase
to expenditure authority of ten
point eleven percent for our
budget fund fifteen point nine
two percent for risk provide an
increase to program support of
two point five eight percent.
For FY twenty three the impact
to public school support is
seventeen point four million to
fund the employer share of
premium increases the increase
consists of fourteen point one
million for employee benefits
premiums and three point four
million for restraints.
Mexico offers the following
benefits we have self insured
medical options under Blue Cross
blue shield Presbyterian and
cigna self insured prescription
drug coverage through express
scripts.
Self insured high and low option
dental plans through United
Concordia and delta dental.
A fully insure Division planned
to Davis vision which includes
discounts for a second hearing
needs.
Davis vision also supports
student vision program for
children enrolled in school.
We have fully insured life and
disability plans to and
And we do offer customer service
for claims issues benefits
enquiries and appeals.
We have a robust wellness and
well being program your name
still wellness.
We have employer benefit
administrator training to RTP
eight which is a research
ministry of services.
And insert offers a program
guiding medical plans side by
side comparison to keep all
members informed on our website.
Slide six shows are total lives
you can see that over the last
ten years are total lies have
decreased this is attributed to
five thousand four hundred and
ninety nine lives being Medicaid
eligible since the New Mexico
Medicaid expansion on January
first of twenty fourteen.
We do have an average of one
thousand one hundred and seventy
retirements per year since
twenty thirteen.
We lost a thousand eight hundred
and forty six lives when we lost
the NM and they exited the
authority January of twenty
eighteen but we regained a
thousand twenty two lights when
you Mexico tech and New Mexico
tech retirees joined the forty
on January first of twenty
nineteen.
This light displays are medical
costs for the calendar year
twenty twenty to twenty nineteen
our highest cost drivers
attributed to prescription costs
rising by nine point nine
percent per member per month.
Approximately eighty five
percent of names you members
reside in rural communities
outside of Albuquerque.
Which has illustrious providers
and hospital competition
resulting in higher costs.
Providers attempt to make up
lower Medicare and Medicaid cost
reimbursement rates as well.
Slide eight displays.
The percentage of names you
members you can see that one
percent of names from members
accounts for thirty nine point
three percent of our spend two
to five percent of our members
account for twenty eight point
seven percent of our staff.
So in total five percent of New
show members account for sixty
eight percent of paid claims and
ninety five percent of them to
members account for thirty two
percent it claims.
Our five most common conditions
are hyper thank you or
cholesterol hypertension or high
blood pressure.
Mental health obesity and
diabetes.
NMPSIA has disease management
care management and behavioral
health programs available to all
medical care years at no
additional cost to our members.
We do have a statewide mental
wellness initiative through Blue
Cross blue shield and ever fight
this ensures access to all New
Mexico schools for
implementation in middle or high
school.
Enrollment in the minister
medical plan is not required
unlimited access to our New
Mexico educators and
administrators as well beginning
July first of twenty twenty one.
We have to diabetes blood
pressure management and weight
management programs implemented
to Livongo at no cost to the
number.
Committee remote monitoring
program implemented to express
scripts safeguard our acting
clinical saving programs through
express scripts.
Which include prior
authorization Drug quality
management step therapy.
At and the same are planned
twelve million annually per
year.
Between March twenty twenty and
September twenty twenty one
COVID nineteen costs associated
with testing treatment and
vaccinations have exceeded
nineteen point five million
dollars for the agency.
Treatment has accounted for
seventy one percent testing has
accounted for twenty seven
percent and it's axing
administration has accounted for
three percent.
This slide shows names just
premium rate increases over time
for our employee benefits fund
at this time we are anticipating
an increase of nine point four
percent however the board of
directors will meet in February
or March to discuss the
increase.
Slide thirteen shows are planned
design changes these changes are
intended to incentivize members
to utilize in network providers
and see character the members
primary care physician.
You can see some of the benefit
reductions and enhancements the
low.
With the I didn't I do want to
mention that these changes are
considered plan neutral changes
we are not really gaining much
from the plan what we hope to
gain is to hear members to seek.
C. coverage through their
primary care physician which
will lower costs in the long.
Slide fourteen teen shows are
risk program.
Name censures approximately
twenty six billion in assets
seventeen billion our frame
stucco construction the most
vulnerable type of construction.
Sixty percent of properties are
located in protection class nine
or ten ten being the worst
protection class.
The property rate has increased
only by eight point zero to one
per one hundred dollars of value
since nineteen ninety one.
We ensure forty four thousand
employees two billion in payroll
three hundred and twenty five
thousand students forty four
thousand school athletic
participants nine thousand
volunteers and nine thousand
three hundred vehicles including
school buses.
This slide represents our
historical and projected rigs
risk claims cost for property
liability and workers
compensation.
The increase in FY twenty is a
tribute into high pay out of
sexual molestation it's.
Slide sixteen shows our
frequency and severity trends
for general liability looking at
this graph the blue bars
represent the severity and the
red lines represent the
frequency although frequency is
down the severity of general
liability cases going up costing
the agency a lot more to pay
out.
The frequency of workers
compensation claims is also
going down however the severity
of the claims is also going on.
Slide represents our sexual
molestation molestation claim
counts and total expenses
incurred for the last eleven
years.
Years twenty twenty to twenty
twenty one and twenty twenty one
to twenty twenty two are still
considered immature.
This slide represents our
property losses for the last ten
years the majority of our
property losses.
Are derived by hell and wind.
This light displays are loss
prevention programs loss
prevention programs are
facilitated three contractual
agreement between NMPSIA and
poms and associates some of the
programs include ergonomics
threat assessment active shooter
employment practices policy
consulting.
Well assistance program for
special education on site school
facility audits identifying a
predator training.
Following prevention training
and sustainable possibly policy
development consulting and arm
school employees.
This slide displays are
historical risk fund premium
rate increases for twenty twenty
two to twenty twenty three we
are anticipating a rate increase
of four point five seven percent
the board will meet in March to
discuss the increase.
And that concludes our
presentation madam chair members
of the committee.
Thank you very much director
Santa if you would stop sharing
your screen I want to be able to
see our
Committee members and
participants before we go to the
committee for questions cut I
get one question for you.
I think I might have
misunderstood you but.
On page two on the benefits it
says the executive recommended a
five percent increase while LFC
recommended that three point two
percent increase but then I
wrote down four point six
percent is that four point six
percent include something else.
What did I just take.
For notes.
Sure you're exactly right I'm
sorry the distinction is the
total so the the total increase
was three point two percent.
How we got there was by applying
that four point six percent
growth rates FY twenty actual
expenditures.
Four point six is that the FY
twenty actuals.
Right so so when the record.
Again we we generally start for
how much the program actually
spent which is often less than
what's budgeted.
and then we.
We grow that to project forward
so that's the difference.
Okay thank you appreciate that
okay we will go to committee
will begin with Representative
Crowder.
Thank you madam chair and I must
say great minds think alike
because I was I had my first
question was the four point six
percent and so that was the same
growth I don't know if you if
that was inflation or what but
you also talked about on the on
the program support I believe it
was.
yes it is assumed cost
inflation.
Number what what was that
percentage I didn't catch that
car.
Yes thank you madam chair and
Representative Crowder so risk
it was on the risk program okay
we have five percent figure so
we assumed that there expenses
for settling risk claims will
increase five percent a lot of
that is just based on on
inflation.
accounting for inflation.
Okay.
Thank you for that.
Madam chairman my only other
question was to the director of
the secretary I'm not sure his
title but
The higher ed I I heard you
mention that New Mexico tech
is is within your system as well
Mr etcetera all.
It would have a list of higher
ed institutions that are using
your services that we could get.
I'm curious if any community
colleges are Bridge colleges or
anyone else like that is is
are utilizing your services.
Yes thank you Mr Crowder and
madam chair members of the
committee we do have a list
right now I know New Mexico tech
utilizes our services eastern
New Mexico also be white
utilizes our services and so
does western New Mexico but we
would be happy to provide that
this to the committee I would I
would appreciate that Sir very
much I was curious provided of
the community colleges and
junior colleges perhaps you you
know where they were getting
their services provided so thank
you for that our records in your
list that's all my questions
chair.
Thank you representative
Representative Allison.
Thank you madam chair.
The Friday before we came down I
met with some educators from the
four corners and one of the
biggest concerns that they had
was.
Why there educators in the
northwest portion were paying.
Three hundred percent more in
the health care benefits than
the APS you kind of partially
explain why.
If.
APS's was able to negotiate the
pricing that there educators are
paying I'm wondering if of.
Senator school district like
central consolidated Gallup
McKinley county blue field
school districts if they have
banded together could they
arrive at the same of rates that
APS is enjoying.
Thank you Representative Allison
and madam chair and members of
the committee I know one of the
big discrepancies with the rates
when it comes to names yet
Albuquerque public schools is
that when we go out to bid
Albuquerque public schools gets
more enticing bids because the
majority of their networks are
within the Albuquerque area so
when we go out to bid as NMPSIA
we're more rural or more rural
than APS so.
Providers don't we tend to give
us as good as a range as APS
gets just for the fact that
there's more competition within
Albuquerque them that there is
an we're not in rural areas.
Wrote you're telling me that
even as several school boards
banded together they would still
not be able to negotiate better
rates than what they're
currently paying.
Representative Allison madam
chair I really can't answer that
question because I don't it all
depends on the providers that
are located within the GF you
geographical region and it would
depend what rates those
providers are willing to pass on
to the school districts.
I'm sorry go ahead Dawn.
So.
Representative Allison so Mexico
is providing more of the
insurance provider's so so when
we think about school districts
banding together that is what
the the authority is doing in
the fact so the so the authority
is attempting to put together a
large size pool in order to
better leverage
those providers and get more
favorable rates I believe what
Mr Santa is alluding to is that.
Because Mexico has so many
individuals in rural areas that
those the rates that are
associated
are typically higher.
But the purchasing is done as a
group through.
Okay so.
When I go back to my
constituents I guess one offer
of suggestion that I could leave
his or recommend to them is so
if you don't want to pay the
high premiums that your pay and
relocate to the urban areas.
I think that's already happening
a lot of educators are leaving
their rural areas because that
is one of the obstacles that
they don't I really enjoy or
don't like pay in and that's
what's making a lot of people
leave how is not yet able to
help them other than what you're
currently doing is there any
other help available.
Madam chair if you wouldn't mind
I'd like to speak on the subject
Representative Allison and
Connor and and director Santa
please correct me if I'm wrong
but I think the the biggest
issue here it has to do with the
income brackets for the
proportion that's paid by the
employer verses the employee so
it needs he has like really low
income brackets in so someone
that's making forty thousand
dollars that's insured by next
year will have to pay about.
I don't know maybe they have to
pay a higher percentage of the
health insurance premium than
someone making that same amount
in a different and different
insurance system so it has to do
with the statutory income
brackets I'm I think they
conduct probably speak more to
that as well.
Okay.
Just before I left for the they
told me that while they
appreciate the seven percent
that they are getting and raises
they expect the seven percent to
go to the rising insurance costs
as well so they're not really
looking forward to the seven
percent raise.
Okay with that the that's my
question madam chair.
Thank you Representative I will
note now go to vice chair
representative small thank you
very much madam chair thank you
director Santa and and analysts
I want to pick up where
Representative Allison was
Four okay can can we have a a
further explanation on the
statutory differences with that
exist within NMPSIA verses a PS
that the insurance for APS.
Well what.
Take that Connor you want me to.
Yes I am.
If I can share my screen I can
put up the first page of the LFC
breach that has some tables but.
I'm so sorry compares the.
Are you not able to share Conor.
there we go.
Yes okay.
So this is what Mr Miller was
alluding to earlier.
Is you can see New Mexico is in
the middle here
and we see their salary brackets
are so the first one is those
individuals making less than
fifteen thousand the less than
twenty twenty five and over
twenty five so those are their
brackets and and their income
so what so what do.
Being the employee share and you
are being employed or so what we
see is that by the time you get
to over twenty five thousand.
on employers is covering.
Sixty percent of the cost.
And the employee is picking up
forty percent when you compare
that to APS you don't get to
that's what until employees.
This making over forty five
thousand dollars.
and with the G. S. D..
It's over sixty thousand dollars
so those are the differences.
In the actual contribution rates
by income there is another sort
of confounding factor here and
that's that's the actual total
cost of the plans are also
different so not only do we have
the
this what's being different but
our analysis is showing we have
plans are costing for a single
member coverage for someone
making forty one thousand
dollars a year in Mexico we have
a total premium of about ten
thousand six hundred dollars and
then that falls all the way down
to about sixty five hundred
dollars in APS and that's what
Mr Santa was mentioning with the
that's what about is the power
of the provider network.
Representative small does that
does that help S. economy thanks
so much thank you and also to to
Mr Miller that explains it that.
That prior to the provider
network benefits gained in the
most urban areas where there's
more competition the provider
that network penalties that the
rural
insure ease in the rural areas
suffer there's just a simple
course structural
you for difference that puts
NMPSIA members at the very back
of the line when it comes to the
share that the state is paying
for their insurance so it does
explain it
and it clearly needs rapid
attention at and I think any you
know we can.
There's the one of these pieces
is this the legislative fix that
that is outline to or that is
needed here.
Yes please.
Sorry.
I think that's exactly right to
point out that these rates are
set in statute but there's also
a little bit of new wants there
are for example with Nipsey of
the statute starts out that
Mexico must pay at least at
least at such a Lawrence so if
you have to pay at least the
amounts are printed on this page
so District Court if they wanted
to pay more whereas for GSD
statutes that's what happened
and so do you know you shall pay
no more than.
and so the policy of the state
has been to pay it back maximum
cap and then interestingly there
is no statute for APS the board
is essentially picked out so so
yes I ate insured entities code
to pay more if they had
if if that was a decision of the
of the individual district
board.
Got it okay madam chair Mister
Jorgensen also incredibly
helpful at so then the last
question in and I maybe instead
offline the differences in
In overall I guess the.
The the the fund balance
difference in the fund balance
usage in the executive would
that translate into lower
premiums for NMPSIA members.
Madam chair representative small
no it doesn't translate into
lower premiums because it this
process doesn't affect the the
premium range of those are just
decided by the.
The new T. four
and overall there's whether
you're using other revenues or
fund balance it's all from that
same health benefits fund
so it doesn't it doesn't really
make a difference in practice.
Okay.
Madam chair thank you thank you
very much Mr Miller thank you Mr
Jorgensen.
Thank you Mr small next we go to
Representative Hadda.
Thank you thank you madam chair
and I and I appreciate this
conversation at and.
I can figure this and either I I
was an employer I used to you
know I used to we went out to
get every year in northern New
Mexico and what I found was that
every single doctor every single
healthcare provided accepted our
insurance because that's the
only way they can make a living
they have to figure out how to
bill everybody in rural New
Mexico if if their provider be
either a rural healthcare
clinics or private physician or
hospital no matter what they
accept the accept all insurances
because that's the only way they
can stay alive and I guess I'm
just curious as it for our state
employees they are all in one
system is is that true I I you
know I don't really I'm not very
data about an inch deep on this
so our our our state employees
in rural and urban parts of our
state they all belong to one
healthcare system right.
Representative that is correct.
Under under GST okay so my
question is why can't we do that
for all public school employees
urban rural and put them all
under one system I mean I can
tell you that five years ago if
I had employed was over fifty
family of four I was paying
fifteen thousand dollars a year
you know in the beginning you
know twenty years before that we
picked up all the health
insurance for employees you know
and over the years we were
paying fifty fifty because
that's all we could do as an
agency because the faster going
so high so I don't understand if
we have that for state employees
and we have one systems
statewide why can't we do that
for public school employees
statewide that I think that's
what we all are struggling.
Because because again the reason
I have to pay so much is because
I only had twenty employees if
you have you know what we have
in our school system we have
twenty thousand teachers if you
have that scale so that you know
everybody isn't getting you know
if you have one person in an
office in a insurance pool of
twenty get a heart attack go to
the hospital that kind of shoots
that the whole profit center if
you divide that among twenty
thousand it evens out so that's
why APS has lower rates to it's
really what the pool is that's
what we I can't understate has
has anybody tried to put a pool
together for all public school
employees in in this in the
state and we talked about that.
Representative Adam madam chair
members of the committee we do
do that when we go out to bid we
go out to bid with the I back
and the I. back is the inter
agency budget advisory committee
which consists of NMPSIA APS GSD
and the retiree health care
authority we all put our lives
together and we do go all we do
go out to bid together for
medical services so the bids are
conducted as one and we do put
all those total lives together
and when we go out and we select
the different medical insurance
carriers so they are ready are
beating on a total amount of
lives independent of each
agency.
Well I I guess I don't get it I
don't get I don't get why it's
so high I I'm I'm lost but
that's okay I'll get out of here
I I just want to know if we
have.
The same price for.
For state employees to do rural
state employees pay more than
urban state employees for
insurance health insurance.
Representative at at out on each
agency sets their premium rates.
So not all rates are equal
amongst APS NMPSIA retiree
health care or the state of New
Mexico.
If I might.
Representative so the wages yes
the school works is it covers
state employees it covers
employees of local local public
bodies and they do all pay the
same rate
Pretty much pretty much
regardless of age they take
parent total cost maybe divided
out over the total number of
folks that have a pool and
that's more or less how they are
how they're setting the right
there is no like rural Hey
penalty.
So if we can do that very state
employees Connor can we do that
for public school employees
that's what I don't understand.
Madam chair and representative
Loretta I believe that APS's
been exempted from.
Mexico so yes it could happen I
believe it it would require an
act of the legislature and
governor in order for it to.
Well that's what we're here for
madam chair that's what we're
here for to find out how we can
do this to make it more
equitable I how how many how
many employees do you need to
self insure I that's my other
question how many state
employees and public
Excluding please do we have in
the state because there is a
level where you just self
insured.
I believe we are self insured
yes we are.
Madam chair and and I think I
have those numbers right here so
between APS GS the New Mexico.
We have I am and FY twenty one
we had ordered eighteen thousand
five hundred or so covered
lives.
Between the three between those
three plants.
In the state were self insured I
I guess I'm missing that can you
explain that to me.
So I am so.
Week in this area but I am the
last questions I want to know.
Yes ma'am and a lot of ways
we're gonna get a head start
or GST it was gonna be up next
week so this is good
So the so the self insurance.
Essentially the way our our
plans work is we pay an
administrative B. R. to the
insurers so if you have a an
insurance card that says Blue
Cross or Presbyterian you're
using their network.
and we're paying a fee to that
person based on a on a permanent
legislative.
we have a we have a cool so we
create we collect all of those
premium so it's I APS GSD Mexico
are all collecting those
premiums of putting them in
their own separate pools and
then when the providers.
Deliver coverage.
They're billing us and we're
paying them back so there is not
a fully insured.
Product like.
Like you probably have as as an
individual the state is sort of
covering full for it.
Okay I mean thank you madam
chair thank you everybody I I
just we we need to do something
to to even out these huge
discrepancies discrepancies
between rural and urban no one
understands that I still don't
understand that but I'll let it
go thank you madam chair.
Thank you Representative and
a Charles Lee is putting some
page references in our our notes
for people in case you're
missing those I'd like to go
back to Representative Allison
for a second time.
Madam chair and think I
accidentally hit the and but I
don't have no further questions
okay.
I'm just confused like Susan
this.
Thank you and I don't see any
other hands but I think we all
are a little confused or or at
least just made by the the
discrepancies and by the at
least perceived to penalties for
our rural educators verses
Albuquerque public schools so I
do think we need to to take a
deeper dive into this not
necessarily as a subcommittee
but just as a legislative body
representing our public school
employees so I appreciate all of
that and I think that that
that's something that maybe in
the interim committee a little
bit of work so we can figure out
how to make
Just to bring parity that I
think that's what our rural
educators are looking for is
parity for us so so thank you
with that though I will go to
vice chair small for the motion
thank you madam chair you set it
really well and the move today
the LFC recommendation.
Thank you vice chair is there a
second.
Representative Armstrong for the
second is there any objection to
the motion.
All right thank you all very
much and that thank you director
Santa and Mrs in Qana for being
here and for helping us we
appreciate you very much that
the questions are not a
reflection of the work you're
doing just a reflection of the
frustration of of our our school
people in in in rural New Mexico
so thank you appreciate you and
damn sure will continue peace
talks.
Okay our next our next Committee
rather Department is the retiree
health care authority agency
code three four three and Connor
I think we're back to you.
All right madam chair members of
the committee on I'm not Connor
and Simon Miller from DFA and
and I'm gonna take the lead on
this one.
So again this is a I know that
we just had a long conversation
about health care but I guess we
can do it again here this is the
retiree health care the wordy
so I will go over the
differences between the
executive and LFC budget
recommendations are fairly
briefly here the retiree health
care story is mostly funded by
employer and employee payroll
contributions it's important to
note that this budget hearing
does not affect employer or
employee contribution rates or
member health care premiums the
premiums are set by the retiree
health care board.
Overall the recommendations are
basically identical the majority
of the agency's budget is used
to pay out medical claims both
the executive and the LESC
assume a four percent increase
in health care spending and a
two percent increase in eligible
retirees.
For about a six percent increase
in the budget overall the only
difference between the two
recommendations is that the
executive legislative a little
more funding for person.
And so within that I will toss
it back to Connor he has on
anything else you want to share
with you all.
Thank you madam chair there's
only you know one thing I'd like
to talk about a little bit and
it's in regards to revenues so
you'll see that this budget is
made up of it's comprised
basically entirely of other
revenues and I just think it's
important to go through and and
give a little explanation of
What those revenues are so.
I'm.
For for this year
we have about three hundred
eighty million dollars so that's
made up of.
About a hundred twenty five
million dollars from the
contributions are active
employees so all employees and
employers have to provide a
contribution to retiree health
care so there's that sort of on
going subsidy.
Additionally there is around a
hundred eighty million dollars
in retiree insurance print in
those are assessed on the actual
plan participants
There's about thirty five
million dollars in our rebates
and then forty one million
dollars and distribution to
retiree health care from the tax
responsible so I just point that
out it's important to note.
That the taxes Spence fund.
That money would otherwise go to
the general fund and Matt
distribution grows at a rate of
twelve percent per year set by
statute so it basically doubles
every six years so six years
from now the general fund will
be increasing its contribution
to the retiree.
Health care of forty to about
eighty two million dollars or
so.
And with that I think
Hopefully we have the.
New executive director.
Neil Keefer on.
Yes the director Kiesler.
Well some and would you like to
say a few words to our
subcommittee on your on your of
forty.
Madam let me just pull up my a
presentation I'm gonna try
ensure that right now that's
okay.
Your your volume is very low I
don't know if there's a way to
boost it or you're just gonna
have to use your classroom
teacher voice or something.
Okay can you hear me better now
madam chair yes thank you.
Thank you madam chair members of
the committee taking time
listening today
I want to also thank Mr Miller
and Mr Jorgensen for their work
in some way of the agency my
name is Neil Keefer I am the
interim executive director for
New Mexico retiree health care
thirty.
To begin with I like to give a
little bit of a background of
the next with our health
authority we were established in
nineteen ninety to provide
health insurance to retirees
from state agencies and eligible
participating public entities
there was no appropriation or
pre funding period and we began
paying budget in January
nineteen ninety one.
Currently there are three
hundred participating public
and.
To include state employees
public school teachers cities
counties universities and
charter schools as mentioned up
for further over time health
authority are composition is
about fifty percent schools
twenty five percent state
agencies.
And twenty five percent local
governments.
I apologize I'm just trying to
re share my screen are you able
to The presentation again yes
thank you.
Jazz.
The party is governed by an
eleven member board of directors
that is comprised of individuals
identified by the retiree Health
Care Act Representative the
population that are authority
insurers we provide both non
Medicare and Medicare eligible
retirees and their dependents
access to medical dental vision
and life insurance we are
currently we currently offer
coverage to more than sixty five
thousand retirees and their
dependents all employees
participating do contribute a
percentage of their pay into the
retiree health care program all
actively working with the
expectation of receiving those
benefits when they retire.
About becoming a member of the
program retirees will continue
to pay premiums for health care
benefits offers based on their
elections and years of service
the mission of New Mexico
retiree health authority is to
foster quality of life and peace
of mind my responsibly
administering affordable secure
health care benefits for public
retirees and their families.
So read agency updates one of
the most recent changes now is
former executive director David
Archuleta has moved on to a new
opportunity but I do believe you
will be hearing from him soon.
With this change the board of
directors acted on our January
board meeting held last week
making me interim executive
director and will soon begin the
posting and hiring process to
fill this position.
COVID nineteen appropriations
for the office is the majority
of our employees.
Are currently working in the
office and the remainder tell
working from home or combination
of the two.
Our offices are open to members
by appointment and customer
Services answering calls Monday
through Friday eight to five to
ensure our members are being
assisted.
Currently retiree health care
thirties monthly board meetings
are being held virtually gonna
go to meetings.
I also want to point out our web
development portal and thanks to
funding from last year's
legislator of this legislature
one of our current projects
being developed is this web
portal to improve customer
service to our members by
providing them access to their
account information for budget
billing direct communication and
automation of some manual
processes we're talking to have
this available spring of this
year.
The retiree health care thirty
is in the midst of an RFP for
pharmacy benefit management
services with our mothers are
partners I know they were
mentioned earlier being the New
Mexico public schools insurance
authority Albuquerque public
schools state of New Mexico risk
management division and happy to
state that the University of New
Mexico has joined us and this
and this are free to further
leverage our buying power of our
total membership of over a
hundred seventy thousand.
As participants of the inter
agency pharmaceuticals
purchasing Council this is one
of the initiatives to bring more
groups together and we'll
continue to look for more
opportunities in the future to
partner with public entities.
What's this PMR is completed a
retiree health care a lot about
the gearing up for the next are
you for life insurance with an
expected release date of all
twenty twenty two.
Looking here at slide number
three is a graph showing right
Trust Fund stands as of November
we have a little over one point
one billion dollars.
The graph shows a steady growth
over the last ten years
beginning with twenty eight
November twenty eleven where we
were at two hundred five point
nine million and as of November
twenty twenty one we're up to
little more than one point one
billion dollars this growth is a
combination of investment
earnings and contributions
retiree health authority has
made contributions of more than
four hundred and sixty four
million and the best investments
accounting for about four
hundred thirty six million this
equates to a combined total of
nine hundred million increase
over the last ten years.
Your claims utilization
determines what we may be able
to contribute towards the trust
fund when claims spend is less
we contribute more towards the
fund to pay for future benefit
costs.
Are projected solvency is
currently beyond twenty fifty
two which puts us over thirty
years.
One of the requirements for
other post employment benefits
such as ourselves is a gas be
seventy four which is an
actuarial valuation performed
every year to review our
program.
This accounting and financial
reporting takes into account
various factors to make an
estimated forecast of our
liabilities and funded status
this review and report was
completed in early December.
As you can see the green for
total OPEB liabilities you'll
see a decrease from twenty
twenties Gatsby evaluation of
approximately five billion to
this year's four point four
billion and net OPEB liabilities
decreased by a hundred ninety
four point two million.
Factors driving this decrease
was an increase to the blended
discount rate of three point six
two percent.
As compared to last year's
report of two point eighty six
percent as well as updated per
capita health care costs.
Based on sensitivity
calculations for the bottom of
this page with the discount rate
has a one percent decrease it
would negatively impact the net
OPEB liability and to the
contrary a one percent increase
lower would lower our net OPEB
liabilities this report also
includes a calculation of a one
percent increase and decrease in
health care costs trend and how
this change change would affect
healthcare costs.
Overall this is led to an
improvement of our funded status
of twenty five point three nine
percent but as you can still
seeing this is only a quarter of
the amount and there is still
work needed to improve the
status of this fund.
Moving on to special
appropriation request.
Last year Senate bill three
fifteen was passed during the
regular session to amend the
difference of state police
member to include officers who
have been previously excluded
officers is good but the
coverage under state police
corrections officer and
probation and parole officer
planned one under para the motor
transportation division.
This change allows these members
to receive this budget sooner
and longer and while they were
members retiring under the state
general plan three.
The impact of this change
according to New Mexico retiree
health care threes actual
consultants with the evaluation
determining digital program cost
of three hundred forty thousand
dollars in liabilities.
Last year special appropriation
directed to the department of
public safety total of a hundred
ninety four thousand seven
hundred dollars.
I do want to remind any entity
joined the program abides by our
statute under section ten seven
C. dash fifteen which requires a
contribution to the fund equal
to the full actuarial present
value for the increase in
liabilities.
Therefore New Mexico retiree
health care of forty
respectfully requests the
difference of a hundred forty
five thousand three hundred as
calculated by actuarial
consultants and per statute to
be directly appropriated to the
agency.
Another special appropriation
requests in relation to Senate
bill three seventeen of twenty
twenty one regular session with
a law requiring New Mexico
retiree health care thirty to
eliminate cost sharing such as
co pays deductibles and
coinsurance for mental and
behavioural health services
starting the first of this year
until December twenty twenty
six.
This change to our plan design
result in additional costs to
the program our consulting
actuaries based the health
insurance experiment that takes
into account how costsharing
affects behavior and benefit use
which leads to projected to
projected increase of this
program a little bit higher than
fifteen million.
New Mexico retiree health care
of forty percent the request a
special appropriation totaling
fifty million to offset the
impact of this trust fund and
are increased to retiree monthly
charges as shown in the chart in
the middle of this slide number
seven.
Our last appropriation requests
for COVID nineteen testing and
treatment.
As can be seen on the slide
between March twenty twenty and
September twenty twenty one for
self insured plans none of the
middle table has a show that
exceeded nine point two million
this request is before to offset
the additional cost and mitigate
the impact to our trust fund or
put additional financial burden
on our retirees for additional
costs above the annual medical
trend.
New Mexico retiree health care
three respectfully request a
special appropriation totaling
nine point two million to offset
the impact of the trust fund and
or increased to retiree monthly
charges.
These requests would help
provide relief to our retirees
by offsetting some of the
increases would be required to
ensure we don't take steps back
on some of the progress that has
been made.
One additional item that the
agency will be proposing as a
duplicate bill in the Senate and
the house to make changes to the
retiree Health Care Act by
making increases to employee
contributions printable such as
myself from one percent to one
point one seven percent of
salary and increasing employer
contributions from two percent
to two point three three percent
of salary.
As an example of the impact
would have that this would have
on an employee who is earning
forty thousand per year who
would contribute greatly
contribute fifteen dollars and
thirty eight cents per pay
period it would total up to four
hundred per year beginning
fiscal year twenty three
contributions would increase to
eighteen dollars per pay period
with an annual amount of
fourteen sixty eight that would
give us the difference of the
sixty eight per year as shown in
the middle of the slide.
For the employer this change
would be a hundred annually to
about nine hundred thirty two
annually for an annual
contribution of a hundred thirty
two.
The retiree health care thirty
impact as it would minimize use
investment earnings the support
budget and extend the solvency
beyond the thirty year
projection period but more
importantly it would sustain the
program with recurring revenue
and increase our thirty year
funded status to over fifty
percent.
This will also lower or all are
participating entities reported
amount of overhead line opened
liabilities.
Placing my contact information
on the slide as well as contact
information for the Mexico
turnkey healthier Authority with
my staff and I can be reached.
I respectfully requests base
budget recommendation but I
appreciate both of the entities
from Mister Connor Mr Miller for
the recommendations of the
fourth and at this time I stand
for any questions.
Thank you very much Mr T. furry
my pronouncing that correctly
that is correct all right thank
you and welcome them I would
encourage my a committee to ask
you incredibly challenging
question since you have had this
position for all of the week or
so.
It's not really I did want to
say that we are here to work to
talk about specials today but we
appreciate you giving us the
heads up on that and also they
had on the legislation because
it's good to know what we have
coming down the pike so I will
go to committee now do we have
any questions from our committee
members from Mr Keefer.
And it doesn't look like we do
so excellent job I think they're
just giving you a softball
welcome for your first week
don't expect that next year's
all I have so I appreciate with
that I will go to the vice chair
small for the motion.
Thank you muted Meister's from.
I apologize thank you madam
chair I would move the LFC
recommendation.
Thank you is there a second.
And second from Representative
Crowder thank you very much is
there any objection to that
motion.
I don't see any so again thank
you Mr keeper and it your
ominous we'll be seeing David R.
to let as.
Hanging over us so we'll we'll
look for him and thank you for
stepping into the role we
appreciate you thank you madam
chair committee members.
All right we go to our next
agency the educational
retirement board so in calling
is this the
Jorgen Center Miller on the the
tennis court here Jorgensen it
looks like it thank you Conor if
you'd started.
Absolutely it was.
Initial retirement board it's
agency three fifty two we still
of course have Simon and we have
about David Archuleta was the
newly minted executive director
of the educational retirement
board.
So I just want to go through a
couple of the differences.
He quickly.
In person the LFC recommended
that
I'm sorry when you back up first
I should say in terms of
revenue.
There's a two point one million
dollar difference.
what.
All of that revenue comes from
the educational retirement trust
fund there's no general fund
here again it's just those those
trust funds and any unspent
amounts will revert back to the
trust fund at the end of the
fiscal year
so with that being said the
difference is the large ones are
the executive recommended an
additional one hundred.
Eight thousand dollars more than
the LFC
in the person category and that
included
An additional financial
coordinator coordinator
expansion position of the LFC
recommendation did not include
expansion the reason for that is
that the agency currently has
a Senator record it's fourteen
vacant positions and there's
nothing in the recommendation
that would prohibit E. R. B.
from reclassifying one of those
positions and using existing
vacancy savings to
create the financial coordinator
position we need the majority of
the difference of almost two
million dollars.
In the contractual services
category and that's related to
investment management students
so the executive recommended an
increase of three and a half
million dollars and that fully
funded the agency requests
Well the LFC recommended one
point six million dollars that's
an eight match half percent
increase I also point out that
investment management fees
averaged fifteen and a half
million dollars between FY
nineteen and FY twenty one and
and part of the reason we see
such a all.
Large increase in those
management fees for.
Twenty one was the pretty
extraordinary performance of the
fund I'd also like to point out
that the E. R. B. retirement
funds have grown from about
eleven point seven billion
dollars in twenty sixteen to
about six billion dollars.
In twenty twenty one and then
finally you the LFC puts
together a.
Quarterly investment performance
report that ranks all of our
investment funds relative to a
peer universe
in the last year E. R. B. ranked
in the top six percent
For all public funds.
Greater than one billion dollars
and for the three five and ten
year periods E. R. B. R.
consistently perform up.
By the media
with that I would like to turn
it over to Mr Miller for any
additional comments.
Madam chair members of the
committee I do not have any
additional comments so I will
pass it over to director
Archuleta.
Well it.
Thank you madam chair and thank
you Mr Miller and I thank you Mr
Jorgensen it's been a pleasure
having you both service by
analyst both when I was in the
retiree health care thirty is
now over the education
retirement board I'm preparing
to share my screen now so we can
pull over presentation and if
everyone can see it if I could
just get a thumbs up to make
sure yes we can see as you go
okay it is mention my name is
David R. to let them the
executive director and the
educational retirement board
like Neil I started my you
responsibility on Monday but.
For me I've got a deep bench of
resources to help me answering
the questions that you guys
might have to date so I'd like
to introduce some of the team
that I have with me today
including the interim executive
director Mister Rick Scroggins
who was formerly the deputy
director and has many years of
institutional knowledge of this
organization our deputy director
Mister Lawrence just keep in we
also have our As T. director CFO
and HR manager Sarah brown Steen
and we also have our chief
investment officer Mr Bob
Jackson.
If we go to the second slide
just to give you a brief
overview about the agency how
many people we serve how how
much money we're we're dealing
with here we have over fifty
eight thousand close to fifty
nine thousand active educators
that are participating in the
program and contributing to this
with some expectation of
receiving a future benefit
Excuse me director to lead we're
not on the second side I don't
know who's running your slides
for you.
Are we seeing the.
Wirth at least my screen my
screen has the budget request
presentation also with the
panels on the side.
Do we see.
Sorry give me one seconds.
Is that better.
Not on my and I have the same.
Are we going to go here.
Do the same the same
screen of just your very first
one.
No difference here I'm sorry
about that.
Right right out the gate my
sister's projects here.
if I can ask you to follow along
in the presentation I'm not sure
if you guys have a copy of it
otherwise I'd I'd hate to just
go through things verbally with
you but I do not we we don't
have I don't have a copy anyway.
Operating from our offices in.
If I may interrupt I have a copy
of the presentation up and I'll
be able to share it if you'd
like.
That would be great.
Thank you Serra roster has
better luck than I do looking at
three screens here in my office
and you probably need to stop
sharing director Archuleta I
will do that.
Well now it's moved to your
second money but.
Technology is wonderful and so
we don't have it.
Yes what I was hoping to avoid.
So we have can you stop sharing
director to letter I am trying
to okay so your screen share
let's say stop share.
We go and are you able to share.
All right thank you so much
sorry for the interruption these
present thank you very much Sir
and
again my sincerest apologies so
going back to what I'm saying
before about the active
membership we have nearly fifty
nine thousand active educators
and public school employees
universities and school
districts along with charter
schools and a handful of state
agencies that are contributing
to into this program we also
have nearly fifty three thousand
retirees who are actually
receiving the benefit of this
organization is responsible for
paying out more than one point
two billion dollars and in in
payroll each year with an
average benefit of nearly twenty
four thousand dollars per member
each year this is the average of
all the employees are receiving
a pension from the program the
average age of retirement for
someone joining our program is
just a here we sixty two years
of age member contributions are
employer contributions can till
it is approaching eight hundred
million dollars you can see
three hundred and twenty seven
million dollars is paid into
this program from employees
number four hundred and fifty
million dollars is paid to us
from their employers.
contribution refunds on average
not on average last year we had
over forty five million dollars
refunded to participants were
pulling their money out of the
system and elected to join the
program and left that left to
their their employment with
their educational institution in
tech their contributions with
that we drop on an active table
of over three billion dollars
from both higher ed and a public
school employees the
participating number of employer
groups is up to two hundred and
sixteen.
In the net assets as a you heard
a car mentioned before have
grown to over sixteen billion
dollars which is growth of more
than three billion dollars over
the course of last year for
return of almost twenty nine
percent.
So if I could ask you to the
next slide share.
Now here's the really.
Important info on information we
have our chief investment
officer at answering the
questions associated with our
investment strategy or the
returns so you can see here that
over the course of last year at
least through June our
investment returns were close to
twenty nine percent if you look
at our one year performance
which is reference down at the
bottom of the screen as of
November thirtieth which is our
latest information that's up to
twenty one point eight percent
but I think it's important to
note that it's important to look
at basically a long term
perspective of how our
investment has has done and I
think that in particular it's
important we look at things at
least over quarterly basis but I
think if you look at the very
top you see that our thirty year
return is close to its over
eight and a half percent and
since inception this program
going back to July of nineteen
ninety three it's been over nine
point two point nine point two
four percent and that's just a
testament to the success that
our investment staffers had so
it's an incredible team of
investment professionals as
reflected by what is been
reported here and obviously what
Mr Jorgensen mentioned before if
I could ask you to move to the
next slide Serra.
Just briefly about the FY twenty
three appropriation request you
can see that in fiscal year
twenty one we spent a little
over twenty four million dollars
between salaries benefits and
contractual services in our cast
category our our operating
budget for this year is just
over twenty eight million
dollars in the request for this
year
The proposed new spending to buy
this program by four point three
million dollars up to thirty two
point six this reflected about a
fifteen percent increase over
the past year and this also
included a one percent I'm sorry
what one FTE additional
resource dedicated to the
finance and investments group
and basically the personal
services employee benefits
reflects basically the projected
costs associated with all our
employees along with this
additional FTE so on the
contractual services category
this is a projection of the
investment costs will be
incurred over the course of the
next year and under the other
cost category there were some
increase related to that
property insurance fees as well
as the increased use of web
DocuSign
materials for this year I would
say that you know they went over
both sides well.
Simon and Connor went over the
recommendations that were made
on behalf of the executive and
legislative recommendations for
this year.
I would state that a the LFC
recommendation funded about a
recorder of the requested
increase well the executive
recommendation was a little bit
over half
obviously we will be
respectfully requesting support
for the executive recommendation
I I realize that it's sort of
standard practice to go with the
lower of the two recommendations
or at least the legislative
recommendations but any
consideration that we have of
the executive will be greatly
appreciated.
But will be forward I just have
a few more slides to you before
you I'm just going over a couple
of the items that is going on
with the agency today to provide
you with a brief update
previously we received funding
to acquire and develop or build
an office complex here in Santa
Fe we're right in the middle of
process including reviewing plan
designs for the new office
location down south and Santa Fe
we also requested some
additional funding for this
upcoming year to complete that
process while we're in the
process of actually right now
sort of in the final stages of
approving the plan designed for
your for the upcoming year are
not the plan design
administrative leave the plans
for the development of this
office complex we did request an
additional five million dollars
for the completion of
construction of this project
this next year I did see that as
being part of the recommendation
from the legislative finance
committee but at the conclusion
of this next fiscal year will be
moving into a new office and
that's already been supported in
the past if I could ask you to
move to the next slide Serra.
A little bit about our a little
bit more about some ongoing
projects with the agency in
fiscal year twenty we received a
special appropriation to hire
some additional staff in both
the in in temporary positions to
help us with the specific
project right now we have over
sixty four thousand in active
members less than sixty four
thousand in active members at
this point because of some of
the work that was done but
basically back in January twenty
nineteen the identified a number
of members who had been
contributing to the program I
have made contributions and had
since left are terminated the
coverage of terminated their
employment with your be
participating employer as a
result of that their money's
basically sitting in an account
waiting to be claimed so we
hired some staff and we're in
the middle of that project I
believe we spent a little under
five hundred thousand to one
point five billion dollars
appropriated will be performing
in valuation of what additional
resources need to be dedicated
to the completion of this
project we will be asking for an
extension of the time that we're
allowed
to spend money that's been set
aside for this project it's
important that we get these
these accounts cleaned up some
people are of that age for the
required to
began pulling a minimum
distribution from these accounts
so it's important because were
notified some people some people
that have either passed away are
having a difficult time tracking
down nonetheless the work
remains ongoing up until this
point we've experiencing
difficulty in recruiting and
retaining some folks in these
positions but on the last non
the less the work needs to
continue to occur.
I can ask you to move to the
next slide Serra.
A couple of other items that I
think reporter the committee to
be aware of is were undertaking
a business process improvement
project we have a contractor
here that is valuing in our
pants and pension administration
system
reviewing our processes in terms
of how we serve our members
offering up opportunities and
suggestions for us to improve
those proper processes we're in
the middle of an R. P. that was
issued earlier this month for
actuarial services so whenever
we receive legislative request
in addition to the ongoing work
that occurs at the agency on a
daily basis a request related to
what in it doesn't increasing
employer contributions main what
do changes to the budget mean
having them run those actuarial
services forcing calculating
your guests be reporting
requirements it's all part of
these actuarial services that
we're preparing for at this time
we're also in the process of
developing an R. P. for a new
pension administration system
either update in the system or
moving to an entirely new system
all together I believe we're
approaching the end of the life
cycle for the current version of
this of the system that we
currently have salumi looking at
opportunities to either upgrade
or replace that and then just
lastly there's a couple
different reorganizations going
on between our member services
staff along with their I. T.
staff to better align with the
services that we need to find a
to our members today.
And Sir if you can to the next
one the last thing that would
make mention about is that.
Last year we received support
for Senate bill forty two
sponsored by Senator Stewart it
increased employer contributions
to this program basically the
first year this increase posted
for contributions to this
program to a total of fifteen
point one five percent the
second year this increase which
is expected to occur now fiscal
year twenty three will boost
back to sixteen point one five
percent the legislative proposal
that was endorsed by the
Legislative educational study
committee last week and what has
been pre filed will further
boost that from sixteen point
one five percent to seventeen
point one five percent next year
so instead of getting that
sixteen percent or an additional
one we would potentially get two
percent judicial percent and
then in year three basically in
fiscal year twenty four that
would further increased to
eighteen point one five percent
this would serve to
Further reduce our unfunded
liabilities by pre funding those
benefits I think that it's an
important step in the direction
of making sure that this pension
program remains solvent for.
Our retirees and making sure
that we were making good on the
promises that have been made and
committed to return educators
and I believe that that
concludes the slides again I
have
Several of our experts from the
agency so feel free to ask any
of the questions you have they
don't necessarily have to be a
softball questions because we
got some of the people on online
with this are prepared to
answer.
All right thank you very much
and welcome to your new position
I will go to the committee now
and see if we have any questions
from our committee members.
And we'll begin with
Representative Crowder.
Thank you madam chair my first
and only question is a very
simple question in it and it's
for Conor Conor I I noticed
some.
Total recommendation that the
LFC is under but two point one
one five million.
Is that correct.
Yes Sir okay.
But I also noticed that that LFC
is two million.
Over about two million over
there FY twenty two operating
budget.
And so in essence the executive
four million over four point two
million over what the twenty two
operating budget was is that
correct.
I'm trying to look at it the
year over year it appears to me
LFC is to mess over there twenty
two budget.
And the exact just four million
over there twenty two budget
there's a for rate increases
that correct approximately yes
okay I just wanna make sure I
was looking at this right thank
you madam chair.
Thank you Representative
Representative Eli.
Thank you madam chair
so what have a question about
the.
My numbers right so the total
management fees.
FY twenty one one hundred twenty
four million is that correct.
So management fees are paid in
two areas we have some that are
paid out of a contractual
services
and that was about the bulk of
the request so but the.
Twenty million dollar increase
you see there are twenty million
dollars in the LFC rack.
That's for management fees and.
There's also a whole bunch of
management fees that are paid
out side of the project
And those are.
One is yes we do tell them on.
Thirteen.
fall you agree I know we got we
got Bob.
Jack shop here but yes a hundred
twenty four points.
Four million detailed on page
thirty nine of your body.
So.
Roughly sixty million assets.
So I know for for some of us is
there may be some sticker shock
at a price second twenty four
million.
But if you do the math it comes
out the point zero zero seven so
it's less than one percent of of
assets under management and they
get a professional.
Advisor for less than one cent
I'm I just want to make the
point that I thought the state's
probably getting a.
You know that's a pretty good
right for for that kind of
return to get less than one
percent fee so that's always
pointing out thank you.
Thank you Representative very
good point.
any other questions from
committee.
I guess director to lead I just
kind of wanted you to address
your fourteen vacant positions I
know you haven't been there long
but.
I just sort of wondered where
you were going with those
vacancies and and if you you
know feel comfortable in being
able to move positions as
needed.
Madam chair representative
speedster
as I start to wrap my head
around sort of the.
The organization
it will be our priority and it
is still closed those vacant
positions so I don't have better
news for you the the next time
we present before either one of
the interim committees or even
next year in the fall when we
present our next appropriation
request but I'm but I can assure
you that a a top priority will
be to fill those vacant
positions.
Okay good that's what we were
hoping to hear all right thank
you with no other questions I
will go to vice chair small for
the motion.
Thank you madam chair I would
move the LFC recommendation.
Is there a second second.
Thank you Representative Crowder
on the second is there any
objection to the motion.
Right if not again thank you and
director Archuleta welcome
aboard and and you're familiar
face to just so so we didn't
feel any need to give you some.
Thank you madam chair.
You bet all right and now we go
to public employees retirement
association agency three six six
Miller or Jorgensen.
Afternoon madam chair members of
the committee.
I'll go over the differences
between the DFA and LFC FY
twenty three recommendations for
para.
Karia is funded by the.
Investment fund it doesn't
receive our sorry did the
pension fund it doesn't receive
a direct general fund
appropriation
overall the LFC recommendation
provides an increase of one
point six million or four point
three percent the executive
recommendation provides an
increase of three point eight
million or ten point four
percent.
Almost the entirety of that
difference lies within the
contractual services category
just like E. R. B. E. R.
expenses in this category for
para are mostly for investment
management fees are these
investment management
expenditures are based on the
value of assets under management
so basically the better the fund
performs the more the agency
must spend on investment
management fees that's probably
very overly simplistic
but anyways due to strong
investment performance in FY
twenty one the executive
legislative more funding than
the LFC for investment
management aligning with the FY
twenty one actuals.
so with that I will pass it over
to Connor P. has a anything else
to say thank you.
Yeah thank you Simon and.
Madam chair I'd like to just
point out over that same twenty
sixteen to twenty twenty one
period
the pair of.
From about fourteen point three
billion dollars to seventeen
point eight dollars and has
Pretty strong recent performance
however over the
over the longer term period so
when we look at the three five
and ten year period the fund has
ranked below the middle of the
pack in terms of investment
performance relative to those
those peer funds of greater than
a billion dollars
And also you know the last time
we talked about the current
budget a number of
issues were.
Walks there however they have
their executive director who's
here with us now Mr Greg
Trujillo and the parents also
working to fill a couple Bacon
leadership positions so there's
a national recruitment efforts
under way so selected chief
investment officer
And the search for the general
counsel I believe it is ongoing
but I'll turn it over to Mr
Trujillo
to explain their request.
Thank you Connor and well known
that Mr to hear good to see you
can see you thank you madam
chair let me share my screen
real quick.
And hopefully madam chair you
able to see that.
Right now we just see a
spending.
Spending little there there we
go thank you.
Right thank you madam chair
thank it's that that
presentation.
The actuarial.
Sorry.
Try this one more time manager.
That is a look okay madam chair.
It looks like a seventy fifth
anniversary invitation you know
it is I believe that is your
presentation thank here perfect
thank you madam chair before we
get started I want to thank a
Connor and signing up for the
work on our budget joining me
today is Anna Williams our
deputy director well as a
Christian but I love our acting
chief investment officer and to
kick off the presentation madam
chair wanted to make the
committee aware that Karia
actually is turning seventy five
this year so the pair Act passed
in nineteen forty seven
and we've got a lot of one forty
just virtual events at this
point in time but monthly events
celebrating para turning seventy
five.
Getting right into things of
fast forward to fiscal year
twenty twenty one madam chair
the the verifying his what
closed at an all time high of
seventeen point six billion
dollars that's an increase from
fourteen point eight billion
dollars in fiscal year twenty
twenty we had a twenty four
percent return we currently have
forty seven thousand six hundred
seventy nine active members
three hundred and thirty five
participating employers almost
forty three thousand retiree and
benefit recipients we paid out
one point three million dollars
in pension benefits about ninety
two percent of that goes to
retirees living in the state of
New Mexico
and are funded ratio increased
to US seventy one point four
percent if you recall madam
chair the legislature to pass a
significant pension reform the
twenty twenty legislative
session R. twenty twenty one
valuation is the first valuation
that captured a year of that
reform so seventy one point four
percent to funded ratio and that
was an increase from seventy
point three percent the year
prior our amortization period in
twenty twenty was a hundred and
six years that's now decreased
to seventy two years and we are
on track to be a hundred percent
funded within the twenty five
year time frame.
Senator the legislature in
twenty twenty so very thankful
to the to you for your help in
the legislature's helping in
getting that reform done.
Moving on to our appropriation
request as Simon mentioned the
bulk of the increase is due to
increases in contracts because
of the the larger investment
fund.
Taking those contracts away our.
Increases about two percent of
that reduces our vacancy savings
rate as well as takes into
account increase contributions
to pera as part of this P.
seventy two we also move some
money around which had which was
related to I. T. cost of at the
direction of DFA and we do have
a special appropriation request
of three point three eight
million dollars madam chair just
to make the the committee where.
Menial from retiree health care
mentioned this that was
legislation last year that was
passed having to do with some
state police officers that were
not part of the state police
plan I believe the cost last
year was five point one million
dollars we received two point
four million dollars up to cover
that cost and we are requesting
additional funds to to make the
fund hole in absorb those costs
that we incurred.
try to be brief on the budget
madam chair we're happy with
most recommendations and with
that I'm gonna turn it over to
Christian but I love our acting
CIO to discuss our investment
performance.
Thank you so much great madam
chair members of the committee
it is an honor to be in front of
you I might be in your face to
many of you but let me assure
you not and if faced a parapet
para for almost eight years now
serving in a deputy CIO
capacity.
The can with a tremendous amount
of family in this plan and you
know just completely invested in
the mission so thank you for
allowing me to be a
representative for such a
wonderful mission over seventy
saying it's been a very strong
here in markets and as well as
prepare we actually would call
historic as Greg said the market
seventeen point six billion and
we March of return of twenty
four point zero two percent both
of these numbers for all time
highs for the funds and then
experience the plan has actually
never seen since its inception
very proud of that we did pay
out one point three billion in
total budget and of that fifty
two percent or six hundred and
eighty four million came
directly from investment
activity and although you know
returns might look small these
are quite tremendous returns as
well absolute returns twenty
four point zero two percent and
when you think about how to
measure effectiveness and
implementation I like to break
it down to kind of three
different levels the first being
our number one missions are
members how are we meeting or
exceeding that required rate of
return for us that is seven
point two five percent and as
you can see both in the one year
as well as in the long term we
are exceeding that benchmark for
all measurement period nearly
all measurement periods.
Is how are we needing the
returns of the market based on
the policy portfolio that spans
I delegated to us through
leadership.
That we're closely tracking
implementation as well so very
strong performance there.
There is however we are stacking
up to national heroes and I'll
start by just saying every
investment philosophy is
different and it's really
because of I am it's really
because of the needs of the plan
that could be liability
liquidity needs our overall
appetite for diversification and
when we talk about New Mexico
care you can think of us as risk
allocators and focusing on
diversifying risk across
economic regimes so the fun can
be stable and continue to
generate steady compounded
return any market environment so
what you see is although we did
talk a bit about absolute return
peer rankings not being above
the median appear set when you
look at the risk adjusted return
rankings and you consider how
much risk for taking in the
market for how much return are
actually receiving for that were
well above that median mark us
for the one year fiscal year to
date we were in the twentieth
percentile outpacing eighty
percent of our peers and long
term well well above that median
mark for measurement so we're
pleased with that and what that
really is is our focus on
building stable being
diversified and not risking too
much more members money without
reasonable compensation to go
alongside that the end of the
day we're focused on that
Seddique compounded returns we
can continue to generate you
know wealth for all for me for
my son and for hopefully my
son's children as well I will
stop their the only other thing
I would say quite exciting we
continued into the new fiscal
year in the last quarter of a
calendar year twenty twenty one
seeing more all time highs we
didn't we do anticipate that
will close the fund December at
about eighteen point three
billion so overall as I can look
into this next calendar year I
think we're well positioned one
in in terms of diversification
we're ready for any market
uncertainties that may come
because we're balancing our risk
profile to.
So we are outpacing our
benchmarks as of the December
benchmark all the required rate
of return the market return as
well and three where hyper look
with good focused on liquidity
our number one jobs to pay those
benefits day in and day out and
we manage that risk liquidity
quite prudent so also out there
and thank you all so much for
your time.
I think you still need it.
Sorry about that madam chair.
So we always throw in the slide
at the end of every presentation
you're showing the amount of
budget para pays out of by
county as I stated previously
ninety two percent of the one
point three billion paid out
this last fiscal year remains in
New Mexico and without madam
chair we're we're happy to
answer any questions.
Madam chair I believe you are
muted now.
It's the famous phrases in it
thank you very much director
Trujillo and this that I lack
for that great presentation as
best I want to thank you for
letting us know that the pension
reform seems to be working as it
should you know we we have these
things brought to us and we're
never quite sure if they're
going to end up coming to
fruition and the the vision that
the directors have come up with
and so so I think that some
comforting at and director trio
you can you can.
Reinforce that right out the
reform that we passed is is
performing as it should.
It is madam chair and just just
to caution the committee it is a
six year implementation like I
said we would for in in our
second year so we will continue
updating the legislature on its
progress but I'm I'm confident
in the the reforms that the
legislature passed it wasn't
easy and and I will do all I can
to not have to make a
legislature go through that
again.
Excellent thank you all right I
will go to committee do we have
any questions from our committee
members on para.
Does not appear that we do so I
will go to by your small for
motion the thank you madam chair
I would move the LFC
recommendation.
Madam chair thank you
Representative Castellano so we
have a motion and second is
there any objection to the
motion.
All right I don't see any so
again and thank you director
Trujillo and this but I love for
your great presentation and and
we look forward to being kept
abreast of what's happening with
the Paris so thank you very much
thank you madam chair.
And we are on our final agency
for today the state investment
council it is agency code three
three seven and I'm not sure who
is starting us out on this one.
Thank you madam chair my name is
is not for them to keep comments
from the LFC in all of our.
As you mentioned this is the
state investment council agency
code three three seven and then
the LFC and Executive
recommendations for the funding
agency requests which was to
increase the FY twenty budget by
fifteen point four percent which
is an eight point six million
dollar increase over the FY
twenty two budget it's important
to note that the as I see
doesn't have any general fund
revenue in the budget and
revenue increase actually comes
from the relevant on of course
if they have any unspent funds
at the end of the year those are
those funds as well.
This budget increases really
driven by increased management
fees that increase management
fees of about eight point six
million dollars which of course
are a function of the asset
values over the last year or the
last fiscal year I should say
SAC's managed assets grew by
about twenty four percent or
five point eight billion dollars
to thirty point one billion
dollars you can see that
performance on page twenty of on
one and the on that page you'll
see that for FY twenty one the
land grant permanent fund
typically performed in the third
quartile your public funds
greater than a billion dollars
for longer term period it's
while the severance tax
permanent fund typically
performed in the lowest
quartile.
In addition to the eight point
six million dollars in increased
management fees the LFC
recommendation includes a
hundred eighty seven thousand
dollars recruitment retention
and billing vacancies about the
request and this is because as I
see indicated to the committee
that they had some additional
need after the submission of the
budget request when some
turnover intensified in their
agency so this funding would
help as I the bill twenty five
there twenty six all right.
And finally up all analysts
three consensus on performance
measures and targets in the
battle and over to Mr Miller in
case yes the discount.
Thank you madam chair thank you
smile
he covered everything there so I
do not have any additional
comments and I will pass it over
to our state investment officer
Mr Modi's.
Thank you Simon madam chair
members of the committee it's
nice to be with you this
afternoon I'm C. Maurice.
As it said the state investment
officer and I.
Been honored to serve in this
role row for almost twelve
years.
With me on the call today are
Representative ship our chief
chief financial officer.
Sure.
Who is our director of
communications legislative and
client affairs.
And any of the three of us will
be pleased to respond to any
questions let me very briefly
make just a few comments.
the fund as of today.
What is it thirty six point four
billion dollars.
Funds have grown by twenty two
billion dollars since our
current staff leadership.
Began investing the funds in
twenty ten.
With our council support the
funds have performed well.
We will be in fiscal year twenty
three distribute one point two
five billion dollars to the
state.
That's an increase from seven
hundred twelve million in twenty
ten and of course that's.
A very important thing to keep
in.
We are having difficulty
recruiting and retaining staff.
We need staff we do quality
investment professionals to
maintain the level of
performance and distributions
that we've achieved.
And we're going to ask that you
please consider reporting part
me supporting the LFC budget
recommendations.
The council our staff.
strongly committed to serving
you and our citizens.
Madam chair I'd like to ask our
CFO Brett Shipp.
View comments.
Thank you Steve madam chair
other members of the committee
I'm honored to.
Here today with you just just a
couple of comments are always
like to
put a few things in perspective
of for request for fiscal year
twenty three contractual
services are over ninety percent
of that request so of you know
it kinda shows you were that
were the dollars are spent the
majority of those contractual
services of course our
management fees which vary based
upon asset size and I think
Steve mentioned that we're at
over thirty six billion dollars
right now which of over the last
two love in years that's a
pretty hefty increase of of
fifteen percent increase in
fiscal year twenty three of
might seem on a little strange
it's it's a pretty good
increased I just want to
emphasize that fiscal year
twenty one in the land grant
permanent fund of the return was
so close to twenty six percent
we've had tremendous inflows as
it relates or additional inflows
to the early childhood education
and care fund and the tax
stabilization reserve fund and
we continue to this day I think
this last month we had a record
breaking inflow from the at a
Land Office so we continue to
get in large flows because of
those large flows are assets are
larger and the continue to
increase I would also point out
when you're looking at a fifteen
percent increase for fiscal year
twenty three compared to fiscal
year twenty to that worry on
it's very likely of because of
the it is super good here that
we had in fiscal year twenty one
that will have to do somewhere
in the neighborhood of about
five to six million dollar bar
for fiscal year twenty to so if
you factor in that.
More for fiscal year twenty two
and then make the comparison for
fiscal year twenty three that
increase is quite a bit smaller
and then also I want to
emphasize I think Simon already
said that are funding for the
state investment office is of
from the land grant and
severance tax we don't get any
general fund monies and the in
the unused amounts that are
appropriated and budgeted for at
the end of fiscal year after the
audit is completed reverts back
to the original funding sources
and then I'd also just like to
emphasize as Steve did we we do
have some staffing challenges
before us I don't think we're
probably the only agency in that
area but we do we're very
concerned because of the process
is that we have the
responsibilities that we have in
managing over thirty six billion
dollars as a result of that we
highly recommend the the the
approval of the a higher request
and that's all the comments and
we're happy to answer any
questions.
I'm sure if I may add it didn't
recognize our chief investment
officer because I don't see is
photo up stairs so yes would you
join us.
Do you have any comments you'd
like to make governor there
buddy thanks to you know no
comments you're a brick of a
great.
We're all available for
questions madam chair.
All right thank you very much I
appreciate you all being here
today I did catch our LFC
analysts tortoises comments
about some needs after the
submission of the budget request
and and from the comments of the
of the you and Mr Shipp are are
those primarily staffing needs
is that what you're what ended
up not being able that are not
being included I guess in the
initial request.
Madam chair as you know the a
request for the appropriation is
twenty two months ahead of the
end of that fiscal year so we we
don't have a perfect crystal a
crystal ball but in that time
we've lost of two investment
analyst and then we've also
lost.
He's still here but we're going
to be losing an asset class
director on the investment side
and we've been recruiting for an
accounting analyst for the past
year and have been unable to
fill that position and we're
we're only at twenty six
employees are authorized I think
we can go up to thirty one as we
need them but we're we're having
a difficult time the investment
world the accounting world right
now is a little bit in turmoil
as far as staffing is concerned
and because of that we we have
the those concerns and the fact
we just didn't anticipated at
the time.
Thank you for that Simon do you
have any other comments on that
since you're you're
recommendation actually does
seem to reflected that as much.
Madam chair members of the
committee the executive
recommendation just match the a
request that came in on
September first
and I I didn't really have any
communication with the agency
about the additional needs
so that that explains that
hundred eighty seven thousand
dollar difference there between
the executive and the LESC.
All right perfect thank you I
will go to the committee do we
have any questions from
committee members.
I don't see any so I will go to
vice chair small are based here
small do you have some questions
please thank you madam chair
just briefly and yet yes in
several madam chair analysts Mr
Maurice in your team
several agencies we just saw who
also have budgets that are fully
funded from their investment
funds with no general fund had
significantly larger differences
So
I guess one question again the
knowledge and has been stated
that this is not just there are
no general funds that are
included in in your budget.
Is the a hundred ninety is the
extra hundred eighty seven
thousand dollars is that just
simply that one extra position.
or is that additional to support
the potentially higher salary
classifications that are a
result of the current labor
market.
Representative small altered
that question I think it's
probably that's a good question
I think it's a combination it
just provides us some additional
flexibility we are pushing up
against our our Max of twenty
six of I think prior to this
last year we had thirty one
employees and I think we
probably over the next of
Senator of months will be going
above that of of twenty six
employees with approval but then
additional funding is to provide
some additional funding for an
employee and potentially allow
for a little bit of flexibility
should we need some additional
funds for both retaining or
recruiting additional employees
of the that are needed to
replace ones that we're losing.
Okay thank you very much and Mr
dot as madam chair
is there any additional comments
that you would offer as to the
the analysis for this that this
increase again announcing that
it does not come from the
general fund.
Madam chair and director I
think.
Great great jobs.
Really be I guess whatever
challenges they encounter
including those additional
positions it's not funding for
that position but of course if
if that funding is better used
retaining the current employees
it it might be more suited to
use that and recruiting
additional.
Okay.
Thank you very much madam chair.
Thank you Representative the any
other questions.
Okay I will go to you
Representative vice chair for
the motion and I and I do think
that this is one of those
agencies that that we ought to
have some consideration for
madam chair taking your lead
integrating entirely I would
move the LFC recommendation.
Is there a second second
Representative Crowder is there
any objection to the LFC
recommendation.
All right seeing none I thank
you very much investment officer
police and Mr Shipp and Mr Smith
thank you for joining us thank
you for for making your here
please so easy for us to
understand that and that and
appreciate the situation that
that you're in and and we wish
you the best keep keep doing a
great job you're doing thank
you.
Q. and thanks to our analysts
thanks to the committee we
appreciate your support.
Right committee that is our work
for today thank you all so much
we appreciate you have a great
evening and we'll be back with
our
I believe full committee hearing
starting at nine in the morning
thank you thank you mentioned.
