far as you know people process
which which we've seen what that
leads to is greater investments
at the federal level and and so
as the numbers have been going
up which they have the number of
exports in New Mexico have been
going up the number of of
customs agents have been have
also been going up so we we have
seen that increase
when we talk about the
immigration side that's had an
impact on on trade because they
take away customs agents from
the port of entry to process
migrants
in that respect we we do need
always need a federal person
that is on the federal side
we're always lobbying for more
customs officers on the border
and we have been getting those
as those numbers have been going
up so that's good news great
thank you.
Representative.
If there's no more hands up of.
I got a couple questions you
mentioned you had a twenty
million dollar project but I
fail to hear what that project
was.
Mr chair so that is a berm
project for the Columbus region
basically it and you'll see it
here on the list and I didn't
want to find that much of a
in depth explanation on this
presentation.
But basically what it does is
it's it's a flood protection
project that goes around the
Columbus port of entry region of
that area regularly floods but
it doesn't just applaud because
it's funny because we're in the
in the middle of the desert but
you have these huge mountain
ranges and the run off comes
down into the valley area where
the port of entry is and then it
just sits there.
Obviously when the floodings if
flood so much that it doesn't
allow for that growth we have
the only twenty four hour port
of entry in that Columbus region
and they can't really take
advantage of it because it
floods every single year can't
stand so that funding will allow
us to build a large flood
infrastructure projects around I
believe it's fourteen hundred
acres.
Fourteen hundred acres will be
protected that now you can
attract businesses now you can
develop now you can create jobs
we've been working to get that
first phase done.
That was the the first goal
however you know it when this
major landowner didn't want to
sell his land because he wanted
to get the entire thing done so
that led us to ask for more
revenue and we secured the
funding so now will be able to
finish the entire three phases
of the phases of the project so
we'll finish at all.
Thank you for that I know the
importance of birds because I've
got a thirty seven and a half
years in the poll mining
industry so I know about
flooding in Birmingham so thank
you for that answer and then
the.
You're getting a lot of work
and.
I'm just wondering if you're
following people from both sides
so that you can get the work
done I don't think of just one
side of the border can complete
those projects for the self.
But Mr chair so we do have you
mean as far as agency staff is
that we are just so we'll works
yes so we have a small team were
about four people in the office
we usually contract out a lot of
a lot of our work so we're
working with several partner
architecture engineering firms
to try to get our projects done
but as far as our staff we're
we're we're very small team and
we get a lot done considering we
only have four people but we
only have a we only have a
limited amount of staff we have
four people and and and most of
us honestly live in in the sense
on parks and that as a region.
Thank you for that anymore
questions okay we don't have any
more questions so I'm gonna ask
the vice chair to.
Of maker motion point of
recommendations thank you Mr
chairman I move the LFC
recommendation.
Second.
So we got a second on the LFC
recommendations any opposition.
Okay that's seven four zero gets
you have an LFC recommendations.
Thank you Mr.
Okay next we have the board of
nursing.
And miss Kelly will lead us all.
Thank you Mr.
Okay.
Good afternoon Mister chair
members the committee Kelly
closed with the legislative
finance committee we're on HSD
code four four nine board of
nursing with the message today
is the director Sheena Ferguson
and honoree veer from DFA and
election introduce our staff for
once we're done with the
presentation.
I will note that this is a non
general fund agency there's no
general fund in the state agency
it's all revenue from their
licensing fees and when that
there revenues are not spend it
does not revert to the general
fund goes back into their
internal fund balance which
you'll see as budgeted in this
budget.
So with that bill C.
recommendations supported the
board's request for fund
balances will be executive was
sixty point four thousand lower
the boards fund balances
projected nearly one million at
the close of FY twenty three
meaning that there's nothing
funding in that to continue
using fund balance in the
future.
The executive increase personal
fifty seven point six thousand
above the board's request to
reduce the vacancy rate while
the LFC recommendations
supported the board's request.
You'll see recommendation was
one hundred and eighteen
thousand above the executive
recommendation other cost
categories for building lease
costs and the board must move to
a new lease space by the end of
may twenty twenty three the
executive recommendation also
reduce funding for travel and I.
T. supplies and we have
reconciled all performance
measures and with that I will
turn it over to d'anvers from
DFA for any for it Madam.
Afternoon Mr chairman members of
the committee I would just like
to point out that the executive
recommendation for personal
services employee benefits is
greater than the agency request
because when they requested it
was their budget is submitted in
early September and since their
budget was requested they have
done a bunch of quite a few re
classifications and then pay
bands and so the executive
request takes that into account
that's why it's more than the
agency requested amount.
And as far as why the executive
recommended less we find the
executive meets the increased
cost for rent however reduce the
other cost basically kind of
accounting to what their actual
expenditure level was thank you
Mr chairman.
We'll go ahead and if it's okay
with Mr chairman the agency can
speak now.
Thank you Mr chair this year and
so she's our operations director
over licensing as well as our
chief financial officer of I
have a few remarks if if that's
okay I just to talk about what
we've been working on the last
few months I started in March of
last year with an emphasis and
focus on licensing we had
tremendous turnover in our
licensing positions they weren't
the in the right
Job description for the
activities that they undertake
there are seventeen different
types of applications that they
will have have to learn to prop
to process and it was seen as a
starting position for the state
and we had a lot of turnover and
that was really hampering our
ability to process licenses so
that was that corrective action
we took a as quickly as we could
with help from our colleagues
and inspo getting them into the
right job description the other
thing that we did was created a
training program for the
licensing specialists when I
started there were five and two
of them were looking to transfer
and so when you takes you a year
to figure out all the different
types of nurse practitioners and
different job descriptions and
licensors we just we're not ever
getting them to a level of
expertise that they needed that
they could rapidly process so
there is a backlog there and
that training program and I need
to give Dawn credit for that
because that was something her
team put together quickly she
also implemented to tracking
outcomes and so we could know
how long licenses were in the
queue at we are right now we
believe strongly were eighty
five to ninety percent of where
we need to be we are waiting on
some additional functionality
from that National Council state
boards of nursing with some of
their tools to facilitate that
licensing fees and we have
reduced a lot of unnecessary
steps it while still maintaining
safety and accuracy in that we
also started a communication
program of getting the phones
answered with an issue very
frustrating for licensees and
then also process on the portal
which is a of facilidade way
back and forth to have that
communication so we also added
two FTE ease in licensing
specialist the the initiative.
That the legislature had last
year in funding the education
and of more nurses and having
more nurse requests we knew that
we were going to need to make
some changes in that area and
we also the transition to a
position that over licensing
there would be a nurse over that
who understands all the nuances
of the different schools and
programs in that in in the
country
so that was a major force so
what we did we've also added
some dollars for additional
administrative prosecuting hours
to work down a backlog in some
of our discipline cases and also
did just a lot of work with
standardizing just standardizing
processes and some
infrastructure so the other
thing that we will do this year
is at a nurse the the board of
nursing was short nurses so we
have added another nurse to help
with the nurse practice act
reviews and facilitate that so
the those at and then as was
mentioned we're also going to be
moving in so
it's a little hard for us
probably to find the right place
because we also have to have a
good sized board room and some
additional parking with that so
those are things that we've been
that we've been working on as
well for many many years New
Mexico board of nursing was
known across the country for the
diversion program conference
that they added every year and
that wasn't something that we've
been doing recently and so we
have a put our efforts towards
of having that so that we can
help nurses when they get in
trouble with the substance use
disorder we've also been asked
by our constituents to talk more
about the process in
investigations and complaints
and we are having a and offering
that conference coming up in the
spring.
Sometime so those are some
additional things that we're
doing again we want to support
the legislature's initiative for
producing more nurses and make
sure we get them licensed in a
in a
very timely manner some.
And the.
If there are any questions.
No thank you.
The eligibility question from
the.
Was the Representative there.
Thank you Mr chair thank you for
being here two quick questions
the speed of processing military
spouse licenses if you're able
to expedite that.
Mr chair Representative Garrett
yes we did left that out it
house bill one ninety one from
last year we spent a year
streamlining getting all those
things down we had to promulgate
new rules and then also do
training for that but for every
level of our licensees that that
it that is in there and that
that has been taken care created
thank you I I just I never
realize there were so many
categories that you're dealing
with just one final quick
question I didn't know that
there was a doctorate of nurse
practitioners nurse
practitioners are terrific.
How many people are in those two
programs that I guess and I miss
you and you NM I was a graduate
of that program in twenty twenty
one and we had two different
levels of cohort in there
there's one for the nurse
executive.
Rupe and there's then there was
a cohort for nurse practitioners
and there is and there was
sixteen in my class there I
believe I cannot off the top of
my head think about what the New
Mexico state is but I also know
that with the funding
for a a C. R. N. A. program that
that is a doctorate level too so
I know that there's just going
to be an increase in that thank
you and thanks for included in
your report in the the book
thanks that's it Mr chair for.
Representative Paul thank you Mr
chairman my questions are just
really kind of short suddenly to
a Lincoln explanation so
personal thank you for your
presentation thank you for what
you do I'm really supportive of
our nurses our medical field
how many license did you say you
process a year for new nurses or
nurses are coming into the field
approximately I don't need to
know exact.
Yes.
At.
Representative **** a last year
we processed approximately
twenty one thousand in five
thousand of those roughly work
new licenses last year that's
our internal pants.
Thank you Mr chairman and how
many
we're we're facing a shortage of
all medical personnel.
Do you guys have any numbers as
far as how many nurses we would
need to provide better health
care specific to our more remote
regions.
any idea Mr chair representative
Baca we have follow the work
force
report and we agree that it
would be six thousand for RN's.
In my final question Mr chairman
it is
I know other places they kind of
the utilize nurses from other
places even other countries is
that something that in New
Mexico we have begin to tap into
some of these nurses that may be
coming from of the the
Philippines or some account of
thank you I guess the.
Mr chairman and Representative
**** we do have a significant
increase in international
applications the beautiful X.
right now from Jordanian
applications the Philippines
and I think last year we saw.
I don't want to shoot a number
off the top of my head again but
it was approximately three
thousand increase so right now
we are continuing to see if
international applicants
increased drastically that's
taking a significant amount of
time.
Thank you and get a so called
because I think that the Mr
Chairman I think by my colleague
Representative Garrett it's at
about the time between
application of the time that
they are able to provide
services is about what how are
we looking at so that for for
these for nurses.
And.
Mr Chairman representative
office when they are the
applications are complete so
getting the information is the
biggest challenge by the time we
get all that information to a
license within ten days of all
those documents being provided.
Thank you Mr chairman I have no
further questions.
Thank you Mr chairman thanks for
the presentation.
I have a question I'm travelling
nurses a lot of the get licensed
in the state of New Mexico when
we come all from all over the
country.
So how do you license somebody
save would represent about a
question on the license well
traveling nurse to get to work
right away that yes okay of Mr
chairman and representative
Garcia we have something called
the multi state compact license
and we are in conjunction with
thirty nine other states that
all have the uniform licensing
format so when they are licensed
in one state that allows them to
come and work in any of those
retrospective States those
collaborating states without
requiring them to have a New
Mexico license for example
Arizona is one of those states
when they're licensed in Arizona
they can come to New Mexico and
worked as a traveling nurse
without being required to get in
New Mexico license should be
relocate here than we become
their primary state and then New
Mexico would ultimately state
license thank you Mr chairman in
other words the.
What fourteen fifteen states
that are not on the compact.
So they cannot practice.
At all in the would be required
to get a New Mexico licensed
okay and that takes you to the
team under some damage no no and
we license within ten days of
all the program working in so if
the applicant submits all the
required paperwork with our
application they're done within
ten days if they're struggling
to get transcripts in our
verification from another state
that would be a delay in
licensure right now we're seeing
probably about sixty to ninety
days and an average movie if
you're out of the compact great
correct okay thank you very much
thank you very much
Representative.
Representative sentence thank
you Mr I'd set a quick question
on I know this legislature
passed a bill to our freeze
liability limits on our.
I think the medical field
I know it's deterring doctors
from coming to our state how do
you see that happening with
nurses.
Mr chair representative Sanchez
I
That isn't something that we
normally track but we do hear
from some of the licensees about
that the cost of the insurance
that they
have to find so we know it's at
it's a concern for some people.
Thank you I I guess I just want
to make the point that we.
I guess I wasn't here but we
this legislature passed policy
that's raising insurances which
is our we're trying to get
doctors here and it's scaring
them off so I guess when we vote
on bills we need to think about
stuff like that thank you Mr
chair.
Percent of the other groups.
Gentleman.
So we talked about the compacts
can you explain a little bit how
the compacts are important.
Absolutely so Mr chair
Representative gala Cruz the
the
what it took here in New Mexico
was the legislature had to
past those laws that allowed us
to do that the executive
director of the New Mexico board
of nursing myself is considered
the executive officer executive
commissioner for New Mexico and
we we participate in a lot of
projects with the National
Council state boards of nursing
that they have specific rules
for the follow don just was
talking about coming from a
compact state you know there's
some ease associated with that
but there are a lot of the
questions are a lot of processes
that are attempting to be
improved by by that and then
there is a board at and they
take input and let the executive
officers vote on those changes
when it comes up to processes or
what have you
so and we have we we shared data
but it's also trying to make
sure that
that everybody who's coming into
the compact has a certain
standard for certain level of
accuracy and review that they
will do to make sure that the
licensee it is suitable to be
licensed in in another state and
also in terms of discipline and
those kinds of things that those
are those are shared as well
within the compact and I would
just also share that this year
Ohio became part of the compact
there for other states right now
who's legislature's are
grappling with bringing them
down on as well as Canada.
Thank you Mr chairman of follow
up question related so when you
talk about compacts is there any
Association or coordination with
our military bases.
That at Mr chair representative
dela Cruz that
the
National Council state boards of
nursing has worked diligently
around that that issue are they
also of realize that nurses and
be a system as well as some at
and military system and we do
work with them closely about
that so that that is something
that everybody does try to make
sure we're doing everything we
can to make it easy so with the
compact then be able to work
with our VA hospitals.
Military bases second.
At and I think you went to the
the those
latest conference on that that
we had I did the nursing compact
it does indeed work with not
only the dust with the expedited
military licenses but it has a
uniform level of a baseline
level where everybody is
Licensed so then that becomes.
Transferable press the states
that are participating so from
the military standpoint it is
very much the same thank you Mr
thank you thank you for.
Of there's Lujan so I've got a
couple questions self first of
all I have a lot of respect for
the nurses as well one of my
daughters is a registered nurse
in the rural areas I come from
the Navajo Nation or very close
to the Navajo Nation so when
people talk about rural they
really don't know the real
meaning of rural send of one of
my bills as a freshman was
trying to get tax credit for
rural nurses
it.
Just a few committees but the
Senate floor and last year they
had a a similar house bill I
think that got some credits for
the nurses so I'm glad that that
happened.
With mentioning the Navajo
Nation.
I think of my nation suffered
the most during the era of COVID
I'm just wondering how it
affected nurses in your district
your area and some of the nurses
that I know that are in the
Navajo Nation
they were for so first health
that they never went back to
nursing afterwards I'm wondering
if you experience that problem
and how you handle.
Mr chair the national
organizations for nursing like
other American nurses
association the local
professional organizations
whether it's
there's just a variety of
professional organizations for
nurses in the state and across
the boundary into our other
states to that have identified
that there are there's a lot of
need for support and so there
are a number of programs that
are available whether it's a
podcast or classes were
different methods that people
are are reaching out to nurses
and given and and other people
in health care too because it
was everyone of to
to.
Pay attention and listen and
think about the things that we
can do one of the things we are
seeing at the board of nursing
is some folks that may have let
their license go or elected not
to work are now coming back out
of but they're wanting to do it
carefully and
pay attention to what other
resources are available to them
but it really has attempted to
be a group effort I know a lot
of that facilities have also put
in either wellness programs for
different different ways to
support their staff and at deal
with their mental health
The needs and concerns of it's
not enough but it's a start a
lot of places and it's really
my my mailbox is full with
national programs every week
about my my stress were
since I'm not clinical anymore
that the folks that are.
In the profession.
Thank you for that and the I
applaud you for keeping New
Mexico safe and healthy so that
the no more questions.
My advice here will make a
motion Mr chairman I move the
executive recommendation.
Okay second by Representative
Garrett.
The opposition.
No opposition so.
Madam direct you get the
executive recommendation thank
you thank you.
Thank you.
Okay next we have a.
Agency for sixty four board of
professional engineers and land
surveyors up next if you would
let us know if you have any
handouts or if you have anything
up here for us to refer to so we
don't go scrambling through the
paces thank you.
Yes with that.
Miss Anderson.
Thank you and good afternoon
Mister chair and members of the
committee today we are going to
be looking at agency for six
four and this they're gonna be
on pages one eighty eight and
one eighty nine of the LFC
shaped.
I.
And today I have with us out and
ginger Anderson LFC analyst we
have director of period Valdez
with us as well as DFA
counterpart Donner Vera.
And I'll just quickly run over
the differences in the executive
and legislative recommendations
before turning it over to the
agency.
If and to DFA for.
so the LFC recommended close to
one point four million dollar FY
twenty four operating budget and
this agency it generates
revenues from licensing fees so
they do not draw from the
general fund this recommendation
is a five point three percent
increase from FY twenty three.
I'll quickly run over the faced
recommendation.
No okay so some of the key
differences that you'll see
between the recommendations is
that there's a difference of
five thousand dollars in the LFC
recommendation for person and
employee benefits.
so pretty minor in the grand
scheme of things maybe not minor
to the agency but in contractual
services both the executive and
the LFC funded the agency's full
request for three hundred and
thirty one point one thousand
and this is in there contracts
category which will be using
they wanted this funding for
hiring legal services to improve
the number of compliance cases
resolved the biggest difference
between the two recommendations
are the LFC is recommendation to
fund a hundred and twenty
thousand dollars of fund balance
into the agency's scholarship
funds
which director Valdez will talk
a little bit more about that
signing by statute the agency
distributes educational
scholarships to qualified New
Mexico educational institutions
to candidates for engineering
and surveying professions
willing to reside in practice in
New Mexico
so this agency is one of the
many agencies that was up for
extension on their sunset date
to think Representative Harry
Garcia it can speak to as well
and the there was a push from
the sunrise sunset subcommittee
back in August of for the for
the board to
but change their statutes and
increase their scholarship funds
from their existing cash balance
of which at that point in time
was about one million one
million dollars so they wanted
to increase their scholarship
fund by one hundred percent of
the bumping it up to two hundred
and forty thousand dollars so
the executive recommendation
does not include the scholarship
adjustment they are at zero but
but that ledge.
Needed recommendation includes
that scholarship adjustment and
with that I'll hand it over to
Donna.
Thank you thank you Mr chairman
I have nothing to add to that
that's actually correct Mr
director.
Good afternoon Representative
Allison gentleman else and and
members of the committee.
again my name is Perry Valdez
and and executive director for
the New Mexico board of
engineers and surveyors.
With me today in attendance are
are Mr operations manager
crystal the ministry of Madam
roentgens all this.
And our financial assistance
definitely Trujillo along with
our board members Robert
Kaminski Stephen I internally
Dorman.
And I'll be brief the agency's
mission is to safeguard life
health and property promote
public welfare in the state
regardless engineering
surveying.
The board is self funded as
ginger stated with our revenue
is derived from licensing
renewal fees it does not require
any appropriation from the
general fund for its operation
we currently have nine thousand
seven hundred fifty one license
active licenses.
And that number used to be a ten
thousand but with the license
renewals some people do not
renew their licenses but those
are the numbers we have so far.
We're happy to report that we
have a full board with newly
appointed members and non
unexpired terms.
We're also pleased to announce
that we are fully staffed with
no vacancies staffing agencies.
The board approved of some
proposed changes to our engineer
serving practice act as ginger
and mentioned.
We have on the on our bill an
expedited path for serving
licensure by endorsement.
Which is similar to the
engineering expert expired
expedited path which is
currently under Act.
Also wish to increase and expand
our use of the engineers to
service product serving
scholarship fund from a hundred
thousand to two hundred fifty
thousand.
And this with this increase
would allow not only for more
scholarships but also to allow
us to help universities on
purchasing equipment for the
purpose.
Of of that scholarship we have
twenty nine students attending
New Mexico universities to have
been awarded scholarships for
fiscal year twenty twenty two of
which I students have graduated
in December twenty twenty and
have
stated that they intend to stay
and work in New Mexico which is
what we're trying to do.
The remaining recipients of the
scholarships are juniors and
seniors so we're hoping that
they also will intend to stay
here.
The board recognizes the need to
retain talent to develop talent
developed New Mexico's
institutions of higher education
to the benefit of the citizens
of New Mexico therefore as of
may first of twenty twenty two.
All first time board of
publication fees for inner
certification exams initial
license fees are waived for all
applicants who meet the required
criteria and the residents of
New Mexico graduates
And so this way we can promote
the retention New Mexico
graduates and also accelerate
the path to licensure without
them having to worry about those
fees.
And with the mobile twenty
questions or finish my board
members wish to state anything
if you so please.
Thank you for that Mr.
Thank you Mr chair I just a.
I know that there is no I'm
actually a registered PED so he
has to do with me every two
years but I also on the welcome
Mr Steve knight who works of no
less almost national laboratory
just wanna thank you guys for
for the help they're very very
efficient they do a great job
with that with the what they do
I just want to make a comment
someone brought up that there
might be a bill to change the
state engineer and allow it to
be an attorney or some other
thing
That's kind of like save
Attorney General does have to be
an attorney so I just want to
make this committee aware at a I
think that's a crazy bill and I
just want to thank you guys for
everything you do and
I guess a Representative Garcia
is helping you guys out with the
sunset bill or something I'm
jealous because I'm the engineer
and it is not.
Thank you.
Representative let's
representative here thank you Mr
chairman Representative Sweetser
there's a new engineer house in
integral as an engineer also to
say no I have a question in
which engineering fields do we
have the greater shortage.
In New Mexico if you have that
information.
The report Mr chair
representative joy.
Senator I do not have that
information but if I were to
have to.
Based on my experience with the
board.
I would have to say electrical
engineering there just hasn't
been a need for electrical
engineers to be licensed in the
state so that's probably one of
our lowest.
As far as a major disciplines go
third several disciplines of
engineering so some of them may
be less than that.
Thank you very much.
Okay thank you very much
Representative Garcia.
Thank you Mr chairman.
Representative.
No shoes anyway.
thanks for the presentation of
how many people are are new
board.
Currently there are ten board
members there are.
Two public members.
Three's professional surveyors.
And I find licensed engineers.
What point is members the
governor does the governor
they're all over appointment yes
there will be
Mr chair one more last question
how important is that
scholarship.
So
Mr Chairman representative
Garcia so far it seems that the
scholarship is very important to
help the students especially
those students who are from
rural areas to be able to to go
to school internet engineering
and surveying degree.
We have been trying to promote
it more more often whenever we
do presentations we don't
presentations at the
universities with the
presentations at some of the
schools we've been as my fact.
We've been asked to do
presentations at so ciation is
to and we try to promote that as
well as well as in our
newsletters we try to that
people know that that's it's
available.
Resource for them to send their
students are to send someone
that they know.
We can get that scholarship Mr
chairman of.
You are we knew how important
the scholarship is because you
know a lot of a.
People want to get into the
field just can't afford it
correct if you can if we can
help them in any way to advance
that is the Domingo and that's a
Domingo my Domingo and I'm in
the position in route to our
state we need to help for
students this fist in rural New
Mexico.
To advance so we can have the
same opportunity is Irvin people
do and you know I'm not knocking
review will over rule but the
reality of it is the rural New
Mexico really gets that of.
We need to
locate an office.
Thank you Mr thank you for.
Offenses sure I know we got to
take the executive
recommendation but I hope this
committee considers the LFC so
we can help those scholarships
thank you.
The school education system.
I am not.
So New Mexico.
I'm glad you're offering three
ships and Office of
scholarships cause direct.
You don't want to have sex.
This is the first census may
develop.
The
Mr chairman that there's no
general fund in the state
agencies so that when the effect
your overall budget plan if you
want.
Thanks for the.
So with that
Here with the.
Gentleman there's no general
fund in the state agencies so if
you adopted the LFC
recommendation which is higher
it wouldn't accept any of your
your planned budget development
in this point of the Mr Chairman
is that with the LFC that
include the amount of money
given the scholarships yes yes I
think that's what the committee
wants and so they'll see from.
Also on that point it was very
important that we take care of
this you know there's a lot of.
Well.
So one of the issues that I
experience and members are
committee of experience is that
there's like a lack of shortage
or there's a shortage of
surveyors is there something
that has occurred change of log
pardon my ignorance but that
that has made it more difficult
to become a surveyor
consequently having a shortage
of surveyors because surveyors
are literally on the ground
pardon the pun.
Mr Chairman representative of
the cruise of so far there has
not been a change there has not
been changed since nineteen
ninety two we do require a four
year degree to be the land of
land surveyor surveyor of we
have noticed that as well
numbers have stayed static
around five hundred servers
license in the state of New
Mexico so may retire but then we
receive some that come in New so
the number doesn't go up it just
stays as a static rate of one of
things that we are doing to try
to address this is as I stated
making that change in our
practice that where there's an
expedited pathway so.
Possibly trying to bring in new
surveyors into the state to
increase that number but as far
as any changes there have not
been any changes.
Mr Chairman follow up question
so the requirement for years a
four year degree what with that
degree be an.
Representative Cruz a the four
year degree can be either of the
survey industry for years or
integrate out of New Mexico
State University or any
university the offers that or
can be three related science
pathway so it that can tell
mathematics physics you could
also include a business
administration degree as long as
they're augmented that related
science degrees augmented with
eighteen semester hours of
serving courses.
Do you Mr Chairman do you all
know what the genesis of that
requirement was and was that in
enacted in ninety two correct
isn't it does before my time
I believe from my understanding
from when I first came onto the
board it was to to promote the
Serving to become a profession
not just a an occupational
license.
Seems to me that that associates
degree which would serve just as
well it seems like it's a very
limiting
Way of of of actually decreasing
the numbers of surveyors by
requiring forty greed that's not
necessarily associated with
survey now granted if it's a
serving degree I I could see
that but then again you have
limited colleges are offering
that makes that's another
prohibit our I think that's
something that a some point
needs to be revisited thank you
Mr chairman thank you.
Thank you for that.
Before we move.
Search to the vice chair is
there any loss of present it
again sorry yes she can do it
again okay Mr chairman I move
that policy recommendations.
The second from Representative
Sweetser.
The opposition.
No opposition so.
Thanks for.
All of.
I.
He said.
Of course.
Thank you Mr chairman members of
the committee Amanda Dick Peddie
legislative finance committee
we're joined this afternoon by
Scott McLaughlin director of the
spaceport Authority as well as
DFA analyst Simon Miller to
speak about the executive
recommendation.
So
the spaceport Authority is
agency for ninety five again
if you're working in your volume
to document the spaceport begins
on page one ninety nine also in
your volume three which is this
one with the little ring finder
page sixty has a great sources
and uses sheets on the spaceport
Revenue this spaceport it does
rely heavily on general fund
revenue but they also receive
revenue from leases from their
tenants and from various sources
and this kind of tracks how that
goes throughout the agency so if
you're interested in that that's
there for you on page sixteen.
The LFC and Executive
recommendations are pretty
similar
there is a slight difference the
LFC recommendation is about a
hundred thousand dollars higher
in general fund revenue and
that's due to a position that
was added for a business
operations manager and a lease
negotiation assistant and that
was part of HFC R. I. pardon me
that was part of LFC is catch up
cleanup back in September
otherwise they were to
expansions both recommendations
support the expansions for an
infrastructure planner and a
director of security there is a
slight difference the LFC
recommends one of those
expansions with other revenue
and the executive recommends
both of those expansions from
the general fund so it's a
pretty close budget but there's
some small differences.
analysts did reach consensus on
all performance measures and
targets and I can toss it over
to Simon for any other
additional comments.
Thank you Mr chair my name is
Simon Miller and I'm an analyst
with DFA Amanda pretty much
covered it all here the the
budgets are very similar
the LFC is the hundred thousand
dollars higher overall but the
executive is ten thousand higher
in general fund
and I will toss it over to the
executive director thanks.
Can.
Mr chair can I give us a quick
presentation thank you so you
should have a presentation in
front of you and and I've tried
to keep it pretty short the only
start at the top so the on the
first page of those two pictures
one is a picture of Fanta
amerispec state came out to the
site and did some work with
engine testing they're standing
on a
with with the engine testing
platform those now one of the
facilities we have out there
that that a previous customer
manufactured installed so we're
able to market that and then
down to the bottom is the atomic
Aggies New Mexico state atomic
Aggies aerospace rocket team
winning the chili Cup which is
an award we made specifically
for local team to compete in the
spaceport America Cup so down
are these two the chancellor of
NMSU standing there next to how
we Morales to ten a governor
myself and many members from the
team so that was kind of a fun
thing to do for them at one of
the Aggie games.
So on the next page we have some
of the customer activity so
I can go through these quickly
spend much was the one that had
built a very large Connecticut
system so there continued to yes
the Thunderbirds came back to U.
S. airforce Thunderbirds came
back again for the second time
that they've I've made a mistake
there's about seventy people to
come and stay in hotels for
about two and a half weeks they
bring eight F. sixteen so
they're able to use the
restricted air space and they
told me the then this last week
that this is the second time
they've been incredibly
productive in their and our
winter training that often do
eighty of shows after the state
and I'm going to Edwards for two
weeks Edwards airforce base but
they love coming the spaceport
so it's worked out very well
it's good revenue for us a good
economic impact.
We have other small launches U.
S. and military academy west
point is an example of one we
have other universities that
come for a weekend
wireman is it a picture of them
feedback they've they have a
very large two hundred sixty two
foot wing span high altitude
platform system and what it's
meant to do is act sort of like
a satellite but it does it at
sixty thousand feet above so.
County near of firemen into
other of those haps developers
we have three of the four major
house developers who of all
visited or are currently at
spaceport doing work and
AeroVironment built their own
facility and they'll be back
later in twenty twenty three we
think in the long term goal with
them could include manufacturing
so it's a big one for us the
other two are doing testing here
but they've been here some off
and on in the they bring forty
people the time the state for
weeks and months at a time.
just moving ahead real quick
virgin galactic I don't know if
you've been watching the news
but they have selected a site is
here County for what they call
the astro campus and so that
will play about a hundred people
and they will start building
that sometimes I think in the
next eighteen months or so I'm
not sure exactly but with
they're also going to wind up
doing site expansion at
spaceport America so the current
facility that gateway to space
is is not big enough for the the
future plans so they have talked
about their quarterly reports
and otherwise that they'll
eventually have three Kerrier
craft in New Mexico and up to
twelve spaceships and to do that
and to have the through but they
want to there will be building
their own hangers these will be
furnished by New Mexico like the
first one which we leased back
to move the building their own
hangers and have additional
staff to man those and get to
the high cadence appropriations
state will hopefully start
here in Q. two two just and
hopefully few months
Skipping ahead I'll go ahead and
go to the pictures on page three
so just give you an idea of the
kind of the breadth of the
things we do at the spaceport
we're continuing to get a lot of
inquired for lots of different
events and
one of the things that mentioned
about virgin galactic I forgot
to mention is staying there now
up to about two hundred eighty
people locally and on New
Mexico.
And and what they previously
said about those people about
half for hire locally in about
half for folks that they have
brought in so they've attracted
a meant to Mexico it's giving
ahead of.
Very quickly part of our mission
statement the statutory mission
statement is to do stem and
workforce development so we do
quite a bit of that
so here's some examples of what
we do have quite a bit of
requests to come out to the site
one of the things I would like
to do is is get rural folks out
there you know it's pretty easy
for some of the surrounding
counties to come and visit but
it's difficult to get people on
some of the far away places to
come once virgin galactic gets
into a lodge cadence that this
kind of dependable where you'd
be able to see him take off of
land that would be a really good
opportunity to bring kids and
from rural areas and let them
see something kind of different
and maybe light a fire for them.
moving ahead on the business
development side last June we
signed a MOU with us here space
here spaces is a spin off from
Sierra Nevada which is a major
aerospace company and they've
been working on a on a small
wing vehicle called the dream
chaser now for quite awhile they
would like us to be a back up
for when they go to space so
right now they have three funded
missions to the space station
and they'll take off vertically
and landed Kennedy Space Center
but if there's anything going on
the Kennedy Space Center that
prevents of the land they would
like to land in New Mexico in
addition to that a long term
goal is that there this is the
first of several winning
vehicles they'll be developing
the next one will be will be
creating rated and then they'll
be other ones that could
conceivably do manufacturing
there's a lot of manufacturing
being considered in space where
you send something up you out
Thomas we manufacture something
you bring it back down again
what's special about the dream
chasers of towing vehicle so
when it lands it lands very
smoothly and a very low Jeez so
it's very suitable for these
sorts of things up our long term
goal is to make Newman spaceport
America a landing site for them
so that requires is working on
an FHA orbital re entry license
so we're doing that right now
that also requires us to update
to environmental impact
statement a little bit which is
about fifteen years old so that
needed to be done anyway
one thing I did want to mention
I hope you'll start seeing in
the news more more the space
Valley coalition and I put a
link there so this was a group
of us who got together a couple
years ago to bid on the requests
of the original one was to build
back better grant which was part
of the stimulus that president
Biden put out we only want to
small portion when when the big
the big piece of that the space
on the coalition now is is a
rogue group and we're continuing
to look at grants and other
things that we can bring into
the into New Mexico
Also on the very bottom there if
you were to put in Google new
space growth you and I put a
little link shortly if you have
time to do that I highly
recommended so you understand
what's going on with the space
economy it's continuing to grow
and and New Mexico's a good
place and one thing I should
mention is that all passed so
now it's just a couple days ago
that they're working on their
own spaceport so somewhere in
the West Texas area they would
like to build a space point so
it's just an indication of where
where where the market is going.
The next pages spaceport America
capital we had our we were back
after COVID we had a worldwide
there's about five thousand
people participating we're able
to bring fifteen hundred to New
Mexico we think this is a huge
business development and
marketing event for the state of
New Mexico in the region so
these are all aerospace related
students in that picture they
could be programmers and could
be mechanical engineers but they
get to know it New Mexico is and
I get to see a spaceport America
so we're going to continue with
that.
capital outlay projects we I
don't know if I need to go
through these but I'd be happy
to if you have any questions
probably the the biggest thing
was that we're we're finishing
up the we're about to make an
award for master plan
R. F. P. so that was some money
we've got a few years ago it
kind of got stalled by the.
the COVID and some other things
but this will be a big deal or
work and will be working on what
the spacebar look iPhone X. five
ten twenty years.
I'll go ahead and and skipping
ahead to budget on page eight in
the past we had some budgets are
uncertainty this really cost a
lot of problems in getting
things done I I I do appreciate
that we got an increase in the
general fund that allowed us to
have some certainty in our
budget and we skip to the next
budget here are the three
positions that we ask for for
from the executive and and the
LESC so that and this has to do
with our overall growth one of
the problems we've had is is
spending the capital outlay so
we're if you saw the pictures of
the of the companies were
working with were very focused
on operations so it's actually
pretty hard to dedicate someone
just to getting the capital
outlay spent and and done
appropriately so we're asking
for that to help move things
along we did hire two outside
project managers there through
the statewide pricing agreements
so we're able to use the capital
outlay money for them and that
is greatly helped us move money
for but we wanted to get one
person dedicated that to to
guide that and they would work
again with the master plan
that's coming up and so we put a
roadmap down for the next five
ten years although in the
security and safety we had a
visit there's fourteen active
commercial space point the F. A.
A. along with the FBI and
several other agencies has
decided to go visit every
spaceport and understand what
the national security risks are
for us launching I tar
controlled international
trafficking controlled
regulation type rockets and
planes the things that have to
be protected is there security
rest of the nation are we doing
a right so they visited us.
And the visiting every other
commercial spaceport they're
going to put out of best
practices but sometime in the
next year and there are some
pretty strong recommendations
that we need to take a stronger
focus specifically on security
and safety so that's that's
where that position comes from
and then the third one is the
business manager so especially
with with companies like virgin
galactic but many of our other
tenants we have a normal
commercial a land lease leases
but they're also very
complicated because of operation
so this was a suggestion that we
need to take a stronger focus on
that on the business side so
that's for the third one comes
from.
I do have the budget table on
page nine I don't know if we
need to go through that that the
twenty twenty four is in the LFC
recommendations so that's all I
have for you thank you Mr
chairman I'll be happy to answer
any questions.
Thank you chairman thanks for
the presentation good to see you
again and my question is can
question the last time I'm in
New Mexicans are hired in that
speech for operation.
I think.
Sarah and and Representative
Garcia the the as we discussed
before I did ask virgin galactic
as one of our companies that you
know work with this the company
with the most employees how many
of those people
in Los crucis area we're we're
from Los crucis from New Mexico
and how many in for outside in
the number I got was about fifty
fifty so but as they expand I
know that one I work with you
know I we all at the spaceport
Authority work with several of
the of the folks out it the
spaceport would have with virgin
active many of their employees
are New Mexicans that were born
in and raised in New Mexico and
are working for virgin galactic
and then of course they bring
talent in which we hope stays in
New Mexico two years ago the the
number we got when they finally
moved in was about sixty million
dollars of a real estate
transactions occurred for the
folks that have moved in and
bought houses so we're hoping to
see that go up Representative
Garcia but I understand your
question thank you Mr chairman
of the next question a new pay
scales.
Of the New Mexican employees.
Send up to the other state
employees.
Mr chair representative Garcia
for you mean for the overall
workforce hello what we're for
see we have labor from Mexico
and you have a high tech people
from California.
Where we are in that speech.
Mr chair representative Garcia I
think probably I.
The best way to answer the
question is that several of the
graduates of New Mexico state
and local graduates have gone on
to work for virgin galactic and
my understanding is they have
gotten fair salaries within
their space sector there are
many different levels you know
virgin galactic for example is
is focused on hospitality and
operations so unfortunately we
don't have a lot of design of
what they're doing in New Mexico
so we don't have all their
engineers but we have the
technicians who will maintain
the space craft and and the and
the white I to the carrier after
that we have their whole
hospitality segment or training
segment might understand it
those are fair wages appropriate
for that those positions I don't
know if I compare with
California budget system Mexico
as a lower cost of living place
to live so I I imagine there's
some depression there compared
to California but I think
they're good fair wages of the
meeting we refresh the question
of.
People are for California that
are here virgin galactic or the
spaceport.
And New Mexicans that are
working there for the equally
rate I know different positions
and and salaries but.
Mr chair and representative
Garcia I I don't know how virgin
galactic pays their employees
but I I would assume if they
didn't parent pay them fairly
than they would be a lot higher
in that The New Mexicans are
paid the same as the folks they
brought in and understand that
the ones they brought and you
know they they have a house and
a home and families and they're
very integrated in the community
and like I said I think they're
up to about two hundred eighty
when they bring life back to
backs this sometime in the next
a few.
Months and then when they expand
we expected to hire more and and
if it.
It is the same as as a has been
expected to bring some people
into the state in the continue
hiring native New Mexicans.
Thank you thank the thank you Mr
Representative.
No more questions from the
panel.
Two minute question from the
audience.
Sorry about that movie one of
the Senator.
Of the four that was all the
questioning the the vice chair
to entertain a motion thank you
Mr chairman I move the executive
recommendation.
The the second.
Thank you executive
recommendation of second by
Representative Garcia I'm gonna
let the young lady in the back
knows it so that's why I'm
calling your name second by
Representative for C..
Okay any opposition.
No opposition.
Mister director you got.
Exactly what I said.
Thank you.
Okay we have.
Agency for ninety one offices of
military base planning.
And the cement that can lead us
off.
I I do want to kick it off for
you the fact go for Amanda.
All right thank you Mr chairman
the year analysts are the same
but we're also joined by Mister
Glover from the Office of
military based planning and
support again the
recommendations are identical
the LFC and the executive
recommendation supported the
agency request for a budget that
was flat with FY twenty three
analysts reach consensus on all
performance measures and targets
and I can hand it over to the
director to make any additional
comments.
If you Mr members we're
requesting a flat budget this
year I'm I'm relatively new
starting July I want to get a
good handle on the funds needed
make sure that what we Fund is
appropriate and executable I
expect next year to have a
request for some additional
funds and and we'll clarify that
as we go.
Up first would be set the
foundation the
University New Mexico bureau of
business and economic research
did a study they call the impact
the economic impact of military
installations in New Mexico I
think it's important to
understand the value of the
military installation systems
not include the lapse just the
military bases nine percent of
New Mexico population of
veterans.
Of these installations bring
fifty two thousand two hundred
sixty eight jobs to the state a
labor income of about two point
eight billion industrial output
of about fourteen point one
billion.
Thank you so the core of why the
office of military base plane
was first set up.
And that was by statute to
prevent base closures primarily
by Brax rex aren't in the
offering right now but that is
been primarily a defensive
effort.
So react to threats and trying
compensate as this as a threat
to me to the basis.
But economic and technological
changes Representative constant
pressure on what makes a
military installation valuable
what was valuable ten years ago
may not be in ten years.
With artificial intelligence and
autonomy and robotics and drones
and communications changing we
need to be aware of those
changes and help our bases both
locally and from the Pentagon
adjust those changes so they
remain valuable to the Pentagon
and river and valuable to the
state.
So we're expanding our effort.
We're going on the offensive to
be more proactive with the
bases.
We're anticipating and preparing
for economic and technological
changes and working with the
bases working the representative
of the Pentagon to prepare for
those changes working to promote
growth and expansion to regional
quality of life.
Improvements in addressing those
to do you don't DOT metrics in
those important I'll talk to
those in this in in just a
second here.
One of these is really important
to keep a base prospering
improve their quality of life is
to foster economic growth in the
communities around the bases
when they prosper the basically
prosper and they become a
positive target for military
families to move to the state.
We also will in this will be
part of the ask next year.
Want to invest in tools to
quickly identify and resolve
potential issues as they arise
we can address some relief and I
will talk about that in just a
second.
So when you look at is the
installation commander issues
and concerns and those come
primarily through the day of the
the right each installation with
the report card.
That report card is a key factor
in whether the base can expand
whether needs to be close to
where the new units can be moved
to the facility.
Those report cards look at
primarily things like spouse
license reciprocity in K.
through twelve education.
And the license reciprocity is
very important because military
members move here.
And their spouses would like to
go to work right away three
maybe improve be in professions
like cosmetology accounting
engineering nursing.
And so the do the right states
based on their ability for
spouses to come here and start
working right away in the
profession.
In two thousand twenty one only
three of the ten professions
identified by the day of the war
green.
Last year house bill one ninety
one address that and did a
fantastic job.
Right now as we speak eight of
the ten professions are green
and the other two accounting
engineering we expect the green
the next month or two they
should have been they were
overlooked we've we've we've got
to do the and they're now
working to reassess that so that
all of those will be great.
Now they're going to add new
professions and as they do we
think the way that the way the
house bill one oh one ninety one
was written you will deal with
the new professions so we expect
new professions will become
green as soon as they're
announced by the DOT.
However the do you do is is now
ready to move on to the next
step and that's compacts the
nursing board has done a
fantastic job staying ahead of
that they are already in the
contact with the duty would like
to see is states joining
compacts for all the professions
and ideally what they would like
to see is for the professions to
be like your driver's license if
you have a license in
Mississippi for example it's
good in New Mexico regardless I
understand we have to get the
verbiage to this the Arizona
last year a past legislation
that allow them to accept all
licenses from all fifty states
so they are open for business in
their perspective I will provide
a license you know sure that
with the committee and you can
do with it what you will but
that's where the DOT wants to go
but as of now we're making great
progress and what they're
looking for.
The next category K. to twelfth
not so good.
We're deep red you know our our
ranking in education nationally
but the things we can do that
are quick and relatively simple.
The duty has certain metrics
they used to grade the education
in the state and around
primarily around each
installation so they provide
report card for each
installation.
Some of the criteria include
things like absences of
absences graduation rates and
that sort of thing.
Some school districts around the
state are doing things that
don't help that accreditation
for example when athletes leave
for the day to play in sports
weather's gymnastics or tennis
or football those are counted as
unexcused absences.
So we may be able to in we'll
talk with the PD on that once we
get the statistics we may be
able to substantially improve
our education just by making
administrative changes and how
we count other states like
Oklahoma for example have done
that they've taken their their
metrics and they've matched what
the DOD uses and they went from
red to I think all right.
To green in less than a year so
so I think there's some smart
things we can do and as soon as
we get the information will
share that with the committee
and and see what we can do the
work that for.
Other quality of life issues are
very important to the
installations and those are
local housing.
Severe housing shortages
particularly in Alamogordo in
Clovis we did get word at our
last commission meeting that
there is no work beginning for
apartments in Clovis in those
these are particularly good
because the builder plans to
match the rent.
To the B. HA of the army so
they'll be able to move right in
it it's it's a very good move we
still have to address Alamogordo
and other places it's a big
issue and it's a local issue.
Our commanders also look at
medical specialty care in the
area of course look at crime
qualified workforce and
infrastructure resiliency all
those things affected tractive
nous of a base so the duty once
that base to be attractive so
people are happy to move there
the state there the family works
and everybody prospers including
the local community that's the
goal.
One of the bigger issues that
the basically have to look at is
encroachment.
All the bases in New Mexico are
highly focused on training the
fly to regions the fly
helicopters they drop the launch
missiles those sort of things
and what happens is developers
command say for example building
wind turbines.
And they cite wind turbines in
the path or right in the area
with the military's been doing
training.
These issues can typically be
resolved quickly it's not an
into the world thing but if you
look at for example sons the.
That's been ten years and work
to get the to get the re routed
to an area where doesn't
interfere with white sands
called range in the north.
My guess I wasn't here my guess
is if they have been identified
as requirement early that could
have been worked out in the year
and they were to save time and
money work that through the
challenge we have in in the in
PPS is knowing when.
Those winter months are going to
be put up whether can be put up
if we could be notified.
We'll contact the military talk
to them and say is this going to
cause a problem if it is sit
down with the developer said
that with the county have a
discussion right then early and
typically when you look at those
kind of things it's not a matter
of moving winter went to another
county or twenty miles away is
moving maybe a mile I move it a
quarter mile so that this only
means clear military can
continue to operate what will
happen is if they lose those
training grounds they will have
to go somewhere else and as I
mentioned in the impact we don't
want them to go somewhere else
we want them to bring more who
wanted to expand its and improve
our labor market in our
industrial output.
So with that Mr chairman I I
will just add I do have a back
up sheet on this on this talking
paper I want to keep it simple
but I will point out that our
board is twelve members.
Two at large.
It is a extremely effective
board all those members are
members of other parts of the
community they do economic
development they're very
proactive is the best for their
work with I just want to say
that is a really well
functioning board.
And with that I will stop into
the questions thank you.
There will start the process
here Representative Cruz thank
you Mr chairman thank you very
much I was fascinating to have a
report card as you look at each
of the basis for that area I'm
I'm in northwest Bernalillo
county Albuquerque and there's a
high percentage of our military
people living there so she from
Kirtland Air Force base but I
wonder if you have a map that
grades that report card those
statistics for each area where
there's a base Mr chairman
And your we do and we have those
and we can share that with you
we have one each installation
has our own report card so take
from from in terms of the
licensure that's a statewide
score then they look at locally
at the schools K. through twelve
schools in each area so Kernan
airforce base includes all of of
Albuquerque I will say we the
army use a different scorecard.
Up but they are changing they
will be adopting a card very
similar to the Air Force and so
we'll be able to to look at all
those together but I do have
those cards in in if I can I I
can share those with you when I
get back thank you very much
okay.
Thank you for both the cruise
thank you Mr chairman I I'm
curious how does your office
encourage economic development
you talked about.
Amenities around the base I
imagine that could be a bit of a
hard trick for you Mr chair
Representative del Cruz it is
but what we do is we try and
find what the bases are focusing
on introducing the company's I'm
I as you know I'm
administratively attached to the
Economic Development Department
so it's easy for me to to work
with them and say Hey this this
base the really growing in this
area the need some technology
here the new technology here can
we get a company to build a.
Facility outside the base and
hire locals Mr do and expand
their work because the base is
going to start expanding that
area so it is a bit of a trick
it's not black and white but
aside in economic development we
trying get ahead of it we try
and work with them and we also
like to talk to our Pentagon
representatives and say look
talk to the baser said in this.
House of funding the house
support looking thing I can we
increases that artificial
intelligence drones and
entitlement systems huge they're
they're good anywhere and and
we're working to expand I will
say one of the big areas will be
Montoya rectification.
That's a a big challenge for all
the military you know as you
know we've done reports
Solar wind batteries don't get
it done for the military when
they elector they do like for
cation the they want to rectify
there's a lot of pay offs for
that.
But you can't be charging
batteries kids that wind
turbines in tactical areas where
you're where you have conflict
so that is an issue which I
think all of our bases need
become attuned to and we're
working to make sure they're in
tune before the Pentagon's going
and what those changes might
might be Mr Chairman so who was
your contact at the various
military installations that
would communicate concerns
issues who does that I'm here
Representative Cruz I do that I
talk with each there's a PA.
At each at each base but I
talked usually with the
commander for example as a white
sands told journalists a little
conventual I've met with the the
leadership at Holloman I'm will
be meeting the leadership it can
in the with the leadership at
current and work not just with
them directly but they have
their own communities of their
own economic development
communities that that work with
them and I'm part of those
committees to so there's a lot
of discussion and communication
thank you Mr chairman so
we talked earlier about compacts
and it was wrong nursing.
However there's other licenses
that you also described.
Is there any pending legislation
now this session that would
address some of the issues
around acceptance of difference
licenses from different states
I'm here the still present this.
Check for quick Paul part of our
commission do is that
legislation is our legislation
yes Mr Chairman representative
bill increased Marian Matthews
Representative expects to be
processing of legislation
R. O. D. director Trujillo is
preparing that legislation on
several subjects.
May not be too far the issue I
think there's cater nine or ten
additional compacts on the
agenda so look for that the
session.
And thank you for secure support
defense on that too is very
important thanks Paul thank you
Sir thank you Mr Cassidy have
the privilege of working mothers
to Cassidy would knows a brother
County does a fantastic job
you're lucky thank you Mr
chairman thank you the things
were overs of off of the sensor.
Thank you Mr chairman and thank
you for your presentation I'm
gonna just be very brief I
expect if you're using more than
two sentences to answer my
questions I didn't do a good job
of explaining itself I like it
briefly to the point Mr Chairman
you talk about do you mentioned
four bases is that currently we
have New Mexico's for military
bases Mr Representative Baca yes
it so if we look at white sands
you look at Holloman you know it
can which also includes Melrose
air state with a test range and
then current airforce base thank
you Mr chairman about how many
personnel are attached to each
of these and still I mean just a
general general number Mr chair
of Representative Bach I believe
the number is thirty eight
thousand five ninety nine
direct.
And that is the economic report
points out there's about a one
point three five multiplication
factor for jobs result.
In that in those jobs that are
on the facilities to not include
both military contractor and
service.
Thank you Mr that was actually
my next question is what is the
percentage would you say of
military versus civilian kind of
jobs just if you can give me a I
guess they're a refund back I'm
not sure I could do that justice
I would say that the activity is
the smaller of the numbers but I
don't know how much I don't know
what that would how much smaller
because when you look at this
this thirty eight thousand five
ninety nine that includes civil
service whose contractors and
then you're active duty military
but typically active duty
military is smaller than that
support base.
And thank you Mr chairman I'll
make one final comment to
Representative dela Cruz I did
understand that there was as far
as with medical license for
doctors and otherwise that may
be attached to medical personnel
I do of support and think we
need to streamline the licensing
process so that we can get our
folks out there serving our
community if their broader we
located here thank you Mr
chairman I have no further
questions for.
thank you for your presentation
I think we'll be working closely
come in the Veterans Affairs
committee and the science and
technology week we did a lot
with our our bases a couple
years ago when since the issue
happened if I thought there was
a committee that the bases and
the and the the
The provider this the winter
money people were together on
and committee so they could plan
around the state what we're
they're going to have to have
infrastructure and is there not
a committee so that the base or
included in everything Mr chair
representative Sarinana I don't
believe there's a committee for
that other art for example the
current partnership committee
which includes the the
developers so the so that's an
area where we're information is
shared but for example
We were just notified that that.
Winter months have been approved
and I believe Torrance County
which is lined up with the fifty
eight special operations wing
flies to do the testing.
We didn't we weren't aware of it
until unofficially somebody
whispered it.
So there's no official mechanism
that we know of but we're asking
it I think we part of what.
We need to do is make sure Delph
developers understand it is
better to engage early have
those discussions are gonna save
time and money is going to be
better for everybody because I
like I said it's not a big
changes to the a small
adjustment of position that kind
thing but I do remember about
four years ago than talking
about putting a map of New
Mexico and and showing what
areas we couldn't because of the
the operations of the base of
that are there missions where we
could put turbines and could put
solar but okay what to look into
and see
of education I know my
daughter's enforce and my son
was marine and I was Air Force
so I understand as far as the
bases and how they how they
really they can really look at
which base they want based on
everything in our education as
far as New Mexico we are moved
trying to move up we're doing
everything we can to make it
better so hopefully we can move
up on your list from red to
green soon to see if there's a
my list I well okay
And
I know local housing when we've
gone around to Clovis and
onboard housing was a big deal
so we understand that too but it
look like with more federal that
had to deal with a lot of things
that that we heard from the but
the bases and I have to actually
representative curtains I
believe listed housing so I
haven't I just got that in my in
my new districts on pretty
excited about that so.
But that's all I have thank you
so much Mr chair representative
Sarinana a let's talk about that
when you get on the committee
there's any issues let's talk
and see if we can help thank
you.
Okay.
Okay anymore questions from the
panel if there's none then vice
chair to make thank you Mr
chairman I move the LFC
recommendation.
I think it's.
Representative dela Cruz.
C..
Mister director you got the.
Thank you thank you for reading.
Thank.
From.
Yeah.
Process.
It is.
Yes.
Yep.
All right I thank you Mr
chairman members of the
committee we are on to the inner
tribal ceremonial office that's
Agency I thirty eight my
goodness the HSD five thirty
eight under tab five of your
binders if you're following
along in volume two that's going
to be page two twenty nine
volume two.
We are joined this afternoon by
Jennifer city dress she is the
general counsel for the tourism
department inter tribal
ceremonial office is currently
administratively attached to the
tourism department.
So
the recommendations are the same
the inter tribal ceremonial
office officially requested a
zero dollar budget but both LFC
and Executive recommendations
kept funding levels flat with FY
twenty three.
I'm part of the reason the
office requested is your dollar
budget is out there is a
legislation that was endorsed by
the interim Indian Affairs
Committee to repeal the enabling
statute for the ceremonial and
move it from the tourism
department where it sits now to
the local government develop at
local government division of the
DFA of the department of finance
and administration that bill if
you're interested is house bill
one sixty one sponsored by
Representative Johnson.
for performance analysts reach
consensus on all performance
measures and targets if you're
looking at your different sheets
on page two there's a little
section that says language
regardless of which
recommendation you adopted staff
recommends considering this
language and the language does
two things one eight it's worded
a little funny by eight I'm does
this appropriation is house bill
one sixty one were to pass so
with that statute gets repealed
this three hundred twenty
thousand dollars wouldn't go to
an agency that no longer exists
it to this language insurers
that any entity receiving these
funds meets standard audit
requirements because that had
been an issue in the past so
it's some language to just make
sure kind across your teas and
dot your I's with that I'll pass
it over to Simon for any
additional comments on the
executive recommendation.
Mr chair members of the
committee
Amanda always does such a good
job you really don't need more
so I will pass it over to the
general counsel thanks.
Members of the committee thank
you for having us today
we are at this point once the
committee to know that we do
support house bill one sixty one
we heard at the voice of the
community loud and clear which
we respect and we honor and they
want local control over this
events so we support that the
tourism department will continue
to support this event we know
how important it is to the
community so.
We just wanted to say that
Mr chair members of the
committee to note that thank
you.
The person spoke.
Survive.
Thank you Mr chairman first I
think it's great to support this
but my my only question because
I I think I was able to ten was
there an incident where people
were injured or for during the
freighter some again.
And insert.
Representative Baca yes that is
in fact correct it was during
the night parade there was an
individual who drove through the
parade I actually attended that
parade as a staff member for the
New Mexico tourism department I
can tell you it was a very scary
events I'm very glad that nobody
was seriously injured I was very
it was a heart warming to see
the response by our governor by
the local officials by law
enforcement to get that
contained quickly and we
appreciate them in my thank you
Mr chairman just appalled
question again because I think
it's a great event how much of
this is actually geared toward
security in is our need for for
more security for this event.
I'm Mr chair representative you
F. if it moves over to local
government I think that the
community realized and stepped
up security for the morning
parade that happens that next
Saturday and I think it's going
forward that will be an emphasis
for the offense.
Thank you Mr chairman of no for
the question.
Mr Garcia.
Thank you Mr chairman.
You know us very little very
minimal I think you know and I
don't know if you folks have
been adopted ceremonial but
there's a lot of people that and
it's a great booster to the the
county and surrounding counties
for that matter and you know I
supported wholeheartedly and you
know just to come.
Three hundred twenty it is not
very much money at all.
The end to what you have to put
up with we're.
What you have to do to get this
for more going every year no and
issue of the hundredth Center
anniversary maddening gets
pretty costly for security
everything else involved so I
think.
That
question.
Security so we just security now
the
The local government.
My understanding is part of that
bill is that the money will go
to the county so the county
would be responsible for
ensuring security.
Any further questions.
The questions.
Vice chair to the promotion
thank you Mr chairman Mr
chairman I move the LFC
recommendation for the second by
Representative Gary.
Any opposition.
Would you like to also adopt
that language just to clarify.
Would you like to also adopt the
suggested language.
Yes the suggested language on
page two that just insurers if
this statute is repealed his
money.
Okay Meister can you make that
motion to adopt some of.
Billing
I move that the language for
that okay.
Languages drive by
Representative Sergio.
Okay with that concludes our
presentations for the afternoon
but before we leave we're gonna
open the floor to.
Comments from the audience.
It's.
