Reagan's all as I am the
executive director and the CFO
and the chief procurement
officer for the New Mexico
border architect.
I'm sorry.
Everybody else but you need.
me ask you something I can't get
any sound what's going on here.
Great okay at.
Mallory would you please
continue.
Yes.
Here virtually with me as chair
Ostwald and Mr secretary
treasurer Mr ABL our board is an
enterprise agency were not part
of the General Fund and our
mission is to protect the health
safety and welfare of the public
we are requesting a budget in
thousands of four hundred and
seventy five point four dollars
I'll make it brief so with that
I will stand for questions.
Thank you all very much
committee members.
You please raise your hand if
you have any questions.
Okay I don't see any questions
and just one quick clarifying
question that I'll pass New
Mexicans Alice you just mention
this this is not a general fund
agency.
The slide it
slightly higher number on the
LESC side comes out of fund
balance correct.
Mr chairman that is correct.
Okay great okay seeing no
questions from committee I go to
Mr Chairman boat yes
Representative Ezzell please
thank thank you Mr chairman I do
have a question regarding this
in the book it stating that.
The compliance officer position
is currently vacant what are the
plans for getting that position
filled I think it's very
important.
Mr Chairman representative that
position is actually build when
I submitted the FY twenty three
appropriation it was big time
but it is currently held.
Okay that was my concern there I
know that I have had some
questions in the past a
regarding the.
I needed some help from you all
and I I I was just curious I
just want to make sure thank you
very much thank you
Representative.
Representative vice chair hi can
be help you have a question.
Thank you very much Mr chair I
was just going to move that we
adopt the LFC budget
recommendation.
Okay there's a motion to adopt
the LFC fiction.
Is there a second.
Great it's been moved and
seconded is there any opposition
to that motion.
Okay seeing none thanks so much
we have adopted the LFC
recommendation for HSD coach for
all four let's move on then to
HSD code four four six board of
medical examiners.
And and at Kelly was continue
please start us off there Mr
chair good morning members Kelly
current legislative finance
committee on HSD code four four
six The Medical Board we have
the directors under Frank and
her staff for a miss Moscow
Moscow just with us today on
donor there's also the DFA
counterpart on this is going to
be a quick presentation as there
are no differences between the
two recommendations and with
that I'll turn it over to
director Frank.
Good morning I'm Sandra Frank
and I am the executive director
of the New Mexico Medical Board
as you can see there are no
differences in the
recommendations by both and I
just wanted to explain a little
bit about our agency we are also
funded solely by our licensing
fees we are not General Fund
agency and we are our mission is
to protect the public through
the proper regulation and
licensing of physicians and
other healthcare providers to
two notable events this year
that I thought I would point out
number one is that we marched
and the osteopathic medical
examiners board which was
formerly under our LTE so we now
have both and dis and deos under
our licensure process that's
been significant and notable for
our agency we also received two
positions from our L. G. and we
are in the process of selling
those two positions to handle
the additional work from the
osteopathic medical doctors
additionally our agency has been
in the process of securing an
updated data system RLD has also
looked at updating their systems
with sales force system and we
are in the process of doing the
same and although this is not
the subject matter of today's
budget hearing I thought I would
mention it as we think that once
that is established we will be
able to improve our licensure
time frames significantly thank
you and with that I will stand
for questions.
Thank you so much miss Frank
are there any questions.
Representative Dixon.
I'm thank you Mr chair and
Kelly and I apologize.
Director
I was wondering if you could
just highlight it says
licensing fee revenue your
request is slightly decreased in
terms of the licensing fee
revenue and I was just wondering
if there is a reason for that
thanks.
I have missed muscarine yes here
with me she is my sister former
CFO and now my financial person
and I'll ask Miss must continues
to explain that to you.
Hello yes to the licensing fee
revenue is.
Two million five hundred is the
request and the fund balance is
two hundred it's slightly
decreased just.
Just in the effect that are
revenues in FY twenty one were
actually the highest that we've
seen so the potential for that
high
is is why the the request is a
little lower on just to
safeguard what the are we
requested.
I think you are and Mr Chairman
other questions thank you.
Great thank you very much
Representative vice chair
Hochman Vigil.
You Mr chair I move that the
committee adopt the LFC
recommendations.
Is there a second.
Second right it's been moved and
seconded by Representative at at
a lease I sign other others is
there any out the opposition to
adoption of the LFC
recommendations for them for the
medical examiner's.
Seeing none the LFC
recommendation which of course
is the same as the FAA is crime
pointed out is adopted for the
board of medical examiners
agency called four four six next
we're going to move to
Agency code.
Four six five that's our gaming
control board.
And we're gonna go ahead
mystatesman if you could again
start us off please with the
LFC.
Recommendation introduce the
participants from the gaming
control board and then we'll go
to our DFA department of finance
and it's already analysts.
Thank you Mr chairman thank you
members of the committee again
my name is Jessica and I'm
joined today for of the gaming
control board this is agency for
sixty five I'm on the call today
we have a genesis money out she
I apologize if I pronounce that
correctly which is the executive
director to tape the help which
is a state gaming Representative
Angela Armstrong attorney for
gaming control board Cynthia or
take O. R. B. Hall which is the
HSD director and Sam Bregman the
board commissioner
we will go over the different
sheets of these information can
also be found in volume two on
pages one eighty five and one
eighty six there are also some
associated charts in volume
three on page sixty six and
sixty eight those are also noted
on your differentiate.
starting with the revenue the
executive recommendation for
general fund revenues exceed the
legislative recommendations by
seven hundred and forty two
point six thousand this is
primarily because the executive
recommendation funds additional
FTE and also funds higher travel
costs for the agency.
Of the legislative executive
recommendation as below the
executive in person by about
five hundred eighty seven
thousand both recommendations
support funding in the base to
fill statutorily required
positions so these are some
board positions that were filled
by the governor but the
executive also funded three out
of six requested additional FTE
for compliance officers and a
special agent which the LFC did
not support the executive
recommendation also exceeds the
legislative recommendation and
contractual services for cost of
website support and hearing
officer contracts and also
exceeds legislative
recommendation by a hundred
thirty eight thousand in other
costs primarily due to requested
increases for travel and
training analysts have come to
consensus on performance
measures and targets and all
handed over to Donna to talk a
little bit more about the
executive.
Thank you very much
please Mr better if you would
start us off and then we
definitely want to hear from the
gaming control board.
Participants as well Mr data
good morning members of the
committee and Mr chairman small
I would like to explain that the
executive supports most of the
agency requests for additional
support for the three new
oversight and regulatory
positions the the executive
understands that there's a need
for fiscal compliance as well as
regulation and so the additional
cost in personal services is a
hundred and eighty four thousand
dollars general fund and
while.
The other part of the executive
would like to expand on is that
the vacancy rate for this agency
is recommended at one point
seven six percent we support
them filling all positions and
and providing oversight of the
gaming industry thank you I'll
turn this over to the chair
thank you.
Thank you okay.
Chair please from the gaming
control board please go ahead.
In a minute let's work through
that I know we have a number of
representatives from the gaming
control board
We we absolutely want to hear.
As we're working to get the
chair.
Perhaps is there anything Mr
Bragman or.
Miss.
We feel that you would like to
add before we go to committee
questions.
Yes yeah.
Good morning members of the
committee my ideology I am the
executive director of the Civil
War.
What we're supports the
executive recommendation may
twenty five percent increase our
current operating budget because
it will provide our ability to
better service state any
industry.
All of their recommendation will
be forced to continue operating
our agency all the employees.
Unless we had back in two
thousand nine the budget similar
to what we are asking today FY
twenty two began with a major
deficit due to two thousand
whatever.
If the governor and attorney
Howard in addition of tribal
representatives and my position
as executive director.
The comply with statutory
requirements we are now I'm able
to hire person build agencies
they can be back on
the bench for budget has
complained have either retired
or have gone on to work
elsewhere.
The staff take on more work in
addition to general Myers
possibility creating sustainable
situation ultimately affecting
services provide for customers
granted an apple increase your
budget.
Over the years the lord have
continually strive to increase
the level of service providers
for customers in the gaming
industry well imposed a steady
decrease our budget and the
number of employees.
Over to our administrative
services director and CFO and
yet are working our New Mexico.
Good morning sorry.
Members of the committee I just
want to dress if you things
regarding our our budget
executive director this one is
this correct in stating that we
would have to continue leading
positions vacant critical issues
that that if we were to is the
LCD budget is recommended
and unfortunately we are
currently has sixteen positions
bank and we do not have the
funding at the current budget
that we are at right now we were
our budget was reduced five
percent this year so in essence
the LC recommendation would be
you know the budget we were
offering last year with an
additional one point three
percent
has missed money out she stated
critical opposition those
statutory required
expositions were finally
appointed and so just the salary
I mean just the increases hello
from Elsie's would not or would
just barely cover those salaries
we had two employees that were
classified that were appointed
to got expositions so it didn't
have as why the impact but I'm
having you know here that we saw
one of its positions still
vacant
you know that's right thirty
three point three that was right
now although it would help it
with the same position we are
here today next year
you know we would you know
definitely like to go to the DFA
recommendation that would give
us the ability to hire the
majority of our employees not
every single it really depends
on salary benefits that we have
to pay out I'm and that would
definitely give us back starting
a good starting point to get
these employees on board to the
jobs that we are that our issues
yes here and so.
You know we really were requests
that.
That the legislature that the
committee members but government
DFA is recommendations
are you know right.
Turn our turn it over to archery
Thank you.
Thank you for.
Mr.
Armstrong and staff.
The gaming control board I would
like to.
This is.
Right right here in the fact
that we contribute all help
State it reminded it's not that
we just should be millions of
dollars the general fund as an
agency.
On the tax he revenue sharing
the tribe's we contribute
hundreds of millions of dollars
a year your.
And jobs is the regulatory.
In the money making sure that
the integrity of the game for.
The state.
Is protected are.
Great and number of personnel
and increasing the amount of
work in the number of licenses
that we have our rural and we
need to get people out of these
so I would hope you would go
with the DFA recommendation we
need staff yes.
And we work hard every wait to
make sure that our mission is
carried out thank additional
staff or would be tremendous.
The HSD.
Thank you and I would ask Mr
chairman it is suggested
creating.
Mr Chairman.
Please Mr regnant Mr chairman
thank you for the opportunity to
serve on the gaming control
board as a commissioner based on
on the statue because on the on
the chairman of the racing
commission I have spent the last
since about February of last
year serving up in this position
on the gaming control board I
can tell you that the staff does
a hell of a job they do a great
job with with quite frankly over
the years as I've looked at the
budget the budgets gone down and
they're doing more work so
they're doing more with less and
they're at it they're at a
critical stage here obviously
gaming is exploding throughout
the country as well as here in
New Mexico people during the
COVID and now will start
hopefully as COVID gets better
some out and this is in the this
is not an example of that
because we're obviously you know
virtual but people are getting
out and we're seeing the numbers
and we're projecting the numbers
to be continuing to go up and
the staff is is critical in
getting that and making sure
that everybody is in compliance
with the rules everybody is
compliance with the law and it
is a big state and they are
fraternal organizations and in
gaming throughout the entire
states of not only the staffing
but the travel budget we we we
beg of this committee to to look
at this as I know you will and
and the adopt the executive
recommendation on this because
it's critically important that
not only is it a big source of
revenue for the state but with
that we do this and make sure
that gaming is fair and and and
done by the rules throughout the
state I'm happy to answer any
questions and I certainly think
Mr chairman and the committee
for your time.
Thank you Mr Bragman thank you
so much to also that the
industry in station from the
gaming control board let's go
now to member questions then at
first I see Representative
Crowder.
Thank you Mr chairman Mr
chairman I want to look at the
funded vacancy an unfunded
vacancy sheet.
For this agency I noticed I have
a authorized fifty two members.
They have filled forty.
And then they have an unfunded
vacancy rate.
So instead of asking for three
more employees.
Is LFC actually funding some of
the unfunded vacancy rate can
can the Ellis speak to that a
little bit on the funded and
unfunded vacancy rate.
Thank you Mr chair thank you
Representative Crowder up for
that question and based on the
work so as you all might be
aware Allison Nichols was the
analyst for gaming control I
recently took over for her and
so based on her recommendation I
believe what she was signing in
addition to the three additional
FTE she was also allowing for
additional vacancy savings to to
fill some of those vacancies and
so we would want to
to allow for enough filling up
vacancies with this
recommendation the agency did
request an increase in person of
about thirty eight percent over
FY twenty two and so the LFC
recommendation instead funds
about seven and a half percent
increase to allow for those
again those three positions and
some filling up vacancies so we
we try to apply a higher vacancy
rate to the program.
Okay so you're you're unfunded
vacancy rate is going to
decrease your a.
Funded the.
Employees work will increase is
that correct.
Correct and that's primarily for
those positions that the gaming
control board mentioned that
we're the sexually required
governor appointed positions and
so we provided enough of funding
to fill fill those as well and I
would put it in that that
increasing that funded vacancy
okay well they're they're
they're funded vacancy rate look
really good and that's that's
the person I really noticed an
unfunded vacancy rate of twelve
people and instead of asking for
additional employee it seems
logical to go ahead and fund
some of the ones that have not
been funded so thank you I
appreciate that thank you Mr
chairman that's all the
questions
excellent thank you so much
Representative Crowder next
we're going to go to
Representative Ezzell.
Mr chairman thank you very much
I do have a couple of three
professionals that are pretty
important to me.
There I I guess I need to as the
gaming control board have there
been any corrective actions
Happening at any of our casinos
and if so what measures are you
guys taking to ensure the.
Proper.
If you want to say it this way
and.
One of those people that are Hey
can get into the system so that
our casinos.
If I were clarification are you
Us.
So like you compliance or you
asking about criminal complaint.
Criminal complaints would be the
one Mr chairman of the reason
I'm asking that you know how the
rumor mill get started I just
want to make sure that there's
nothing going on at our.
Seen those that would
They looked on negatively by the
public.
Sorry if I could just ask for
what Asian user specific
incident or something that
inform you on fully.
I really don't want to bring
that up over the public aspect
of it right now I will get hold
of you all after awhile and.
Give you my concerns there.
is everybody our all the casinos
at the racetrack in the tribal
casinos is everybody in
compliance as far as follows at
paying their taxes to the state.
Sure that regularly do have
regular audits in there have
been a couple of incidents where
we have hi at the actually your
payment errors and something
that we the board in this past
year that is something that we
monitor really.
We try to be on top of those.
So that we make sure that the
state is getting every payment
of tax dollar do and every penny
revenue share
We're working also.
You are speaking Representative
thank you E. Vigil making sure
that are being.
Revenue sharing is compliant it
is the number tribes she deals
with.
Making contact is open
communication is clear and then
everybody's on the same page
there you know with the licensee
race tracks the nonprofit.
I want to make sure.
And the charity in that office
it access to the state
Hey your.
Every.
Appellation is ranked in more
recent years state.
Yes we do find errors.
Those errors are corrected in
timely manner we make sure that.
Whatever has occurred we are
doing our best to make sure that
it doesn't occur again.
Which thank you I just obviously
go to Representative is out just
a reminder to to go through the
chair and also we have it going
deaths but that to keep the
answers as concise as thank.
Mr chairman thank you very much
one thing I would like to point
out to the gaming control board
not thank Mr Brinkman might be
aware of this as well the web
pages might need to be updated
to state who do does serve on
the gaming control board and Mr
pregnancy on that is
statutorily yes you are correct
Mr Brigman as chairman break
meant statutorily because he is
the chair of the racing
commission he does have a seat
on that board but otherwise I
know in the past that
That webpage has been.
You can if you want to call it
that because members that were
on there are no longer on there
thank you very much Mr chairman
I do have questions regarding
the gaming control board
whenever we go into the next
item on our agenda thank you
very much absolutely thank you
very much Representative Ezzell
next we're gonna go to
Representative Hochman Vigil.
Thank you Mr chair I appear to
be having trouble with my camera
but can you hear me at least.
We absolutely can't okay thank
you so much Mr chairman I just
have a couple questions related
to Representative Crowder
already asked about the the so
they can see positions but I was
wondering if one of the
representatives to tell me
exactly which statutory
positions were appointed and
tells.
Mr Chairman.
Thank you Representative for the
question at gaming control board
members.
Can you answer vice chair back
in the house question please.
Yes the positions that were
pointed at were the attorney to
the board.
The state Representative.
Create.
By the board as the executive
director.
The pair took last sound from
the gaming board Mr chairman.
Now.
Okay I I I I kids let's go ahead
Senator.
We can hear you.
I apologize Mr chairman I lost
found so I've only got a portion
of the answer that's okay that
gave me and it Madam executive
director could you please go
through the statutorily
appointed positions that you
less that are once yes
Attorney the war was one of the
positions the other position was
BCK.
The other was the eight
Representative.
And I was appointed by the board
as the executive director.
Thank you very much Mr chairman
and at this many Archie I also
want to ask about your request
for additional it looks like
traveling funds and also
Hearing officer contracts can
someone tell me a little bit
more about that request.
What the limited funds that are
available to our agency we have
been unable to do any real
traveling and that is one of our
regulatory responsibilities is
to get out there and visit the
racetracks and the nonprofit.
In our funds are so limited a
lot of that is having to take
place from March yes so that
means that our auditors and
aren't worth the department are
having GPS audits and
inspections.
Okay.
Thank you and then about the
hearing contracts and yeah
hearing officer contracts what
what is that for.
When.
for action.
You control board that any
person.
As I mentioned to the he'll to
that and we have to have for
those a hearing officer
appointed.
Our budget is normally pretty
woman however.
Here in this budget we have.
The.
you.
Increase and we've also seen we
have.
Waiting in.
Our agency which is part of a
larger.
Any action going on with.
Commission and involving.
All being at their leisure order
intake District Court.
So are you hearing on your
budget and right gonna.
Okay thank you very much Mr
chair and members of the
commission that concludes my
questions thank you.
Thanks thanks very much
Representative Hochman Vigil
I I do see administrative bad
are DFA analyst at your hand is
a is there anything you'd like
to add I'm and then I'm I'm
gonna ask a few questions before
we go for the the
recommendation.
Thank you Mr chair members of
the committee I would just like
to offer that to bring this
agency to almost full employment
with a one point seven six
percent vacancies is right
without adding on the three
expansion positions.
Services would cost four point
three million not million four
million three hundred thousand
so I just thought I'd offer
that.
Thank thank thank you very much
just for the.
So I want to ask a couple of
quick questions
To be clear the new that that
the executive funds three new
FTEs that's the complete to is
that to compliance.
FTEs and then one special agent.
That's correct Mr chair.
Okay thank thank thank you very
much and in terms of the
additional hires that the
additional hires those came kind
of in calendar year twenty
twenty correct as.
The state the whole world was
was.
And and and as Mr Redman pointed
out unfortunately we we continue
to struggle with COVID but that
was prior to vaccine release and
and and some of those sorts of
things that.
That is correct okay so
Thank thank thank you.
Mr my attitude so I think
As we look at your it we really
appreciate going deep into the
details capturing in for this
subcommittee hearing course the
adoption of a recommendation at
the end of the day
well the there continues to be a
process with.
To continue to work on the
budget.
Yes let me ask one more get more
questions
If we remain in a in a very
hybrid environment one of our
environment where some gaming
facilities are open for up
summer clothes many are
operating at less than full
capacity.
That that changes the demands
placed upon the gaming control
board is that fair to say.
that that is I'm not very state.
Have the by racetrack casinos
that are throughout the state
and almost a hundred nonprofit
gaining operators additions that
thirteen I that we do need to
get out there and and regulate
and in order to do the the on
inspections and audits that
can't really take continue to
provide that.
Okay thank you very much
mismatch and so.
will you be sending folks out
would you be sending folks out
in this current COVID
environment if you had people to
do to do that in person
inspection yes we are actually
working from the office we only
have one hello we're that is
offered to every employee but
also that are coming into the
office five days a week with the
exception of their wanted
telework got it okay thank you
thank you very much bye actually
so
Thank what I want to stress than
is the they're they're clearly
seem to be some critical needs I
think it's it's been noted it's
important to know that much of
the increased budgetary usage
came during a period of much
lower gaming activity albeit to
fulfill statutorily required
positions inside traps that's
where some of the given state
around the differences in the
budgets are but as we look
towards re opening the and and
and traps better way to say it
is the new normal in our state
deeply appreciate the clear
expression of.
Of the needs for the gaming
control board and again want to
stress that what the committee
about what the subcommittee
adopts today is not what.
It is not a.
Guarantee of what will go
through the budgetary process
that there will continue to be
spaced to adjust based upon the
kind of detail feedback that
we're going through today.
I'm not with that I would then
go to Representative Hochman
Vigil for the recommendation for
today.
Thank you very much Mr chairman
for today I'm going to move that
we adopt the LFC graduated with
our copious notes on the
additional needs noted.
Excellent thank you very much
Representative Hochman Vigil is
there a second for that motion.
Great there's a second from
Representative Dixon is there
opposition to adoption of the
LFC recommendation with the
clear provision that there will
be continued work in this
agency.
Reconciling the executive the
LFC.
Okay I don't see any opposition
deeply appreciate the part
everybody's really detailed
input and look forward to
continuing to work on the
control board next we're going
go to agent and we've adopted
the LFC recommendation.
Next we're gonna go to HSD code
four six nine.
The racing commission.
And mystatesman we're gonna call
on you again please to start us
off.
Mr chair members of the
committee I'm I'm joined again
by Donna Rivera will be looking
at the issues for the racing
commission this is agency code
of four six nine.
I'm also joined today by amber
Trujillo the CFO is my trico the
executive director and so I'm
pregnant the chairman as well I
will go ahead and start with the
dish sheets again this
information is in your volume
two is on page one eighty seven
and one eighty eight there is
also a volume three charge
associated with the live horse
racing days on page sixty seven
of Boeing three.
I'm starting with the Revenue
differences of the legislative
recommendation exceeds the
executive by fifty five point
two thousand this is primarily
due to differences in
contractual services cost us
specifically for independent
auditors and con to conduct
audit the racetracks excuse me
both recommendations however
support people revenues from all
other funding sources this
includes three hundred thousand
from industry raising revenues
and seven hundred thousand at
that the agency projects as
revenue from the horse race
testing.
The legislative recommendation
exceeds the executive by
personnel of by three point five
thousand the LFC just fund the
agency requests to fill vacant
positions.
in terms of contractual services
the LFC exceeds the executive by
sixty six thousand this is for
additional contracts with
independent audit staff
veterinarian services and IT
contracts and then looking at
the other costs category the
executive exceeds LFC by
fourteen point three thousand of
the executive for other costs
just fully funded agency request
where is the LFC recommendation
funds a slightly lower amount
for travel and vehicle.
analyst again going to come to
consensus on performance
measures and I will go and
handed over to Donna to explain
the.
Good morning members of the
committee and Mr chair I lost my
computer hello I'm trying
calling in by phone
there are no additional comments
other than the executive did not
consider one it is a bar had
been submitted by the agency
after the executive
recommendation had been done
have been completed and that
explains the difference between
the executive and the LESC the
in the sixty six thousand and
contractual services
other than that I will refer to
the.
There thank you so much.
Excellent thank thank you Mr
Berra and we go to now to Mr
threshold.
Morning Mr chairman members of
the committee is mile trail here
executive director of the New
Mexico racing Commission.
Just basically in a synopsis is.
The HSD had cut four percent as
a requirement during the
pandemic we're merely requesting
to get that four percent back
and as far as the contractual
numbers go we do need to
regulate the racetracks
financials we've been without an
accounting auditor.
Since January of two thousand
are you two thousand January
sixth of two thousand twenty we
recently hired one in the sixty
five pay great but our feeling
is that that pay grade we're not
going to find a candidate they
can do a full scale audit of the
race track financials yes the
request for increase in that
contractual lined so we can do
our job as regulators and
regulate the racetracks.
And I just I could have missed
number tree if she has anything
to add to that she surely
welcome she's our CFO.
Thank you Mr here.
Good morning Mr chairman members
of the committee please excuse
my voice I'm a little under the
weather this morning hello.
Executive director thank you so
much
our agency at this point in time
respectfully requests the LFC
recommendation and again this is
just to assist our agency in
performing additional race track
on its which our agency has not
filled currently this fiscal
year we are working on
submitting a contract that we
that we can hire an independent
audit firm to conduct that that
body and again that's just in
case we have any non compliance
issues on our agency has an
independent auditor and is not
part of the racing commission
that way you know we we truly
have an independent on it so
that is the reason for
increase in contracts as far as
for the increase in travel in
vehicles our agency has a couple
of vehicles that are already
reaching on three thousand miles
so we are requesting newer
vehicles that are safer for our
staff to use when they do travel
out to race tracks.
The increase in travel excuse me
that you see is because of the
implementation of the federal
hiss of Bill the horseracing
integrity and safety act which
was passed in December of twenty
twenty we are required to attend
these meetings with the federal
government so that we that we
understand how to implement the
S. that program for our state
going forward so that is the
reason for the increase in costs
that you do see at that time.
I stand for any questions.
If you have any.
Thank you very much we're good I
thank you so much thank you Mr
ho we're gonna go to committee
questions now first we're gonna
go to represent these out and
then to Representative Dixon.
Mr chairman thank you very much
thank all of the presenters for
being here today yes I do have
quite a few questions regarding
the New Mexico racing Commission
of and Mr Brigman you might be
able to answer this question for
me the committee the commission
is made up of five members that
are appointed by the governor
and statutorily says three of
the must be breeders in the
state of New Mexico is that the
case right now your honor the
here sorry I used to be in the
courtroom Mr chairman and
Representative thank you for the
question the governor's office
has appointed folks that the
definition of a breeder has been
looked at by the governor's
office and I believe the
governor's office feels that
we're very much what's what's
the issue.
Okay Mister chairman of thank
you very much Mr Franklin for
that answer Mr chairman.
Your seat on the gaming control
board Mr Brigman is statutorily
in place because you are the
chair of the right.
The racing commission and to me
it's very important Mr Mr
chairman and members that we do
follow statute Mr try how this
question is for you right now is
the racing commission in
compliance with what has
happened over the past couple
years I know the two thousand.
In two thousand twenty into the
first part of two thousand
twenty one is kind of hard to.
There was nothing normal about
that but have we been in
compliance ever since them and I
will go ahead and answer that
question for you know we
haven't.
So Mister chairman
statutorily Mr try how and I
hope that you are.
Up on this I know you have
because we've had this
discussion.
Statutorily.
What type of a break is the
maximum amount of time be
between.
One track shutting down and the
other women taking place.
Chairman and members of the
committee representatives out
thank you for the question yes
we had these discussions over to
in my previous.
Recently every year for the last
five years a recommendation
fails when it allocates race
states that has
Statutory authority to regulate
to allocate race states reach
racetrack basically in the
statutes it's not clear that.
Can have breaks you can have can
have breaks it's very clear
though that the commission has
the full authority to recognize
the beginning date of a race
meet the end date of a race meet
and the dates in between those
states in which live racing is
to be conduct.
I would feel that we are in
compliance.
Well Mr chairman Mr try how
you're not and it's very is
spelled out in in statute what
the brakes are Mr Chairman
and Mr Brigman Mr try hello.
We all the different maybe the
committee doesn't know the
difference between class A.
tracks in the class B. tracks
the class eight tracks are.
They have paid in.
It's over ten million dollars
that have been wagered the class
B. tracks are under the ten
million dollars wager.
So our class eight tracks
according to statute they do
have to run four days a week
with minimum of nine races a day
are class B. tracks and there's
two of them are required to run
through can run three days a
week with opportunity to run
more but those three day wait
crisis have to maintain ten
races today is everybody in
compliance right now.
Mr chairman members of the
committee representatives out
yes everyone is in compliance
the lesser racetracks are
conducting three days a week ten
races a day currently is someone
parked their classe racetrack
there are conducting racing four
days a week ten or nine races a
day as.
Mandated by the gaming control
board are Los.
Mr chairman Mr try how I do have
to refresh your memory regarding
C. part Mr Brigman I know that
you had to go over there and
stir the pot a little bit to get
them going for these horses and
horsemen could even be able to
train at the start of their May
because they were not in
compliance it seems like see a
park also said told the
commission that they were only
going to run three days a week
Mr chairman when in fact they
were statutorily required run
four days a week therefore I do
have concerns Mr chairman.
These are suggestions these are
in statute and
It's up to the gaming control
board and that's why one of them
these ladies to stay on board
because that does fall under
sixty dash two eight dash twenty
seven F..
And I think it's very important
that
Like I said earlier it's not
suggestions.
We.
We do have some other concerns
that I have brought up before
the gaming control at before the
racing commission seems like
there was a lawsuit that was
brought forward by a group.
That is the lord yes benevolent.
Decline of our racing.
Organization in our state they
were not allowed to speak at any
of the commission meetings to me
that's the kind of.
Disingenuous on their part
because.
This one particular group is a.
Takes care of all the business
whenever the numbers come in as
far as audit compliances it was
just but the envelope
organization.
That did have those members that
the racing commission was able
to base their numbers off of Mr
chairman I did want to point
those things out because there
are grave concerns we do have a
good industry in our state but
these horsemen and horses have
to have the opportunity to run
and I have a problem with
certain tracks.
Telling the racing commission
what they're gonna do and if
they don't like it you know it's
just a flood.
As it is right now this is a
huge contributor to the New
Mexico tourism industry.
And we are successfully forcing
these trainers and owners to
take their horses elsewhere to
be able to refer to rice Mr
chairman thank you very much.
Thank you very.
The next going to get that
fixed.
Thank you Mr chairman and thank
you to all of our presenters
today this is been very helpful
I was hoping to learn a little
bit more about the efforts
regarding hisa the
that you did briefly mention I
was wondering I see that we're
still waiting for some of the
final federal rule I was curious
how.
the commission is proceeding
with appropriation
to make sure that we're in
compliance and have everything
we need to do chairman.
Mr Chairman yet Mr Shipp I'm
thank you I'm happy to
it's the question I am and I my
screen lock there we go okay I'm
sorry about that I am on the
board of the of the national
racing Commission authority and
I want to and that's an
important question because this
is been passed now for a little
bit over a year so and
unfortunately they're not
getting the kind of things in
line yet that we would hope by
this point more specifically his
to.
The implies to thoroughbreds and
not quarter horses and price the
thoroughbreds and they were
supposed to get you saw the the
United States doping agency to
to come in and help with
regulating the the drugs in the
and and the cheating that goes
on sometimes in this industry
and unfortunately they have not
been able to come to an
agreement yet so I had a meeting
this morning on soon very early
and I can tell you that we're
still waiting for his finalize
an awful lot so it is still so
much up in the air and I I
appreciate the question
Representative because it's
important to this industry it's
important the state to figure
out what what exactly it's going
to mean what kind of costs are
associated with that because
it's gonna have a major impact
on this industry but we just
don't have enough information
yet that I can give you a thing
I mean they have not even come
into a contract yet with who's
going to implement these
proceedings are or or this
testing so that's where we're at
right now unfortunately I wish I
had more to tell you but it is
very important for for our
commission as we we monitor to
see what goes on and how it
affects us here in New Mexico
that's that's all I got right
now is that unfortunately.
Mr chair do you mind if I are
comment on that as well thank
you restrict Mr better.
It's been from LESC just wanted
to know the committee that's
okay I just wanted to let the
committee know as well that the
LFC recommendation currently
includes a special appropriation
for the racing commission of
five hundred thousand dollars
which will be it the purpose of
that is to help the commission
with these federal requirements
and so that that is in the LFC
recommendation right now and so
unless that gets changed by the
subcommittee that is currently
in their wanted to bring that up
a specific to the hit the
requirements great I'm thank you
miss hits then and commissioner
pregnant recommend for that
information I am really pleased
that there is of funding in the
specials are to help with that
because that was a concern that
I had
and the last thing that I just
wanted to mention is that I'm
really pleased that the agency
is working on exploring options
to reduce the time that it takes
to get
the fines paid I think that
very I'm I'm quite pleased with
that so thank you very much and
thank you Mr chairman.
Thank you so much Representative
Dixon so I just a quick quick
couple of questions and then
what we'll go to vice chair
Hochman Vigil the so the kind
currently the contractual
difference is focused on the LFC
support for a full auditor to
audit the the racetrack state
racetracks correct.
I guess Mr Charlie that's
correct okay great and then
agency admin can you also can
you just for for us just briefly
on the difference where the LESC
is a higher recommendation in
general fund currently.
Is outside of the contractual
services what are the other
what's the other main difference
yes Mr chair so the main
difference is that contractual
services and then we the LFC
recommendation fully funded the
agency requests for personnel to
allow filling of vacancies where
they believe the executive was
just a little bit lower there.
Okay great sure thank thank you
so much miss it's been we want
to capture all those details
we're going to.
The recommendation that we take
today is is guided
with with the general fund very
much in our mind but of course
there's continued work that goes
on on the budget as we go
through this and this is just an
initial subcommittee
recommendation so with that I
would go to vice chair Hochman
Vigil for the recommendation.
Thank you Mr chair at this time
with the cabbie out that we are
still continuing to look at this
request I'm gonna move that we
adopt the executive
recommendation.
Great it's been moved so that
the executive recommendation
is there a second second.
Great it's been moved and
seconded and.
By Representative Dixon I think
And is there any opposition to
that motion.
Okay seeing that and in knowing
that will continue to look at in
both areas with the racing
commission with the also the
per.
Considerations for the specials
and supplementals
recommendations of the COVID we
adopted the executive
recommendation for agency called
for six nine state racing
commission.
Thank you all very much for
taking time and for being part
of this we're now going to go to
HSD code four seven nine board
of veterinary medicine and would
go to miss Caitlyn wants to kick
us off from the LFC.
Good morning Mr chairman members
of the subcommittee again I'm
Caitlin one LFC analyst and
Donna Rivera from DFA is here as
the DFA analyst we also have
from the board of veterinary
medicine that the executive
director Francis towers as well
as her successor will Duran will
be taking over upon her
retirement I did want to note
that the board chair I wanted to
be here today but is in surgery
at with her veterinary practice
she couldn't make it on again
this is agency code four seven
nine or that are in every
medicine I'm just going to
briefly go over the different
sheet there's not much
difference between the two
recommendations the board is
funded by fees collected for
licenses permits and
examinations there's no general
fund appropriation due to
revenue shortfalls in FY twenty
one and FY twenty two the LFC
and Executive recommendations
reduce revenue by an almost
equal amounts.
Well recommendations made
reductions in the contractual
services and other costs budgets
and I LFC and DFA staff reached
consensus on all performance
measure targets I'll turn it
over to Donna she has any
additional comments.
Good morning Mr chair members of
the committee the executive
recommendation is slightly
less than the LFC recommendation
mostly just to calculated
different tools and personal
services thank you I'll turn
this over to the agency.
Morning Mr chairman members of
the committee I am Francis hours
the current executive director
and CFO and as Kaitlyn mentioned
joining me today is Wilder and
my successor I will be retiring
the end of January
I have applied the board has
applied for of deficit and
supplemental funding of which we
will be we will receive when I
prepared the FY twenty three
appropriation request I took the
bare bones I have discussed with
the board the need to raise
license fees we need to increase
revenues we are experiencing on
non renewals in the professional
services veterinarians and
veterinary technicians so our
revenues are down even further
than I had projected I am now
going to turn it over to will
Duran to let you know what plans
he has in store for the board.
Warning Mr chair members of the
committee so and thank you for
for entertaining a so I do have
some plans to how we could
potentially cut some cost
savings cuts some costs by going
online applications there's some
things that we can do that will
make our agency more efficient
being able to apply online
instead of the a paper
applications and then I am going
to work hopefully to convince
the board to increase fees so
there's just a couple things I
think there is room for growth
and some room for improvement.
She's being one of them and
hopefully we can get back to
where we will have a fund
balance thank you.
Mr chair one more comment all
these years I did want to go
electronic on everything but we
just never had the funds because
we travel strictly on license
fees.
Thank you very much thank you
really for your for your service
and that Mr did on great to
great to have you as part of
this hearing today
we'll go to questions now from
the committee.
See if there's any questions I
just ask a quick question which
is
So it seems like there's really
no difference is there any
backstory to the slide their
friends and how the calculation
was applied that that's led to
to the slight difference in
projected revenue.
Mr chair members of the
committee and members of the
committee of the deficit was
caused by of course COVID and
the need to upgrade the website
so that we could put information
out there to the public into our
licensees so the supplemental
funding for FY twenty two
I just didn't colluded Fund
balance that we didn't have
medical by medical I mean much
local by.
Sh no I'll get that thank you
very much for for the
explanation okay great we're
going to go now to.
Vice chair Hochman Vigil.
Thank you very much Mr chair at
this time I move we accept the
LFC recommendation.
Okay there's a move to accept
the LFC recommendation also
understand that doesn't include
any general fund is there a
second a second it Mr chair okay
great I see there's a tied
second screen with
representative speaks or and
representative Armstrong
we're is there any opposition to
accepting the LFC
recommendation.
I see none we've adopted the LFC
recommendation for HSD co for
seven and the board of
veterinary medicine thank you
congratulations on your
retirement and and
thank you again for all that
you've done for our state.
We're gonna go now to our final.
Sept agency for this
subcommittee in the morning
that's agency code seven six
five this is the juvenile public
safety and by or Mr Saini eight
in you kick this off eight.
Yes Sir yes Mr chair my name is
Eric should be able to LFC
analyst for the juvenile public
safety advisory board S. H.
again that's HSD seven sixty
five you'll find narrative from
LFC in volume two on page three
forty nine.
I hear you we have the director
Tamera mark Intel
and I'll go ahead and go through
the if she this is a very small
agency it doesn't have any FTE
and the the request was flat LFC
and both the executive and LESC
supported the request there's no
differences between the two and
with that all pass it on
to the executive if they have
further comments.
Thank you I see Mr Martinez
please yes thank you good
morning Mr chairman members of
the committee to table you mess
with that the the analyst for
this agency is actually other
subcommittee I'll just chime in
and say yes the both the LFC and
exec are exactly the same and
basically funding provides
really solely for the board
members are pretty I'm in
trouble so with that I'll turn
it over to HSD for any comments.
Thank you very much miss
Martinez any any agency any
additional comments.
Mr chairman members of the
committee good morning my name's
Tim remarking tell and the
deputy director for the children
youth and families department on
this board is administratively
attached to CYFD and as was
indicated the funds that are
requested as port that per diem
travel and administrative costs
associated with the board and
I'm happy to answer any
questions.
Thank you very much thank you
very much miss marking top
Are there any committee
questions.
Yes we'll go Representative is
up eight.
Mr Chairman very thank you very
much I do have a question for
the agency of.
Full of candor said are
incarcerated for a specific
number of days
they are receiving educational
instruction is that correct.
Mr chairman members of the
committee and Representative
Representative Ezzell yes that
is correct we R. as state
supported school and and so we
offer full educational services
to our youth and also college
education credits.
Okay and Mr chairman miss more
control of.
Where they tracked once they are
released because I know that
whenever I served on he
Education Committee for very
short time last year.
Before I was put on this
committee it was.
It was provided it was proving
to be a problem as far as
education with and been able to
track these young people that
were being went through the
system and then they were.
Read eight.
And if the numbers.
It was hurting the dollars that
we're going to it drove our
graduation rate numbers down can
you expand on that any.
And Mr chairman members of the
committee and Representative
Ezzell I'm.
So once their commitment ends
there's
no jurisdiction that CYFD has
over them at that time however
we do find academic transition
coordinators that can help them
enroll in in public education or
charter schools upon their
release
they can help them as.
Get enrolled in GED programs or
they also assist them and
enrolling in community college
whatever you know the goals are
of that particular use so we do
try to support them in their
educational transition that once
their jurisdiction ins with them
we're really not able to follow
them.
The okay Mister chairman miss
mark until thank you very much
for that response I just know
it's of concern to of the
members of the Education
Committee about our graduation
numbers being driven down by not
being able to track where the
students are going Mr Chairman
thank you very much thank you
Representative Ezzell next we're
gonna go to Representative
Dixon.
I thank you Mr chair I have a
question I believe for Mr
Shenyang.
With the LFC
and that is I noticed that the
legislature
that LFC recommends that the
legislature consider
including this point budget as
part of CYFD is budget moving
forward and I was.
Curious as to what steps would
need to be taken.
But I believe it would be it
could be as simple as you know I
have to look into a little bit
more but I believe it could be
as simple as simply just rolling
the budget into the CYFD is
budget you know that we would
take the seven point six
thousand roll that into the CYFD
I think we probably roll it into
the juvenile justice services
and it would simply just become
part of.
The budgeted as a part of CYFD.
Great thank you it seems to me
that that would be a
efficient thing to do and also
save a little bit of money
thank you thank you Mr chairman
that was and the question.
Thank you very much
Representative Dixon saying no
other questions I go to vice
chair hawk and the.
Thank you very much Mr chairman
we adopt the LFC recommendation
Hey there's a motion is there a
second.
I see Representative Crowder
stand this is been moved and
inspected go Bob adopt the LFC
recommendation for LFC one six
five two non public safety
advisory board there any
opposition to that motion.
Seeing none.
That motion is adopted for see
and that concludes the morning's
portion for our subcommittee be
hearing I just want to really
emphasize my appreciation to all
the members for bearing with us
especially to all of our
participants from the executive
the legislative finance staff as
well as other members of the
state attached to the various
boards again thank you all for
bearing with once we got up and
going we went very smoothly and
into that it took us awhile but
thanks for bearing with everyone
this afternoon beginning at one
thirty
again thanks everybody.
Just right.
The.
Read.
