Here.
Representative Herndon.
Representative Herrera.
Representative Hereta.
Representative Little.
Representative Little.
Representative Luhan.
Representative Lu Han.
Representative Pettigrew.
Representative Pettigrew.
Representative Sanchez.
Representative Sanchez.
Representative Sarena.
Representative Silva.
Here
Representative Vincent,
Representative Vincent,
represent
Representative Vincent,
Representative Vincent,
Vice Chair Dixon.
Chemo
I am here
We don't have a quim yet.
OK.
Great. OK, we've got
representative Dow who's still
here, uh, Sam Lohan is here, so
we do have a quorum. We're gonna
go to, uh, House Bill 192.
Please go ahead. Thank you. uh,
Mr. Chair and members of the
committee, we're here to present
uh House Bill 192, uh, House
Bill 9 192, um.
is a relatively close bill to a
bill that we passed a couple of
years ago, um, having to do with
public safety radio trunk
through the Department of
IT, uh, that bill we asked for
too much and it was pocket
vetoed, um, has been in the
budget the last couple of years,
um.
And so what we're trying to do
is we're trying to get in um
some reporting to LFC about
usage, um,
Throughout the year, but I have,
um, Eric Master Chief, Eric
Masterson from Sandoval County
Fire to explain the trunk system
in the radio is a little bit
better than I will ever be able
to.
Great. Thank you, uh,
Representative Hernandez, really
appreciate you being here,
Chief, go ahead, please be brief
and then we'll, you also have an
amendment and we'll go to that,
but go ahead, Miss Sharon
members of the committee, thank
you for having me here today.
This is a little bit of a, a
cleanup bill language, if you
will, in the sense that for the
last 3 years, public safety
entities throughout the state of
New Mexico have been working
together to try to ensure
interoperability, especially on
large scale incidents such as
the fire in Riodos. So this is
proven to be very, very
successful over the
last couple of years during
large scale incidents, Riodoso
was a great example of multiple
different partner agencies
coming together throughout the
state of New Mexico, including
our federal partners and
ensuring interoperability while
we worked through the challenges
of the Riodoso fire and
subsequent flooding. The harming
members of the committee, this
interoperability will not just
help on the fire side, but the
law enforcement side too active
threat situations, security
concerns, etc. Multiple agencies
will be able to come together
flawlessly to speak together and
coordinate.
efforts moving forward. This is
a state asset that Department of
Information Technology has put
forward for state usage agencies
are currently in the process of
procuring their own radios,
maintaining their own radios at
5000 to $8000 apiece. The
current rule for do it requires
a uh a fee if you will, for
agencies to utilize the system.
What we're requesting today is
that we move forward in a, in a
process that we've done the last
3 years to help uh ensure
Those fees are covered from the
state level so that agencies can
continue to use for, continue to
use it, and we can ensure
interoperability, Mr. Chairman.
Thank you very much. OK, uh,
Hernandez, can you read us the
amendment number that you have,
please, Mr. Chair, 231-700.1.
Great, we've got that. And all
this does is uh remove the
appropriation from the bill and
keeps the rest of the language
intact to hopefully keep going
forward.
Great, thank you very much, uh,
can we move that amendment for
discussion.
OK.
So let's move to discuss um
this.
Uh, just, uh, uh, OK, great.
We're striking the
appropriation, we're also
striking.
Uh, making an appreciation on
page 13, um, any questions on
the amendment?
Representative Do, would you,
can you move to adopt the
amendment? Great. OK, it's been
moved by representative Dallas,
seconded by Vice Chair Dixon,
any opposition to that motion,
seeing that we've adopted the
amendment. OK, now we're gonna
go, uh, is there anybody here
who wishes to make public
comment?
Great, come on up, please.
Uh, Mr. Chairman, uh, members of
the committee, John Garcia,
former deputy county manager,
Sandoval County former Secretary
of 3 cabinet departments, uh,
this, this is, as the chief
said, it's a, it's a cleanup,
um, do it charges fees,
subscriber fees, $20 per radio
and right now rural communities,
Cuba, San Ysidro, Bernna Leo,
Little communities struggle to
make that $20 just to get
everybody on board, uh, better
to use a carrot than a stick,
strategy a couple of years ago
was do it, have a
stick, get everybody involved.
However, if you want compliance,
it's better to just have one
appropriation. Thank you, Mr.
Chairman.
Thank you.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman members.
My name is Catherine Crociatta
and I'm a registered lobbyist
with the New Mexico counties.
This has been a priority of the
counties for, for several years
now, and honestly, I don't know
where we would have been in some
of our communities during the
fires without the radio
networks, and I think it's
important to know that this is a
statewide public safety
communication system, and it's
only as good as the agencies
that participate in it and it's
critical for all New Mexicans
that we support the system and
help it modernize. Thank you.
Great, thank you.
Chair and committee members. My
name is Manny Barreras, cabinet
secretary for New Mexico, do it.
Uh, we definitely support this
bill 100%. We have
60 agencies that are currently
on the system today, we have a
statewide system that's been
probably 60% built out. We have
over 10,000 users that are
currently utilizing the subsidy,
and we are thinking by next year
that we'll have probably over
13,000 users in regards to
public safety, interoperability,
collaboration, we support this
bill. Great, thank you very
much.
Mr. Chair, members of the
committee, Anthony Lebo, Deputy
Chief state fire marshal's
office. We support this bill,
anything that we can do to
enhance the response of our
responders, uh, we, we support
this, thank you. Great, thank
you very much.
OK, um, that concludes in, uh,
in person. Is there anybody
online who wishes to make
comment on how to spell 192 is
now amended. Uh, go ahead, Jared
Zuniga.
Yeah.
Yes, thank you. I am the deputy
chief for Eddie County Fire
Rescue and we were just wanting
to say that we support this
bill, we join the state system,
um, and end of last year and
when we joined this system, we
brought in $14 million worth of
infrastructure, including 5
tower sites that were added to
the state system.
But as the current
Fee works is even if this bill
doesn't pass and, and monthly
fees are charged, any county
could incur $20,000 a month in
user fees to use our own
infrastructure, um, just the way
this is works the way the fees
are. So we're in support of this
because it not only would help
us but all users and help
interoperability throughout the
state. So we at Eddie County
support this.
Great. OK. Uh thank you very
much, Mr. Deputy Chief.
OK, I think that concludes
public comment. Uh.
Represent.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman and
thank you for bringing this
forward. Um,
I think Mr. Chairman and
Representative Hernandez said
this bill is going to really
help us to improve
communication, which will
actually help in our response to
serve in our public serving our
communities and protecting our
land, so, uh, Mr. Chairman,
Representative, uh, you know,
for, especially for smaller
departments whose don't
necessarily receive the funding
and other financial challenges
like my police department in
Bosy Farms.
Um, I am happy and look forward
to supporting this bill. Thank
you, Mr. Chairman. Great. Thank
you very much San Baca. Uh, are
there, uh, thank you, Vincent,
thank you, Vice Chair.
Thank you, Mr. Chair and thank
yous representative. I'm sorry I
was late and I didn't get to
hear your spill, and I've been
out of the business for a little
bit, so I'm, I'm very interested
in this because I know that
communications are, are dire.
So
What we're saying is we're gonna
implement a a subscriber fee.
So, can you explain that to me,
Mr. Chair and Representatives of
the subscriber fee already
exists, um, $20 per radio that
goes from the department to do
it in order to be able to use
the infrastructure. Um, with
this, OK, so a couple of years
ago, uh myself and Senator
Brandon, Senator McKenna got um
this uh got a bill to cover
these fees through the
legislature. It was pocket
vetoed because we requested too
much money in the
appropriation, um,
And so it got pocket vetoed the
governor along with um the
finance committees have been
covering it the last couple of
years. Um, what this is doing
is, um,
Do it will now have to give a
report to LFC every year so that
the number, so that there's an
accurate number, um, going
forward to make sure that or to
I guess, try and get it into the
budget every year, but at least
there's an accurate number of
current subscribers. Um, so
really that, that, that's what
this bill without the
appropriation in it, which has
now been stripped, um.
is going to do is is make sure
that the numbers are accurate
every year for LFC so that the
budget number can be as accurate
as possible.
Thank you, Mr. Chair and thank
you, Representative.
So
We went from VHS to digital, and
now we're talking about is this
trunking?
Mr. Speaker, I mean, Mr. Chair,
Mr. Chair and Representative,
yes, this is trunking.
OK, Mr. Chair, and, and
representative.
How do we get, how do we get a
lot of these departments
retrofitted.
To do trunking when they have
all these other radios, and I
know that there's always a lot
of, you know, radios,
communications is very, very
expensive. How do we, how do we,
uh, lay the plan out where
everybody has trunking.
Mr. Chairman Representative, uh,
so,
Every department's approaching
this a little bit of a different
way, uh.
Yes, it is expensive to upgrade
and to work on that process. I
will say that do it requests
every year, uh, millions of
dollars to work on the capital
investments throughout the state
of New Mexico so that they can
ensure first and foremost,
obviously, like state police,
etc. have uh communications
throughout the entire state of
New Mexico. So they're already
working through their capital
appropriation requests to ensure
the infrastructure is there.
However, on the other end of the
spectrum, local entities are
again using a variety of
different techniques to work on
procuring radios.
themselves dual-brand radios,
upgrading their infrastructure.
I will say that the, the
legislation over the last
several years, Mr. Chairman
Representative has been very
helpful to local agencies in
providing funding to assist with
those those purchases, and there
are, there's a lot of grant
funding out there for those
options as well.
Thank you, Mr. Chair and thank
you, Representative in Chief.
So I want to take a a a
department in my district bent
bent volunteer fire department.
And they can barely even buy
trucks.
I think there's somewhere, and I
don't want to implicate them in
any way, but they're somewhere
in the 8 or 9.
ISO rating, so they don't get
much funding. How do we make
sure that departments like that
are gonna have the capabilities
of having trunky.
Miss Sherman Representative.
We're gonna go a couple
different options. The State
Farm Marshal's office does
grants every year.
funding request can be requested
through that in addition to the
ISO funding that they get from
the state fire marshal's office,
the EMS Bureau also does grants
every year that they could put
in for to potentially get some
radios. And then as, as the
contingency plan or, or the
backup plan if you will. A lot
of these systems are, are able
to be patched. So legacy VHF
equipment is being patched into
the 700 system through various
means so that the agencies that
have not upgraded yet, still
have some interoperability with
the agencies that are.
coming in that have it, so that
we have time to actually make
those transitions moving
forward, Mr. Chairman, but I, I
think between grants, grant
opportunities and then
potentially looking at, again,
like I said, legislative
funding, legislative funding
requests, capital outlay, etc.
Uh, we
I was very successful with it,
Mr. Chairman, several years ago,
and I'd be happy to help any
agency out there, uh, work
through those processes to get
that funding, as chairman.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman and
thank you, Representative in
Chief.
So I'm gonna give you another
example.
And I know you're gonna, you're
gonna this is gonna resonate
with you. So,
I know I'm just thinking of one
volunteer fire department.
That have a lot of businessmen
and women, and they have
Lots of resources when it comes
to writing grants, and then I'm
thinking of my other volunteer
fire department.
That hardly have any resources.
And I look at the grants all the
time I look at the list to see
who's getting awarded and the
bad part about it is, a lot of
these departments are not
getting awarded the grants
because they don't have somebody
that can.
Take the time to write the
grant. How do we, how do we fix
that?
Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Chairman, Representative,
yeah, that, that's a, that's a
huge problem. And even when you
look at the, the federal grants
that are coming into the state
of New Mexico for firefighters,
the EFG grants, the FEMA grants
are few and far between. They
are so competitive, uh, that it
really takes specialists to do a
lot of that. I will say that
there are uh resources
available, um, for example,
there's uh
New Mexico counties will
obviously provide, I shouldn't
speak to him too much, but I
know that they've helped with
grants, um, before municipal
leagues have helped with grants
before, uh, local cogs have
helped write grants. I know that
the uh the Albuquerque area cog
um has actually offered two
funds, some of those grant
writers to come in and help
local agencies to, to do that.
So I think sometimes, Mr.
Chairman, it's just about
getting
Those local agencies, the
information that resources are
available to them at little to
no cost. And again, that's
probably just going to be a
marketing thing, Mr. Chairman,
that I think we can all do. Um,
I'd be happy to work with the
fire marshal's office to get
that information out there about
resources that these agencies
can can tap into, uh, to start
working on that moving forward
as Sherman. Thank you, Mr.
Chair. Thank you. Appreciate the
time. Thank you very much
Representative Vincent.
Uh, Vice Dixon.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Um,
Representative, you did mention
that uh there is funding in the
budget for this.
So Madame Weiser, we were um we
were under the assumption that
it was that there was and um we
found out earlier today that
there is not so is there, is
there, I, I've been told both
ways, so I actually don't know
the answer. If you want to know
the truth, Mr. Chair,
Representative, there is funding
in the budget. Um, there is a
$20 million special
appropriation to do it and.
Uh, encompassed in that sum is
funding for this. Um, it is a
special appropriation and the.
Um, the reasoning is that um I
believe Mr. Chair Representative
of the LFC would like to work
with do it in subsequent years
to make sure that we know
exactly uh what funding is
needed moving forward.
Thank you, Madam Vice Chair for,
for Mr. Chair and Madam Vice
Chair, I had not, we had not
found that special
appropriation. So I appreciate
you clearing that up because I
had been told both ways. So I
appreciate that.
Excellent, thank you very much,
uh, Madam Vice Chair Represent
Brown, please.
Yes, thank you, Mr. Chairman. I
apologize for arriving a little
late to committee today. I, I do
have a question, uh.
Mr. Chair, Representative, um,
so,
I want to make sure um we have a
chart here in one of the
analyses, uh mention
subscribers, a list of them,
some um state looks like some uh
You know, local government and
then federal Eddy County is
listed as having basically um
1100, a little bit more
projected devices, that's for FY
26.
says cost if charges, charges,
subscription fees, $282,000. So
my question is,
Mr. Chair Representative, are we
saying that if this bill does
not pass, this would be the
expense amount for Eddie County
282,000, or are we saying this
is
Um, the amount of the Mr. Chair
and Madam Representative. So,
um,
Through do it, there is a $20
per radio subscriber fee, um,
which is where that number of
2,082,000. Sorry, it's very
small on my phone, uh, comes
from. So as we were just talking
about there is a special
appropriation, um, to cover
those fees, so the appropriation
has been stripped out of the
current bill that we were
talking about.
Um, so that we can get the
reporting aspect to continue
going through the process, um,
that will help LFC and do it, be
able to come together, um, after
we've had a couple of years of
Um
Not
will not close to perfect
amounts of what of the amount of
people who are using the system.
Um, so for a few, what this bill
is now trying to do is for
future, uh, make sure that
the LFC and do it are on the
same page about the number, the
amount that needs to be in the
budget so that
The $282,000 or more or less,
depending on your county,
doesn't get saddled onto your
municipality or your county.
Um
The, so it sounds like after we
were just talking to Madam Vice
Chair that this will be covered
for this year, um, and it has
been covered the last handful of
years, um, and we're hoping that
it will be covered.
For future years, but we, um,
you know, we can't saddle future
legislatures with
With appropriation, so.
Um, we are working towards
figuring out how to get it
covered every year, but we're
not quite there yet. So this is
the closest thing we could come
up with.
Thank you for that.
Mr. Chair Representative also
see that our representatives,
excuse me.
So if these subsidies are not
continued, it's anticipated that
some of the ones the agencies
that currently subscribe would
drop their subscriptions, um,
and this would have a negative
impact on first response
responder interoperability and
communication,
so, um, that is the worry is
that, um, like in our neck of
the woods, um, Cuba, for
instance.
Wildfires, um, that they can't
afford it. And so they would
drop their subscription and then
that interoperability would just
become more, you know, the
process that this makes very
easy, would.
Now be a hindrance when they are
trying to respond to.
Um, a wildfire or any of the
other things that
That they would be responding
to. Great. Thank you very much
representative uh Brown, uh,
representatives, thank you for
bringing this, uh,
Deputy, uh, Chief, thank you.
Uh, also noting, um, last year,
uh, we increased the local
distribution to communities uh
for emergency funding. Chief can
some of that potentially be used
to cover some of the costs. I
mean, it's the floor for that is
6 million. The ceiling is is 11
million recurring.
Chairman, uh, yes, the answer is
yes, the EMS Bureau has allowed
us to use uh those funds for
communication costs. Yes. Great.
That's it. And that's something
again, the legislature did
additional state funding going
to um municipalities, counties,
other loca to support their
emergency uh response and a
particular focus in rural areas.
Um, so, and we've gone through a
great questions from the
members.
Where we are with the bill and
why this is important now. We
have funding this year both in
the budget, other funding that's
available on a recurring basis.
This bill is critical so that
there is an accurate accounting
from dot that can then be built
into an annual budgeting
process. I want to think to do
it, uh.
yeah,
I wanna thank them for being
here, Mr. Secretary, Deputy
Secretary.
So thank you guys for that, uh,
Representative Vincent has one
other question we'll go, we'll
go back to him. Thank you, Mr.
Chair, for the 2nd time. I'm
having a hard time with this
bill, and I really need you to,
I don't know why, I, I guess
cause I was late and I apologize
again.
Are we saddling departments up
with an annual cost. Is this
gonna cost them this annually or
no?
I thank you, uh,
Mr. Chair and thank you,
Representative.
Currently, all the fire
departments have to pay this
small. It looks small, $20 per
communication device, but in the
smaller communities, this can be
a significant line item. And we
have shown with our wildfires,
especially, but in all emergency
events that when you're a small
community, you need your
neighbors, you need to be able
to communicate to people outside
your actual immergency response
to be able to identify.
This is to, uh, this is too
great of a uh a burden, this
amount of money. Great. Thank,
thank you for that. Let me,
uh, Hernandez, thank you, um,
the $20.
fee is existing. We are not
touching that at all. That is an
existing fee from do it to the
department.
Um, my hope and dream is that
Next year through the interim
and next year we can figure out
how to erase that fee or get it
covered forever or something,
but that we're not quite there
yet. um, is what it is. So it's
not a new fee. We're not
imposing a new fee. It it's been
existing for
Um, since the trunk system went
in, so.
Yeah, I hope that that clears it
up. And Mr. Chair, and this is
to the chief.
Our our other chiefs,
municipalities gonna be mad at
me for voting for this.
Ms. Chairman, no, they're going
to be thrilled that you voted
for this and, and if I can
really quickly just say that uh
right now the way it works with
the, with the subsidies that
that this body and in the
executive have taken on the last
couple of years. I still get a
bill and it shows what my cost
would be and then it shows an
influx from do it and my balance
is 0. So we're, they are already
as representatives said, they're
already getting a bill, but
right now it's showing a cost of
0 because you guys
have supported this over the
years so that we comply with the
rule of do it to charge that
fee, but then they have that
line on them now that they're
applying to that fee. There's no
cost. Your municipalities and
counties, especially in Lincoln
County where we spent so much
time, every department did this
last year, um, are going to be
thrilled that you voted for
this, Ms. Sherman. Thank you for
that, Mr. Chairman. Great. Thank
you very much Representative
Vincent, for a great, uh,
clarifying question. OK, I don't
see any other questions. We'll
go to the vice chair for a
motion.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. I would
move that the committee, uh, I
would move a due pass for House
Bill 192 as amended?
And Kate's been moved by Vice
Cha Dixon, seconded by
Representative Doo, 3 any
opposition to that motion,
seeing none.
Thank you very much,
Representatives. Uh, thank you
for your work on this. Thank
you, Chief.
OK. Uh, our next two,
Thank you, Representative Silva,
come on up.
And thank you to Cha Ortez, uh,
we'll be right to you.
Yeah
Please
Hello chair and committee, um,
house built 288 would make an
appropriation to conduct a
feasibility study for the
community of Chaparral. Uh, it's
$100,000.01 time that would um
go to DFA and um then contract
with the South Central uh
Council Southeast Council of
Governments, so, um, and for
that, I will stand for
questions. Great. Thank you very
much, Representative Silva. Um.
Yeah, is there anybody here who
wishes to speak publicly about
this bill?
Is there anybody online?
Don't see anybody, we'll go,
uh,
uh, this is in the budget. It's
one of the uses for some of the
public safety funding that's
been directed, is that correct?
Yes, that's correct. Great. OK.
Any other questions?
Thank you very much,
Representative for your work on
this. We're, uh, asked for a
motion to table simply because
it's in the budget, but again,
want to note the work and the
fact that uh we've been able to
move this forward.
So there's a motion tabling
motion, is there any opposition
to that, then it's been tabled,
but it's moving forward in house
bill too. Thank you.
Uh, Chair Orense. Thank you.
Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Members of the committee, um,
I'm here to present House Bill
92, Healthy Rivers and Jobs Act,
um, this funds uh the New
Mexican Environment Department's
river stewardship program, um,
our state is facing drought,
wildfires, extreme weather
events, I'm not asking for money
for extreme weather events. I
just want to be perfectly clear.
This is for the river
stewardship program. Um, this
money provides essential funding
for projects that restore.
River habitats, improved water
quality, support the long-term
sustainability of a watershed.
What's important about this
money is that um it allows uh
communities to leverage these
dollars for federal dollars, so,
you know, it just spreads the
love and we bring more money
into our state to um to do the
important and Mr. Chair, I have
um an expert with me, two
experts actually, uh, Dan Roper.
I'm trying to limited and
He
Mm
Kate Lacy Young, New Mexico
Environment Department.
Excellent. Thank you very much.
Excellent, thank you, chair. Um,
is there anybody who wishes to
comment publicly.
Please, come on up.
Mr Chair representatives, my
name is Steve Roman. I own a
small business called Keystone
Restoration Ecology. Uh, we do
river watershed restoration
projects throughout the state of
New Mexico. Um, this is a very
important source of funding that
we use to match even local
municipality dollars. Uh, we did
a big project for Los Alamos
County where they had $500,000
to restore road, but without
restoring the stream through Los
Alamos Canyon and dredging the
reservoir, the road would wash
away for the 6th time from
wildfire damage, uh, this year
we're planning to work.
tells Pueblo, Santa Clara
Pueblo, and even high up in the
watersheds in a little town
called County Loan near Chama
and working from the top down
will really help, um, kind of
maintain these communities and
basically restore their
watershed so they have water for
irrigation. And so this is a
funding that I think is very
useful for all of us and as we
already mentioned, it also
matches federal dollars, so it
allows federal funds to come to
the state as well. Thank you,
representatives, and thank you,
chair. Great, thank you.
Thank you, Chairman Small and
members of the House
Appropriations and Finance
Committee. My name is Stephen
Fry with Amigos Bravos as a
recipient of River stewardship
funds, I can attest to the value
that these provide for our
restoration community and for
our watersheds across the state
in the interest of time, I just
want to make 3 points. One is
that this empowers New Mexico
local businesses to work in our
watersheds.
The second is that because this
program targets headwater
systems and uh wetlands. It
brings money and projects into
our rural communities. Second,
this program has been over fund
or not overfunded, um, over
supplied as in too many
applications the past few years,
which shows the demand that New
Mexico's spiel for this program.
And then third, with the federal
uncertainty and lack of funding
coming down now. It's more
imperative than ever that New
Mexico dedicate these resources
to protecting our watersheds.
Otherwise, our communities,
irrigators and outdoor
recreationists and wildlife will
all suffer. Thank you so much.
Oh, and I just want to thank you
for your support of this and the
7 million that you put in the
House bill too already. Thank
you.
Thank you.
Mr. Chair, members of the
committee, thank you for the
opportunity to speak today. My
name is Emily Wolf, and I serve
as Rio Grande coordinator with
American Rivers. I'm speaking in
strong support of of HB 92, 1
example of a huge community
benefit that has resulted in
recent years through this
program was the community
restoration project conducted in
the Eastern Navajo Nation in
partnership with Ohonino
chapter, River Source and Rio
Puerco Alliance to improve soil
and watershed health through
revegetation and building
erosion control structures. This
project over the last several
years
employed over 100 community
members and local youth for
seasonal restoration work and
planted thousands of trees and
drought resilient plants, while
implementing community
priorities to restore the Rio
Puco watershed.
This program is a critical
investment in projects that
carry overlapping ripple effects
for our waterways. Thank you for
your support.
Thank you.
Good afternoon, Chairman,
members of the committee. My
name is Todd Lopez. I'm the
director of Rio Grande Return.
We're in New Mexico nonprofit
organization that is engaged in
watershed restoration. Um, we've
been working with the river
sewage program for nearly 10
years now. We've leveraged every
dollar we've received at least 1
to 1, um, we're currently funded
to do work in the Hermit's Peak,
Caf Cannon Burnsar, and the vis
called National Preserve as well
as in the Rio Puerco, which is
largely considered the most
severely degraded watershed in
the entire country.
Um, we've
Currently have about 20
full-time employees, um, these
are primarily from tribal and
from rural communities across
New Mexico. And we also hire a
number of seasonal, uh, and
part-time staff, um, our crew at
wages average about $30 an hour,
um, our seasonal positions are
also filled oftentimes by
recruiting college students, um,
either current students or
graduates in restoration ecology
programs, uh, as well as, as New
Mexico natives who are looking
for opportunities to
returned to the state to live
and work, um, all of our
approaches, our science-based
strategies that have been proven
across the West to be some of
the most effective and
significant in terms of drought
and wildfire mitigation. So like
um my, my co-supporters here, I
want to thank you already for
your, for your support, uh, of
the investments chairman and
members committee, uh, and thank
you so much for your ongoing
consideration and your support.
Excellent. Thank you very much.
OK, uh, that concludes in
person, we're gonna go online to
the.
Mexico Asea Association.
My name is Vidal Gonzalez and I
work for the New Mexicose
Association as the director of
policy and planning. I'm a
registered lobbyist, and I'm
here to speak in support of
House Bill 92. This bill has
broad support among the sec.
entities due to its importance
in helping to restore and
improve rivers streams,
wetlands, and watersheds, which
enables communities to prepare
for the effects of climate
change and to recover from
natural disasters. I just want
to say how significant this
piece of um funding is for
recovering from natural
disasters, specifically in the
Hermit's Peak Ca Canyon fire,
the Lost Contras Fire and the
fires that we've seen in Riodos
so, so we are in supported and
we vote, so I urge you to vote
yes. Thank you.
OK. Thank you very much.
Uh, OK, that concludes the uh
testimony, um, we'll go to
members for questions.
Uh, Representative Brown and
then represent Thank you very
much, Mr. Chairman, and um thank
you for this bill. I just have a
few questions. So,
Um, I see the, um, river
stewardship program project for
fiscal year 25, and I see verbs
like install, restore, improve,
reduce, recharge, construct,
address, promote, and continue,
and I'm just, uh.
I don't really have a lot of
information on this one page to
tell me what exactly to some of
these projects involve? Are we
talking about scraping out
sediment and moving it somewhere
else. I heard something about
planting trees from one of the
um.
People who testified, what, what
are we seeing get done.
With and maybe there's no one
typical project, but if you
could just cover a few, please,
Mister Chair.
Thank you, Mr. Chair and
Representative Brown. That is a
great question. You know, some
of the projects are, um, you
know, involve, you know, heavy
equipment where you're moving,
um, boulders into a river or,
you know, getting, trying to do
some field operations that
others are, you know, have lots
of people power, um, where you
need to hire lots of people to
do that, that kind of planting
that rest that kind of
restoration that's needed. We're
gonna let um Dan Roper talk a
little bit more and of course
our expert from the department
who can give you more detail.
Uh, thank you, Mr. Chair and uh
representative for the question.
Uh, I think, uh, at a higher
level, I would just say these,
these projects work to restore
ecological function, and I think
that can mean a lot of different
things. The uniqueness of this
program is that we're working
lower down, I guess you could
say in the watershed, uh, in the
rivers, on the streams, on the
wetlands, you have other
programs in the state that focus
more higher up, uh, working in
the forest, reducing the risk of
wildfire. This is really about
improving and restoring our
water resources.
It can include everything from
working on aquifer recharge to
uh restoring riparian
vegetation, basically just when
I think of this program, I think
of Healthy rivers, healthy
streams, healthy, healthy
watersheds, but the bulk of the
works lower down um in the
system.
Um, share a small Representative
Brown, uh, just to add to that,
yes, the river stewardship
program, um, again in the
mission of the surface Water
Quality Bureau where the program
lives, is to preserve, protect
and improve New Mexico's uh
surface water quality for
present and future generations
and how the river stewardship
program does that, is it aims to
improve surface water quality
and river habitats statewide and
what that looks like on the
ground is um a variety of things
from those plantings to address,
um, shading streams.
to address the temperature
impairments that most of our
streams in New Mexico are
actually impaired from the water
quality standards for
temperature. So trying to
address and, um, and restore the
quality of New Mexico's.
Oh, Mr. Chair Representative
Brannan, I'll just add, um,
there, I worked with Steve
Roman, uh, on, uh, uh a wetland
restoration project in Taos at
the Rio Fernando Park. We did
not use river stewardship money,
um, because we, we couldn't
access it. Um, but that project
was very costly, and we did
things like re meandered a
river, uh, put in very, very big
boulders to slow down the water
removed, I don't know, 300 trees
or so, so that's the kind of
thing that um that this money
could go for.
To, to really, you know, restore
wetland habitat, and it, it
also, I think what's really
important is that you have to
hire a lot of people to to do a
lot of this work, even when you
when you're operating with heavy
machinery, you need lots of
people on the ground to to do
this kind of restoration. So
we're really investing in like
the restoration economy. Thank
you. Um, that's helpful
information. I would imagine,
Mr. Chairman, there's a
reporting.
Um, Mr. Chair Representative
Brown, yes, uh, the River
stewardship program does have
several reporting avenues, um,
because there's several funding
sources assigned to the program.
Uh, the, the program has
historically received capital
outlay funding, um, and so we
have reported quarterly through
the CPMS uh monitoring system
and through um the Capital
Outlay Bureau, um, further the
programs received, um, land of
enchantment Legacy funds, which
there's reporting through that
to the legislature and LFC um to
just the status of of
The program is spending those
funds and then in 2022, the
program received an American
rescue Plan Act, um.
ARPA, state and local fiscal
recovery fund, uh, from the
legislature and that funding
source also has its own
reporting mechanism as to DFA
and so we are reporting for
through several avenues on the
progress of these, these
projects, um, and, and
information is available on our
website regularly. Uh, we keep
updated project profiles for um
EPA um through a database, all
which is accessible through our
website, um, on the current
status of each of our projects,
should you.
want more information.
Very good. Thank you, Mr. Chair,
and, and, um, presenters. So,
um, last question, um, the Pecos
River runs through my district.
And just curious to know if any
of the stewardship programs have
been on the Pecos, Mr.
Mr. Chair, Representative Brown,
um, in, in the past we have had
projects on the Pecos. Uh, it's
been many years and maybe uh we
have old projects from when the
program was previously named the
river ecosystem restoration
initiative, um, prior to 2014.
So that said, we recognize that
there should be, and we would
like to see more work in the
southeast corner of the state
and have recently um hired a new
member of our team on the
Riodoso field office, which we
have never historically.
um, in order to develop projects
and um develop more work for
water quality improvement in the
southeast corner. Thank you very
much. Let's do it, Mr. Chair and
Representative Brown. There we
go. Uh, thank you very much,
Representative Brown. Uh, next,
we're gonna go to Representative
Vincent, uh, then representative
Dallas.
Representative Vincent.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Thank you,
Representative.
Uh, I, I got a few questions.
So
Could the proposed projects,
possibly disrupt any kind of
water right.
Things for people.
Mr. Chair Representative
Vincent, I, I don't think so,
but.
No.
No.
You're sure.
Yes, Mr. Chair Representative
Vincent, but I, I'd like to
understand a little bit more
where you're coming from.
So my question is, um, I, I was
writing things down as you were
asking them, but so could the
proposed projects disrupt local
ecosystems or water right
agreements.
Chair, uh, representatives now.
Thank you, Mr. Chair and
Representative soul, the other
thing I had was for some of my
ranchers.
And um they, they have.
Allotments, and they water their
cattle in some of their cattle
water in riparian areas.
Would there be a, a, a chance
that you would fence cattle out
of these riparian areas.
Uh, Mr. Chair Representative
Vincent, I, I think it is a
possibility to do restoration on
some of those, um, the, you
know, on the banks of those
rivers.
It's possible.
OK. Thank you, Mr. Chair, and,
and thank you Representatives.
So the ranchers that I'm talking
about.
This happened to them.
And they're in.
The business
To put weight on their cattle.
But we fenced their cattle off
of water. Now their cattle have
to walk 3 miles to get water, so
they're actually exercising the
cows, and they're not putting
weight on them, and that's,
that's one of the problems I
would, that's one of the reasons
I would not be able to support
this, this bill, um.
So my question would be,
Will the, will this, and I have
to always write these out so
that I can give you what I'm
thinking. Will this bill place
additional regulatory burdens on
farmers, ranchers, or in
industries that rely on water
access.
Uh, Mr. Chair Representative
Vincent, no, it will not. Um, I
think this, this program is very
carefully crafted. We understand
the importance of ranching, uh,
within the department, um.
This, you know, this funding
would provide um additional
supports to do restoration
projects, which, you know,
Which really just makes more
water available, healthier grass
available to, to rich. I
understand your, I understand
your concern. I really, really
do because when sometimes when
you're doing restoration
projects, you do have to fence
off a part of that riparian area
to get the work done. Uh,
generally those fences, you
know, come back off. Sometimes
those fences stay. I'm gonna let
uh Dan Roper explain a little
bit more.
Uh, thank you, Mr. Chair and
Representative. Um, I'll just
speak to this very briefly and
say some of our experience
working in Headwater streams
where we have people grazing
cattle on, on allotments. Uh,
sometimes fencing is a tool to
help reestablish riparian
vegetation, but I've never seen
anything, uh, at the scale that
you've mentioned, and I think it
would be highly unlikely that uh
through this program, you would
ever see that kind of extensive
fencing where cattle are having
to walk miles.
uh to access water. In fact,
most of our projects, if there
are uh grazing permittees, uh,
on the landscape. We are, we are
approaching this work in
partnership with those grazing
permits. They're talking to us
about everything from the design
to their own objectives, uh, on
that allotment, their own
resource objectives, and so I
think uh our experience has
been, it's very collaborative
and the type of scenario you
mentioned, I just, I can't
imagine this funding, uh, uh,
doing, doing that.
that, uh, as you described it.
Mr. Chair and Representative.
And presenters.
I couldn't believe what I saw
when they fenced off the
riparian area in the Sacramento
Mountains and made these
ranchers cattle walk 3 miles to
get water. So I guess, Mr. Chair
representative is what I'm, what
I'm asking is, are you
guaranteeing that that wouldn't?
Um, Mr. Chair, Representative
Vincent, I think, um, what we
would like to do is work in
partnership again with those
those um permittees on the
allotments, especially on
federal lands in Sacramentos in
particular like Lincoln National
Forest, and, um, I to identify
where necessary alternative
watering sources that's the the
program could potentially fund
and think about what that looks
like as opposed to 3 miles away,
maybe closer to a quarter mile
away, but off of the stream
segment.
alone, but something upland
where that that stream is then
also protected, the riparian
area can grow and provide that
forage for cattle, but also have
an alternative water source
where that is not um
concentrated, um.
cattle to just kind of undo what
the the riparian restoration is
is in.
Thank you, Mr. Chair and
Thank you, Representative, and I
appreciate that answer.
Whenever we look at a
compromise,
Would it be, if, what if you
couldn't compromise with the
ranch or what happens? Do you
get your way?
I've learned a lot of compromise
being in this building.
And I don't always get what I
want. Matter of fact, I don't
get what I want a lot and I've
learned, but.
Before I vote for something, I
have to make sure that my
constituents are, are taken care
of and if I voted for something
where they were fencing cattle
off, that would, that would be
bad for me.
Um, Mr. Chair Representative
Vincent, um,
Compromise always looks
different, as you've mentioned,
so it depends on the project, it
depends on the location, it
depends on the involvement and
um what was scoped. That said, I
have seen projects where the
department has, you know, we've
scaled back on maybe what was
contracted based on um what the
needs were on the ground once
the project was funded, so thank
you for that Vincent, um, we are
gonna be tabling this as just a
straight appropriation that's in
the budget. We, uh, this go back
to you and we have
representative Doo.
Uh, we have, these are good
questions. We also have a list
of some of the projects.
Um, and it sounds like there
are, there are state projects
that we have here, we've gone
through and represent Brown's
questions were excellent. We can
go through sort of all of what
these are funding, um.
some of the other things I think
are, are, are um almost 100%
sure are not state projects.
Uh, we'll go back to you though,
but, and we will be tabling the
bill. We did want to have this
discussion. Thank you. Thank
you, Mr. Chair, and my last
question is you said it would
take lots of people to do a lot
of these projects when you're
hiring people, are you talking
about local contractors or you
talking about?
State people or volunteers.
that they're all local people
cause they're local projects,
right? So, you know, a county or
a nonprofit works with that
county is is applying for these
kinds of funds, um, and they,
they have to hire locally. OK,
so Mr. Chair and Representative,
so if I'm a contractor, and
we're doing some of this work
right here, would I get to bid
on this?
Um, miss Mr. Chair
Representative Vincent, yes, um,
this.
Absolutely.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Thank you
for the answers. Thank you. OK,
next we're gonna go to
Representative Dawn.
Thank you, Mr. Chair and thank
you, Representative and um at
the the river stewardship
program, there's not a project
this year in Sierra County, but
in the past there has been, and
they've been very positive
programs, um, at one point, uh,
they, they use the money to, to
protect the trees from the
beavers along the Rio Grande.
I've seen thinning projects, I
mean, it really was local. I
think the the Sierraswan Water
Conservation District's done
them, RCND has done them, um,
you know, I called this year and
I was like, are you guys gonna
apply for river stewardship? So
You have to apply, um, but it,
it stayed local in my community
and, and I can see the concern,
and I think you guys are
sensitive to that.
And, um, it's, it's, I, I
definitely understand where
Vincent's coming from because he
has, um,
Producers in his district who've
gone from 1500 head of cattle to
less than 200, but those were
federal decisions.
Um, and I've seen, I, I see on
here from my old district, the
Upper Gila Watershed
Association, which is those are
farmers and ranchers, and
they've been partnering a lot
with the soil and water district
to get some very much needed
work done to improve their crops
and remove improve the landscape
for them. Um,
After a fire, so I do, I, you
know, you do have to, you know,
recognize on here that there is
a project that specifically says
that it is to, to keep livestock
from grazing. Um, so is that, uh
Someone's, that's someone's
private land and it's their
choice to do. So we are a fence
out state, so it says um 0.7
miles of Bear Creek from
livestock grazing.
Under the
Uh, healer resource information
project. I mean, I, I support
readership, river stewardship
projects, but I mean, there's
one right there that you're
building a fence to stop people
from grazing.
Um, Mr. Chair Representative
Dao, yes, um, so that example
is, I think for the, um, Upper
Gila Watershed Association is a
spring specifically, um, so
that, uh, it's again the source
of that water in the landscape
and in order to um help.
Restore that landscape, um,
fencing out at immediately at
the source of that spring will
um help promote that that water
source can actually go further
downstream and help promote grow
further down, um, if that, that
source is hit hard at the uh
spring source itself, um, it may
not do that and provide that
makes sense to me. So I just
Representatives, uh, Mr. Chair
and Representative, this is,
this is one of those projects
that I hear of the farmers and
ranchers and, and producers in
my district, even those folks in
the forest are very positive
about and um look forward to
applying to applying for and
receiving funding for. Thank
you. Thank you. Great. Thank you
very much for sending it down.
Uh, next, we're gonna go to
representative Silva. Thank you,
chair, and thank yous
representative and presenters,
um, I just wanted to.
They my support for this
project, and I know we'll move
the table and um
But
I have helped to be a part of
smaller projects, not with this
program, but with others and
improving creeks and widening um
creeks so that the water can sit
in places longer and that's
really important for riparian
areas for big trees like juniper
and pinon, um, and so I just
wanna to name my support for
that and my experience in doing
that and it's fun, but it's also
really rewarding because you can
see the impact of how waterways
get improved by, um,
really knowing the science of
slowing water down. Um, I'd also
name that Blood Good Spring and
the hea, which is in the South
Percher Creek, um, shares, it is
a portion of it is fenced off so
that um that um.
That biodiversity along the
creek can grow and thrive and it
shares it with cattle on
occasion, and so there's a
spring nearby, uh, there's a
watering hole right next to the
spring that's fenced off and so
I think there is a way to create
some um some shared space there.
So thank you, chair. Great.
Thank you very much,
Representative Silva. Hey, uh,
members, great questions, really
appreciate it. Uh, great to have
the public comment, uh, church
has wanted to thank you for
bringing this as folks have
noted, um,
the, I think is the house we've
taken on a very strong share.
There's $7 million. Uh, we'll
see if our Senate colleagues
choose to invest additional
money, um, but the, uh, great to
see that there's now um sort of
across the state, uh growing
interest in investing in uh
these sorts of watershed health
opportunities.
Uh, with that, we're going to go
to Representative Luhan for the
motion, Representative Dao for
the 2nd.
Mm
Mr. Chair, I, oh, sorry, for the
table in motion
gentle table
to
make the motion.
OK, uh, motion the table, $7
million motion this time around.
Uh, is there any opposition to
that motion, seeing none. Thank
you and again, committee, thanks
for the questions.
Um
OK, uh, Representative Mohan,
we'd ask you, uh, members, we
have a new substitute for House
Bill 113.
That will get handed out as the
representative goes up there.
Thank you, Mr. Chair, um.
Committee, as you mentioned, we,
um.
We're here again before you with
the house appropriations and
Finance Committee substitute for
House Bill 113.
And the, the, the 22 number is
23.
142 3.2.
Mr.
Mr. Chair.
OK, great. Uh, that's the one
that I have. Can we have a
motion in a second for
discussion?
Hey, it's been moved by doubt,
same by representative Silva for
discussion, uh, representative,
uh, thank you, uh, experts,
thank you. Can you summarize
sort of what's uh new in our
substitute, please Mr. Speaker,
after, um, discussion and and
compromise with our fellow
members of the committee, we
simply struck from the original
bill on page 2 lines 20 to 24.
the section who um subsection 7
and now that is not in the bill.
Great. OK, thank you for that.
Any questions? uh about uh the
substitute.
So, uh, taking out sort of the
personal that, that component,
OK? Um, can I, oh, Brown, yes,
please. Mr. Chairman and so just
to, just to comment, I want to
thank you for the compromise
here. I really think we had to
be very careful, so we didn't
violate the anti-donation
clause, so I think you've solved
that, and I fully support your
bill. Now I
I'm glad to see we're gonna have
some more funding for the animal
shelters. Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Excellent. Thank you very much,
Representative Brown. OK, can we
have a motion to adopt a house
corporations and Finance
Committee substitute for
hospital 113. So.
OK, uh, moved by Representative
Silva, seconded by
Representative Doo, there are
any opposition to that?
OK, we now are on the
substitute. Is there any public
comment, uh, for house
corporations and finance can be
substitute for House Bill 113.
A month.
Chairman, committee members, my
name is Kathy Elliott and I am
the uh registered lobbyist for
the city of Raton. City of
Verone has
Many, many animals that are
roaming their streets, and we
actually have video of a small
boy being attacked by a group of
about 18 to 20 animals headed to
school. Um, this is just one
instance of the many, many
animals that we have roaming,
and it's not just unique to the
city of herton as well. They
have a no kill animal shelter
that is 100% full.
And so we actually have on our
capital outlay requests, um,
another building that would be
larger, and we see this bill
brought by the representative as
an opportunity to bring funding
to animal shelter needs across
the state. So we are staying
100% in support and thank her
for that. Great. Thank you very
much.
OK, uh, is there anybody online
who wishes to comment?
Seeing no one, we'll go back to,
is any questions from the
committee?
you.
Uh, yes, please. Represent
Vincent.
Mr. Chairman, Representatives,
and experts.
I'm having a real hard time with
this bill, and I don't know how
I'm gonna vote. I really don't,
and I'm gonna tell you why.
I love animals. I, I, I don't
like to see people get bit and
with the testimony we just have,
uh, or had
You know, 15 to 18 dogs running
loose like that, I don't know
why our animal control and if a
if a dog bites a kiddo in, in
my, in my area they get
euthanized. They're, they're
done. They don't get a second
chance if you bite a kid.
And
As I've been here in Santa Fe,
and I drive to work or I drive
to the roundhouse, I call it
work, I drive to work every
morning.
Um, you know, all the, the
homeless people that I see.
And then
For me to vote for a bill to
give 7 million.
Whenever we could direct, this
bill is 7 million, correct? uh,
yes. OK, I saw you squint your
eyes like, it wasn't 7 million,
so $7 million I just think what
could we do for people?
For $7 million.
And so that's the only thing
that hangs me up on this bill,
and if I vote no for it, I just
wanted you to know why I'm
voting no for it because I'm a
humanitarian. I, you know, I
like to, I like to help people
and uh I know that our, our
animal shelters need help.
And
Mr. Mr. Chair and
Representative.
Is there any donations that come
in animal shelters to help you
fund these, these shows.
Madam Chair, uh, not enough.
Not near enough, I, as I
mentioned before, even in the
the county of Taos. I wish the
representative was still here.
Uh, you could tell she could
tell you, um.
They they've closed their their
shelter there, there's there are
no services in that regard we're
seeing this across the state.
This is a, this is a crisis,
this is dire. This is a public
health and safety measure, and
if we don't get a hold of this,
this is just gonna get worse, I
mean, uh, in your district alone
and in the ruralness of our
state, we need to really address
this.
And I will turn this over to my
experts if they wanted to.
Excuse me, members of the
committee, um, you're absolutely
right. Um, Representative
Vincent, that um
We need to be able to enforce
the um statutes that are already
on the books, the municipal
codes, um, as far as dogs
running loose and making sure
that folks vaccinate their dogs,
but what we find without the
funding to flow to our municipal
shelters as well as the
nonprofits that step in and
raise money on their own to
provide those services. Animal
control officers don't have
basic things like vehicles or
like bite sticks or catch poles
or the uh boxes that they put.
on the top of their trucks to be
able to safely transport the
animals to the shelter, and then
once they get there, um, what we
found from speaking with
shelters across the state is
they don't have basic supplies
and basic equipment to operate,
so we're, we are really looking
at this from a public safety and
health point of view and
allowing this money to flow to
the shelter so they can address
those issues, we wholeheartedly
agree with this being a good
approach to take.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. One last
question, just
So you're saying that not every
community has an animal control
person.
Mr. Chair, that is correct.
And so when a when a community
doesn't have Mr. Chair, sorry,
Mr. Chair Representative when a
community does not have
An animal control officer.
Then what do they do
uh communities, they, they do
have to fend for themselves and
defend themselves, I mean, the
video that was just, I saw the
video that was mentioned from
the the town of Raton.
And there's this little boy get
coming down from or walking down
the streets and being attacked
by a pack of dogs.
What is that child's food is his
family supposed to do when they
don't have the services to
provide that safety. This is
safe. This is public
representative and if my experts
wanted to add, please do.
Uh chair representative Vincent,
uh, what they do is they, you
know, try the best they can to
scrape together those donated
dollars, um, but they are
basically just at the mercy of
these packs of free-roaming
dogs, and we recently received a
report, um, in that same
community from a different
person who was taking on his
trash and was approached by a
pack of, he said roughly 6 to 8
dogs.
these communities are at risk of
greater uh transmission of
rabies because these dogs are
unvaccinated, um, and the dogs
are, of course not spayed and
neutered, and so they continued
to reproduce. They cause vehicle
accidents, I mean the downstream
um effects of not having
adequate animal services in a
community are just the really um
impacting um quality of life for
people in those communities.
And last question, Mr. Chair and
Representative, so we have a
pack of dogs, we have a pack of
dogs of 15 that crowd a child
and they bite him and attack him
and do all that and and so when
we do take these, these dogs
into custody, I guess is what
you would call it, what happens
to them?
Madam chair, there, uh, I
believe there are ordinances
that that would um if that's in
the ordinance, yes, sir.
Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Thank you for your answers.
Great. Thank you, Representative
Vincent. Next we have
representative Dow or we're
gonna go to represent out for
the motion, uh, Representative
Herndon, uh, any question?
Thank you, Mr. Chair, and thank
you presenters. So as I listen
to you talk about the the pack
of dogs and that they and
utilizing them in a shelter. I'm
going to just follow up on
representative uh Vincent's
question, what happens to the
animals after you put them in
the shelter, Mr. Chair, um,
Representative, it depends on on
the local government's
ordinances. There are some no
kill shelters. There are some uh
shelters that provide you in uh
to services to youth.
the animal and it, it depends on
if, you know, with the, with the
public safety
Uh, Mr. Chair and Madam
Presenters, one of the things
I'd like you to think about, um,
if we spend $7 million on the
shelter that you not necessarily
euthanize the animals, but
there's a program called Vets
for Pets to try to help make
sure that veterans have access
to support animals and just
animals in general because it
helps improve their lives. And I
would just ask you to think
about.
Utilizing that process as
opposed to uh euthanizing the
animals. They, there are a lot
of veterans who need help. They
are um.
On the street and um they could
use the assistance that you're
producing with respect to the
animals, Mr. Chair
Representative, thank you so
much for that. A lot of the
efforts that um uh programming
money goes, not a lot of the
money, but some of it that would
go to the, some of those types
of programs. I'd have my experts
add to that.
I think you're representative
Herndon. Some of the projects
and programs that we're looking
at inside the shelters, um,
include collaborations like the
one you're speaking of, but they
also include mechanisms for
behavior training, because a lot
of these animals can face a
turnaround with proper behavior
training, and also, um, the
longer they're in the shelter,
the more training they received,
the more adoptable they are and
the more compatible they are for
programs. Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Thank you. Thank you very much,
uh, uh.
Just want to thank, thank you
for your work and um uh good to
see that we're able to move
forward. We'll go to
Representative Dow for the
motion. Thank you, Mr. Chair,
and, and thank you, thank you
for working with us and making
this something we can all
support, uh, move to table. Oh,
no, sorry.
Oh, OK,
because that's why I asked you,
is it in the budget?
OK.
The, yeah, so, and, and just as
a quick explanation, we have uh
this creates a program where we
can uh distribute and there is
funding in the budget associated
with the program. Uh, the
motion, it will have a, a do not
pass on House Bill 113, and they
do pass for house appropriations
and Finance Committee substitute
for House Bill 1133. Thank you,
Mr. Chair, he said.
OK.
We have a motion for do not pass
on.
OK, excellent. Uh it's been
moved by Representative Dao,
saying by Representative
Herndon, in the opposition to
that motion.
See then
That concludes us for the day.
Thank you, uh, presenters,
members, thank you very much. We
got our work done quickly today,
