Do that with I'm in I I don't
know any school district that
wouldn't go over about at this
point especially now that things
have changed.
But the kind of feedback
that we're getting budgetary
early is that if they're already
doing it under the SCG with many
of the schools in the school
districts they're already
qualified in other words to get
the additional money.
So that's what our focus really
is on it's not so much
You know some of these other
issues that we talked about
whether or not Senate bill one
or house bill I was better
getting and all of that kind of
policy it's about what the
budget impact test.
And I had a long discussion just
a few minutes ago about this
bill with the.
Person that's been interested
in.
What their concern was and I
tried to dissuade that is that
they can't believe that we would
be promoting a system now of
keeping kids on a computer
longer than they already are you
know the kids are virtual and I
have been being taught virtually
there's some concern about gosh
are we just adding more time
circuit assistant front of a
computer screen you know that
kind of thing and I I said no
that's not necessarily what
we're doing is that this is you
know the decision of that.
Policy board at the local level
on how they want to handle these
things.
But that has been a concern the
spending concern that if this
goes through and.
And I quite candidly part of
that is because one of our
largest school districts has
decided to stay virtual for six
months so there's stuff coming
down that doesn't even have to
do necessarily with our budget
discussion but it is of concern
to parents and the public so
when we when we talk about the
so I prefer that we talk about
you know what this is going to
if there's the opportunity to.
I'm in the US.
And I mean like I told the
committee I'm indifferent to it
if we're adding days or adding
hours I mean that's.
Up to the locals on how they do
it but I do care about double
paying for things and I do think
that is within our realm as a
budget committee to look at.
So
I'm gonna ask do we have
anything yet that has been
drafted for consideration.
Does anybody know I mean has
there been anything brought to
our committee madam chair not
yet.
Very frustrating
that across I don't know
credit incredibly frustrating we
had thought that there was going
to be some fast tracking on this
currently we don't have anything
even look at at this time so.
You know I'm
Willing to take the committee's
recommendation do we hang on
that or do we just roll this
over till tomorrow.
The point is not.
Okay we have one representative
that would like to just hang on
let's see what we get out is
that okay with everybody.
Madam madam chair if I if I may
suggest I I do appreciate
Representative Trujillo is
willingness to do that but if we
can guarantee a here to hearing
tomorrow I would rather have
myself and the stakeholders look
over the committee substitute in
whatever form it takes in order
to to really have it properly
vetted instead of just having
something for the sake of having
it and that the turning prior to
the floor session and taking
action on something that
We are quite sure of I think
that would be more prudent madam
chair.
Yeah we wouldn't do it just for
the sake of having it
Representative Romero we do take
our time when we look at these
things and we discussed on so
that Madam isn't necessary so
this time when we go ahead just
take Representative Crowder our
motion.
Thank you madam chair I would I
would move that we will roll
this over until we can they can
come back with a suitable
amendment.
It
it's at the request of the
sponsor Representative Trujillo
so we're going to roll over is
there any objection to that
madam chair it's not at the
request of the sponsor it's
being placed upon me.
On the imposed upon you.
Okay well that's how committees
work and as a committee chair
you should know that the
committee has an option to look
at things and if we want to
question things will do that.
So your current comments you can
keep to yourself so at this
point I'd like to ask that we
just go ahead roll this over and
we'll take it up first tomorrow
in our our HFC Committee and
then we'll take the banking of
bill at second because that
one's gonna take a long time so
thank you everybody will see it
tomorrow.
Still.
Cherubs everybody.
