The Romero acting cabinet
secretary department of finance
and administration Stephanie
Chardon Clark secretary of
taxation and revenue and then
after after Stephanie will be on
years.
Okay.
With the she's the chief.
I don't think that'll be next
LFC
again we like to keep the Mike
muted into let's turn to to ask
questions but before we start
I'm gonna ask the secretary to
take role please use.
Also.
I am here.
Representative.
Representative.
Representative Armstrong.
Here.
Representative Brown.
Representative Brown.
Representative Castellano.
Representative Chatfield.
Representative Crowder.
Representative Crowder.
I see him there.
Representative Dixon president.
Representative Garcia.
Representative Garcia.
Representative your.
Representative.
You.
Representative Hochman Vigil.
Here.
Representative Lane.
Representative lane.
I see you there but you're not.
Not hearing you.
Representative Lada.
Here.
Representative Sarinana.
Your.
Representative secretary.
Here.
Representative Trujillo.
Will.
Representative vice chair small.
Here.
Madam chair.
And I I want to know that I do
see Representative Anderson and
Representative brown.
They're here I think about all
right so looks like we've got a
full house here this afternoon
of Debbie are you ready.
madam chair step in the
secretaries charm park will take
the first half of this
presentation and then I will
pick up later on in the
presentation.
Very Stephanie we're ready okay
thank you madam chair and
members of the committee it's a
pleasure to be with you today I
will just take a moment to share
my screen.
And I just need to get in
slide show mode correct.
Okay you can see that.
You hear me OK okay great thank
you madam chair so we'll be
going through a presentation of
the December twenty twenty
revenue outlook for the state
general fund we'll go through
this pretty quickly and I I know
many of the members have heard
it in other committees but we
look forward to your questions
just particularly because this
will be an abbreviated
presentation so I'll be covering
slides having to do with the
macro economic outlook for the
US the globe in New Mexico
economies and touching very
briefly on oil and natural gas
and and our largest general fund
revenue streams the personal
income tax G. R. T. severance
taxes rents and royalties and
then I'll turn it over to acting
secretary Romero to talk about
the forecast itself in the
general fund outlook reminder
for the committee this work
product is the result of the
work of career economist at four
different agencies three in the
executive branch as well as the
staff of the LFC and they've
shown great public service and
commitment over this year
they've done more complex more
volatile estimates than probably
ever before and and more of
them.
So real briefly on the slide
shows you what's been going on
with the US GDP since before the
pandemic and then you can see
basically in the second quarter
of twenty twenty there was a
sharp contraction and in U. S.
GDP at the onset of the pandemic
followed by a fairly sharp
recovery and then the outlook
for the forecast period you see
it November the black line is is
moody's forecast for the US GDP
growth for the forecast period
you can see basically that the
movies at that time expected
gross to be moderate and it's
going to take us quite awhile
for the U. S. economy to get
back to pre pandemic levels I
will note that we have a few
more months of economic data
since the December forecast was
released and growth in the more
recent quarter FY twenty quarter
for is expected to exceed the
black line pretty significantly
and will be presenting the mid
session update that will give
you any relevant updates in
early February.
I'm just a real quickly on the
US employment situation I just
want to mention that the B. U.
S. economy lost about.
I am trying to move the pictures
so I can read my on site.
the US.
And with the slide area the US
economy lost almost twenty one
million jobs at the beginning of
the pandemic and about half of
those have since been regained
but the US economy is still at
this time down over nine million
jobs from where it was pre
pandemic and you'll see a
similar picture in a moment for
New Mexico.
I think I can get the slide it
it tells you for your reference
a bit about inflation
expectations expectations for
federal relief and things like
that that went into the
forecast.
the time of the forecasted you
want to highlight that moody's
was assuming F. one point five
trillion dollar federal fiscal
stimulus being enacted in the
first quarter of twenty twenty
one while I H. S. was not
assuming any federal fiscal
stimulus so the bad news is that
there's a lot of uncertainty
about the amount the timing and
the size of federal stimulus and
how it will come into the
economy the only good news for
us is that we use both of those
services and so our estimate is
sort of hedging somewhere in the
middle of that page ads a little
bit there takes away some
volatility from the estimate.
I presented a moment ago what it
happened with the US GDP at the
onset of the pandemic incense
this is a similar chart but for
the New Mexico and you can see
our GDP contracted very sharply
about twenty eight percent in
the second quarter of twenty
twenty and just like the U. S.
economy rebounded very
significantly in the third
quarter our our growth
expectations are a little bit
stronger than I showed you a
moment ago for the US economy
but it is still going to take
about three years for the U. S.
for the New Mexico GDP tour
reach pre pandemic levels.
Unemployment is is obviously
something that we're all very
interested in on this chart you
can see the new claims are this
this dark gray line and so you
can see there is a huge spike in
New first time unemployment
claims at the onset of the
pandemic and that stabilized
somewhat spiked again a bit as
they were continued closures as
cases rose in November but would
sort of interesting here to is
is the continued claims so one
of the flow of new claims into
the unemployment system but the
Graybar is continued claims and
you can see that it remains very
high it is coming down but it
remains high and the blue line
layered on top of of the great
continued unemployment claims
are the P. you see the pandemic
employment unemployed.
Pandemic emergency unemployment
assistance program that is
basically the federal program
that is extending unemployment
type budget when unemployment
traditional benefits have
expired and you can see that the
the longer this goes on the more
traditional benefits are
expiring and the more New
Mexicans are relying on those
extended pandemic benefits from
the federal government.
I just I'm here I just real
briefly want to highlight that
unemployment rates did spike
tremendously in both US and New
Mexico through the beginning of
the pandemic but have somewhat
stabilized other obviously not
where any of us want to see them
but we are we're making steady
ground up each month that goes
by the new data is released.
this this gives you a snapshot
of New Mexico has a job changes
year over year since it is and
and this would have been data as
of October twenty twenty
compared to October twenty
nineteen and so you can see that
on the whole over that year New
Mexico is down almost fifty five
thousand jobs and the job losses
were centered and and a few very
still very concentrated in a few
sectors but also sort of across
the board there were large job
losses in the mining sector
attributable to the slow down
that we know occurred in and oil
markets and natural gas but also
the leisure and hospitality
retail trade local government
state government just about the
only sector that was up with
federal government and that had
to do with the fact that in
October the census was still
ongoing.
If we look at this at that
number again with another month
of data the amount that jobs
were down had actually risen as
in October October we had lost
almost fifty five thousand jobs
if we compare November over
November we were down sixty one
thousand three hundred jobs.
I'm this chart I won't go into
in a great amount of detail but
I want we want to provide it to
you you can basically see over
that the pandemic the trough
level of job losses that
happened in each sector and then
compare that to the percentage
of the number of jobs in that
sector that had been regained as
as at that point in time when we
made the December estimate.
So you have that in your packets
if you want that level of
detail.
the Economic or the employment
recovery in New Mexico here
we're just really trying to
emphasize for you that it took
New Mexico longer than the U. S.
economy in longer than most
states to regain job losses that
we experienced in the Great
Recession it was about the end
of twenty eighteen The New
Mexico regained the number of
jobs it had before the Great
Recession and now according to
the forecast that we rely on
this from this is from moody's
it looks like it'll take about
until the end of twenty twenty
four for us to regain the number
of jobs we had before the
pandemic so we're definitely in
this for the long haul.
I'm moving now to some slides
Updating on the oil and natural
gas markets as as they were at
the time of the on December
forecast what we want to show
here is is basically from peak
to trough recount in New Mexico
the black line is the current
cycle that we've been in and and
it appears we may have bottomed
out with the lowest number of
rigs will experience in this
downturn but that could be wrong
but it remains to be seen if I
were to update this the site for
you as of today the number of
rigs in New Mexico it is
currently more like about
seventy eight and as of this
slide it was in the fifties I
believe so so we have made up
ground since the December
forecast which is very good news
of course recount is a leading
indicator of production and
recount is also tends to be
representing taxable activity
for the G. R. T. so the more
rigs we have the more G. R. T.
activity we have and the more
future production we expect to
have.
I think all of us get this
slight in the interest of time
but we're comparing here New
Mexico's recount changes to the
US and to our neighbor Texas who
shares the Permian basin with
us.
oil production here we're we're
sort of showing that oil
production really does follow
price and so as the price of oil
which is shown in blue really
took eight at a very steep dive
in the beginning of twenty
twenty then not long after we
saw the recount follow and the
production several months later
began to follow it downward it's
of course at all impacts
revenue.
I'm here on the slide for your
reference you can see the
assumptions that were made in
the revenue estimate for the
prices and volumes of both oil
and natural gas and you can kind
of track the time from from the
bottom to the top so at the
bottom table you have what we
expected as of December twenty
nineteen we were looking at oil
and about fifty to fifty two
dollars per barrel at the onset
of the forecast period by the
June twenty twenty estimate we
had taken that all we had taken
nineteen dollars out for FY
twenty one and then you can see
for by the December twenty
twenty forecast things have
stabilized significantly over
where they were in the summer
and we had added back on that
pretty significant portion of
that revenue so it at as of the
December forecast the price of
oil is expected to average
thirty eight dollars per barrel
over FY twenty one forty three
fifty in the following year
creeping up a couple dollars for
fiscal year after that.
next under the personal income
tax one of the topics that I've
tried to stress in these
presentations is you know we've
we've heard over the course of
this economic downturn in the
pandemic economists always
talking about what shape
recovery we're going to have is
it at thank you swooshes it and
L. as a to be you know all these
different things and what I've
been kind of trying to emphasize
is there's really two different
shape recoveries depending on
who you are and the I'm calling
medication recovery where we're
seeing that wages are are
recovering much more quickly
than the total number of jobs
and mathematically what that
means is that wages are
recovering much more quickly for
higher paid workers and they are
for lower paid workers and so
when we talk about job losses
not being recovered to a pre
pandemic level for something
like three years in New Mexico I
just really want to emphasize
that there are a lot of workers
who are lower wage to begin with
I probably have lower savings to
indoor
you know a loss of revenue and a
loss of income and it's going to
take them on average much longer
than it is to regain then it is
higher rate and higher educated
workers.
On to the gross receipts tax
here I know you each have your
own legislative district and so
we want to provide you some data
on gross receipts tax by county
I would just urge you not to get
it respectfully for counties
that have a fairly small tax
base don't get too excited about
large swings in in these numbers
year over year
a lot of the large swings like
for example at fifty percent
change year over year in
Guadalupe County or seventy one
percent Torrance County is
probably attributable to a large
construction project that was
sort of overshadowing everything
else in the base but those
numbers are there for you and
then similarly this like where's
the past chart was year over
year this is quarter over
quarter growth and and taxable
gross receipts and the G. R. T.
base I County so that's there
for your reference.
I kind of already talked about
the relationship between recount
price and and revenue but here
putting it another way we've
lined up for you the recount in
red in the Permian basin
together with Lea and Eddy
County taxable gross receipts to
green you can see that very
tight relationship and the price
of oil and blue so think about
blue the blueline Act first the
price of oil changes in its
early out of our control step by
global markets and then I after
the price changes the recount
changes so the gross receipts
change.
And last a little bit on
severance taxes and federal and
state rents and royalties what
we you know generally referred
to as energy related taxes into
the general fund I just want to
basically show that
comparing fiscal year to fiscal
year in twenty twenty we had
record rents and royalties and
the severance taxes were very
high and then just just
basically that they're coming
down year over year but maybe
the most interesting part of
this chart is the little green
bar that's the estimated
transfer to the tax
stabilization reserve which was
set up in legislation about
probably four years ago now and
it's been in place for a couple
fiscal years so when the revenue
from the stores exceeds the five
year average we automatically
put that excess windfall revenue
into the tax stabilization
reserve and and what you can see
is that by that five year
averaging even in FY twenty when
we rode over the second half of
the year we enjoyed a pandemic
and it and it boiled Boston a
shut down we still moved a
hundred and sixty six million
dollars in to reserve and
despite what's going on we're
still expecting to move about
fifty million dollars in to
reserve each of the coming
fiscal years and so that
mechanism is working just the
way it was intended to and it's
given us all a lot of
maneuverability and flexibility
to shield ourselves and our
constituents for making more
difficult and deeper cuts than
we might otherwise have to make.
And next I'll turn it over to
secretary Romero for the general
fund overview thank you so much.
Thank you and so this fight is
the general fund overview and so
FY twenty general fund recurring
revenue declined by about one
point nine percent the being of
our reserves at two point five
million or thirty five percent
of three point four percent of
recurring appropriations FY
twenty one declined by ten point
nine percent but we ended up
with reserves at about thirty
three point four percent and
then FY twenty two are we grew
by about five point five point
four percent resulting in bad
hundred sixty million of new
money.
Slide twenty nine.
Next slide please.
Shows a breakdown by revenue
source and so the bottom line is
the total recurring revenue of
ten point nine it indicates ten
point nine percent reduction due
to widespread COVID because you
do comment basically and the
decline of recovery are driven
by COVID the it's all related to
employment wages and salaries of
consumer and business confidence
and the oil demand recovery.
Next slide please.
So this is the general fund
revenue forecast so back in.
June I believe we we that crack
provided a forecast that gave a
range and so what's important to
note on this is is at that time
that range that kind of mid
point we're we're actually
ending up believe just slightly
higher than that midpoint range
so that twenty twenty forecast
is higher than June and we
expected in June by about one
point zero eight six million and
in for FY twenty one and about
one point one almost one point
you for FY twenty two FY twenty
two revenue is estimated to be
about seven point three seven
nine billion and again these
well they're better than we
expected in June they're still
below that dotted line which was
the December two thousand
nineteen projections.
Next.
The general fund reserve levels
and and you can see where
the general fund reserves have
tended to go up I think the
legislature has made some really
good decisions in in trying to
to have that reserved level at a
higher range and that reserve
level has actually come in very
handy especially now during this
last year when we when oil
prices dropped plus the economy.
Basically shut down so on this
you can see that the FY twenty
reserves are estimated to begin
thirty five point four percent
and FY twenty one before any
legislative action is taken are
estimated at thirty three point
four percent.
Next.
So I'm secretary Sean Clark
touched a little bit about the
tax stabilization reserve in the
transfers so you can see that a
hundred sixty six million this
transferred next slide twenty
and the December estimated
estimated forecast estimates
that transfers the TSR will
continue to twenty twenty five
nine hundred sixty six million
dollars worth but but about
approximately fifty million
dollars for the next few years
and these transfers ultimately
help the reserve levels.
Next thanks.
So when financial summary
You can see the details in here
disruption does the beginning
balances it shows total
recurring revenue for current
appropriations and reserves
transfers
again FY twenty one projected at
thirty three percent you can see
a hundred and sixty nine million
of new money for FY twenty two.
That's the good news.
Thirty four please so these are
all the reset rest and I'm not
going to go through all the
basically we're still dealing
with COVID we're still waiting
for you know vaccines of started
but we're in probably not where
we need to be and I don't think
any status where they need to be
as far as vaccine rollout but
we're hearing more good news
from the best federal government
from president Biden and his
plans to do more to help with
vaccines so hopefully that will
help
you know employment recovery is
really dependent on the virus
and you know our economic
recovery and fiscal stimulus is
all you know we're still waiting
to see how that is going to
impact us and how it will help
we're not sure where it would
receive some additional from
stimulus we're hoping that we're
gonna see more coming and so
that's still to be decided and
then I think still waiting on
you know oil demand is really
dependent on consumer behavior
and need we have we're not
traveling there's no airplanes
running about you know there's
that's declined significantly
and so that definitely has an
impact on the oil and gas
prices.
Next please.
The stress test that that's used
by the correct and this this is
a key component of revenue
estimates it provides an
optimistic and pessimistic view
so the top chart is the
optimistic view and so you can
see that FY twenty one hundred
seven point four million three
hundred sticks in FY twenty two
and three hundred and eighty
three hundred eighty in FY
twenty three the more less
pessimistic actually shows
declines in all of those areas
and so that this gives you a
range gives you an idea of what
what to consider as you're
making your funding decisions
do you miss the forecasted those
traits a prolonged economic
downturn for two to three years
our with revenues lower by seven
hundred thirty six million two
hundred eighty eight million
online yes New Mexico is really
sensitive to the Energy downturn
international recession and it
highlights the need for us to
maintain healthy reserve levels.
Next please.
The ten year
A ten year trend it is destroyed
This slide illustrates the
general fund revenues versus ten
year trend it highlights the
above and below revenue trend.
Revenues above the trend line
usually are not sustainable and
so New Mexico's Jennifer average
general growth rate for the two
thousand eleven two to two
thousand twenty is is only about
four point seven percent so you
actually get there the strategy
for managing managing volatility
is really standing when we are
above that line on one time
purchases
you know one time expenses and
then anytime we have more money
we should deposit what we can
into the rainy day press which
New Mexico has done a really
good job
with the transfers to the TSR
this general fund average growth
that mentioned was forty four
point seven percent the G. R. T.
average growth is about five
point two percent and severance
tax average growth is three
percent.
So secretary Sean Clark if you
will go to slide forty four this
is the sources and uses table
that before severance tax
bonding so if you can see in
here if you look about the
middle of the of the page are
you will see that there's about
four hundred and thirty three
million dollars worth of
severance tax bonding capacity
for capital outlay purchases
that does not include the
setasides Y. colonias
water projects and the tribal
projects has already been taken
out of that that actually
increased a little bit from the
June numbers that we had seen
before and so there are some
opportunities to take advantage
of the major
infrastructure projects
broadband hopefully being one of
those.
Madam chair that is all I have
right now we your available for
questions.
Go to the help of C.
presentation and then we'll go
to questions.
Thank you madam chair members of
the committee can you all hear
me okay.
Yes yeah.
Right thank you I'll be speaking
to the LFC brief on the general
fund estimate just highlighting
a few quick points I know most
of you have already heard this
information I'm gonna be
respectful of your time and try
to be very brief but of course
that there any additional
questions on information is
provided here I'll be happy to
answer any of those one thing
I'll start out by iterating on
the first page of our
presentation is that the current
revenue forecast for FY twenty
one is an estimated eight
hundred and fifty seven million
dollars the local revenues for
FY twenty so that is a pretty
precipitous decline and most of
that decline.
Is due to the pandemic the facts
on the oil markets
When we look at the combined
effect for FY twenty one through
FY twenty three Representative
total revenue estimates are down
about one point nine billion
dollars over the course of those
three years from where we
expected to be pre pandemic one
of the things we also want to
iterate is that if federal funds
had not been available to offset
general fund expenditures in FY
twenty one the state would have
needed to pull nearly one point
one billion dollars from the
reserves to cover the current
budget so just because we didn't
need to tap significantly into
those reserves this year that
was primarily due to the federal
funding that was available and
when we have significant oil and
gas down turns if this had been
an oil crash that was unrelated
to the pandemic we would have
had a very similar effect on the
state reserves and probably no
federal funds to assist the
state in that effort.
I'm going to skip the
information available on general
fund reserves as the secretary
mentioned we ended at thirty
five point four percent many of
you may be asking why it was at
thirty five point four percent
instead of the twenty five
percent target and we do listed
the reasons that all add up to
that thirty five point four
percent in this document you're
welcome to read through it and
if you have any additional
questions I can also explain
that later on.
I'm going to move forward in the
presentation
To talk about our stress testing
activity so the potential for
prices for oil and gas to be
higher or lower than these
assumptions is a very
significant risks to our
forecast and that has been the
case for many years now and we
tried recently we started
recently since about two
thousand and eighteen including
a stress test in each of your
revenue estimates to provide
that sensitivity analysis to oil
and gas revenues as well as to
other on economic conditions and
in the sensitivity analysis one
of the things that I want to
point out is what our revenue
estimate is right now is very
close to what we expected
revenues would be if we
experienced a significant oil
downturn so in the twenty eight
December twenty nineteen
consensus revenue estimate our
stress test considered a low oil
price scenario where prices not
would fall to thirty five
dollars a barrel for two years
and the current FY twenty one
revenue estimate is on par with
the estimate that was projected
and that low oil price scenario.
The other thing that I'll point
out in our current sensitivity
analysis in which we consider
oil price
oil prices falling or a longer
prolong economic recession as
well as a potential upside
scenario at the variation is not
a significant in this Rabb in
this sensitivity analysis as it
was in the prior one and part of
that is because we are already
in the economic downturn we are
already experiencing the low
prices and so that variation is
not as stark as it was when we
were experiencing high prices
and high production and the
effect on the general fund that
that did occur when that price
and production fell.
The next thing I'll point out on
page six of this document is our
revenue volatility analysis the
same that the secretary
mentioned but the thing that
I'll point out about this is
that in our other forecasts
particularly in December twenty
nineteen when we were looking at
fifty dollar oil prices and very
high production our economists
warned that the revenue
estimates and it for FY nineteen
and FY twenty were significantly
above trend and cautioned that
things that were that are
significantly above trend tend
to not be sustainable over time
and cautioned about
incorporating that above trend
revenue into the forecasts and
now is we can see what we're
experiencing now is that above
trend growth now immediately
followed by the low trend
declines due to the oil price
collapse and so these trend
analyses are a very good tool
for you all to use in each of
the revenue estimates and as we
move forward to get a sense of
where we are basically based on
where general fund revenues are
historically turnover
significantly above or below
trend and to use that in your
decision making process when
you're looking at recurring
budget for.
Next I'll move forward just to a
brief discussion on page seven
for the gross receipts tax I do
want to iterate that declines in
Eddy and Lea counties and
drilling related out of state
receipts accounts for over
ninety percent of our projected
decline in G. R. T. and this
affects not just mining which is
down very significantly but it
also affects many other
industries in that area
including construction
manufacturing warehousing
transportation et cetera so
there significant client
declines in each of these
industries that are largely
driven by Eddy and Lea counties
and drilling out of state
receipts.
Other than
Mining related declines leisure
and hospitality was also very
hard hit for G. R. T. and is
still down fairly significantly
even as we enter into the new
fiscal year.
The other point that I make is
available on page eight of your
presentation of your document is
that small businesses are also
very hard hit during this
pandemic and total small
business revenue in the state
was down twenty five percent in
September and even present as I
got further into the fall it was
down forty percent in November
and new data shows us that a
small business revenue was down
forty five percent in December.
On page nine just as the
secretaries iterated I would
like to point out with this
transfer to the tax
stabilization reserve secretary
certain Clark mention very
accurately that this mechanism
is doing exactly what it was
intended to do and one of the
ways that we can see that is
even though the total forecast
for severance tax revenue is
declining from FY twenty to FY
twenty one we are actually
looking at an increase in the
general fund revenue that will
be received from the severance
taxes that's because we look at
that five year average anything
above that five year average
would go to the tax
stabilization reserve so all of
the variants that we've seen
specifically in the severance
tax revenue over these last
several revenue estimates most
of that variance is impacting
the estimate of what the
transfer to the tax
stabilization reserve would be
but still the the planned amount
for the general fund from those
severance taxes has very very
little on it is actually plans
to increase in FY twenty one.
We also implemented a very
similar mechanism for federal
mineral leasing payments that's
royalty payments for production
on federal lands that will take
effect in FY twenty two and will
help bring down even more of the
volatility that we've seen in
the general fund revenue
estimates due to changes in the
oil and gas price and production
estimates.
And of course when we talk about
stability we have to mention the
permanent funds which are most
stable source of revenue even
though nearly every major
revenue sources expected to
decline in FY twenty one the
permanent fund distributions to
the general fund are expected to
grow by about six percent that's
about fifty five million
dollars.
Head to page ten of your
presentation and talk about some
of our forecast risks.
And we as we all know
Variation in prices and
production is one of the most
significant forecast risks that
we find and you can see a little
cheat sheet here on what we call
our you general rule on what a
one dollar change in the price
of oil will impact the general
fund in terms of severance taxes
and royalty payments as well as
changes in production and what's
important to note about this is
if you have a change in price
and the change in production
these variations in the general
fund or even more pronounced.
and the other thing that will
point out at today West Texas
intermediate prices are sitting
at about fifty three dollars a
barrel they were sitting at
about thirty eight dollars we
produced this revenue estimate
as a significant amount of
variation and if prices stay at
this level this recovery in
prices and potential recovery in
production could she could throw
the general fund revenues
with either sizeable increases
or decreases depending on the
direction but that's completely
separated from the state's
actual economic recovery in
terms of gross receipts tax
income tax or any other revenue
source of the economic stability
of the state that is separate
from oil and gas so we could end
up seeing sizable general fund
revenue increases even without
an economic recovery should
those prices and production
recover faster.
Next I will skip ahead on to
page twenty two of this document
just to briefly go over our
general fund dependence on oil
and gas you've all seen this
several times.
In terms of where we are sitting
at with the general fund
reliance on various oil and gas
revenues and the point that I
want to make about this is that
our general fund dependence on
oil and gas revenues varies with
boom and bust cycles so this
dependence significantly
increased in twenty nineteen
when we when production was
booming and we reached in terms
of
And.
Revenues excluding on the
permanent funds will was nearly
thirty five percent dependent on
oil and gas revenue in twenty
nineteen now as we've
experienced this boss the those
revenues as a proportion of the
General Fund had declined but
you'll notice there still at
elevated levels compared to our
historical dependence on those
revenues and that's because
production is still at a very
high level even though it has
declined.
The last thing that I'll leave
you with is on page twenty five
of this document and it really
gets to the point that Secretary
Chardon Clark mentioned in terms
of this case shaped recovery or
a different on outlook for high
wage versus low wage earners and
so this is a change in
employment what we're looking at
higher wages earners versus low
wage earners and you can see
that as of October as of the end
of September high wage earners
had restored about nearly all of
their job losses that were
experienced in the pandemic but
low wage positions we're still
down about fourteen percent this
is actually worsened some since
the date of this data that's
available in this document which
is as of the end of each
December we can see here which
I'll pull up briefly this data
as of mid October high wage jobs
were down about three percent
but lower wage jobs were still
down about nearly nineteen
percent so that is a very
different look in the recovery
of of jobs we're looking at
different income levels.
And then lastly I'll leave you
all
with the bottom of this document
which also about provides
information on consumer spending
and small business revenue you
can see that overall small
business revenue was still down
very significantly and that's
also in small business retail
and leisure and hospitality
which is down nearly seventy
percent as of
Middle of November and then you
can see consumer spending has
shifted very significantly
consumer spending in restaurants
and hotels is down nearly fifty
five percent however with
federal stimulus and other
checked other supplements that
were made available from the
federal government retail
spending has actually increased
eight percent and this is led to
a bump that we've noticed in our
out of state gross receipts
which is where we get revenue
from internet sales and that's
been one of the few bright spots
in our revenues is that
capturing of that internet cell
revenue with that I'm going to
in my presentation but I'm happy
to answer any questions that you
all may have.
You and I just think the
presenters today I want to make
a couple of comments before we
go to questions from the
committee the reason that this
can obviously the consensus
revenue report is done is
because it helps us incising
budget and those of you that
attended our budget briefing
back in December or in Jan
January saw that we went through
that what we're looking at how
much money we actually have
available to the budget for
reoccurring expenses and I think
it's an interesting I also
mention to you in those
trainings that we're one of the
few states that has a a governor
process and then a legislative
process if you look on page
thirty eight of the secretaries
handouts when we look at
consensus general fund revenue
forecasts and compare it to page
one of the LFC general fund
consensus revenue estimates
what's interesting to me if you
look at column FY twenty one and
you can see exactly how that
correlates back to the LFC
number.
Eight hundred sixty eight
million dollars and then you
look at the secretaries handout
on page thirty four FY twenty
two and you look at the FY
twenty two on the LFC Shea it's
five hundred forty seven million
dollars so and this is
Is it down it's a downturn based
on our projections were for
nineteen.
So this is one of the key
reasons why these reserves are
so incredibly important to us we
have to have that reserve we
have to to know exactly what
we've got so to speak in the
bank account as we're moving
forward because we can't control
the national economy.
As the presenter said it's going
to take three years to recover
even to pre pandemic and and pre
pandemic wasn't exact exactly
stellar of economic robust
economy so what we're dealing
with now is we're hoping to get
to where we were but we know
that the volatility is there and
we're going to work within those
constraints when we're building
our framework so we're gonna go
to questions now and
I'm going to I don't know whose
hand was up first but I'm going
to go with what I see on the
screen will start with Conklin
Vigil Representative Hochman
Vigil.
Thank you very much much madam
chair and thank you Mr grace's
for that very informational
presentations very helpful I
just was wondering today the
legislative administration
announced that they would be
putting a moratorium on any new
drilling and leasing permits on
federal land and I was wondering
if that was something that you
had anticipated and it would be
something we would be building
into your forecast down the line
or if they are already there and
so we know how that could be
impacting us then we're building
the budget down the road.
I'm thank you madam chair thank
you representative inner
I I haven't heard the news yet
on a total moratorium out what
I've heard so far with an
announcement about as.
Approvals of for the federal for
federal leasing
L. but we are keeping a close
eye on that that is something
that will look into this current
stress test does not consider a
federal band on any new trailing
and so that would be a separate
piece that we would have to
incorporate an absolutely if
that happens we would have to
incorporate that into our
revenue forecast as many of you
are familiar with the current
decline right of wells what that
means is when we drill in New
well it produces a significant
amount in the first two to three
months and then that production
declines precipitously in the
following months and therefore
new drilling has to continue to
occur in order to maintain or
drive growth in production and
so if there are limitations on
new drilling I particularly for
federal land which represents
roughly half or so of all of the
state's production are at the
location of all of the state's
production that could
significantly impact that
production levels and so that's
something that we are keeping a
close eye on and would
significantly affect the revenue
estimates if that happens.
Thank you very much.
Thank you Representative
Kristine trail.
Thank you madam chair and thank
thank the presenters on page
twenty five The New Mexico
employment by income consumer
spending is small business
revenue patriots attachment P.
Levin.
You know that it really struck
me the difference between.
The wages of the highway to
owners of earners and the lower
wage earners Center still
struggling.
How.
Madam chair.
Outside of the the.
Care is money but also we doing
what we do to ensure that these
low wage earners could stop
struggling so much you know
there are so many issues that
we're gonna have to listen to
regarding daycare and education
and a variety of these things
small I guess I want to
definition about who who are the
high wage earners I know it's
it's eighty plus but what are
the names of the the restaurant
owners because I think they're
losing what about about
me who are still low wage
earners could someone respond.
Well.
I'm gonna ask Stephanie to talk
about that but before I do that
it's very cool.
Thirty may cause we've got a
case shape recovering now the
higher wage earners are going to
pay higher.
Sessions we need somebody to.
But there are.
Get place.
Michael.
I think you're the one we can
we're picking you up there but
what what we can talk about and
I'm sure it's by category will
ask Stephanie to just briefly
defined with the lower wage
category consists of.
Sure madam chair and
representative here I'd be happy
to talk about that and that also
invite any of the other
panelists to join me when I
think of the higher wage jobs
that are coming back quickly I'm
thinking a lot of things that
are health care related and they
probably take advanced training
in degrees and and health care
services industry think about
financial services again higher
educational attainment levels
and then higher salary to begin
with
and lower wage think about
retail trade all the retail is a
bright spot and it does there
are job losses there just not
across the board summer doing
well some are not food services
leisure and hospitality those
are those are the hardest hit
sectors and then of course the
New Mexico were very at
dependent on federal and state
employment and local employment
tribal employment it's it's a
bright spot for us that there
has been quite a bit of
stability in government
employment it's not all high
wage but it is a stable source
of employment benefits
in a way and I guess it was the
second part of that question
that came first as far as what
we can do to support them just
off the top of my head from a
tax standpoint we've offered
penalty and interest relief
which helps somewhat to make
sure that if F. I many people or
businesses aren't able to keep
pace with their tax that they're
not falling into a kind of an
and a downward spiral of penalty
and interest a cruel there's
also been a lot of activity
around providing child care like
Representative Trujillo
mentioned child care support and
services
through the educational systems
and you know certainly the stuff
isn't my bailiwick but as as a
parent of two young kids who go
to public school from home I
it's amazing the transformation
that's been made to allow that
to happen and in a few short
months and then just so many
various forms of state and
federal relief that the federal
cares Act money I don't think we
can over estimate on.
The importance of that as as Mr
place yes mentioned in without
that money our reserves and be
in a very different picture than
they are today and you know the
state has also been innovative
in figuring out ways to support
businesses through grant
programs and and programs that
help retain employees and and
we're really just trying to make
sure that the most at risk
businesses aren't faced with
that difficult decision of
letting go of employees or
permanently shuttering their
doors.
I'll stop there.
I just had one more question to
add to that because of all of
this I know that the president
trump's last few days he three
two seven that I think it was
six hundred dollars to
families and then of the new
president Joe Biden said in this
next few days he would try to
get twelve hundred dollars
something like that I remember
the numbers what is gotten out
from all of that to know.
Madam chair representative
Trujillo so there was the
original cares Act payment that
you know provided the twelve
hundred or so dollar stimulus
check too many Americans and the
summer and then there was
another six hundred dollar
payment that was enacted in.
I don't know if his December
January right now I think it was
December that that law was
signed end of December I think
by president trump and of course
there are now with the new
president and a new Senate
Majority I think there'll be a
lot of on going discussions
about a next round of federal
stimulus and and it's kind of
too early to know what what that
might include in terms of checks
to individuals versus different
types of federal support.
Thank you all right thank you
very much Representative was
going to Representative
Anderson.
Your muted Representative.
Thank you madam chair I think
you can hear me now of.
Madam chair the I was gonna ask
you a follow up on the point
that the Representative Trujillo
was was visiting about and is it
accurate to say that if I'm
repeating what I heard to
whichever panelist up has the
number but as of today New
Mexico has lost fifty five
thousand jobs since the pandemic
yet will say March of last year
is is it still fifty five
thousand jobs.
I'm madam chair and
representative Anderson it's I I
just want rephrase that just a
little bit the slide that I went
over showed that from October
twenty twenty back to October
twenty nineteen we were down
that number of jobs and then
actually if we had updated that
slide on two November data were
down more like sixty one
thousand jobs but that's a
different number than pre
pandemic and and I can look that
up on the slide as we speak here
and I'll put the answer in the
chat app how many were down
since the onset of the pandemic.
Madam you please go ahead Madam
chair representative Anderson I
was just going to add on to that
in terms of jobs that were lost
say from February to April
during those first closures we
were looking at more close up
close to a hundred thousand jobs
and so we've recovered
at some of those jobs but we're
we're still down on a year over
year basis by that sixty one
thousand figure that seventy
Jordan Clark mentioned.
Okay thank you very much well I
I and then I was thinking about
that to who two thousand twenty
four being the date upon which
the current estimate suggests we
will get back to pre of decline
employment level which would be
sixty one thousand jobs over the
next forty eight of fifty months
or so is that rule of thumb in
my sort of on the right track
there.
Madam chair representative
Anderson I would say somewhere
in that ballpark it it may not
be an exact number but it it
that's along the right track
thank you well that's that's
certainly over well over two
thousand jobs a month in and I'm
just I'm sitting here very
concerned about whether or not
the state can afford to wait
until two thousand and twenty
four to get back to this up of
pre.
Return down because as you
pointed out the turn down was
not just oil it was oil and and
pandemic combines that that
drove us so far into the
unemployment category in and I'm
very for the concerned that you
think it's going to take that
long to recover is that the same
recovery of wine that other
states in other economies are
looking at Mr glacier.
Madam chair representative
Anderson I would have to look
specifically at other states but
I can say that our forecasts now
for the US total employment
recovery is expected to recover
in about two years so about
twenty twenty to beginning of
twenty twenty three is expected
total US job recovery where is
New Mexico's job recovery is
expected to take longer and just
a quick follow up why is that
going to take New Mexico two
years longer in your opinion
madam chair Mister gracious.
Mr chair are excuse me madam
chair and Representative
Anderson.
New Mexico has tended to lag the
United States in its economic
recovery is it could be because
of the types of positions and
types of jobs that we have
available in the state
the availability of resources
infrastructure workforce things
like that that we've tended to
lag in those recoveries and and
that lag is going to apparently
continue on as it has with
previous economic recoveries
thank you very much for that I I
I agree with the Representative
Trujillo that that the burden
is disproportionate to low wage
earners here in New Mexico and
so when I hear about the rather
slow recovery rate over four
years instead of something
shorter I'm I'm I'm I think we
face the reality that a low
income wage earning New Mexicans
are going to be the last to get
their jobs back or find a
redeployment and I hope during
this legislative session we can
see some initiatives that are
going to help accelerate that
last thing I want to do madam
chair real quick was on the pew
study it was mentioned the pew
study that was mentioned natural
resource dependent economies and
I think we'll boy after this
presentation this morning that's
certainly New Mexico.
Are any other states able to
reduce the risk of the price of
the commodity.
And we are naked in the market
place on on oil and gas
increases and decreases is that
really a prudent policy to the
secretaries or the economist
please.
Short answers Preciado thank
you.
Well if I may start madam chair
and representative Anderson I
kind of just want to start by
saying that our forebears and
and former policy makers over
many many decades actually have
taken many important steps to
somewhat build at least
government from down the oil and
gas in the the three things that
come to mind are the permanent
funds you know which take some
of our windfall revenue from oil
and natural gas and coal and
other things and place and and
and and and basically a
protected and dominant the
second one would be the
establishment of the severance
tax bonding program which
diverts that money and it's only
about half of the the revenue
that we received is used for
operations and and savings the
other half is used for bonding
and as a secretary Romero
mention we want to use that
volatile revenue for one time
things and that's what we're
doing through the severance tax
on program and then the third
one is this new windfall
transfer to the tax
stabilization reserve so.
Don't get me wrong it's it's
hard and we need to manage this
roller coaster but I do want to
point out that we do have
several really smart mechanisms
in place that other states have
have copied over the years
precisely to to protect
government services from that
volatility.
Thank you Secretary Clark have.
Only.
Turn it around a bit and say all
three of the examples you used
our oil and gas prices depended
and the state does not.
You anything to date to protect
itself against volatility in oil
and gas prices and that madam
secretary is something that I
would like to see the state come
forward with an ideal because
other large producers in America
image the risk they produce oil
as New Mexico does and they have
the right hedge the risk last
thank you very much for that
madam chair I'm done.
Representative Anderson
Representative Castellano.
Thank you madam chair quick
question what other Revenue
impacts on personal income tax
for fiscal years twenty twenty
one twenty two.
Since we lost almost close to a
hundred thousand jobs I believe
due to the COVID.
Understaffing at.
Thank you madam chair
representative Cassie and I'm
just looking very quickly to get
those exact numbers for you
while we're looking those up it
looks like secretary starting
clock is looking for the exact
numbers one thing that we'd like
to point out is that the impact
the personal income tax was
actually much less severe than
what we would have normally
expected for a hundred thousand
dollars hundred thousand jobs
decline or even where we're at
now that sixties one thousand
jobs being down and that is
primarily because of where those
jobs are being lost because
fewer higher income earning jobs
were lost and they recovered
more quickly personal income
taxes actually hasn't dropped
off in quite the way that we
would normally expect under what
we would think is a traditional
recession and because most of
those jets are as significant
portion of those job losses are
concentrated low concentrated in
low wage workers and while
devastating for the family as
well devastating for those in
need individuals it is less of
an impact on our personal income
taxes and I'll turn it over to
the secretary she was able to
find those numbers thank you Mr
thank you madam chair
representative I'm I'm looking
at appendix one eight in the
slides that secretary Romero and
I covered and there you can see
the line by line revenues that
go into the general fund you can
see that in FY twenty personal
income tax grew by one point two
percent and then in FY twenty
one it's expected to fall by
seven point two percent before
growing by six point three
percent in FY twenty two and a
couple things I want to know
related to that
trajectory the PPP loans that
the federal government
facilitated I think had a
stabilizing impact on pit and
then also we've got the new top
marginal tax rate going into
effect for tax year twenty
twenty one which is built into
the estimate.
Thank you madam chair.
Garcia.
Thank you madam chair of this
you're gonna want to mention
that there was an eight percent
increase in G. R. tease.
Was that do people actually
working with this money comfort
Care Act money that we're
spending.
Madam chair representative
Garcia I mentioned there was an
eight percent increase in retail
spending not an overall G. R. T.
and and where we see that that
retail spending though is is to
show up in our our retail G. R.
T. and we do think that that
most of that increase in retail
spending is largely due to the
additional cares Act money that
was provided to individuals both
in the form of the stimulus tax
but also in the form of the
enhanced unemployment benefits.
Thank you madam chair in other
words if you and I got the
stimulus money what would happen
to R. G. R. tease and the
spending on people.
Madam chair representative
Garcia while that's difficult to
quantify exactly we can we can
say in terms of what typically
happens in recessions like this
if that type of funding wasn't
made available so if
if those who are unemployed
didn't receive such a
significant unemployment
supplements they certainly would
not have been able to spends I'm
not just on things that are
taxable but things like rents
and and car payments and and and
a variety of other things that
keep the economy going they
would have had much more
difficulty making those payments
as well as reduced spending in
in areas like retail so it would
have reverberated very
significantly had that federal
money not been available.
Thank you Donna madam chairs
will move question don you
mentioned that there was a ten
year created and I'm willing gas
How much the wind and solar
going to have a not printed in
the ten years.
Madam chair representative
Garcia so just to clarify that
ten year trend analysis is a is
a total general fund revenues
not just oil and gas revenue
however currently
Taxes on renewable energy show
up mostly in the form of
construction so one time
construction projects that occur
in certain areas and we see
bumps in the gross receipts
taxes related to that it can
also show up in forms of state
property taxes or in lieu of
taxes but there's there's very
little other associated taxes
that are generated from
renewable energy and even if we
were to impose said taxes on it
would not come anywhere near are
other major revenue sources
including oil and gas but any of
the other major revenue sources
as well so in and of itself it
would probably have a relatively
small impact on that total ten
year trend.
Thank you madam chair but done
with the what we're driving that
is durable peace building so
they want to do well awesome
foods what is it by going to be
on our state following gas just
shut down because of our energy.
Chair representative Garcia
I I would hesitate to speculate
on oil and gas to shutting down
as soon I'm out of time however
what I can say is that when we
look at all the various forms of
revenue that the state gets from
oil and gas so not just revenue
directly into our general fund
but also revenue into our
bonding funds both in general
obligation bonds through an ad
valorem property taxes but also
our severance tax bonding on
revenues that are received that
are put into our permanent funds
and then re distributed to the
general fund we're looking at
upwards of three or four billion
dollars annually that is
generated from oil and gas and
that funding would no longer be
available if we said oil and gas
and disappears tomorrow however
one thing that I would point out
is that should that be the case
the fact that we've invested in
such a large permanent fund were
all of those royalties are
available are we are we're all
of those realty's are deposited
that if oil and gas did
disappear tomorrow while the
permanent funds would no no
longer be receiving
contributions from that
production those permanent funds
would still exist in would still
continue continue to distribute
to the general fund.
Thank you done and you know just
a concern of mine because
we do this marginally gas
everybody's education education
education and they need to be
filled be aware that most of
this money come from oil and gas
and you know everybody wants
clean energy it will keep
pressure we all agree on that we
need to see what we're doing.
To not make that guests will we
thank you thank you madam chair.
Representative Garcia and for.
Person on the list as
Representative small but before
recalling him there is going to
be an assignment I've got to ask
LFC to work on based on the new
restrictions on oil and gas
development on federal lands it
likely to do a scenario parted
Alice's I want that actually
will cost the state of New
Mexico to include gross receipts
tax and payment
particularly since we we are we
are without protection against
volatility so we can see that I
think that's gonna be incredibly
important when we get our mid
term revenue projection all
right Representative small.
Thank you very much madam chair
thank you secretaries and LFC
presenters madam chair
the first question for maybe for
missing less yes the building
off of your and Representative
Hochman Vigil the drilled but
uncompleted wells.
Do you have that number off the
handy Mr glass yes those are
what wells that have been
drilled they don't require a
drilling permit but they have
not been completed so that the
the hydrant whether oil and gas
is not following it do you have
that number by chance.
Madam chair representative small
we unfortunately don't get that
data broken out specifically for
New Mexico we do have access to
that data for the Permian basin
overall a large chunk of those
will be the Texas basin as a
rule of thumb it's usually about
seventy five percent Texas about
twenty five percent New Mexico
more or less in terms of
production and that that
correlation may or may not hold
to to the drilled but
uncompleted wells the energy
information administration place
that out I haven't looked at
that the in the last week or so
I'm happy to send that to you
that there is a significant
inventory understood thank you
thank you Mr this is and I think
all of that I want to ask
anymore questions that area
madam chairs request.
I think will cover the report
will cover that
Two final quick questions one
get it in the EDD drilling the
number of drilling rigs
percentage wise has recovered
more quickly in New Mexico and
our portion of the Permian than
in Texas correct.
Madam chair representative small
that's correct great thank you
I guess the third question is
just to reinforce the point
that's been made
With the the current increase
prices and quicker return of
drilling rigs to New Mexico.
For the short term Mr glass yes
it seems like we may be even as
we see the economic the D.
horrible economic struggles that
state revenues
in the very short term.
Could
in the get in the short term
climb correct.
Madam chair representative small
it's corrected it the prices
that are currently of available
today and it has relatively
stabilizer above where we were
in the previous estimate that
that that would have that could
have a positive impact on
revenues when we do the mid
session update.
Thank you and then the final
point and it's to reinforce
something that all the
presenters of said madam chair
really has continued to work on
with the stress testing scenario
is that even as we perhaps look
forward to this short term
increase in state revenue there
is a very it is there is
significant risk in recurring
investments given the many and
and just new today.
Substantial risks to state
revenues so.
Is that fair the services madam
chair Madam chair representative
so small I would say that that's
entirely fair for example to the
extent that revenue estimates
would come up the dependency of
of that on oil and gas so let's
say if for example most of the
and at any increase we were
solver to be depended on oil and
gas and that means that it is is
dependent on what is still a
highly volatile revenue source
that this time it was a pandemic
last time it was and OPEC
decision next time it could be
who knows what but that price is
out of our control and is
subject to shocks that can just
happen at any time and to the
extent that we use any increase
in revenue to increase recurring
budgets were increasing it would
be increasing that dependence on
that volatility understood thank
you very much Mr glasses thank
you madam chair.
Representative spoiled we have
any other questions for this
particular panel.
Right I don't see any hands
not been informed of anybody
that has any questions so I'd
like to thank the panel for your
presentation today I'd encourage
the members chair read the
information that's been provided
by the panel and certainly if
you have any questions are
available to speak with you one
on one but I strongly encourage
that you get real close to this
information thank you again
ladies and
I will move on to our next hello
thank you madam chair thank you.
The next panel that we have is a
presentation of LFC and exec
appropriation recommendations
that we have Debbie Romero
acting cabinet secretary as well
as David Abbey our director of
legislative finance committee so
I'm not sure who's gonna go
first Debbie or David of we're
all heroes.
Thank you Director Abbey madam
chair of Cindy Martinez the
deputy director is going to be
sharing the screen with the
presentations of you give us a
minute to get that set up.
Wirth.
So madam chair
three he's been consistent madam
chair are packed.
We can see the screen but we
need the members to keep their.
Here's needed place.
Okay thank you madam chair so
this is a book but through the
first couple of of squads its
the the cover page and then the
staff at DFA so move on to the
third slide please.
So I just thought I'd touch a
little bit on that the current
census spending and special
cares Act spending that was
appropriating during November
just to give you a status update
so if you're going to the
census.
So so what I can say about
sentences legislature
appropriated by eleven point
five million dollars for the
twenty twenty census about eight
hundred that we kind of thousand
about was allocated to the
twenty two tribes and the
balance was allocated to state
agencies to community based
organizations to you a local
media agency and used for web
development and then also to the
funding was allocated to UNM
geospatial and population
studies program.
Next slide please.
So this is just a chart of the
distribution of that funding
just a small portion was used
for administrative expenses
about to present
counties received about forty
two percent of the funding and
the tribes received about seven
percent of the funding as we all
know Census has not been
finalized and so you know
waiting on federal government
and then also I believe that
that do present buying has also
or is if you haven't already
there's discussion about an
executive order that's related
senses so this is not a done
deal get which in our case
percent New Mexico we hope
that's actually true because we
feel like
you know that that there was a
lot of areas that were given the
pandemic given given everything
that was going on that we didn't
get
the numbers are the the counts
that that we were hoping for I
think there was some breakdowns
in the way that the federal
government we're doing things
personally I can tell you I
submitted money online and then
one day I was working here and I
have somebody drive into you to
to take my senses because they
have be it down as non
responsive so I know there were
a lot of glitches and I'm hoping
that some of that can be
resolved
Not just for us but for
throughout the nation throughout
the nation the next one city
place.
The report on the three hundred
nineteen million that was
allocate or was appropriated by
the legislature in November and
so
fifty four percent of that of
the three hundred nineteen went
to DWS for unemployment benefits
the next biggest chunk was
thirty six percent you a small
business relief for a total of
about a hundred million dollars.
The next one I will show you the
actual distributions so DWS
distributed a hundred and forty
four million almost a hundred
forty four million they used
thirty three million for
administrative expenses they
actually had ballot balance left
over at the end and so they
transferred fifty point four
million Judy unemployment trust
fund there's only two agencies
that actually did a transfer
that NMFA's the other one the
transfer but two point five to
the unemployment fund
so
it was twelve hundred dollar
checks that went out and they
went out there was almost nearly
two hundred thousand individuals
that receive a twelve hundred
dollar tax for this the US small
business loans or grants not
loans grants there about six
thousand seven hundred twenty
six requests that were awarded
through NMFA the average grant
amount was about fifteen
thousand dollars forty percent
of the funding went to non urban
areas.
The next slide is the HSD cash
assistance so the legislature
appropriated five million
dollars once the application
started coming in HSD reached
out to the executive or to DFA
and said we've got lots more
than we anticipated is there
anything you can do to help you
know so that we can meet reach
more people so we actually had
two million dollars that had
had gone out to a local
government that was not going to
be used and so we were able to
use to allocate that money to
you HSD for these cash
assistance programs so they sent
out about fifteen thousand
Funding for about fifteen
thousand individuals about and
the checks were four hundred and
sixty five dollars each so that
was that was definitely
you know how to all these
individuals and the mortgage
finance authority distributed
the full fifteen million dollars
thanks there's what they did is
they used
Mortgage companies and
management companies and they
accepted.
Some applications for
individuals that needed
assistance and so they actually
reached almost thirty four
hundred households are impacted
three three hundred households
and HSD the food support five
million dollars was distributed
to the five food banks I've been
in there was a slight in there
that I kind of brief over jump
over.
That's the next slide so just to
show you that the total
revisions to the unemployment
fund was about fifty two point
nine million almost fifty three
million dollars they went to the
unemployment fund of the larger
questions largest portion from
D. W. S..
Is the cares Act the right hand
side reflects the allocations
and the some portion of this
with the transfer to the general
fund appropriations account so
that was four hundred thirty one
million after three three
hundred nineteen million was
taken out for the that during
the special session and so
there's also a hundred fifty two
million for local governments
small businesses tribe's
allocating allocation was twenty
six point three million in state
agencies about a hundred forty
million.
The chart on the left is
actually a break down of the
expenses that we have been able
to charge against
so agencies are having to
identify COVID related expenses
in their operating budgets to be
able to charge against the cares
Act in there some accounting
things are going to have to go
on for the federal government
but you know the fact that the
money was appropriated didn't
mean that we it could be used
just for any purpose it has to
be for COVID related purposes
and so you can see the chart on
the left that that about four
hundred thirty one million our
target and there's a breakdown
Department help most of it has
been is your mark for public
health and safety personnel with
the accent exception of the last
which is facilitating a distance
learning for K. twelve and
that's about thirty one almost
thirty two million for public
education.
The next slide will show you the
distributions to the local
governments in the tribal and
small business
Grant agreements were sent out
to all the tribal governments
local governments for these do
these funds and so those grant
agreements expired actually a
December thirty first and so
eight these local governments
have until January thirty first
to submit their reimbursement
request as of Monday
There was a seventy eight
percent of them had submitted
reimbursement requests there's
about thirty nine million
dollars it has not been
submitted the largest portion of
that we have local governments
and and the tribal governments
that really we're trying to
encourage them to submit their
reimbursement there may be small
balances left over at the end
and then we'll do an analysis of
the needs not just for local
governments but state needs for
some Miss Kerr's Act money I
don't anticipate we're going to
have a lot of money if we have
five hundred thousand dollars I
think that will be on the high
side.
It sounds like all these local
governments tribal governments
will be submitting the full
amount for reimbursement.
So now I'm going into the budget
so I think you know the
executive and we talked a little
bit in the previous presentation
about the reserve targets and so
the executive target is twenty
five percent of reserves
that's compared to where we
thought we were gonna be in June
at the end of the June special
session that target was actually
eleven percent and so the.
Recommendation the
recommendation is actually three
point three percent above the
FY.
Twenty one budget but it's still
four percent low what was passed
in in March of twenty twenty.
Next slide please.
This is the general fund reserve
table it if it shows where
reserve levels are going to be
yes the executive recommendation
we're based on the executive
recommendation so both FY twenty
one in FY twenty two reserve
targets would be a twenty five
percent.
This.
That the two thousand eighteen
reserves are high are hired
progressively
I than in previous years and I
think that's really what's
helped us the state of New
Mexico
deal with this this pandemic I
mean it wasn't just the pandemic
we were dealing with that was
the crash in all prices and so
that have these healthy reserves
and what got us through that
this downturn.
The next slide please she
struggling a little bit.
Okay I'm sorry so this is like
my category of the second
recommendations public schools
health and Human Services and
higher education are the largest
pods you can see that it about
that public safety additional
general control all over pretty
flat it's just these three year
you're even higher education is
just slightly higher than FY
twenty one
Human Services of the same
health and Human Services is
just like the higher of the the
public education this is it
seems to be the biggest
difference.
Next please.
So again the executive
recommendation is actually seven
point two nine eight point five
of recurring expenses and seven
hundred sixty nine point four of
non recurring expenses for both
FY twenty one in FY two.
Next slide please.
So I just basically took some
highlights on on things you know
that that that the governor
included for but executive
budget you know the priority
areas for the governor are
pandemic but the public
education early childhood
services and youth and I
adolescent and young adult well
being and actually and and the
main purpose of all this is to
position the state to prosper in
the post pandemic world how do
we get prepared as we roll out
of this pandemic you'll see on
this one there's twenty five
million for the tourism
department to the to help with
the tourism in the economy you
know we don't like the vaccine
is here people are going to be
anxious to travel and it's what
can we do to help stimulate that
that economy
this investment could actually
has the potential to shorten
economic recovery from seven
years to three years with
targeted investments and so and
and we also have the potential
to increase state and local tax
revenue by ten to fifteen
percent each year and put it is
projections are that'll put
about twenty seven thousand
people back to work in two years
you'll hear a lot more about
this in your eight then winters
and
has there HSD hearing.
Next slide just again some more
high level type breakdown inputs
included the second
recommendations behavior health
with a big
initiative four the governor you
know behavioral health
investments suicide prevention
school based health centers role
in primary health care programs.
Next please.
Again I'm but that
recommendation has investments
in early childhood
you know pay equity increased
home visiting family first
increased
you know cybersecurity we keep
you know we it's around us and
and and we know it's there I
don't know that we've done
enough to protect ourselves and
so there were investments both
are are appropriation there
isn't something in the budget
for both Pat and Department of.
Department of information
technology for cybersecurity.
I'm not on public schools
because you're gonna get to hear
that next so.
Go over those so starting on
page slide twenty two through
twenty to thirty one those are
the breakdowns of the highlights
of the executive recommendation
I want to go into a lot of
detail to be respectful of your
time but but there's the details
of what's included in the
executive recommendation for
your review thank you madam
chair.
Presentation please.
David we're ready.
Sorry I thought I was unmuted
fund on Tuesday received LFC is
three volumes for its budget
recommendation I'm just going to
touch on very briefly before I
go to the review of the spending
recommendation of volume one is
significantly discussion of
major major policy and spending
areas in the state education
higher and so forth don next
please however if the fact of
buying one there's a fairly
lengthy review of agency
performance reports and
we.
Agencies under the counter
million government act included
their budget request and LESC
recommendations and even
included House Bill to Senator
measures and LFC receives
reports four agencies and
flagged those as red yellow and
green red doesn't mean failure
means needs attention next
please don here's a here's a
little more on what we look for
for good measures we receive
quarterly reports as I said from
agencies next on here's an
example for example public
education what's more important
than reading and math
proficiency so on the top right
so hard to see but this isn't
going one you can see that
A reading and math proficiency
is in the range of twenty to
thirty percent and whether it's
fourth right and we've made
modest progress but we're still
far below what we need to get
our next slide for CYFD I think
this there's a couple measures
we look at very closely for CYFD
of.
Just scroll down a little bit
please the.
I'm sure subject to repeat
maltreatment this is an example
that we call the Canary in the
coal mine for an effective child
welfare system and this this
sense of the state puts children
in foster care can they keep
them safe and nationally ninety
five percent of children are
safe when they go into foster
care but in New Mexico where the
higher levels for for quite some
time I I modest improvements of
maybe I think the for the latest
year quarters one of fourteen
percent range from even higher
but it just tells us we need
need to make more investments
and in that area and and.
Place a greater focus on HSD
action plans to improve results
our next done.
then we go to buy into the thick
document volume two has a
narrative and spending
recommendations for every agency
here's an example for the state
engineer page one thirty.
One thirty six statutory
authority agency mission a
summary at a glance the Google
page narrative and then the
performance measures other over
a hundred and eighty agencies
and we have this format of
reporting for everyone next on
finally in volume three we have
worksheets that span all aspects
of state finances here's one of
the three pages of the of the
index providing three and for
example lead expenditures per
job who the permanent fund but
beneficiaries building
conditions so I think you'll
find is the hearings proceed.
Analysts will draw your
attention on many occasions to
performance and financial data
that will help you in your
deliberations with that done
let's go to my main
presentation.
This is from volume one this is
the highlights of the LFC
recommendation the LFC
recommendation avoids damaging
cuts to agency budgets
prioritizes modest fund funding
increases to stabilize schools
in Medicaid and replaces one
time federal funds and education
health care continues to expand
investments in early childhood
services
Secretary Romero earlier
mentioned new money up very
important concept new money is
next year's recurring revenue
minus this year's recurring
spending and we.
We show on the bottom of page
one don go down a little bit we
show new money as a hundred and
sixty nine million however that
H. excludes another hundred and
fifty five or so million that
replaced federal funds that were
swapped out at the June special
session so really we had three
hundred plus million of revenue
growth but half was used to
replace the federal funds the
next slide.
The recommendation reallocate
savings for expense of services
due to declining workload such
as faster per care prisons and
we allocate funding to evidence
based community interventions to
get better outcomes at lower
cost the LFC recommendation
totals.
seven point three six billion
that's a four percent increase
over the current fiscal year.
In the early childhood area of
the General Fund recommendation
is down slightly on the other
hand the other state fund
recommendation for the oral
early childhood department
includes twenty million up from
the early childhood trust fund
created last it the twenty
twenty session the public
education there's an increase of
a hundred and five million
The significant amount of that
was to replace federal funds but
there were two other significant
uses of recurring revenue
increases one was elimination of
the impact aid credit and it
under the state equalization
formula the state for four
decades yes reduce the general
fund distribution to school
districts by seventy five
percent of local revenues and
the most significant local
revenue yes impact aid to Mexico
substantially to Nate districts
with predominately in native
American population half of that
was rolled back for the current
year for the FY twenty two
recommendation the LFC
recommendation eliminates the
higher credit it the entire
credit for include incremental
cost over thirty million in also
eliminates the credit for a half
mill property tax levy that
every district imposes on that
cost another fifteen million so
this this recommendations about
the executive and the LESC have
for impacted although the
executive doesn't have the
property tax base so that was
also kind of a multi year you're
at ten I would call it an budget
making for public education.
The LFC recommendation also
prioritizes extended learning
time for for all students both
An extra ten days for many
schools as the K. five plus
program which is an extra twenty
five days for schools with a
high percentage of at risk
students thank the
recommendation can cover two
thirds of students and and up
high poverty schools of and it
also includes in addition to the
hundred fifteen million it uses
funding from the education
reform Fund which is left over
from prior years to expose to
extend early learning in K. five
plus for higher education the
main aspect is replacing twenty
million of federal funds that
were used to supplant General
Fund in the current fiscal year
there's a modest increase in the
eye and she or instruction in
general formula for schools.
Health sciences center is up to
percent.
For Medicaid.
a couple big factors are for
almost for every quarter this
year the state has been
receiving what we call the past
F. map it's an extra six percent
of federal funds and that's our
help achieve significant general
fund savings it goes all the way
through June at this time we
don't see it continuing into FY
twenty two but that may change.
so there's a need to replace
seventy five million of one time
federal funds that were in the
FY twenty one fiscal year and
don't carry forward into FY
twenty two in addition Medicaid
is experiencing about ten
percent enrollment growth one of
the conditions of getting the
enhanced federal match was not
descend rolling of the.
Medicaid recipients and so
that's that counts for a lot of
the growth in the Medicaid
budget.
CYFD.
The bottom of page three there's
so general fund increase for
behavioral health services
support at present.
In health on page five.
Let's start page four of the LFC
recommendation increases general
fund revenues for public health
in the program one of the
highlights of the twenty twenty
session was strong investments
but when we disable program both
expanding services implementing
a new community support waiver
and are raising rates for
providers which which was widely
recognized as a need
unfortunately some of that had
to be rolled back at special
session so this restore some of
those funds with the almost a
four percent increase.
For the judiciary funding is
approximately flat for a public
defender the DHS and the of the
Courts of the.
Judges are provided to present
targeted compensation increased
in the wake of a recommendation
of the judicial judicial
compensation commission.
Well rolling to pick to page
five compensation the LFC
recommended the cost of living
adjustment for all public
employees that's state agencies
higher ed and and public
education one half percent cost
about sixty million for the last
you'll see a slide later on in
my hand that's it for the last
twelve years we've only had
across the board increases half
the time
and you know can tell by looking
at they can see rates for state
agencies you're gonna hear a lot
about that when you get into the
details of agency budgets but
the average think it's the right
for state agencies is eighteen
percent but some of that
reflects the fact that agencies
may have positions on the books
that are no longer needed but
also in our view reflects
problems with recruitment and
retention.
For one time funding the LFC
recommendation is.
Then the we call it in the back
of the bill this is special
appropriations which is
typically used to start up new
programs or supplement agency
activities of.
Let's see some of the highlights
of the special and supplemental
appropriations or allowing
agencies extra money for the
current fiscal year so some of
the highlights include twenty
one million for impact Aid
liabilities and by the way that
was in the paper this morning
the.
Decision of a federal
administrative law judge
requires us not to take credit
for last fiscal year FY twenty
and some of those monies are of
already been allocated to the
states for reserve but we think
twenty one million more is
needed to cover those twenty one
FY twenty liabilities twelve and
a half million to the Economic
Development Department including
a seven half million for leader
there's more in capital outlay
the five million for J. tap and
then for broadband the LFC
recommendation as ten million of
general fund.
Senator official ten million
capital outlay separately.
Some significant recommendations
for fund transfers and and I I
so to state the obvious because
revenues were underestimated now
we are almost a wash in one time
the general fund revenue that
is.
Available to help sure up thing
chair of the funds but not
necessarily start recurring
initiatives given but while
touring uncertainty especially
for a guest room with some of
the significant features of the
what are fund transfers include
two hundred and fifty million
for state roads that's a hundred
and fifty million for the state
road fund and a hundred million
for local roads there's a three
hundred million dollar transfer
to the unemployment trust fund
we project that the unemployment
trust fund will end the year the
position of minus four hundred
and fifty million without any
of.
any action and.
It under federal law the state
is able to cover that shortfall
in in payments to New Mexicans
by borrowing from the federal
treasury at a very low interest
rate in fact it may be zero till
the end of.
It was near it is she bears
there are very low.
But so the LFC recommendation
has three hundred million still
would leave a shortfall of one
hundred fifty million that is of
great concern because there is a
formula for setting the tax rate
for employers to cover these
unemployment cost and sooner or
later if we don't resolve that
shortfall will end up having a
fly up in unemployment tax rates
which will be have adverse
effects on New Mexico businesses
there are also a number of other
programs that receive one time
funding state maybe that will
help us down the road on a
recurring basis.
Separately I won't go into it
much here but the LFC has
recommendations for capital
outlay mainly for state agencies
and universities that totals
about two hundred million.
Additionally the LFC
recommendation left a hundred
and fifty million for members
and the governor to divided in
their customer waste and now
that residual this is two
hundred twenty five million so
in addition to the statewide
framework you can look to about
seventeen million of peace or
war between the house the Senate
the governor births.
Okay I'm gonna go ahead to.
The H..
Thirteen.
No.
Gonna skip some details on the
LFC recommendation like details
by agency in the financial
summary and here we compare of.
List of a a
General fund sources and uses
for both fiscal year between the
executive and LFC and.
And I'm not sure all the
recurring appropriation
recommendations are pretty close
so for the the
executive is about.
Sixty million less than LFC
maybe.
They can explain that a later
point there are both LFC and
exec have significant non
recurring appropriations
look at line forty now here's
here's an interesting area LFC
in line thirty nine set aside
seventy five million for
economic development initiatives
the executive set aside four
hundred and seventy five between
the two fiscal years we know
that already have had
significant bills that will
address expanding elector
expanding working families are
perhaps waving gross receipts
taxes
these.
These lines are address that.
I I mentioned roads the LFC has
two fifty the executive doesn't
have road recommendations at
least from the general fund
those are some of the biggest
differences are and then finally
online fifty three you can see
that the LFC recommendation was
to lower general fund reserves
to about twenty two percent the
worst executive station twenty
five percent
of the classiest nice job and
and sort of the executive in
talking about stress testing not
show hi reservist served the
state extremely well and twenty
twenty.
In terms of our keeping a high
reserve mark that when the
pandemic kit on gas prices
collapsed went from the fifties
to twenty in a month.
When they collapse the state was
able to avoid cuts they had to
roll back increases that were
passed at the twenty session but
they didn't have to move into
the cut territory because of the
high reserve level combined with
federal funds so we know high
reserves helped but I also think
Mr glasses pointed out that when
you're on the high side of the
trans or wench when oil prices
and production are hiring you to
stress testing there's a lot
more downside risk conversely
conversely if we're at the low
end of the trans we're and lower
oil and gas prices the downside
risk is less so that was some of
the thinking behind LFC
recommending a twenty two
percent reserve toward now let's
turn the page the.
Here were comparing maybe to
blow this up a little bit here
we're comparing for the large
agencies recurring appropriation
recommendations for next fiscal
year I won't get into a lot of
detail on it but for schools in
higher ed.
Currently close in percentage
terms some differences probably
the LFC it's fair to say realize
more formula funding the sector
relies more on what we would
call below the line or out of
formula recommendations that the
executive would target typically
the legislature has been more of
a more supportive of leading the
formula working in fact that was
the funding of Martinez Yazzie
was favoring more formula based
funding especially for public
education there is a big
difference on eight sixteen the
executive has so.
The significantly higher amount
reflecting of funding for the
opportunity scholarship the LFC
recommendation puts more into
the instruction general funding
for many of the small agencies
that or other agencies aren't
small agencies the small
agencies are out there this
sheet will same in the second
probably the biggest here is
Medicaid that's one thirty
three.
The Medicaid recommendation for
LFC is sixty eight million
higher than the executive and I
think we're in the process of
trying to understand that but I
would note also that HSD
presented a forecast of
Medicaid.
For FY twenty two which was
about showing a need about sixty
or seventy million higher even
than the LFC recommendation so
we know that it's important to
members to to make sure that we
adequate adequately fund
Medicaid without using.
Without using nonrecurring
revenue.
And then finally on one forty
five we show the compensation
sixty million LFC nothing and so
the fact that the executive put
sixty million and compensation
compared to nothing and
executive probably accounts for
why then you're gonna find that
most executive agency
recommendations are going to be
a little higher than the LESC
because they're not doing
compensation of course a lot of
what agency spend.
Yes for compensation anyway so
if they can't hire people that
make money maybe sit there be re
prioritized a budget adjustment
process.
I won't go into the details but
they list every single agency
the difference between the LESC
and the recommend and Executive
recommendations and you'll hear
all that's what you focus on for
the next few weeks.
Thanks nineteen.
Again here some of the
highlights of the one time
monies that LFC recommended
almost eight hundred million
dollars.
I talked about roads.
The economic recovery money
unemployment trust fund.
The next slide is the history
of.
Hey adjustments I noted that for
half of the last twelve years
there were not for state
employees we phone behind I want
to wrap it up with a little bit
of federal funds.
Well here's a report.
By.
My staff by the way I should
take this time to acknowledge
Charles lease but deputy
director he's the head of the
analyst is on with you now will
join Courtney may also be used
the head of our performance
group one of his analyst Micaela
Fischer prepared this chart.
We know cares was a huge benefit
to the state cares passed in
April and Congress for for nine
months about whether to do
another round.
After LFC preparedness
recommendation Congress finally
agreed on another nine hundred
billion dollar stimulus package.
They combined the nine hundred
billion stimulus package with
their regular ongoing budget
this interesting to put in
perspective the stimulus package
the of nine hundred is almost as
big as annual recurring
appropriation from the federal
government of of one point four
trillion.
So hi there is a lot a lot of
federal money pouring into the
state both from cares in April
and now the omnibus act which
passed in December this table
here just shows the portion of
the omnibus Act that was rolled
in from the stimulus and so it
is very important as you go
forward and look at initiatives
to keep in mind the federal
funding that this comment from
cares and is coming in from of
us at the same time issue
consider our request for state
funding so
I'm blessed another one point
two billion to estimated from
the paycheck paycheck protection
program for our state PPP
Unemployment support I mentioned
earlier the shortfall in our
fund because the fed isn't
paying our share what they're
paying substantial amounts to
increase payments to individuals
by three hundred dollars and
extend the term of payments to
individuals for I'm gonna say
three months or so and and so
that totals almost six hundred
million of four or four five
month period through to March or
so
stimulus checks a billion
dollars.
Coming into New Mexico from
stimulus checks.
Our economy is ninety billion so
that that's a one percent alone
of our economy is going to come
from the six hundred dollar
stimulus checks that many people
received already in a mental
last couple weeks.
NexPoint Education.
Fifty four billion at the
federal level New Mexico share
of that is estimated at four
hundred and forty million.
And cares only brought in a
hundred and ten million or so I
that number right enabled and
went directly to the school
districts I'm the bus is going
to bring in four hundred and
forty million the total general
fund school budget is three
billion so we have almost
fourteen percent of supplemental
funding for school districts
from the bus that goes directly
to them it's available for two
quarters this year.
FY twenty one all of FY twenty
two in the first quarter of FY
twenty three.
That that's all a lot of money
that is not factored into the
budget and you want to think
about issue consider the request
to of districts higher education
a hundred thirteen million.
When the LESC took credit for
twenty million from cares for
higher education.
The institutions were really
frustrated and I'm happy about
that and so fortunately the LFC
and executive recommendation
reached I think they restore the
LFC definitely restores all that
money the twenty million but
here is a hundred and thirteen
million more federal omnibus
money on top of the general fund
increase of about one percent so
a lot of money for higher at
thirty million or more for for
U. N. M. C. N. M. at NMSU also
getting big amounts next next
page.
I'm almost done let's see
funding to states for testing
tracing and COVID medication
twenty five billion nationally
estimated.
Using population to allocate the
state sure well over a hundred
million perhaps coming in to for
for that for that activity of
transportation about halfway
down a hundred and twenty eight
million going to the state
transportation department for
roads with broad discretion for
the state.
Broadband of sixteen million
subsidizing operating costs for
low income families another
almost ten million for internet
providers to make infrastructure
investments.
So let's see.
Last page or rental assistance
and this was something that was
considered at the November
session special session DFA
talked earlier about.
Fifteen million went to M. MFA
for rental assistance well look
at this this looks like another
two hundred million coming in
under the post rental system so
again as you do this work as you
work on capital outlay gonna
want to consider these monies
which are not typically
reflected in the budget so thank
you madam chair all trying
secretary Romero and answer your
questions.
All right this is a very in
depth presentation now we're
getting a very short on time
here already gone over all about
an hour so why don't we see if
we do have any burning questions
at this point by any the
committee members
if not we're gonna live and
share that piece of public
school support this is a lot of
information in a very short
period of time and certainly I
recognize that as your chair but
it's it's critical it's the kind
of thing that we need to go over
so everyone understands what the
start point is as we move
through these agencies on Monday
so let me ask just a is there
anyone that's got a burning
question for either David or
Debbie at this point.
Okay I David and Debbie
excellent presentation.
I don't the.
Don't know quite any questions
as a is a hit on the
presentation is just so
overwhelming I mean it's it's a
it's a big deal and unless
you're living and breathing this
every day as many of LFC
committee it's hard sometimes to
get your arms around it but I
anticipate as we go through the
various budgets for each of the
agencies you'll get lots and
lots of questions so let me
think the presenters both Debbie
Romero and David Abbey for your
presentation this afternoon.
I'd like to now move to the
public schools support I've got
John here sunny
Yes madam chair and that will be
Synthia R. who who's is that
going to be our presenters of
public school support all right
we're ready we're all ears.
The the please you madam chair
I'd like to share my screen to.
I believe all of you should have
the same packet but.
I'll be supposedly speaking from
page to page is your general
fund high level.
Thank you madam chair and so
once again my name is Sonny
realligned the LFC analysts for
public schools and with me is
Cynthia Martinez W. director for
DFA.
And I believe Dr Ryan Stewart
secretary of public education is
also on this call but in the
interest of time I'd like to
just highlight some of the big
differences between the two
recommendations and then I'll
head over to seventy four
comments from the executive.
So first off.
You go to page three the
document about the middle of the
page you'll see the total.
General fund recommendation here
online seventy nine.
And.
This does not include as David
mentioned earlier the new
federal aid above that four
hundred million coming in the
schools from the caress the.
Package but this is just the
general fund.
Increase in as you can see the
executive recommendation is
about a hundred twenty seven
million which is four percent
over the prior year the LFC
recommendation is about a
hundred and five million which
is three point three percent
this does not include in the LFC
recommendation another thirty
three that's estimated within
that compensation package at the
back of the bill.
And so the biggest differences
in the public school support
recommendation are going to be
primarily and the program cost
and say it was ation guarantee
section I'll just briefly go
over some of the big differences
here by David mentioned earlier
the executive an LOC
recommendation do remove the
impact aid credit online for the
LFC recognition further includes
another seventeen million almost
to remove the half melody and
the federal Force reserve
credit.
As well another big difference
you'll see here on lines.
Eight three two ten are the O.
C. and Executive recommendations
for relevant the executive
provides another twenty three
million four.
Additional enrollment growth
units while the LFC
recommendation takes a credit
based on the natural decline
that we're seeing in student
enrollment statewide they also
recognition also includes
additional language giving
budget instructions on
enrollment growth units for FY
twenty two given what we've seen
from enrollment declines due to
the pandemic.
Online's Levin and twelve of
the.
These are your K. five plus
extended learning time program
lines the LFC recommendation
increases these using the public
education reform Fund to provide
universal extended learning time
programs for all schools and
provide all at risk elementary
schools K. five plus and the
executive combines these two
programs into a remediation
program that also includes
community schools and career
technical education.
Another big difference online
sixteen you'll see insurance
differences in assumptions for
Health Care.
Remains and risk premiums the
LFC recommendation also further
includes increases for minimum
wage on line eighteen and five
million for instructional
materials.
Categorical appropriations are
essentially flat from the
executive recommendation the LFC
recommendation includesd
additional funding for emergency
supplemental.
for below the line starting on
line item fifty one.
The executive recommendation
takes a flat recommendation for
low land programs while the LFC
recommendation consolidates some
of these initiatives and uses
the public education reform Fund
to supplement other programs and
last but not least the bigger
differences come from the use of
the public education reform Fund
which you'll see here starting
on line ninety nine the
executive includes a lot of
appropriations for several
initiatives alliance won a one
to one oh seven the largest of
which would be your family
income index online one of three
and your travel revenue
framework online one of seven
the LC recommendation primarily
uses the public education reform
Fund for extended learning time
and K. five plus programs which
you'll see on line one oh nine
through one eleven and I'll go
ahead and handed over to Sydney
four additional comments.
Thank you US Senate madam chair
members of the committee I just
like to walk through a few of
the items that city did already
cover but these are executive
priorities and you do see that
the executive recommendation
does total three point three
billion and this is a four
percent increase.
And there's about two hundred
and fifty million of non
recurring initiatives that are
funded both by general fund and
by the education reform Fund so
move up to the top of the
spreadsheet you'll see on line
thirteen where there's just a
shift in the thought of how we
use K. five plus extended
learning time and also community
schools and career technical
education so where is this the
entire funding is combined into
a hundred and fifty one point
two million and so like I said
this is a new appropriation but
expands the use of the funds as
part of the Martinez Yazzie
remediation strategy and this
approach it basically allows the
schools to supplement their K.
five plus and E. LTP with career
technical and community school
initiatives so essentially
snaring and stacking the
programs on each other the next
large priority that's important
in the executive recommendation
is on line sixteen and this is
for the insurance cost and
basically the supports of PED's
requested level of funding for
medical insurance costs which
are in nine point three percent
increase and that's seven point
eight percent increase for rest
costs such as property and
liability he.
The the numbers are already
existed and Nipsey as
presentation that they did to
the alley S. C. I believe in
November so this is a difference
compared to the LFC which I
believe computed an increase of
seven percent.
will be on to nonrecurring
initiatives.
The executive us supports about
a hundred and forty seven
million dollars abuse hop from
the education reform Fund and
these begin online ninety nine.
The first is on line one aligned
when I was three sorry and this
is eighty million dollars for
the family income index so this
is forty million dollars of
spending each year over two
years and this funding
specifically target schools
serving students with the least
resources and of course the most
need we're asking where is the
at risk index factor provides
additional funding at the
district level the family income
index provides it at the disco
I'm sorry at the school level.
Moving on to line one oh seven
you'll see thirty million
dollars for the tribal remedy
framework and this supports
transferring thirty million
dollars to the Indian education
fund to support education
efforts in New Mexico tribal
communities so this of course
includes language for the
transfer and it proposes fifteen
million dollars each year for
two years and this funding will
directly support the
implementation of the tribal
remedy framework.
Next on line one hundred is
fifteen million dollars for work
based learning and paid
internship program so this
funding supports like a salary
match for work based learning
and paid internships
specifically for high school
juniors and seniors.
On line one oh two of course I
think secretary spoke about this
earlier but there is ten million
dollars for digital access for
students that's a line one oh
two and then on line one oh four
we have eight million dollars
for regional accountability and
technical support so this
translates to four million
dollars of spending each year
over two years to increase
technical support to schools
throughout the state and such
supports would be technical
assistance helping with
budgeting and program
development.
And lastly nonrecurring
initiatives that are supported
by general fund those start
online eighty seven just a
couple we have three million
dollars in emergency support
funding for school districts
this combined with a million
dollars in the categorical for
total support of four million
dollars.
There is on line one ninety five
one point two million for
funding for legal fees.
And on line ninety to one point
five million dollars for cyber
security and data system
upgrades and these are based you
know this would help support PED
to support schools to protect us
student data financial in each
our data.
And with that I will turn it
over to the secretary.
Thank you sandy and thank you
Sonny and I also just want to
know them also joined today by
our W. secretary for finance
operations W. secretary and don
Delgado and one thing I would
just start off insane is that as
you likely heard from me as we
are leading up to the session
one of our big priorities in the
administration wants to make
sure that we continue to build
upon the investments that we've
made in education over the past
several years and that even in a
time of the having to make some
difficult decisions that that
that momentum stays moving
forward and very excited to
present both executive
recommendation and very
encouraged by the legislative
recommendations that that really
recognize the priority that
education is in the state and
continue to invest deeply in in
our students particularly the
students who really need us the
most and for that reason that's
one of the one of the reasons
why we're very excited about the
family income index which we
think presents another very
targeted and purposeful tool for
the legislature to be able to
direct funds to those students
who live in circumstances of
poverty and who who both the
research shows and and who we
know from experience often
require more and more in
additional supports on top of
many of the other important
funding streams that have been
made available and so that is a
top priority both of of the
governor and myself as we move
forward in this in this session.
And in addition we're also very
encouraged by the the efforts
that are being made around
the building and deepening our
relationships with our native
American communities throughout
the state by investing deeply in
the tribal remedy framework and
although impacting credits don't
solely benefit our native
American communities we know
that many of those communities
also to benefit from
and will benefit from moving
forward with the elimination of
those credits and we're looking
forward to working with the
Legislature during the session
to identify solutions that they
really at the heart of
removing those credits and also
putting in strong language about
how we work with and alongside
tribal communities in close
consultation to make sure that
those funds really go forward
for the benefit of the students
who live on the land from which
those those funds are generated.
In addition of great deal
progress has been made to invest
deeply in our extended school
year programs and we know that
there's still more work to do to
be able to make those programs
more available more attractive
to school districts and charter
schools throughout the state so
in the executive recommendation
we do as was mentioned provide
some ways of of stacking those
programs together to create more
incentives for school districts
to take up of those programs and
also to be able to use any funds
that are not fully accounted for
through those through those
programs directly on other very
important priorities of both the
legislature and the executive in
community schools and career and
technical education.
And then also say that as we as
we look forward at the agency
level one of the things we know
and as we see in some of the
recommendations is that there
are great.
Reset of expectations on the
agency and and our ability to
make sure that not only are we
providing the kind of oversight
and monitoring of districts and
and compliance with statutes and
compliance with the Ozzie
Martinez but that also districts
have the the right levels of
support and professional
development and consultation
program designed that is both
expected of the public education
education department and also
required through the Martinez
Yazzie lawsuit so we do have
funds earmarked in our budget
for be able to provide that
level of oversight and reporting
and monitoring and
accountability through our
accountability and regional
support line so in summary I
think that there are as a there
are a lot of areas in which we
have a strong foundation from
which to build across the
recommendations there are a
number of innovative proposals
that we look forward to working
with the Legislature in
legislative staff on throughout
the course of the session and I
know that will be well
positioned to come out with a
strong education budget that
helps rebound from what is
clearly the most challenging
year of this during this
pandemic that our educational
system has ever had to face so
thank you and I look forward to
your questions.
Representative Armstrong.
Thank you thank you madam chair
I was I was curious on just real
quick on line one oh three on
page three the family and income
index support of eighty million
and and if I understand right
it's going to be school based
instead of going to the district
to allocate it would be going
straight to the school.
Is that correct Sonny.
Madam chair representative I
think the secretary would be
better positioned to answer that
okay I'll I'll go ahead and add
any clarification afterwards
thank you so much.
Madam chair representative the
one of the things that we think
is very important about this the
family income index is that it
really does take a look at down
to the school level so I'm
currently in the way we
calculate at risk it it does
remain up at the L. the a level
this really let's get to a laser
focus to the school and help us
differentiate a little bit more
and it also I think the
partnerships that we developed
it with our tax revenue
department to make this possible
really sets us apart in the
nation about really using a a
much more targeted and specific
measure of of income when we
make some of these decisions.
Thank you for that thank you
madam chair for that hi I'm a
little bit concerns just because
you know all use Magdalene as a
for instance our whole skip
school is free lunches because
or so poverty stricken poverty
stricken I and we have about
forty seven percent of our
students are native American and
so and they also have another
choice to go to school in out at
the Alamo Navajo so it's I'm I'm
a little concerned about that
but I look forward to hearing
more about that also I had
received an email Dr Stewart
about the S. F. C. R. eight
expiring December thirty first
and now so teachers are required
to use their own sick leave is
that correct information.
Madam chair representative the
FCRA due to expire on December
thirty first and we're actually
working right now to look at how
we can continue to support our
educators so that they're
they're sick leave and
compensation with regard to if
they come down to Corona virus
or Corona virus related issue
doesn't impact them negatively
so we still have more details to
figure that out but that is one
one area of concern that we've
definitely heard and we're
trying to help problem solve.
Thank you so much and thank you
madam chair.
Percent.
Yes Sir.
I'm sorry madam chair whose turn
is it.
What.
You're on mute Representative
Anderson.
Representative Anderson can.
Is that better yes all thank you
madam chair thank you madam
chair I'll try to be a short
with my questions to the
secretary of one is up in your
budget proposal how is the.
The two at the concept of hold
harmless being treated relative
to the districts that have all
the missing children and are we
going to hold them to the
current enrollment of that
they're reporting are we going
to.
Make an adjustment Sir.
Madam chair representative the
the hold harmless language that
is in the the executive
recommendation provides for a
awaiting currently where we
would wait the previous year
significantly more heavily than
we would wait this year to
account for the vast majority of
those students who
May no longer be accounted for
for for many districts or should
I should say the the accounts
for the difference between the
enrollment from last year the
enrollment from this year to to
the pandemic so so we have a
awaiting language which I think
is slightly different than the
current LFC proposed.
Thank you Secretary on the
waiting language my only comment
to add to that would be want to
make sure that there's not a
disproportionate.
Advantage or disadvantage to
those who suffer the most from
lack of wifi because I would
think that would have to do
that would directly relate to
the number of law students in in
in Roland so I hope you will
keep that in mind in your
waiting then up the secretary of
state asked does your budget
proposal includes a salary
increase for the education
community in New Mexico.
Madam chair representative our
our a budget increase focuses
the.
Compensation increases are
mainly on insurance it doesn't
have a salary increase but but
does have insurance increases to
make sure that salaries are
impacted by by by those expected
increases next year.
Thank you Mr secretary
then I wanted to ask you what I
think we visited in December in
a previous LESC meeting about
the.
Going out and talking to the
private schools about their face
to face experience and what is
spend their success in and it
was it was my fault that that
public school education could
learn a lot from private school
education as they have
successfully
with great personal support
carried out of face to face at
elementary of of high school
education so I was curious what
kind of response you got in your
service is talking to the
private schools are.
Madam chair representative we
did actually with through our
options for families division
which is also are charter
schools division did convene
some private schools to have a
conversation about some of their
experiences I don't have my my
recollect that conversation with
me one thing I I will say is
that
we're we're very hopeful that
that will be able to expands
eligibility for in person
learning services very soon we
know that this is a critical
issue and so I would I would
need to to follow back up on
some of the specifics of that
conversation follow back up with
you.
Thank you Mr secretary I'm I'm
love hoping for a more
definitive answer that very soon
a when we meet again later this
month I was going to ask you Mr
Secretary on the.
Of is there such a thing as.
Her student.
Spending.
My district so ROS one dependent
school district has nine
thousand students and their
total budget is acts that would
tell me how much per student in
a very broad and unscientific
way but it does that exist for
all the school districts here in
New Mexico and if it does I I
would hope to have that.
Madam chair Mister
Representative the the per pupil
spending is a it's a feature of
the every student succeeds act
and ask a W. secretary Delgado
if you wanted to weigh in on how
that is the represented in and
looked at both now and in
future.
Thank you a that I in the
interest of time I think I would
just ask Assistant Secretary
Delgado if you could follow up
offline with the data I'm
seeking on that and with madam
chair I that answers my
questions thank you very much Mr
Secretary thank you chair if I
may Representative Anderson on
your volume three and your LFC
valiant the there is a chart
that gives you your per pupil
revenues and that is on page one
twenty nine of all the three.
Thank you very much for that is
there such a thing as an
administrative cost per pupil
can we can we break out the
administrative cost every school
district and breaking into per
pupil as well is is that the
Saudi anything that we have
already madam chair that's not
in our billion through but it is
something that we have done
analyses on and be happy provide
that to you thank you very much
thank you madam chair.
Representative was gonna
representative Garcia thank you
madam chair this brief is it
possible to get well I had one
concern of Secretary Stewart was
on all hold harmless we kind of
went through that I have an
issue on transportation the
schools if you take into
consideration like in my part of
the world Gilly County Cibola
County our school buses will
trigger rules in.
To get to work up pretty quick
of.
Are you do take that into
consideration when you budget
for these particular districts
sure.
Madam chair representative I
would like to ask every
secretary Delgado to talk about
our transportation budgeting.
Members of the committee yes
Representative that that is one
of the
aspects of looking at
transportation funding for this
year we're requesting flat
funding and we have proposed
language that would hold
harmless on transportation as
well we know this is an area
where
that.
Funding is typically on a
typical year based on on prior
year ridership and and this
you're gonna have
significantly reduced numbers on
on ridership so are a request
doesn't include an increase but
it does include flat flat
funding going into next year.
Thank you
madam chair of Secretary Stewart
it's not my district the that's
high school symbol of
reservations.
We have about six hundred
students that are facing right
now.
Of.
The best high school one hundred
eighty seven seniors fifty of
are probably not going to
graduate what are we doing to
alleviate this problem this is
coming from the back of
connectivity to internet systems
so so what we're gonna do will
keep these people failing
schools.
I'm chair representative
supports for seniors is one of
the the most critical things
that that is on the the focus of
our of our team what we have a
couple of a couple different
things all I'll try to be brief
in my answers one with regard to
the connectivity so we've had
multiple different efforts
around increasing connectivity
on including money that's been
budget at the state and district
level and we're going to put
even more money at the state
level into this our goal is to
make sure we we get every single
last student connected
and fully close that digital
divide with regard to the
supports and and failing we've
actually had guidance and
professional development that
that we've been working with our
districts on about equitable
grading practices and how we can
support our it particularly our
seniors but but really
Making sure that the the the the
way that we do creating
especially during this pandemic
takes into account a multitude
of factors including access and
that were not being overly
punitive in in the the great
distribution so so we have put
that guidance out and in the
happy to share some of the work
that's been done around the the
greeting.
Madam chair and Mr secretary a
lot of the respective legal
issues are very important the
store all the rest were kids you
have a ninety metre W. that
failed they're not gonna come
back next year that that just
making sure so I just talked
mission intended and you know
six hundred.
That's like twenty percent of
the population and ranchers
failing out of school and we
need to address those the one
more madam madam chair if I may
of the new federal relief
package will be four hundred
thirty five million dollars
it'll be going out to school for
COVID nineteen and other
operational expenditures how do
we propose on on
Share this money sure everybody
gets the right amount right the
for chair of the.
Madam chair representative the
the federal law actually
dictates how the money gets sent
out so it goes out in the ninety
percent of it goes out through
the title one formula directly
to districts based on the number
of low income students that they
serve so it's very similar to
the way the in fact it's exactly
the same of the way the first
round of those funds were now.
Secretary Stewart the madam
chair is legal first wanted went
out at one point we're not very
equally distributed among the
state at the almost look like
rural New Mexico's because left
out of it and I'm concerned
about that and I don't want that
to happen with these four
hundred thirty five million
dollars for people that really
need.
Thanks for thank you madam
chair.
Next we have Representative
Chatfield in that Representative
Herrera we have Representative
Sheffield.
Thank you madam chair of.
I noticed in the budget in under
deficiency that special
corporation just twenty point
nine million.
Or impact Aid liabilities.
One on page elsewhere I see the
executive recommendation will
the impact aid credit.
What the LFC recommendation when
in fact they local half million
we.
For future credits also is the
twenty fourth
that is contingent on the
in that minute companion
legislation is twenty point nine
million sufficient to cover all
of those losses and they are not
what is the companion
legislation.
More and Representative go ahead
sunny Madam chair representative
I believe the the twenty point
nine million.
That you're referring to is in
the LFC recommendation if you'll
recall during the special
session the legislature
authorized the use of the
state's support reserve fund to
cover any potential impact a
liability and that's about
twenty nine million that's that
was in there and then there's
about ten million that's likely
to revert so thirty nine so the
other thirty nine million to
that twenty point nine million
you get the same amount of about
sixty million to cover the
potential liability for FY
twenty and my understanding is
that the US Department recently
ruled that the New Mexico did
not pass their disparity testing
would have to that that
liability for FY twenty.
Regarding your other question on
the removal of the credits in
the formula.
That is a statutory calculation
that requires the state to
credit local revenues and
federal revenues that each
district receives and that would
be contingent on legislation so
the the need to be a bill
an act to change that
calculation the LC recognition
provides funding to cover the
potential fiscal impacts of that
if the bill was passed I hope
that answers your question.
State.
Representative you're on mute.
Can you hear me madam chair.
Thank you so much thank you
madam chair thank you a
presenters thank you I'm I'm
just curious about the huge
differences between the LESC and
the executive regarding huge
programs I mean the
I guess I'll start with the K.
five plus program where the
where the and extended learning
time
And where the LFC is
recommending eighty you know
eighty forty million and there
is nothing in the executive
budget so I I quite I just don't
know I guess I guess I should
ask David madam chair do you
take recommendations from the L.
S. L. S. C. that go over to the
LFC or how to how does that
process work.
Madam chair members of the
committee and Representative at
a I.
LESC and LFC staff collaborate a
lot you know we're going to LFC
hearings regularly New Mexico
jewel tents are hearings I L.
yes she did not have a
recommendation till after LFC
med is my understanding so but
but we we knew what was coming
down the pike and we try to
collaborate promote legislative
branch point of view.
Thank you David thank you madam
chair I guess I would ask that
question also to to the
secretary if I could ask him why
why do you have like eighty
thousand in the family income
index support and there is
nothing recommended by the LFC
and and I guess the other side
of the coin is what you have
nothing in the K. five plus
programs and and how do you make
your recommendations and how do
you agree that I'm I'm just I
don't see budgets usually this
far part that's why I'm
surprised at.
Thank you madam chair may have
one more thing I wasn't quite
clear on the question well first
of all LFC didn't see some of
the request from the executive
until December first the by the
tenth we have to make
recommendations so in general
legislative branch has a problem
with the timing when the
executive recommendation most
executive rex come in September
first in the old days because so
they were funding our current
year they waited as long as they
could with per year funding is
less important to do that so
that that's problematic for a
full hearing on the executive
director but second the LFC
wants to stick with what we know
that is evidence for and there's
lots of lots of studies on the
benefits of extended learning
time into K. five plus and
finally was the centerpiece of
Martinez Yazzie.
Thank you thank you madam chair
thank you David and secretary
Sir.
Madam chair representative so I
think when we look at the K.
five plus extended learning time
programs we actually still want
to continue those and factor
trying to.
Create more ways to have
incentives for districts and
charter schools to want to take
those programs up so the way you
see it framed in our budget
recommendation is that we we
take the appropriations from K.
five plus extended learning time
and combined them together so
that might be why you see
nothing in K. five plus extended
learning but if you look below
and not sure which wine trying
to find the line number.
and maybe senator Sonny you see
it more than I do more quickly
than I do around the Martinez
Yazzie programs.
thirteen.
Thirteen I must be looking at a
different sheets not one
thirteen money.
you know about the nonrecurring
yes it's further down the line
they start on line one no one
one hundred down.
I'm sorry I I I think I have a
different sheet that I'm that
I'm looking at either way
Representative it basically
takes the appropriations from K.
five plus extended learning time
and packages them together the
same the same amount of money
but what we're what we're
proposing is that we that we
allow all those districts who
want to use that money to do K.
five plus program in extended
learning time program to still
use that money for those
purposes and then if there's
still money left over because
not every district that was
eligible took up those programs
instead of having that money
reverts to the reform Fund those
districts who had opted into a
K. five plus or extended
learning time program could
staff that with a community
schools program or with expanded
career technical education
programs so that would allow for
all of that money to make sure
it gets appropriated in the
current year gets taken up in
the current year and isn't isn't
reverted back to the public
education reform Fund
notification I think what you
see in the executive in the
provided recommendations is that
additional money is appropriated
from the reform Fund to those
programs in the event that more
districts
and charter schools opted into
those programs and was
appropriated in those above the
line items and the
the executive.
instead of takes a different
approach with the reform Fund
and so with our reform Fund
approach with the family income
index extended learning time
would be one of those potential
uses but they were also be
additional uses for the family
income index which would be very
similar to what you've already
seen in at risk programs
those those evidencebased
programs that we know students
living circumstances of poverty
need access to as well so we
really see this is as a let's
take the let's take those
appropriations which to this
date had not yet been fully
expended in the current year and
create some incentives and
stackable programs to try to get
more people into K. five plus
extended learning and then let's
create a new vehicle for the
legislature as well through the
family income index to put out
more targeted funding at the
school level for those schools
who serve the the most
disproportionate numbers of low
income students.
Well madam chair Secretary
Stewart act I'm just very nice
to call everything the same
thing so we could tell what
we're reading I mean if you're
gonna staff different programs
under that under the family
income index support I it be
helpful to know what that I mean
I I don't know how to I don't
know how to look at this budget
I'm just saying it's very
difficult for me to read and see
exactly what we're doing or what
we're not doing and at the end
that's probably because I'm new
to appropriation and and I'll
stop their bid also spend more
time on this was somebody who
can explain it to me better and
I thank you madam chair thanks
for the and happy to work with
you specifically on this
Representative MEHAFFIE.
We have to work on our list
Representative small then
Representative Brown.
Thank you very much madam chair
and thank you very much
Secretary to pick up a couple of
questions and I think also
asking for some feedback from
Mister Liu or others
the on the the family ends
income support is there any
initial madam chair in Mr Liu
perhaps Mr Abbey is there any
and this show LFC analysis I
know it's an area that its peak
a lot of curiosity
is there any initial LFC
analysis.
Mr chairman I I'd like to
reschedule to help me on this
question but again I think a lot
of it comes back to the first
LFC saw this was on December
first there was not a lot of
detail on the executive
recommendation was cultural can
help that.
I'm sure Representative to
understand your it will you
repeat your question for me.
Yes it's a broad question I
think the question was and and
then I'll ask another one madam
chair scheduled the question was
is there LESC I guess L. E. S.
C. analysis for the with the
proposal with that believe it's
eighty million and the family
income support focus at this
school level verses the district
level given Mr Abbas explanation
that of of the time turn around
if there's a thing to add now
great if there is then then what
will there be
what when should we look for LFC
and LESC analysis on in this
area which is one of the
greatest differences as has been
pointed out by multiple members
when can we look for that some
of that explanation to dive
deeper and I think I have I have
the very much the same question
on the
Putting to get the Martinez
Yazzie.
Consolidated approach that
Secretary Stewart is proposing.
So so yeah.
Madam chair representative as
David mentioned we get a public
schools support graduated from
PED.
November thirtieth December
first effectively and not in the
proposal there was very little
language around family income
index we got a couple of pages
of information no statutory bill
language and I think the
department was still working
through some of those details so
they've been working pretty
diligently with the tax and Rev
Department and then with their
own staff to get census tract
data we've had I think Mr
secretary to meetings since then
with house members and PED staff
to understand more but the
the the analysis is been really
hard for us because what it has
been shared has been well we're
going to collect the income data
right kids in these five
categories but it will be up to
the legislature to decide where
the thresholds are set with the
index looks like and I think we
had a really good conversation
with PED about that that last
week identified some challenges
and some of the bill language in
some areas that I think we think
they could be a little more
specific and but we also don't
have the underlying data to be
able to analyze where the
dollars would go
based on I think the department
proposal to look at.
In in the bill they're looking
at five different income
categories of of students and
taking students are the two
lowest family income categories
to use that to create an index
so we're trying to work together
but I know they're working with
tax revenue got an MO you in
place with tax around some of
this information is
sensitive information and so
hard for them I think to to
share with us.
And it's made it really
difficult quite frankly for us
to analyze and I think Mr
Secretary you're working with
your staff to do some we
identified some places where we
could look at say the at risk
index verses this family income
index how did how did they align
what are the differences what
are the similarities with
individual components within the
at risk index or the entire at
risk index
The majority I think to the
major differences in what the
secretary assured with buses
funds are supposed to be
targeted to individual schools
which is not what the funding
formula does right now it's
targets money to a district that
allows districts local
flexibility to distribute those
funds and then there's some more
targeted proposed language by
the department on particular
uses so as soon as we get that
data we're happy to work
together we've all been working
together to get this analytics
work but you know it's going to.
It appears that it requires a
statutory change whether it's a
funding formula change or not
there's a proposed bill the
department's been working on
that we still haven't seen a
final draft on.
Thank you madam chair good.
Chair representative the as
reach alluded to based on the
feedback from from both staff
and some representatives we've
incorporated that into the bill
language in its
with drafters to to be updated
than corporate set feedback to
to bring back for two so we look
forward to having those
conversations and then also
we've we've been able to map out
where depending on how much
money gets appropriated to it
where that money would would
flow directly to school so that
you can get a very detailed look
at at what that impact.
I understood thank you and then
briefly madam chair
With the Martinez Yazzie
consolidation particularly in
the career technical Education
expansion
is that it presumably that's
easier to work through less
proprietary information is there
an initial
LFC and LESC analysis on that
And secretary if there's any.
You know summary things that you
want to add their
be very interesting thank you
madam chair.
Madam chair representative thank
you asking about the the major
differences between PED's
proposal to use some of the K.
five plus extended learning time
funds for career technical
education programs verses
legislative proposals that
continue
Provided a you're you're LFC and
LESC proposals that continue
reform Fund appropriations
directly to the career technical
education funded out at a lower
level and I would say that
Representative priority
differences we have a budget
reckoned Ellie as C. that looks
pretty similar to the LFC
recommendation with a couple of
different
Different priorities one of them
being mandating extended
learning for all students so all
elementary middle and high
school students to add at least
ten days if not twenty five if
you're in elementary school so.
Some of the analytics as I think
Mr Abbey mentioned in Mr Liu
mentioned are continuing
programs that there are data
points that exist and then
continuing to fund growth in
areas that are at a sustainable
rate
to be able to fund those other
priority areas.
So it's hard to I think it's
it's hard for us to analyze how
many schools would be eligible
say for under under PED's
proposal for career technical
education funds because it's
really dependent on on uptake of
K. five plus extended learning
we know there is a need there
and I think we're in agreement
with the secretary that a lot of
the priory the policy priorities
are really in alignment with
what we know needs to be done
and there are different funding
priorities amongst the three
budget recommendations but also
a lot of similarities and.
You know that the types of
outcomes were trying to target
their programming.
And madam chair work ups I'm
sorry Representative.
Madam chair representative I
just wanted to to say with with
regard to
take on the K. five plus
extended learning time programs
so again we're hopeful that that
stacking helps increase the
uptake because more people will
be incentivized if it means that
they may have access to
additional CD and
community schools funding if
they if they were to take it up
I think this past year with the
language that came out
in the General appropriations
act from the special session
which did not mandate deal TP or
K. five plus but asked all
districts to submit if there I
think we're gonna take those
programs up tell districts how
you're gonna address learning
loss without language which as I
understand it is still the the
language recommendation of the
committee we had about half of
the districts which decided to
go ahead and take up a extended
learning time R. K. five plus
programs about half that didn't
so we we still think that in the
in the current year we won't
fully utilize that amount of
money that's appropriated and so
what we're hoping is that by
stacking these programs together
we both create the incentive and
that we get much further down
the line item in really
maximizing the amount of the
appropriation so that we can
make sure it goes toward the
current year benefit of of of
kids for programs that the
legislature thanks important and
that that we agree or port like
CTE and community schools in
addition to extended learning so
I think there's a lot of room to
accomplish many of the shared
goals of between the executive
and the legislature I think
That that we certainly have room
based on where we are to to
accomplish the extended learning
goals and to be able to fund
some of these innovative
programs as we continue to work
through how we merge some of
these things together so I'm I'm
encouraged by.
And madam chair if I may also
add
In your packet if you look on
page thirty five you'll see the
K. five plus extended learning
time participation rates for the
last two years but I wanted to
highlight that the LFC red in LA
C. recommendation.
As a a lot of has been informed
by the evaluation the heard
earlier this year on learning
loss that director Avid also
mentioned and as part of the
Martinez Yazzie lawsuit it did
call for evidence based
interventions for students and
named K. three plus as one of
those potential programs that
should be expanded and offered
to help students and so the
legislative recommendations
provide that essentially for all
students you know given that
this year and the learning loss
that's happened and the impact
that that that may have in the
long term.
The.
Recommendation attempts to
remediate at in a very
significant way.
You move on now Representative
Brown.
Thank you madam chair my
question is for anybody who
would like to answer it I'm
looking at the high level hi
sheet it's marked as page two in
the packet and it line eighteen
this is regarding a minimum wage
increase we know that for FY
twenty one the wage went to ten
dollars and fifty cents an hour
and for FY twenty two it
schedule to go to eleven fifty.
I noticed that the LFC is
recommending just shy of two
million dollars for that extra
expense in fiscal twenty two the
executive is not recommending
anything for that and so I'm
just wondering I doubt it's an
oversight but I'm just hoping
for an explanation.
Representative Madam chair
representative I can say on the
on the part of the executive as
I said before most of our
compensation increase
recommendations focus on the
insurance portion of the
compensation as opposed to the
salary portion of the
compensation and so that's where
you see the the largest increase
their from the exact.
Madam chair Mr secretary but if
it's mandated by law that the
wage has to go to eleven fifty
would that not require some
additional funding.
Madam chair representative a
sick W. secretary bill got I
don't know if you want to weigh
in on on that particular
consideration.
Yes so that the approach of the
PED is that we need to maintain
SCG of payments so so that's one
reason we ask for the fixed cost
increases and the insurance cost
increases as secretary mention
to cover some of those
additional costs and we're also
targeting a flat budget request
for next year in our in a
recommendation from the general
fund so so that's we're we're
that recommendation came from is
try to old the the the district
funding is as high as possible
so that they have the latitude
to make these adjustments are
necessary.
Yes measures I I really do want
understand us so what you're
saying is.
There's going to be additional
money but on a different line
that will be used to take care
of that additional
responsibility for higher wages
that is that correct.
Madam chair representative I
don't know that we have a
separate line for that
particular item and W. secretary
correct me if I'm wrong I don't
I don't believe we have a
separate line that's correct.
Okay well thank you very much at
all.
Follow up a little bit later
thank you.
Thank you madam chair all righty
thank Representative Brown it's
very good to catch on this over
this overall budget I would have
the same question this call
Representative Trujillo.
Thank you madam chair on the
same issue.
Is
The employee who receives any
increase in the increase in
their wages up to shooting it
right back out to pay for
insurance.
Either way there are you know
the the minimum wage increase is
not enough the high cost of
insurance is just overwhelming
and if you're an educational
assistant or anyone else no
especially if you're not if
you're a new M. C. are not in
the APS
arena you're gonna get stuck
paying a big bill for insurance
and any increase in wages is not
going to go to help your family
in terms of income will simply
go out to the pay insurance
because that's a lot.
The reason why EA's work they
pay their insurance and the
husband sometimes pays the the
rest of the the bills the bottom
the bottom line is is that
you know what doesn't help those
of those employees I think it
needs to be a higher minimum
increase and insurance has got
to be figured out in a better
way thank you madam chair.
That's the that's the
interesting use of these two
different they're two different
budgets and I approach it in two
different ways
so is there any other questions
that we have from the committee
representative Allison.
Or at.
Thank you madam chair I want to
referred to the line three.
that says remove impact Aid
credit does that in any way
penalize the schools that rely
on the impact Kate primarily.
Madam chair representative
I was suggested it significantly
helps those those a school
districts that receive impact
aid because the the seventy five
percent of the impact aid that
normally have been credited from
them would now remain with the.
And thank.
Adam chair if I could just add
on to that if you look at lot.
The thirty one million that is
right below the negative sixty
seven million from the twenty
one operating budget and then
you add that to the
recommendation of thirty five
million that's essentially the
offset the thirty one plus
thirty I would get to sixty six
million which is offsetting what
you see online thirty three.
Thank you.
We have anybody else that would
like to ask question of the
staff.
But I don't see any any other
hands I like to think of all the
staff this presented today under
the public school sport
obviously I mean this is just a
preview it's it's presentation
of both the high level budgets
have when we get into
more detail later as as we're
going through with the committee
hearings you'll be able to ask
much more detailed questions but
today has been a very full day I
think particularly for the new
members to get the full impact
of the General Fund estimates
but the executive and LFC
appropriation recommendations as
well as the public schools
support so I think at this time
we've probably completed our
work for the day I just wanted
to ask the committee is there
any questions that you may have
you know we're gonna be back in
Santa Fe on on Monday will fire
up at one thirty.
Hopefully we have worked out are
are all issues or bugs
Regarding having everybody in
our committee Rowe this that
doesn't work we'll have to
continue just going into our
offices I'm hoping we've got
this worked out where we can sit
together and.
We're not sitting close but at
least we've got a stripe we can
set on in the in the room there
and some chairs that have been
set up by the staff.
I sure appreciate I sure
appreciate the time today.
and the work that the staff is
done in preparing for this we
don't have a meeting tomorrow
we'll be back as I say back in
action on Monday Monday the
twenty fifth.
We have
We have
some information of the chat
here and this just say everybody
can read this so I'm not going
to read it read it out but we
don't really have any questions
or anything at this point we're
gonna have to find a different
way to do this and we'll talk to
the staff about how we do that
I'm gonna ask Representative
small to work with our HSC staff
that how this is actually going
to work whether or not the you
know we we don't take testimony
during presentations.
Generally we allow for testimony
when an agency comes forward and
someone may want to stand up and
say I support this in the budget
or or whatever but this isn't
that kind of a committee it's
not like when there's a bill
that's being presented and you
go out to the audience and ask
for for testimony doesn't work
that way with a chance state so
I'll ask Representative small to
work out with bill in the staff
and see how we're going to
handle that starting on Monday
also again thanks everybody a
good day today and look forward
to seeing you next week bye bye
but in my life.
