The floor on Friday, so we'll be
going for a full day, uh, and
apologize, but appreciate that
if that works on Okay, well,
we'll work through to make sure
that the schedule alliance
Thank you, Mr Engineering.
Okay. Um, we're gonna go members
straight into our agency code
356 Wanna thank Chief of staff
Schlegel, Other members of the
executive for being here today.
Uh, Dr Miner is here.
And Mr Isaiah.
Mr Torres.
Mister Isaias Torres.
Um, this is members. This is
agency code 356.
Um
We'll go first to Mr Torres.
Then the doctor minor and of
course, Mr Chief of staff, then
go to you.
Thank you, Mr Chairman.
Members of the committee. My
name is Razia Taurus. I'm the
fiscal analysts for the
governor's office at the LFC.
Um
And I'm gonna just get started
with the differences for the
governor's office. And if you
could please, um, turn to, um
Agency code. 356 Tap three.
So, um, in regards to the
budget, there were no
differences between the
executive and LFC
recommendation. Um, both
recommendations included at
1.6% Increase $100,000 increase.
And contractual services to, um
to find them contractual
services for media interpretive
services, as well as for policy
and research.
Um and both analysts were able
to reach a consensus on all
performance measures and
targets, And then with that,
I'll turn it over to Dr Miner.
Thank you, Isaiah. Good
afternoon, Mr Chairman, members
of the committee. As Isaiah
said there are no differences
between the recommendations, so
I'll just turn it over to the
chief of staff.
Thank you, Andrew. Thank you for
having us Mr. Chair. Good
afternoon, members of the
committee as good to see you all
on the second day of the
session. Thank you, Andrew and
and our analysts at LFC for
coming to consensus on the
agency budget.
Um
Overall, just add some color to
the $100,000 increase that isn't
contractual, and we plan to be
using that for, uh particularly
communications help in the
governor's office, and that's
pretty much it. I will stand for
questions. Thank you all very
much. We love to see these sorts
of budgets. Ah, okay. Members of
first look to the right for any
questions.
Many look to the left.
Mancini. I would ask vice chair
for emotion.
Thank you, Mr Chair. I would
move that the committee adopts
the executive recommendation.
Hey, it's been moved and
seconded. Uh, too Well, um
I can I
We're gonna ask to can we take
the role really quick. I gotta
started here.
Represent.
There.
Down here.
Here.
Sure.
Do you hear?
Yep.
By the meals here.
Here is
Here.
I'm here. Thank you. Thank you
for that. Okay? Remembers, uh,
we have a motion to adopt the
executive recommendation for
agency code. 356, then moved by
Vice chair Dixon seconded by
upset Dela Cruz. Um, is there
any opposition to adopting this
motion?
Okay. Well, please show
represent pedigree and
opposition.
And, um, we
We'll go from there, Mr. Chief,
Thank you very much to the
team's Thank you all. Thank you,
Mr Chairman. Thank you. Members
of the committee,
Alright members, let's continue
on.
Um
We are welcoming up our esteemed
lieutenant governor, the best
basketball player in this
building.
Uh, Mr Lieutenant Governor.
Thank you so much for being
here. We'll do again. We'll go
first to our lfc analyst and go
through and then we'll go to
you, Mr. Thank you, Chairman.
Um, the budget. We're gonna be
looking over his for the office
of Lieutenant Governor Agency
code 3603.
Um, I'll keep this relatively
short, um, the LSC and the
executive were able to meet a
consensus.
On our recommendations. Um the
requests includes $100,000
increase in personnel category
and this was the result of a
2023 amendments.
To the compensation for elected
officials for the pay raise for
lieutenant governors for the
lieutenant governor from
$84,000 to $144,000, and this
also increased the rate for
acting governor from $250 to
$500, so those that increase is
derived from the 2023 amendment.
Um, and my video to analysts and
I were able to meet a consensus
on all performance measures and
targets and then without
turnover, the doctor minor and
Isaiah Good afternoon again, Mr
Chair Committee members, as
Isaiah said there are no
differences in the
recommendations and again that
that bill that Isaiah mentioned
the past last year didn't have
an appropriation in it. So the
request of the recommendation
here from both sides is just too
Make sure that that personnel
budget is covered so with that
I'll turn over to the lieutenant
governor.
Thank you, Mr Chairman, members
of the committee. It's so good
to be here in front of you guys.
Thank you. For all the work that
you've done over the interim, I
know being on that side of it in
the past. I know the challenges
that are there, especially when
you're working with the amount
of budget so you have to deal
with Thank you for that. I want
to also say thank you for the
support is lieutenant governor
going on now? My sixth year, I
think
You've always been there and
been providing that support that
allows me to make sure that I'm
out in the communities are
making sure that we're dealing
with constituent issues coming
out of a pandemic really
appreciate the support right
there, and I'm glad that the
budget recommendations were
given and the consensus that was
made and I stand for any
questions.
Thank you very much, Mr
Lieutenant Governor All look
first to the right to see if
there are any questions.
I don't see any left. We're
going to go to represent Garcia
then represent Garcia. Thank
you, Mr Chairman. Thank you for
being here today. No questions.
I just wanted to tell you thank
you for the support Shorter
veterans always have, and I hope
you continue doing them.
Thank you very much.
Thank you Represent Garcia,
Representing pedigree, please.
Thank you, Chairman and thank
you for being here.
Lieutenant governor. Um, I just
wanted to say I appreciate your
budget estates flat. For the
most part. I understand the
change this year. I appreciate
what you do appreciate the way
that you get out and around the
state.
There, whether it's received
well or not all the time, but I
do appreciate the fact that
you're
Thank you very much represented
integral. Okay? I don't see any
other questions.
Or represent the hunt. I just
want to follow the comments, Mr.
Charity. Thank you for your
service and your staff,
particularly for other things
that they've done and worked
with me when I've had. I've had
a summit here over the summer,
and they're they're helpful and
in all aspects you have, I'm
sure you already know this has
been the best staff their state
government and thank you for
your service. Thank you.
Thank you very much.
Representative Han represent
vodka, please. Thank you. Mr
Chairman. And thank you,
Lieutenant Governor. I want also
publicly Thank you for your
support of school safety as some
of you marry me, and I know
Lieutenant governor and a
committee of folks have been
working.
With different agencies,
Everyone from the FBI state
police to make our schools safe.
He's definitely a champion for
education, and we appreciate the
work that you do to keep our
kids staffing, community save.
Thank you, Mr Chairman. Thank
you very much. Represent vodka.
Uh, Mr The sitting Governor.
Thank you very much to you and
to your team. Uh, and we Yeah,
it's clearly that you're deeply
appreciated the work of unions
and and Mr Chairman and thank
you as well for for the comments
that are made and knowing the
work itself Lieutenant
Governor's office. One of the
things that I'm most proud of.
We've we've worked on school
safety. We've worked on many
issues out of school time after
school opportunities.
Education is always important,
but one of the things that I'm
most proud of is that the staff
that I started with on day one
is still the step that is with
me today, So I'm very proud of
that proud of my staff and the
work that they continue to do
for excellent. Thank you very
much. Madam Vice chair.
Thank you, Mr Chair. I would
move the committee adopt the
executive recommendation.
Okay?
It's been moved by. I sure
Dixon, second by ranking member
Armstrong is there any objection
to adopting that motion?
Yes. Ah, Okay. That's adopted
unanimously. Thank you very
much. Mr. Thank you. Thank you,
Chairman. Okay?
Members continuing on We're
gonna go to agency code 350
Sorry, General Services
Department.
And Mr Simon.
Alright. Uh, thank you, Mr
Mavrommatis. Um
Members real quick there an
additional pages being passed
out. This is the special
supplementals and efficiency
comparison as members will know
this has been part of all of our
hearings this year, since there
are such robust
Uh, dollar amounts that are
being considered in this area.
Okay. Uh, Mr Syme.
I think we have them all handed
out. So, Mr Simon, please kick
us off noon. Mr. Chair members
of the committee. As you said,
My name is Joseph. Simon. I'm
your analyst for the General
Services Department with me
today is Cecilia Mavrommatis of
the Department of Finance and
Administration and Robert do
set the secretary of the General
Services.
So you're different Shoot. This
is agency code 350. It's a
little bit of a complicated one.
It's got seven different
programs, uh, in a number of
different areas. So, Mr Mr Mr
You're telling us that there
there are differences? Um, so,
Mr Chair, there is a argument.
Very small differences on this
one, but I would just point out
The total difference is
$145,000 on a budget of 160
million
So we're pretty close there. I
will point out to the committee.
There is a difference in funding
sources across those the
executive recommendation is
slightly higher in general fund
it about $800,000 in General
fund and about 780,000 in
transfer revenue while the LFC
recommendation is 1.7 million
higher
In the other revenue sources.
Um, So I just point that out and
handed over to Sicily if she had
any big things before we move on
to a program by program look
because there are differences
within each of the programs. You
should be aware of.
Thanks, Joey. And Good
afternoon, Mr Chair members of
the committee. There's really
just two big things to focus on.
That's really the General fund
Ask it does affect two programs,
which we will go over a
facilities management. It allows
them to fund 77 existing FTE s.
So we're just reducing the
unfunded vacancy right with that
general fund as well as in the
transportation, allowing them to
fill an additional pilot
position or mechanic of their
choosing. Whatever they decide
for that personnel.
And those are really the two big
increases for general Fund for
for the executive
recommendation. That's it, And
with that, I will pass it to,
um, Secretary do set.
Actually, before you go, Mr
Chair. Do you want to go through
the different programs? Just so
you're aware of thank you. Let's
go Program by program. Uh, Mr
Descent will definitely take the
time that we need and that you
Mr Chair on page three of your
packet. Is the program support?
Um The main difference here is,
uh, the LFC held the program
support.
Program flat in the personnel
area. There was a small edition
for additional contractual
services, the agency's
prioritized audit services and I
t services in those areas and,
uh, there was a slight increase
in that area. The executive
recommendation was a bit higher
in those areas. Cecilia
I have nothing bad we can keep
going.
Moving on to the procurement
services program, so the
procurement services program is
funded by, uh, fees vendors pay
based on their purchases from
statewide price agreements, so
it's entirely supported by other
state funds. Revenue, um against
your The big difference is the
lfc Rec included a small
increase based on
The division successfully
fulfilling some vacancies, so
there's a small increase to
reduce the unfunded vacancy
rate. The executive was a little
bit higher on personnel to
reduce the unfunded vacancy
rate. I will note that there was
a significant increase in both
recommendations for the transfer
to program support. Um, that's
because this fund is pretty
healthy.
And so we prioritized moving
funds from this program, and
that enabled us to reduce the
the amount transferred out of
the risk management funds, which
we're going to talk about in a
minute, Cecilia.
Nothing to add. We can keep
going. Thank you.
Mr Chair. I won't don't dwell on
state printing because both
recommendations are exactly the
same as another enterprise
funded program.
Moving on to the risk management
program. So this is the
operations of the state's public
liability fund, Public property
fund and other risk management
programs. Being issue here is as
you may remember, Mr Chair,
seven FTE and this division will
be moved out of the General
Services Department and to the
Healthcare Authority Department.
Um, so both recommendations hold
That personal services flat
because of the that transfer of
those agencies. The big
difference here is, uh, the lfc
recommendation transfers about
504 $157,000 less
To program support.
Um, you know, trying to keep
those funds within risk
management because of the status
of those funds.
Cecilia.
Nothing, tad. Thank you. Thank
you, Um, on page seven, you'll
see, uh, sort of a placeholder
for the employee group Benefits
program. As I mentioned, that's
going to Healthcare Authority
Department. So both
recommendations or zero
On Page eight. You see the
facility management division?
Uh, the difference big
difference here you'll see on
the revenue side. The LFC
recommendation includes $1
million in other state funds
Revenues for building use fees,
which the secretary is currently
empowered by state law to set
building a building use fee
schedule and collect other state
funds Revenue.
The reason the LFC
recommendation contained. This
is there's been repeated asks by
the General Services Department
for more personnel for more
maintenance money.
Uh, you know, there's there's a
little bit of a difference in
how we fund facilities for
leased space versus own space.
So, um, you know, basically
building those facilities costs
in the agency's based budgets
rather than doing a direct
general fund appropriation to
the General Services Department
is in line with some of the
recommendations the LFC program
evaluation unit gave to you all
last year in that evaluation.
Of space utilization. And so
this recommendation aligns with
that with that recommendation to
the department.
Um
So that you'll notice on the
spending side. The big
difference is the LFC
recommendations higher in the
other category that we've
focused primarily on projections
of higher insurance rates and
utilities cost.
To add to that recommendation.
Excuse me. The executive
recommendations a little higher
in both personnel and benefit
alright personnel and contracts.
Cecilia. Thank you, mr chair,
just to note that the agency did
ask for an expansion of six FTE
s where both lfc and executive
did not recommend that. However,
the executive recommendation
does reduce the programs and
funded vacancy rate by 4.8% So
going from 92.3 to 97.1, and
that'll allow them.
Um, to fill about roughly seven
positions that currently exist
at that program, So just
something to know Mr Chair,
That's all.
So moving on to Page nine. Mr
Chairman, Transportation
Services. There's a difference
here in the General fund
transfer to that division. The
executive is a little bit
higher. I think Cecilia
mentioned at the top. They
funded additional positions,
whereas the LFC recommendation
held the, um uh, the personal
services category flat.
I think Joey's got it. Mr.
Chair. Thank you.
Finally, Mr Chairman, and this
is maybe a little bit confusing.
based on how the different
recommendations did it, Um, the
risk management funds, which is
the actual fund peace for all of
those insurance programs, so the
LFC recommendation can continue
the practice of providing a
single appropriation for each
fund so you can see how much is
coming out of each fund.
Whereas the executive
recommendation, uh, divided that
into contractual services,
others and and in transfers.
This is consistent with how the
G eight has looked in the past
where we've appropriated those
fund amounts and not, um, the in
the in the different categories,
Um Overall, the executive
recommendations slightly lower
The executive recommendation
held
All of the funds flat due to
revenue collections being lower
than anticipated. The LFC
recommendation used the agency's
projections for FY 25 revenue
into those funds.
And with that, Mr Chair, I think
that is the last of the seven
programs. I did want to point
out because it was handed out to
you. The special supplements and
deficiencies amounts. You have
those. There's some some
differences here, and there's
some big appropriation
recommendations here. Um, so
there's there's eight in total.
So as you can see online one,
the executive recommendation had
an additional $500,000 in
specials for the Facilities
management program. That
recommendation was not in the
LFC recommendation.
Uh, both agency agencies made a
recommendation, uh, to purchase
vehicles for the Transportation
Services division to provide
vehicles to state agencies.
And I apologize. Mr Chair. This
is, uh this has been cut off
here. I'm just now noticing
that, um, they don't online
Three is for the employee group
Health Benefits Fund is a $55
million recommendation from the
amounts transferred to the
appropriation Contingency Fund
of the generals from sorry. The
Appropriation Contingency Fund
of the General Fund. I believe
we talked about this item on
Saturday. That's the shore up
employee health benefits in that
program.
Um And as you can see the online
for there's another
appropriation. This is the
deficiency appropriations. So
the LFC recommendation was based
on an initial request by the
agency and initial projection of
that the shortfall at the end of
the current fiscal I'm sorry at
the end of FY 23 would be 69.8
million.
Uh, the executive recommendation
had a little bit more
information from the audit and
recommended a $60.7 million
appropriation to that fund to
cover those prior year
Shortfalls. Um, online five, the
executive recommended about $2.6
million for the Life Insurance
fund.
The LFC recommendation did not
include that noting that really,
uh, those additional that
additional revenue should come
from from rates, so it's
recurring.
Um, on line six, the executive
recommended and another $1
million for the facility
Management program as a
supplemental for the current
fiscal year.
And online seven. We see an
additional item for the group
benefits fund that is for the
current fiscal year, so the
executive included 65 million
The LFC recommendation included
a total of of a little more than
80 between the 55 million in
Section five and the 25 Million
here in Section six as a
supplemental.
Finally, the
The executive recommendation
include 24 Point included 24.8
Million for the Public Liability
Fund due to recent large
settlement activities. That item
was not considered by LFC. It
was not an agency request but
was added in the executive
recommendation. And I believe Mr
Do sets prepared to talk about
that today with you all, um
And with that, Mr Chair, I think
we're ready to, uh
Proceed to Mr Descents
presentation.
Thank you both.
Uh, Mr
Or sorry. General medicine.
Anything additional to add?
Just one small comment. Mr Chair
out of these items, Items six,
where the facilities management
program did request a $1 million
supplemental that didn't just
get built into the executive
recommendation as well so that
the agency does sustain that
offset onto the upcoming fiscal
year with that, But with that,
Mr Chair Thank you. I will pass
it to Secretary do that now.
Mr Chair members. Thank you very
much. I want to really think
that lfc and VFA analysts on
this big budget. It's a
complicated budget GST and they
weren't there for off And I want
to thank you. I've been here
since March in this position is
my fourth or fifth time in front
of you. And the one thing I
we've been working on is the
deficit in the plays benefits.
Either. One of them takes care
of that. I know that there is
something we've been working on.
It took a team effort. It wasn't
one side or the other. So I have
one too. Thank you. Whatever
budgets is picked will be able
to do that because I've stood in
front of you many times, saying
when this goes over to H A C. I
wanted to make sure it was there
where they could start building.
So thank you both for doing
that. And thank you for your
leadership on that.
So I know that you might have a
lot of questions. So instead of
going over my presentation, um
I'll just I'll turn it over to
questions to the members.
Okay. Thank you. Uh, we do have
questions. We're going to go
first to represent pedigree than
to represent Garrett. Thank you.
Chair, right? I think my
questions are more guidance and
learning that anything.
With the state quarantine and
graphics program. The office is
it that you guys managed the You
manage, Um
Where is that located? Is here
in Santa Fair and Albuquerque?
Mr. Chair represented the street
printing is here. Everything you
have in front of you is by state
printed and what they both
agreed upon. For the last two
years. We've had to borrow in
more money because they've done
such a really good job. So it is
hearing Santa Fe represent.
Thank you, Chairman. Thank you.
for that. The reason I ask is we
actually had a presentation last
week where
They were concerned that the
presentation was going to get
here because it was being
brought up from Albuquerque.
So does that mean that the
departments in the secretaries
don't go through you all the
time they can go wherever they
want.
Mr Tear representative. Yes, No
one's obligated to use us. I
believe we have the best price
in the best materials that you
have. But we don't mandate that
you have to use us and we've
been very successful for the
last few years. Mr. Chair
representative of getting more
business, not just by state, but
other business.
Thank you, Chairman. I It just
kind of made me laugh that
everybody knew for two weeks it
was gonna was gonna snow that
weekend and all of a sudden we
couldn't have our
Governors reports because they
were coming from Albuquerque.
Mr Chairman, representative.
The big budget report you get, I
gotta notice a couple of days
before that we needed to print
it and have it by a certain day,
And we did that.
Okay. Chairman. Thank you very
much for the opportunity. Ask
the question with respect to
that, Um, I do have some other
questions, but they're not.
Critical with respect to the
budget.
Well, we can take that off line.
Thank you very much. Represent
pedigree. Okay, let's we'll go
now to represent Garrett,
please. And thank you, Mr Chair.
Thank you, Mr Secretary and
team.
Um, just the new State office
building construction fall under
General Services, Mr Chair and
Representative Garrett. Yes, it
would fall under the
jurisdiction of the facilities
Management Division of the
General Services Department.
Thank you. Okay, So, Mr Chair,
Mr Secretary, we we know that
their capital for that building,
can you tell us where are we at
in the construction purchase of
property. Can you just give us a
quick update?
Mr Chairman, representative. You
want to mind? I'll turn over to
my deputy secretary in a Silva,
who's in charge of that
department, so you'll have the
right information to me. Just
asking. Great. Thank you so
much.
Thank you, Mr Chair
representative. Um, currently,
right now we're working with the
historic review board. We have a
public hearing tomorrow, um, to
meet with Oxford to talk about
any, um, questions that they
might have about the executive
office building.
Um the location that is going to
be built is already state owned
property and it's right across
the capital.
Thank you very much so as any
design or anything like that
taking place or you're still on
the hearings. The pre design Mr
Chair, Representative Garrett,
Um, there is no design that has
happened yet. Right now, we
still have to meet with the
historic review board before we
can start design. Thank you very
much. You're welcome.
Thank you very much represented
Garrett. Next we have
represented a Han.
Hey, Mr Chair. Um, I just wanted
to dress. I think some of this
came up during last week as
we're reviewing, Uh, special
supplementals. Um
Regarding the line eight General
Services Department to reimburse
the state Public liability Fund
of the Risk Management division
for funding the obligation of
leave US settlements in that 24.
Million.
20
Is that
Reflected anywhere else. And is
this can you Mr Chair can
Can the secretary maybe
elaborate on that? And the need
there? Mr. Chair represented
Luhan? Yes. The public liability
fund for the last five years
from FY 19 to fy 23.
Um there's been six entities
that's made up 86% of what we've
paid out. The number one was,
you know, Unh Hospital
Department of Corrections FD
DPS. New Mexico DLT, New Mexico
State
So since
FY 19 fy 23 roughly about $88.5
million and they made up 86% of
what we paid out of this fine.
Everyone else was about 14
pipes. 14.5 million, which made
up 14% of this
Till recently. What we've
collected like this FY fiscal
year we clicked $40 million in
this assessment. We've been able
to pay these lawsuits within
that.
Um, just for a broad
understanding. Just because we
get a lawsuit today it could be
settled into fiscal year is it
could be. It's very rare that
it's done if it's a large amount
in the same fiscal year.
In currently so we went through
this money we for lots of
reasons. Lots of big settlements
for this fine. That's why we
asked for additional 25 million.
And I'd like to thank you all We
got approval. For addition, we
collected 40. We asked for
another 20 million that we've
received the page. Make sure
that we can pay our bills.
Um
Based on internal legal reviews
it of case pending. Currently,
we're seeing approximately
additional 18 to 20 million over
current budget needs to complete
24.
Obligations.
I have some authority as the
The secretary of what I can do.
In May. I'm going to get
together with my internal staff
LSC DFA in her advisory board. I
believe the rules allows me no
more than 5% of a budget no more
than 40% and when given time. As
I told, said earlier. We have,
like six agencies who are the
vast majority of what we want to
do. I would like to see if we
could do a special assessment on
those agencies if they're taking
a bulk of it.
But this isn't something I can
just today decided to change. It
needs to be transparent. It
needs to be
Everyone's involved in what
we're going to do.
In insurance. 3 to 5 year trend
is what you need traditionally
to figure out what your needs
are going to be.
This last year. Like I said with
this year was the first year
that
What we collected. We didn't
have enough to pay what we
settled in Currently, if we
don't have money this fiscal
year, and we settle something.
That someone will not be paid
until July. 1st when we do our
assessment collection
So
I'm learning this with GSD. I
think we have a good plan going
forward, but I honestly think
this is going to be the new norm
of what we're paying out.
In some of the things that we're
doing at GSC to help
Maybe not. So many are our loss
prevention. We have hired a new
risk management director. She's
been on for about 3 to 4 months
Now we're going to focus on loss
prevention, working with other
entities being a resource.
If we see a big safety needs
going to them explained, this is
what we can do look for trends,
But those are some of the things
we're trying to be proactive
that so, Mr Chair
representative, Hopefully that
answered your question.
Thank you, Mr Chair. That does.
Thank you. We just had some
questions about that and that
that really brings us into the
note and how you're dealing with
all that. Thank you. Mr Chair.
Appreciate that. The other last
question I have is on
Um, the
The benefits and liability in
your presentation, can you
Insurance and liability
insurance. Can you expand on
that? Just a little bit as well.
Mr Chair, representative
benefits liability of what we
for the employee benefits.
Um, Mr Chair, both.
Budgets.
By working with my staff. We
talked a bit again this morning.
We'll take care of that
liability. That's outside.
Appreciate that. I appreciate
everyone's help on this. I know
it was a big ask. It was a big
number.
But when this goes over July 1st
to the new healthcare authority.
They should not have a deficit,
which is important for that to
be successful and to ensure
employees that we can pay their
bills.
Thank you. Thank you for working
with us. Thank you. That's all I
have to thank you very much from
seven Luhan. We're going to go
now to represent Garcia that
represent offered.
Thank you, Mr Chairman. Thank
you for the presentation on the
supplemental sheet.
Online five. You're asking for
60? I mean on lion.
Or
You're actually for $69 million.
For this efficiency on
insurance.
And then online.
Seven. You're asking for another
25,400,000? No, That's $95
Million. Can you explain whether
that deficit is so big and
Don't know. Sorry. So, Mr Chair
and represent Garcia.
Essentially what's happened for
several years We didn't raise
insurance premium rates on
public employees.
Uh, that left at the same time
as those rates weren't going up
expenditures out of the fund.
We're going up and so we We got
ourselves in a deficit. Right?
So expenditures exceeded
revenue. And this is, uh, the
amount that the group benefits
fund was short.
Of revenue to pay bills.
Thank you, Mr Chairman. You know
that. That's a concern to me
because we know we all know that
everything goes up every year.
You let it go so far that you so
far in deficit right now, you
know that's $95 million just to
catch up to start all over again
Representative Mr. Chair
representative. I understand
that And since march since I've
been here, I did raise the rates
for employees at 10% to help
with that deficit.
And I do appreciate the money
that's been appropriated to make
that deficit go away.
Thank you, Mr Chairman and
presenter. You know, it just
concerns me that we're that far
into the sun.
It really uncalled for? Very
really is uncalled for. Anyway,
we'll let that one go on. You're
asking for $2 Million for cars
are looking to be electric cars,
or are they going to be, uh
Regular cars.
Mr Chair, Representative.
Electrical. Thank you, Mr
Chairman. One last question when
comment, I want to thank you for
the good job you did on the
veterans woman here, she New
Mexico.
Thank you very much for that
chair representative As a fellow
vet, It's important that we
recognize the people.
Ladies and men who
A lot of them gave the ultimate
sacrifice that we could have the
society that we have and
Has been actually I've enjoyed
my job as a very challenging but
that day down there as proud,
very, very proud of not just my
agency, but other agencies and
you has elected officials given
that large sum of money at one
time to get that done.
And Mr Chairman without being
said, You know, I recommend that
everybody in this room to go
visit that center. Okay, It is
something else. It's state of
the art.
And for the best people to serve
the country and you know, you
really, really need to go. Look
at it. Thank you, Mr
Thank you very much represented
Garcia and thank you for your
leadership. So many of help in
your voice and leadership has
been central to the absolute
Um okay. We're gonna go next for
questions to represent Herndon
and then go to represent Brown
Sanford. Um please.
Thank you, Mr Chair, and thank
you presenters. Uh, I'm looking
at Page six of of Secretary Do
sets presentation and I'm asking
the LFC analyst
Uh, regarding this one. There
was a request for eight new
position six and facilities
management into and
transportation services. There
was a discussion about four new
buildings that need to be
staffed, and it doesn't look
like they have been, um,
accounted for.
So and they do need to be self.
So please, could you explain?
So, Mr Chairman and
Representative Herndon, if you
turn to page I'm sorry if you
turn to page
Hmm.
Page 15 in your in your
different sheet packet, you'll
see the PS calik form for the
General Services Department That
includes, um, an estimated
$856,000 in vacancy savings for
the facilities Management
division. The LFC
recommendations assumes that the
General Services Department
would fill those positions
before
Um, before an additional
appropriation would be
necessary. Thank you. Thank you
very much for that. Yes, Mr
Dussel. Mr Chairman,
representing also what we're
doing internally. Meet him with
my HR manager. Any FTE is over
two years.
I'm meeting with that department
director. Do we need them if not
were reconverted him? So when we
got this budget, we're trying to
be proactive that way.
Thank you very much. Mr
Chairman, representative.
And Mr Chair and the presenters
just for clarification. Going
back to the life insurance start
shortfalls because of
Says shortfalls in the
contractual category of life
insurance premiums in the risk
management division, so it's
risk management.
Is lfc requiring them to pick up
that funding from someplace else
So, Mr Chair Mr Chairman,
Representative Herndon. The LFC
recommendation would, uh, would
recommend that the agency looked
to raise those life insurance
rates that are paid by state
agencies. Um, it's important to
remember that
That that that deficits
recurring, correct, right? So
By by increasing those rates and
giving the agency of more
sustainable revenue source. They
don't have to keep coming back
to you for
For supplemental or deficiency
appropriations year after year.
Mr Mr Chair, just for
clarification of Mr Presenter.
So this 2 million
596,000 is not past deficits or
it is past deficit. So even if
they raised the insurance
premiums for the future, so they
don't have this deficit again.
How is it going to be covered?
So Mr Chairman and
representative Herndon, it would
have to be it would so again.
The LFC recommendation would
assume that it would be covered
out of those premium rate
increases.
Thank you. Thank you very much
represents Herndon. Next, we're
going to represent Brown.
Please, Mr. Chairman. If I may,
for example, represented Hernan
the lice insurance is paid 100%
by the state. That's one of the
benefits that we give state
employees. I just want to make
that very clear We would charge
see entities more, but it's not.
From the employees. I just
wanted to make sure everyone
knew that. Thank you for that
clarification, Mr Secretary.
And Brown, please. Thank you, Mr
Chairman and Secretary. I just
have kind of a follow up
question on what Representative
Herndon Just asked about the,
uh, the four new buildings.
That you need to staff up. Um,
could you tell us please, Mr.
Chair and Secretary do set where
those buildings are located and
for what purpose they were
built.
Mr. Chair, Mr. Chair represented
Brown.
Deputy Secretary Ana Silva.
Thank you, Mr Chair and
representative round. Um, we
have the secure storage
facility. Um, um in the DPS
headquarters. We have a new
crime lab facility. Uh, here on
Dallas Tail.
And we have the old vital
records building that had not
been staffed before, So it's now
the new vital records facility
And then, um, we have, uh, let's
we actually have seven something
you have the last four that we
built, Um
And then the district one
facility on DPS headquarters.
Thank you for that information.
Um, Mr Chairman. I just curious
to know how many new buildings
say per year on average, are we
Are we building?
Just to see how we're
Meeting. Whatever needs we have,
Mr. Chair. Um, Mr Chair
Representative round. That's a
great question, because, um
This year. Uh, in the last
appropriation last legislative
cycle, we will be receiving the
new ER Be building that's going
to come under FMD, so that's
going to be a new facility. We
also received an appropriation
for C Y F D to purchase a new
facility, so we'll be receiving
that building this year.
We also have the new forensics
building in Las Vegas. That's in
design. We also have, um
Let's see Pine tree Phase three
that we completed in
Albuquerque.
And, um, I think that's it for
this year. Okay? Thank you for
the information of those sound
like very important buildings to
build. Mr Chairman. I just also
have a question when it says you
need to staff the buildings. I
take it. You mean maintenance
personnel. Would that be
correct? Mr. Chair, Mr
Secretary.
Yeah.
Mr. Chair, Representative Brown.
I didn't quite hear the question
The question Mr Chair is when
you say you need to staff the
buildings is that in reference
to maintenance workers, Mr.
Chair Representative around?
Yes, we need maintenance workers
to include custodians.
landscapers, um, maintenance
just to maintain the facilities.
Okay, Thank you and their new
buildings, Mr Chair, So I assume
the needs aren't quite so great.
In the beginning, and then Mr
Chair.
Um, also want to ask about the
vacancy rate It's listed at 21%
Does that include
The maintenance staff that you
would be hiring or is that
separate Mr Chair? This chair
representative? That is correct.
It's our overall vacancy rate
for GST at this as of this
morning. Well, thank you very
much. Thank you very much
Represent Brown. Next, we're
going to go to represent
Montoya. Thank you, Mr Chair,
and, uh, Mr Secretary.
Um, I do have a couple of
questions on the special and
supplemental
Page.
Um, an item three.
It says for testing and
treatment of coronavirus. What
What is the responsibility and
treatment from the state? So,
um, Mr Chairman represent
Montoya. I apologize. This
language was clipped. It's for
healthcare costs for the state
Group Health Benefits fund,
including those, uh,
coronavirus. Um
Expenses. I would point out that
the LFC recommendation uses some
of those funds that were, um
from the American Rescue Plan
Act. So those those covid 19
relief funds, the agency saw
pretty significant cost driver
from from Covid 19 for paying
for testing and treatment of
state employees.
Um
You know for for state employees
that have insurance.
Okay. Thank you. I do. I
I was trying to figure out that
was seemed very specific for
that amount of money. Um, thank
you, Mr Speaker and Mr Chairman,
and, uh,
Now I gotta get used to going
back and forth to the floor
using the right term. So Mr
Chairman and Mr Secretary
Um, also on item four.
The shortfalls in group health
Insurance benefits program.
Uh, the the 60,000 from
Executive.
Am I to understand We're making
an assumption, I believe was a
statement. You said that that
the difference we made up with
Any potential difference. We
made up with increases to
premiums. What what, exactly
Where you stating, So, Mr
Chairman and representative. The
difference online for is it is a
timing issue. The LFC
recommendation was based on an
earlier estimate of the end of
the year. FY 23 deficit in the
fund. The executive
recommendation was based on the
audited number. We did not have
the audited number at the time
we were making the LFC
recommendation.
If we had, uh, it's it's
possible the LFC recommendation
might have been for the 66.
Thank you, Mr Mr Chairman.
So I want to make an assumption
that if we pass this budget that
next year, we will not have a
shortfall.
Mr. Chair representative.
There's an insurance and
healthcare. There's never an
absolute my time that I've done
this and I've been as a number
two for the Department of
Insurance For five years. I have
a huge work hop background, so I
would never sit here and say.
Definitely we won't The odds are
very low, Mr Chair of
representative that there won't
be a deficit.
But there's things that normal
crew before seeing covid not
just covid. But the impact of
covid for the years. I feel very
comfortable with the two
proposals that in going forward
with the H A. C, which I do
believe they did in their budget
presentation have an increase
that
It should be solved, But I can't
stand here and say that's a
certainty. Mr. Chair
representative.
Mr Chair and representatives
just to add further context to
that the healthcare authority is
approaching the deficit in their
own way, and they do have some
intent with the procurement of
the health benefits contract
through I back there are some
things that are governed by
statute that relate to how
increases to premiums are made
and how insurances are decided
upon the state as a whole. There
are a lot of people that
participate local public bodies.
To be included on those
Um, increases. However, I would,
um
Suggest that maybe looking at
the Health care Authority budget
request for fiscal year 25 that
might answer your question a
little bit better, and they
will, they will have a better
strategy. Moving forward to
speak on then GSD since both
life insurance and health
benefits are now rolling over to
the healthcare authority, So
thank you, Mr Chairman. Once
again, this was an area of
concern.
Across the budget that we had.
We had a fix for this, uh, last
year.
And so it appears.
Mr Chair that it's still going
to rely
Allows
Rating vetoes that take place
this year.
We're doing all that we can as
the Legislature and quite
frankly, a little frustrated.
I don't believe we have
deficits.
Across all
Departments that the bullet like
we did, um, Election year, Mr
Chair, so I hope the governor
holds firm this year and doesn't
allow this deficit which I
believe is illegally forward.
Thank you, Mr Chairman.
Thank you. Uh, now we're going
to go to Vice chair Dixon.
Thank you, Mr Chair. Um
Thank you. Lfc and D f A for the
analysis and thank you,
Secretary do set for the very
short presentation. Um, I have a
couple of questions regarding
the risk management division.
And I want to start. Um Mr Chair
and Secretary with C Y F. D.
It.
It's my understanding. And you
This is where I need you to
correct me if I am understanding
this wrong, um, that
Um, risk management has not had
the money to pay for recent
hefty settlements. Is that
correct?
Mr Chair, Vice chair, Dixon.
Currently we are projecting
about 12.1 Million for C Y f D
that we know about. Some of them
have been settled. Some have not
currently we do have the money
with the 40 million that we
collected assessments and the 20
million that we got into
supplement.
The concern is, you know, we
still have 56 months. Uh, what
else is going out there? As I
see did earlier, Mr True Mrs
Vice chair.
Usually lawsuits they start to
generally is the general New
Mexico State was anomaly where
something happened. It was
settled pretty quickly, um
So we tracked that I have a
really good Stafford tracking
that and
Our last legal counsel. I talked
with him this morning. We have
new legal counsel to and they're
both tracking the same way.
I wish it was easy as we know
we're going to get generally
this many lawsuits. This is
generally what we pay. And once
again we've been what our
assessments we've been able to
use our assessments that we've
collected and not to ask for
anymore, and
I truly believe this is a new
trend that until I really get
that 3 to 5 year aggregate, um
It is. It's hard to answer some
of these. You know, maybe this
is we're fortunate and
unfortunate way that there's
been a lot of lawsuits this
fiscal year that we're paying a
lot of money out and next year
that's not going to be the case.
So, Mr Chair, Mrs Vice chair. I
hope that answers your question.
That's uh Thank you, Mr Chair.
Thank you, Secretary. That is
helpful. Um
In our recent, um, hearing with
C Y F D, though one of their
special appropriations requests
was $20 million for lawsuits, So
I'm trying to understand how
that works with the risk
management division and the
funds that you have.
Mr Chair, Madam Beister.
It.
It's an assets to liabilities,
equation and
It can be a little complex the
issue with FD and them asking
for the $20 million Special
appropriation is there is when
you have liabilities you don't
necessarily understand or know
exactly what that cost will be a
liability is an estimate. Or,
um, a best guess.
At most at what a judgment might
come down to be. So in the case
of C Y F. D.
There. There's an assumption of
what those settlements are going
to look like. And then there's
an assumption of what that
liability looks like on the GSD
books, right, So what's
happening now is when you
include the C I f d liability or
tentative payout. Um, and then
you look at what's actually cash
in that account and what can be
paid out.
If you combine those
liabilities, it exceeds what's
available to be paid out. The
problem with liabilities are
one. You don't know exactly how
much that liability payout will
be, because it's based on the
determination of the judgment.
And two. You don't know the
length of time until that
determination is going to be
made. So with C Y F D. There's
no specifics to those
determinations. As of yet, But
there is enough concern that
those determinations will be
hefty and the liabilities that
currently exists without fund
along with the liability that
they are now facing is going to
be too big of a hit for that
fun. So until special
assessments are made to bring
the cash back up.
We're gonna have a problem and
and as secretary to set said
those payouts are really just
getting a little bigger, so
we're looking at a long term
solution to problem right now.
The C Y F D is just the most
immediate liability that we're
facing.
Mr. Chair, Mr Vice Chair.
There is nothing obligated any C
agency to you JSC in risk
management, But there's a caveat
there if you don't use GST, if
you have to pay out, you pay out
100%.
If you use Yes. See, we pay 50%.
And I've had people say Well,
everyone should use GSC.
Sometimes there's expertise and
knowledge in the state agency
that we don't have or we don't
have in contract.
So in
For example, the C Y elected
officials some come to us. Very
few. Do some some don't so I
want to put that out there, too.
No one is obligated to go to
GSD two are sometimes there's an
expertise that we don't have
that someone will use.
Because of what they their
niche, So I just wanted to put
that that's probably one of the
reasons why you saw the C Y F D
one also.
Thank you, Mr Chair. Thank you,
Secretary. So for that 20
million
I guess we don't know if that if
they are looking at paying 100%
because they've gone with
someone else, or 50% because
they're working with GST. I want
to be very clear to Mr Chair.
Mrs. Madam Vice here, C Y C is
using risk management Now you're
talking about if they got the
$20 million if they're going to
use GST or not, there's a
combination that they want to
make sure
Mr Chair and um Madam vice
chair. Also to clarify that C Y
f d appropriation of $20 million
is still to that risk management
fund. So even if it's you know,
being paid out 50% or not, by C
Y F D. It's still going to the
same fund that has that
liability.
Thank you, Mr Chair. Thank you.
What happens if C Y f d
Doesn't get the $20 Million. I
mean,
I mean,
Can you pay out?
Past. I mean, you can't go into
a deficit really for this, can
you?
Um, Mr Chair, Madam Vice chair.
We do have assessment. We get
the assessment. We asked for a
supplement. We got 20 million.
Uh, if we have no money in that
fund
They're going to whoever we owe
money will have to wait till
July 1st. That's what the rule
says, Um
So
That's how we will do it, but
that's why it's very important
that it may when we worked with
our partners and our my advisory
board.
Look at these top six. What can
we do by rule? What do we need
to change by law? Because once
again I don't see this being the
tip of the iceberg and let's see
if we have to do a system's how
we're going to do it. It's the
5% no more than 5% no more than
40% so
I know it's not a lot of answers
at this time, but I believe
we're at a point where a lot
more people are understanding
the complication of this in what
we need to do to go forward.
Mr Simon, Do you want to add Mr
Chair represent Dixon? Can I
refer you very quickly. The page
149 of Volume three. This is
your LSC Cash balance report.
And on that page, you'll see the
cash reserves of the public
property fund, the public
liability fund, unemployment,
compensation, etcetera.
So you can see in the public
liability fund as of November,
2023.
Uh,
That reported number is about
$50 million. I think what the
secretary is is telling to you
as they're concerned about
drawing that down and not being
able to pay bills. But as of
November 2023, there is $50
million in cash in that fund.
Thank you, Mr Chair, and Joey.
I'm going to try to wrap this
up. Um, so two things. Um
Number one.
The list of settlements that is
issued in a report annually.
Correct, okay?
Mr Chair, Madam Vice here? Yes.
And also in our sunshine portal
on the first and 15th.
We list everything. When I came
in Marshall were some anomalies
that we did not list that is no
longer talk to my head of my
risk management. She's behind me
this morning to make sure it is
up to date. So and we give a
yearly report, which was the
first time in three years. I
believe my department is given
to you anything over $1000.
So, yes, we're giving you the
information. Thank you. Thank
you, Mr Chair. Thank you,
Secretary. I did actually look
through the report, and it was
fascinating. Um, and so I
encourage other committee
members to do the same if you're
interested, Um, my last
question. Um, you you were
talking about the assessments
and caps and things like that,
And so
Um LFC did an evaluation
recently and had a number of
recommendations for you know,
managing risk management and I'm
just wondering how
Those are proceeding. If you're
implementing some of those, if
you could provide a quick update
Mr Chair, Madam Vice here? Yes,
actually.
But the first day of our new
risk management Chavez, who's
behind me, I gave her that
report. I said, this is where
we're going to start. That's why
Everything has been transparent
on the on our website of
everything that we've paid out.
It takes time. But we are using
it and it was a very good
report. You know, it was just
this is what we need to do The
move forward and Mr Chair, Madam
Vice here. I think that I would
see for giving us a report.
Thank you, Mr Terry. Thank you,
Secretary and thank you for your
leadership and your
responsiveness and engagement.
It is very much appreciated.
Thank you, Mr
Thank you very much, Madam Vice
chair. Uh, let's go briefly to
represent Garcia for a second
time. Thank you. Mr Chairman.
Real briefly. Was there any
money allowed it for the baton
building service. Mr. Chair
Represent Garcia in the baton
building, Not specifically in
the GST budget. No, you're in
charge of that building.
Mr. Chair. Mr. Chairman
Represent Garcia. Yes, that is
correct. Just with that, Mr
Chairman, maybe I dropped the
ball. I looked into that.
Maybe the train already left the
station. But you know that, But
I'm really nares veterans still
You know, because he baton the
people in the Bataan Death
March, either life for this
stuff, You know nothing little
late right now. Maybe, But we
really need to revisit that.
Thank you, Mr Chairman. Thank
you very much. Mr Chair and
Representative Garcia, I believe
there is a capital request from
D F A in regards to that Baton
Building renovation project.
However, I not sure the amount
and
What the specificity of that is,
but I do believe there's one out
there.
Are you asking for state capital
or for individual capital?
It's it's part of the state
Capitol. I C i P request Mr
Chair representative.
Thank you, Mr Chairman. Thank
you. Thank you. Thank you
Members for great questions, Mr
Secretary, and Alice. A couple
of quick questions first. Mr.
Secretary, You mentioned
something around the vacancy
rates. Did I hear you correctly
that you're looking at sort of
the funded vacancies over a two
year cycle? Uh,
If
And you're looking at
reclassifying positions in on a
two year cycle, Mr. Chair, I'll
clarify. I'm sorry. Sometimes
the new England comes out and
I'm not very clear.
I
As a new secretary. I've been in
front of lot of these for many,
many years, and one thing that
was drilled into me if your
positions over two years vacant,
you probably need to reclassify.
that is what I'm currently
doing. We've reclassified a
couple of our over two years to
another HR position that we
desperately needed a couple. I t
so anything over two years.
I'm sitting down with my senior
leadership team. Do you need it?
If you need to explain to me why
it's been vacant for two years,
and then we're re converting
those positions to needs that we
need to have.
So I'm sorry, Mr Sheriff. I
wasn't clear about that
Secretary said not at all. I
wanna
They basically what I heard,
and I wanted to ask about it
because I think it's notable and
it shows for really a very
proactive um
Front foot approach and and
frankly one that I think we
should take note of and and
really looked to praise and and
looked at potentially reward.
Um and Mr Secretary just briefly
on that, I guess sort of next.
You're asking sort of going back
a couple of years. And this is
you'll be doing, Mr Chairman.
I go. We look at that list
monthly of what we need and who
needs it, And sometimes it's re
classed down. Sometimes it's re
class up and I will tell you,
the school leadership has been
great. You know, we have to
justify as we should, but we
haven't had a lot of pushback on
that. And I have a bigger agency
and I know
We have a large percent vacant,
but we're trying to be
proactive, Mr Chair. So when I
do come in front of you and you
as elected officials
We're from asking for something.
I'm trying to do something
before I get here. Excellent.
Thank you. Thank you very much
for that, Mr. Secretary. I'm
really glad that you're doing
that. And that you shared that
with us today. Finally, Mr.
Secretary, um, going on the risk
management side. Want to thank
you for sort of reinstituting?
Uh, the work, you know, posting
things to the Sunshine portal.
Should not have been
discontinued should not have
been an interruption. Thanks.
Um what are their interim
components of that? That is sort
of right before. What are
Prior to final judgments. What
are other public components?
What are other components that
you're tracking so that we moved
from the brother that was
explained by the analyst saying
very well the broad sort of
sense of liability to maybe
prior to a case is settled but
close to the conclusion. Are
there other components? Mr
Chairman, Everything on the
Sunshine Portal is a final
settlement.
Things that are kind of getting
settled or trends. We look
internal of our risk management
with our legal team.
Because our legal team manages a
lot of
The trees that we hire to make
sure that things aren't sitting
and that's where the loss
prevention will come in. That's
the next component. If we see a
trend, we'll just say slip and
falls. I'm just picking
something that just not one
agency.
Do we need to get out there
earlier with salt is an
internal. We look at that
internally as an insurance risk
indicator and try to be
proactive of how to reduce that.
Okay. Thank you, Mr Secretary,
But are there any with other
particularly with other
agencies, and we can take C Y f
d for example.
Are there any other are there?
Ah steps along the way, or is it
sort of all informal meetings in
new monitoring Prior to
settlement? Are there sort of
other more official steps where
you sort of move from one phase
to another?
During one of these actions in,
particularly in another agency,
Mr Chair. If you don't mind,
I'll have even come up. Who is
our our legal bureau chief? Who
does these lawsuits?
Thank you, Mr Chair. Thank you
Very, very didn't thank you, Mr
Chair. Thank you, Mr Chair.
Members of the committee.
So this is a loud, isn't it all
right there Sensitive. Sorry
about that.
Okay, Mr Care. Thank you, Um,
even clock here. I'm the interim
legal bureau chief at risk
management and to help answer
your question with our case,
management protocols were
managing a tripartite
relationship with our internal
risk attorneys.
The contract Defense law firm
and the agency and depending on
The nature of the lawsuit and
the type of litigation, uh at
every key point in which
We would need to make a decision
regarding settlement regarding
trial regarding litigation
tactics and strategy.
Uh,
Ultimately, we would have
ideally the final word, but that
would be done in consultation
with the agency and based on
advice of counsel. Uh so
As as you would expect. It is
case by case and depending on
the nature of the lawsuits and
litigation. Uh, we
Would have to evaluate and make
decisions based upon both the
agency's input and advice of our
civil defense counsel.
Thank you for that, Um
And Mr Secretary, Mr. Council
chief counsel, Um
Is. Are there public? Obviously
the the internal workings and
that the sort of the trial or
others legal strategies.
Uh, those are that's clearly
your work are their settlement
phases other components that are
public.
Or they can be made public so
that there's more transparency
as we go through the process,
particularly getting closer to
settlement, or is it
You know? Yeah, I'm I'm trying
to dig in a little bit because
we've gotten some very large
sort of flashing lights. Red
lights from C Y F D. We're also
seeing now from GSD overall.
And
That's good. It's good. I mean,
we appreciate that being shared
trying to dig into understand.
Uh, between the flashing light
in the settlement.
What are other public
components? What are sort of an
avid invite Mr Simon, Director
Slee.
Deputy director Courtney if
there are other components
where, uh,
Both from a public transparency
perspective from a committee
oversight perspective, uh what
the potential roles are
Mr Chairman. Thank you for that.
My understanding any work
papers anything before the
settlement is confidential in
nature? I'm not an attorney
Never played one, but you get
four trees and you get four
different things. But if that's
something we need to look at, I
have no problem as the Cabinet
secretary working with the F A
and L C to see what we can and
can't do by law.
And be able to report that back
to you, Mr Chairman. Thank you,
Mr Secretary. That's great to
me. Um, I please bring back more
information there. Think we're
seeing some very big estimated
risks out there and we want to
be very closely connected as
those sort of go through this
both for budgeting purposes.
Okay. Uh, I think that does it
for my questions. Um, thank you
to the LSC for following up on
that and thinks analysts for
going through things with that I
go to the vice chair.
Thank you, Mr Chair. I would
move. The committee adopts the
lfc, right?
It's been moved by vice chairs,
Dixon saying by representative
had Emilio Ah, let's Is there
any opposition to adopting that
motion?
Okay. I don't see any opposition
to adopting the motion. So, Mr
Secretary, Thank you. Yeah,
Thank you to you and your team.
Thank you very much, Okay,
members, we're gonna go to our
final agency for the day again.
We're gonna hear US state
engineer and Department of
Health on Friday.
Uh, as a note, um, in keeping
with past practice, we're going
to hear public comment on the
agency's We heard today and
Madam secretary.
Come on up.
Okay. Dr. Gardere. Um, thank you
for being here and we'll go to
you first and go from there.
Alright, Mr Chair and members of
the committee. Good afternoon.
evening. Um my name is Rachel
Mercer Garcia and in the LFC,
analyst for the Workforce
Solutions Department. You're
going to be looking at agency
code 631. It's behind Tab six in
your binders.
Um, You can also find more
information about the LFC
recommendation. Um, on page 49
Volume one and page 315 Volume
two.
Here with me at the table is a
workforce Solutions Department
Cabinet secretary Syrian air as
well as the FAA analyst, Cecilia
Never met us. Cecilia and I will
walk you through the big
differences between the
executive and LFC
recommendations. Um, and then we
will turn it over to the
secretary for a brief
presentation. Um, and I believe
that your team assist us in
getting the projectors that
because they do have a short
presentation.
Um
Problem before we get started.
important to know that the
majority of revenue supporting
the workforce Solutions
Department is federal, um, about
8%, only of their budget is
general fund.
Um
And, um, one of the things that
you will see overall in both
budget recommendations is a net
decrease for the department and
that is primarily driven by the
end of pandemic era enhanced
federal revenue.
All the executive recommendation
is 5.7 million higher than the
LFC recommendation in the
General fund.
Um, and that would be a 54.7%
General fund increase. Um,
whereas the LFC recommendation
would provide a 3.2% General
fund increase and there are two
key differences and two programs
in the agency. Um one within
employment services and one
within the labor relations and
programs. And so I actually
asked Mr Chair, would you like
us to walk through?
Every single program, or would
you just like us to point to the
two programs where there are
differences? Thank you for the
question. I think the two
programs where there are
differences. Alright, we will.
We will go there. Um, I will
pass it to my GF a counterpart
to talk about labor relations
and then I'll pick up employment
services.
Thank you, Rachel. Okay, so
labor relations P. 776 executive
recommendation is $1.6 million
higher than the LFC
recommendation, which
recommended an increase of
262,000 in personnel to fund
vacant positions and reduce
their caseloads.
Following agency budget requests
and the Department of Workforce
Solutions Budget Hearing and LFC
in November of 2023, the Labor
relations division received an
adverse ruling in the case of
Olivia's versus near which was
ruled the program must issue
wage in our determinations in
85% of decisions within 120 days
of receipt.
Um, as a result of this ruling,
the executive recommendation
includes 1.8 Million and
expansions to fund 18 New FTE s
in the labor Relation Division
and meet the new caseload
standards. Um, and of these 15
of these positions are state
investigators and three of them
are management analysts and I
will pass it over to Rachel for
employment services.
That's one of the big
differences. The labor
relations. The second one is an
employment services and that's P
code 778. The executive
recommendation provides 4.13
Million more in general fund
revenue to fund the expansion of
programs requested by the agency
to increase employment among
young adults. These are programs
that the agency has been funding
over the last two years.
Through and our pack one time
Special Appropriation executive
recommendation includes 1.28
million to fund career
counselors who work in high
schools.
Um, 1.64 million for the beep,
probie Proud initiative that is
the mobile truck simulator to
increase interest in the trades
and 1.2 million for pre
apprenticeship programs, which
would allow the agency for it to
provide paid work experiences
for young adults and the key
difference with the LFC
recommendation is that the LFC
provides funding for several of
those initiatives in the
Government Accountability Trust
Fund.
And so within the LSD
recommendation, there is a total
of 10.4 million over four years
and 8 million for the career
exploration initiative and 2.4
million for the pre
apprenticeship programs. Um, and
the reasoning behind that is
because this will be a new
program. It has some promise,
but we don't yet have outcomes
and away to know about what the
real impact on things like Labor
Force. Participation will be.
And so the LFC records
Foundation provides for piloting
and evaluating outcomes
associated with those programs
before moving them into the
agency's base.
Um The lfc recommendation,
though, does not provide funding
for the career Counselor
initiative because some of those
things may be duplicative of the
work of K 12 education.
And those are the summary of the
two biggest differences between
the executive and LFC
recommendation. I'll pass it
over to my idea of a counterpart
Cecilia to summarize performance
measures.
Thank you and Mr Chair. Both
analysts have reached consensus
for the performance measures, so
with that I will pass it over to
Secretary near for her
presentation. Thank you.
Thanks, everybody. Thanks for
hearing us tonight. We really
appreciate it. Um, I have with
me, my deputy secretary, ASD,
director, CFO and budget
director and I want to thank
both my analysts. I have a great
pair of analysts and hopefully
get to keep them forever, so
really appreciate all their work
and prepping So I'm going to
really focus on the big
discrepancy between the
executive and legislative
recommendations that was really
do
To the timing of the adverse
order that we got in the case of
Olive SV near and, um, you know,
Cecilia explained it really
well, but basically the first
judicial district rule that the
wage now our division will have
to issue 85% of decisions within
120 days of receipt, all
decisions within 270 days and
anything that doesn't doesn't
make
The 120 day limit is going to
have to have an individualized
explanation. Um, I You know, we
just were never staffed for that
level of turnaround. Of course,
we would love to hit those
numbers, but we have to increase
staffing. So this they chart
that you see in front of you.
Um, the green bar will show you
the wage claims received in in
these various quarters. The
orangish yellowish bar that's on
the right will show you the wage
claims. Um
That are closed. So you can see
we're closing fewer than we're
receiving. And then the Red line
shows you the average cases per
investigator. That blue flat
line shows you what we've been
funded at, Um so you can see
that Even if we hadn't had this
decision, we were already
requesting an increase in the
budget, So we had originally
increase requested five
investigators and three
management analysts.
Our new request is for 10,
Additional investigators to meet
the timeline stepped forth in
this lawsuit, and I would never
say this, but I am going to
quote the judge in this case
because, he said, My hope is the
department goes to the
Legislature and says this
unreasonable judge. Beachside
has entered this order in this
matter, and we're stuck with
that. Please give us spending
for people so that we can do
what we're being judicially
ordered to do.
I would never call a judge and
reasonable But since he asked us
to say that we're saying it, So,
um we do apologize that we
weren't able to get this in
front of you during our interim
hearings, but and we appreciate
that the executive put it in.
But but that's the reasoning
behind that request.
Um, moving on to the next slide.
We have just a reminder of of
sort of how all the other three
initiatives work together, the
three that Rachel described in
employment services. So, um, we
have people. The first step is
that if we're going to a school
with the B probie proud truck,
we go and register students. We
get them into our career
solutions exploring tool.
So that we start to get their
information and understand what
they're interested in. Then step
two is we take the B probie
proud truck out there which will
hopefully be back up here for
apprenticeship day. If you
haven't gotten to play in it
yet, I hope you get a chance to
do that. Then Step three is that
those folks have one on one
meetings with career counselors
to put them into, um, the path
that they have been inspired to
follow. Step four is hopefully a
pre apprenticeship and step five
is then an apprenticeship or
training program.
Ah, and that's really how these
three pieces are designed to
work. So moving to the next
slide. Um, continue. We're
grateful for the funding through
the accountability Program Fund
for the BP, probie Proud truck
also, um, happy to receive,
although it's tap of our
request, but some money to
continue pre apprenticeship. Um
through also the accountability
program fund and then just, you
know, would like to reiterate.
We still believe that the career
counselors are not duplicative.
We've heard
A lot of good feedback from the
schools where they're placed,
and they also play a really key
role in getting folks into a pre
apprenticeship. So if we don't
receive that funding than the
number of pre apprenticeships
will be able to fund will be
reduced by the amount will have
to to, um, fill, uh,
Positions with that money
because, um, as as Rachel
pointed out, we were federally
funded and we can't have our
federally funded employees doing
other stuff, which is why we
need dedicated resources. So,
um, just also some highlights.
We've had 204 pre
apprenticeships completed 270 or
ongoing or slated in 192
employers and
We've gotten the feedback I'm
happy to to review with you.
Anything else about the feedback
we've gotten on this program,
but it's just hugely successful,
especially for businesses.
And then just a few updates, um,
from the right up in the budget
summaries so
Labor force participation rates
actually have increased in 2023,
So the budget document is still
talking about 2022, but it is
already up to 58%. So that's a
point and a half higher than it
was in November 22, which means
that there are 30,000 more
people in the labor force than
there were, um, and a year
before that. Also some bright
spots. The population with the
disability has increased between
2021 and 2022 increased its
labor force participation rate
by 2.7% population with less
than a high school diploma by
3.7% High School graduates by
2.4%. So we are starting to see
people come out of the stands
get into the game and re engage
in the labor force, and we're
really excited about that. Also
just wanted to note the budget
document talks a little bit
about our carry forward of Leo a
Funding Workforce Innovation
Opportunity Act.
Funding. That is a standard
procedure. Those we we owe
forwards is sort of how that
those programs are built. So,
um, the last slide that I have
in here is just your update is I
always know you're interested in
the labor force participation
rate in the estimated employment
gap that is still sitting at
about 32,000 people as of
October. That's the difference
between if the number of jobs
available the number of
unemployed people looking for
work, but again that is down
considerably from where it was
when I first started repeating
grab
Reporting on this step.
And with that, I'm happy to
answer questions. Thank you very
much. Madam Secretary, thanks to
your team for being here today.
We're going to go straight to
questions starting with Thank
you, Mr Chairman.
Uh huh.
Mr.
Chairman. I'm looking at Page
two on your presentation, and
I've heard
Many times.
That we had. We had one of the
lowest unemployment rates ever
right now. But page do says that
we have a 72% increase in the
cases. So how can we be the
lowest in 72% increase in the
cases filed with your agency, Mr
Chair and Representative
Chatfield. These are the wage
and hour cases. So these are
cases by people who are working.
But believe that they have not
been paid appropriately under
the minimum wage act or overtime
laws. Okay, Mr Chairman, that's
that. That makes a lot of sense.
Um
What is a pre apprenticeship?
Mr. Chair, Representative
Chatfield, So a pre
apprenticeship is a work based
learning opportunity that's
designed to connect a young
person. We we have the age of 16
to 24 in school or out of school
with an opportunity to learn any
any career that they want. And
and we couple that with career
counseling services, we pay 1590
an hour and they actually become
an employee of our department.
So what that has done is removed
a lot of barriers for employee
employers because they don't
need to worry about
Workers comp.
They don't need to worry about
payroll. They don't need to
worry about any of this stuff
associated with bringing on a
new employer and a new employee.
and that's really why our
program has been so successful.
Mr Chairman, I'd like that a
lot.
Uh, my last question.
I remember.
During Covid. You weren't here.
You weren't in that position.
You're probably here but
We were somewhere.
On the backside of 300 million
in the hole.
And we borrowed money from the
federal government.
To survive.
And
You just mentioned some of the
covid money coming in. The feds
were gonna reimburse us.
For that money.
Did they reimburse us for all of
it?
And what other benefits that we
received? Just short? Not not
the just the 50,000 ft level,
but are we, uh
Are we on the
Upside or the downside of the
feds right now.
Mr. Chair, Representative
Chatfield, So we are
Back to normal, I would say with
respect to the unemployment
insurance trust fund in the
sense that we don't have a
negative balance. We still don't
have the solvency ratio that we
would ideally have. And what
that means is that if we were to
get into trouble again, we would
not be eligible for an interest
free loan from the feds. We
would have to pay back interest.
But that said, I think you know
we're going to use the next year
to look at different things that
could shore up solvency and will
come to come to you with that
next year.
Um, in general. The feds have
been great about continuing to
fund us for issues related to
the backlog of claims that came
through the pandemic. We also
received $6 million grant for
modernization of our IT systems.
So we're doing well with
the fence. So, Mr Chairman, I
still didn't hear that word. Did
they backfill us?
100% of
What they were supposed to
Ah, Mr Tear Representative
Chatfield? Yes.
Thank you, Mr Chair. Thank you
very much represents Chatfield.
Next we go to represent the
hunt. Thank you, Mr Chair. Thank
you for the presentation and
drawing our attention to certain
things on your budget.
I think I'm gonna kind of echo a
little bit of what? Um Chatfield
was doing like in some of your
programs I do. I'm going to look
at the
Um
Our budget.
Line item 31 in the regional
career counselors place in
15 high schools and then line
32, the pre apprenticeship
programs coordinated position in
participants. Stipends for
roughly 250 people.
These aligned items are funded
by ARPA to, um
And so you're asking for some
budget for this? How is how are
you working? I believe this is
And I don't know if it's a true
redundancy. I know it's your own
program.
But in working in correlation
with ped, and then our local
governments that are bringing
forward you know, opportunities
for our young and our youth and
our workforce. And you described
at your age 16 to 24 and Mr
Chair. This is this is something
that
So every hearing almost. We're
looking for workforce
development workforce, are you
Are you asking? Are you working
with our state agencies, Mr
Chair to look those those, Um
Apprenticeships through our for
our agencies and through our
agencies as well and also, um
Mr Chair. I know we
Okay. Question on the arbor
front. Did you expend all of
your RP funds, Mr Chair?
Mr Chair, representative Lou
Hunt, So we have coordinated
closely with and the public
education department in where we
place the career counselors and
how we're doing the pre
apprenticeships that pre
apprenticeships that we have are
different. They're way more
flexible than the ones that the
PD has think the ped cut off
ages, 19 that right so and they
also tend to work with folks who
are in school. And whereas we
have the flexibility to work
with folks who may be out of
school
So we do feel like they're
they're not in in complete
overlap. We've also talked about
you know, ways we can help them
expand, expand their funds. Um,
I think your other question was
about, um, they expect
expenditure of RP funds and we
have budgeted to expand the
funds by Madam Sorry. Just
Just a quick note. I know are
microphones are delicate. If we
could have you turned it off,
put it closely and speak very
closely into the microphone for
for all of us who are speaking
into the microphone. I know
there's a lot of folks online.
Uh and we just want to make sure
capture. Thank you so much,
Madam Secretary? Sure. Is that
better? Okay, Great. Thanks.
So thank you, Mr Chair,
Representative Luhan. We have
budgeted and intend to expand
the RB funds by the end of this
fiscal year. Um, I think we have
We are in the federal deadline.
That would be the end of this
calendar year and we don't
actually revert until the end of
the next fiscal year, but we
just wanted to get this money
out the door.
So, Mr Chair in the attic and
expanding those funds with that
include
Um, incorporating this This
amount of money you're asking in
the budget that we don't have
the recommendation from Lfc or
the executive
For this program that I just
talked about. I'm sorry, Mr
Chair, Representative, Luhan.
Um, this the money that we've
requested for all three of these
programs that are on side number
four would be to substitute for
the art defense that will be
gone and we asked for them on a
recurring basis. The two that
were funded were funded through
the accountability program
funds, So that would be the four
years as Rachel described
So this Mr Chair just for my own
clarification and time that also
this is the flexible funding
Also with Y o we are that you,
Ryota.
That you were mentioning in your
presentation as well. Is that
correct? Mr. Chair, Mr. Chair,
Representative Luhan, though we
owe offends are separate from
that's That's our sort of annual
allocation from the federal
government to run the Workforce
and Innovation Opportunity Act
funds that we then dispersed to
the local workforce, development
boards. Mr. Chair, Okay, So are
there.
Or were there, um, flexible
funds to help supplement some of
the restrictions?
Based on those federal funding
that I don't see in the budget.
We don't see the budget, Mr
Chair.
For what? Well, why Iowa?
Um well, Mr Chair,
Representative Luhan, um, that
the programs are separate. We
could not use we owe funds to do
these projects and vice versa.
I'm just
Trying to put things together
from previous hearings and other
in budget and understanding that
I
Maybe need to talk to you out
outside of this because I
thought that they were fundings
helped with that.
Separately, more flexible
funding that you had in your
budget before but be wrong.
I'd like to know more just kind
of show that up. Um
But Mr Chair, I think that that
Zarb refunds and I see that
Neither the executive or else he
has recommended. Um uh, there's
expenses in this budget, so I
think we need a Oh, here, Mr
Chairman, Representative to
clarify the executive
recommendation includes funding,
um, moving all three of those
programs into the agency's base.
Um, whereas the LFC
recommendation provides 10.4
million over four years to fund
two of the programs, but not in
the operating budget within the
and expendable trust so that
that's the key difference.
Perfect. Thank you. That's the
clarification I needed. I really
appreciate that. Thank you so
much, Mr. Chair. Thank you.
Thank you very much upset of
Wuhan.
Next. We're going to go to
represent pedigree then
represented here. It
Thank you, Chairman. Thank you,
Secretary for being here and
enjoying this on a Wednesday
evening.
Um
Madam secretary chairman, Madam
Secretary. I'm looking at Page
four.
And to follow up on
representative Chat Fields
question.
The Prius apprenticeship
program. As I understand some of
the answers chairman and
And, um, Secretary. This is
different than what's happening
through the ped.
Mr. Chair, Representative
Pettigrew, that's correct.
Okay, Great.
And
Give me a favor and define
Workforce Solutions Pre
apprenticeship program.
Mm. Mr Chair Representative
Pettigrew. The workforce
Solutions pre apprenticeship
program is a work based learning
program that offers up to 400
hours of paid work experience
with employers for used ages. 16
to 24.
Thank you, Chairman. And thank
you, Madam Secretary. So
If I look at that, and I look at
Chairman. The line that
representatives Luhan pulled
out.
With respect to the 250 people.
Um
Little locations. Do we have
this?
Uh, apprenticeship programs that
Mr. Chair, Representative
Pettigrew. We'd be happy to
share the fullest, but they are
all across the state and the
rural areas in particular have
really had a strong response
because they just haven't had
programs like
Great. Thank you, Chairman. And
thank you, Madam Secretary.
With respect to that in the 400
hours potential 16 to 24 year
old.
Um, I understand. Did I write
that down, right?
Your your Your pay is $15.90 an
hour.
Mr Chair, representative
pedigree. That's correct. Thank
you.
Originally chairman wrote down
$50.90, and I was like I may
want to jump into this younger
than I look. So, uh, Chairman
and Madam Secretary. Thank you.
So is there anything within the
definition of the pre
apprenticeship program Chairman
and Madam Secretary?
That requires it to go through
the labor Union.
Uh, Mr Chair and Representative
Pettigrew didn't not at all.
So
Chairman and Madam secretary, We
can go just through the
definitions of what it takes to
go through the plumbers
Chairman and Madam secretary, We
can go just through the
definitions of what it takes to
go through the plumber's
apprentice ship or a welder's
apprenticeship.
To to go from one level to the
next within within our state
statutes and the rules, uh and
and bypass the labor unions that
would be correct, Mr Chair and
Representative Pettigrew, it's
just unrelated to the
apprenticeship, the formal
registered apprenticeships Mhm
and that both the formal
registered apprenticeships also
have non union and union.
Participants but that the two
are not connected, Regular
regulatory way.
Thank you very much. Chairman
and Madam secretary with the
last question on that would be
God bless you, Um, with respect
to that, if if we can have
somebody within your office just
follow up with a list of where
we have some of these
apprenticeship programs. I'd
love to have that.
Um, Chairman that just a couple
more questions on Page five.
We talked about bright spots
from the 2022 data.
Um
The population was less than a
high school.
Diploma Plus 3.7 chairman. I
believe that population is
defined based off of
What we're calling on the first
bullet point Labor force
participation fortification,
right?
Would that be correct?
Mr Chair Representative.
Pedigree? Yes.
Thank you.
Madam secretary. Thank you,
Chairman. So
This may be a longer question or
longer answer than the question
And if it is, we can take it
offline.
Um
Would you define
How the state defines the labor
force participation rate at kind
of a 50,100.
Mr. Chair. Representative
Pettigrew's So, um it's actually
a federal metric that looks at
the non institutionalized
population ages. 16 to 64.
And the sort of numerator of the
fraction is everyone who is
employed, plus everyone who is
unemployed and looking for work.
And then the denominator of that
fraction is all of the people in
that age group in that category.
Thank you, Chairman. And thank
you, Madam Secretary for that
answer, So at what point in
time?
Is there a federal requirement
that takes our labor force out
of the metric of looking for
work?
Um, right, Mr. Chair,
Representative Pettigrew. It's a
great question. Um, you know it
is. This is not a precise
measure. I've had people ask me.
How do I check into the labor
force? How do I check out of the
labor force? How did they know
that I'm looking? Um, this is
actually a survey based metric.
so the federal government does.
A survey. I think they end up
hitting about 900 households,
and from that they extrapolate
the data to identify the labor
force participation rate. So in
I think this summer and the LFC
hearing on this this topic I
mentioned that this is not
always the best metric in the
world when it's slow data to its
survey data.
Um And so we try to provide a
lot of context for this, But,
um, I think what you're getting
too is you know how do we? How
do we know that this is
accurate? I mean, it's exactly
aerate as any other survey.
Thank you, Chairman And thank
you, Madam Secretary to follow
up on that. I just You know, the
statistics I hear is that
Working 816 to 64. I think it as
as as a
How we just to find it.
Um out of every 100 people.
There's only 40 for working.
Right now. We're the statistics
that I'm fed. And so I was just
kind of curious about how we
look at some of this.
Yeah, Chairman Secretary this
You didn't create this issue,
but I'm curious. Um, and we can
take this one off line. How we
how we change some of these
dynamics? Um
In my neck of the woods. We have
the tendency for people that are
on some level of unemployment or
something like that.
To go out.
Yeah, and and apply for jobs and
as soon as they get a written
job offer verbal job offer, Um
They call it in that they have
that.
And then they don't show up for
work or they rejected the job
offer after they turned that in
And then they continue on and so
Um, it makes the numbers kind of
skewed, but at the same time
there's still
Uh um.
They go back to drawing the like
to have that conversation. How
we work to fix up
Over time with respect to our
unemployment.
Situation and our labor force
participation rate chairman. I
do appreciate the time.
Madam secretary. I appreciate
it, and I appreciate that you're
upset pedigree representing
Garrett. Thank you, Mr Chair.
Thank you.
Secretary Rita
Three questions, um, just to
follow up on the career
counselor.
Um, I was very disappointed in
the LFC line that went with
that. Which was that
We don't need them because it
duplicates guidance counselors
and doesn't reach the
disengaged, too are unlikely to
attend school.
I think we need to add that
money back into the hopefully
past Expendable fund, which for
putting some major
Important pilots and
Um
Because first of all, we don't
have enough high school
counselors to start with.
And they're juggling so much
work that having that extra
council in those 15 schools
makes a huge difference.
And the follow up as the be
proud. Be pro and other efforts
going to place. The follow up is
the most. If we always feel at
the follow up, so having notes,
drifting counselors, I would say
we probably need to expand.
Also, we want to engage our
youth before they get disengaged
and those counselors can be that
conduit.
So I would recommend that we
make 12 million instead of the L
S F c recommendation of 10.4.
What should be a 2.6 million
increase in 3 million a year to
address that so, just a comment
on that. My second question is
in the
And volume. Two other
performance measure that was
identified with bringing workers
back into the workforce. That
target was 188,000 were
receiving services with bets and
disabled.
Um lacking Do we have
statistics? It seems like we're
talking about vets reentering
after leaving the military.
But and you don't have to give
them all. But do we have
statistics on age? Um, and why
they don't? I mean, if you have
PTSD, that's a whole nother
issue of reentering the
Workforce. House Workforce
Solutions work with bits have
you identified
Any key things that need to be
addressed that would improve.
The recruitment of vets and
other people that need to get
reengaged.
Mr Chairman, Representative
Garrett. Thank you for that
question. Um, it is a
challenging population to work
with. So we have two pieces to
our veteran program. One is the
specializes in the disabled
veterans and the other works
with all veterans and be happy
to share with you. The
demographics. I don't know them
off the top of my head. I do
know that you know, we do have
still a large population of
Vietnam era vets that we work
with. But then an increasing
Gulf War and subsequent war
population. We have a major
issue with the data in that we
do not get, um, the automatic
report. When these veterans get
federal jobs, there's there's a
Fed jobs database that we didn't
neither we nor any other
department in the country has
been able to connect with for a
couple of years.
Um, so you'll see that in our in
our report card, I think, um,
but because of veterans
preferences with the federal
government, we feel like we're
probably missing a lot of that
data. But we don't want to, You
know, mess with the integrity of
what we're reporting, so we
don't want to just go by, like
anecdotal data. But that said, I
think we have developed a much
closer relationship with the
Department of Veterans Services.
And love General headed a class.
Glad that he's over there What
we've talked about as one
strategy is, is just really
unifying the point of entry to
the government for our veterans,
as opposed to saying, Okay, you
go over here to get your custom
license plate and you go over
here to get your benefits and
then somewhere else to get your
job help.
Um, and one of the things we've
done in that direction is is
joining them as they go, You
know, on their tour, we try to
have a presence with them at the
V a facilities, So I do think
that there's a lot more work to
do and outreach and be happy to
share that That's does
statistics with the committee.
Thank you, Mr Chair for
addressing that cross
fertilization. And then my last
question is, um
On page 322 in the book.
You talked about the outcome of
those enrolled in the title when
we're Force Innovation
Opportunity Act.
And the goal was 6800.
The percentage of
Those that group
That entered unsubsidized
employment during the fourth
quarter was 78%. Do you take
surveys of the people who enroll
in those programs?
But become that 22% that doesn't
enter the workforce. Do you
track that survey interview
anything?
Uh huh. To recapture data that
can be used in reaching them
more effectively later.
Mr. Chair, Representative
Garrett, So the title one
programs are administered
through the local workforce
development boards. But that
said those career counselors do
have the ability to continue to
track and follow those people.
And I haven't seen a report
lately, but we also do an
annual, um, outreach survey to
our participants and
And understand where the
obstacles were, Um, one of the
obstacles we've identified is
people moving from region to
region because it is a locally
administered program. Sometimes
we lose them. And sometimes we
also lose the data if they
worked with someone in the East.
They got inspired to do
something, then moved to the
central. Um, so we have
currently and Aligned Case
management initiative. It's
actually the last piece of rrp
funding that we're using for
that that should help us fill
that gap and track people a
little better.
Does that seem, K 12 Mobility
impact? Thank you very much for
your answers.
Thank you very much Represent
Garrett. Next, we're gonna go to
represent Herndon and Reps of
Brown.
Thank you, Mr Chair, and thank
you presenters.
I would like to direct your
attention to the
To the first page of the
difference, worksheet.
And it also specifically focuses
on the court's order in terms of
making sure that you meet a
certain criteria in processing
these claims in the future. I
see that the LFC did not include
an 18 increase.
Number and F T E positions in my
concern is how did you
Why not because they could be
held in contempt of court. And
why wouldn't they be included?
What was the thinking process,
Mr Chair and
Madam analyst. Yeah. Mr. Chair
Representative, so that court
determination occurred in
November. It was after the
agency submitted the budget
request. So that 1.8 million
total was not included in the
agency's budget requests. They
did request an additional
Several additional 80 FTE the
LFC recommendation provided
funding to fund three but that
court determination occurred
after the agency request as well
as after the LFC hearing for
Workforce solutions, and so
because we didn't have the
information about the court
ruling, it was not. So. Thank
you. So, Mr Chair, madam, Um
analysts, So you're asking the
LS this committee today to
consider the request to be in
alignment with
The executive request. Is that
correct?
Um, Mr Chair, Representative.
I'm I'm not making that
recommendation at this time. I
am simply noting that it wasn't
included in the LFC
recommendation. Because we
didn't have the court ruling. It
was included at the executive in
recommendation because ruling
had occurred when that record
Thank you, Mr Chair, and thank
you, Madam analyst and I do wish
to go to the section on the pre
apprenticeship program that's
come up a number of times and Mr
Chair and Madam secretary. The
question was asked if does how
does this align with and relate
to P e? D? He said it doesn't
so, Mr Chair and Madam
Secretary. We have a CT program
in our schools, which would
include, uh, career technical
training that would require
printer ships.
So why doesn't it aligned with
ped? Mr Chair and Madam
Secretary, Mr. Chair,
Representative Herndon. I'm
sorry. If I was unclear it does.
It just fills a gap that doesn't
it doesn't duplicate P E. D s
internship program or their work
work based learning program.
That's what I was trying to
indicate. It's not duplicative,
but we do work closely with the
schools.
Including the schools that are
in the innovation zone. Um we
chose this. The placement of the
career counselors in in
conjunction with PD, based on
places that had strong CTE
programs. So we do have that
alignment.
I'm sorry. Were you gonna say
something? So, Mr Chair and
Madam Secretary just for
clarification. So these
apprenticeship programs do come
out of students who are in the
CTE programs. So if we look at
this first page only talked
about 15 schools. Is that the
maximum that we have that are
doing CTE programs and then that
are aligned with working with
you.
Mr Chair and Madam Secretary.
Mr Chair, representative. Her
and you know we can work in any
of the school districts. In
fact, we are we already have
over 90 requests for the B
probie Proud truck, which is one
of the major points of entry
into the pre apprenticeship
world, so it is not limited to
those areas. What we've done is
asked every career counselor to
take on a region so that if they
are not located if they are in
an area and that there's a
school there that doesn't have
one of our career counselors and
doesn't have adequate staffing.
To coordinate with us. They just
take on those duties as well.
Okay. And Mr Chair and Madam
Secretary if I if I look on page
two of the difference worksheet
under for Workforce Solutions
Department and specifically
bringing your attention to the
$1 million that's transferred
from the Department of Workforce
Solutions to you. There is no
statutory provisions.
That seems to require that
transfer Mr. Chair, Madam
Secretary. It just seems like
it's something that's always
And what I'd like to comment on
a man in in anywhere or shape.
Um there has been discussion
between ourselves l F C and D f
A in regards to the solvency of
that fund. And I know, um, both
workers' compensation
administration and Department of
Nation, but then they go and ask
for an increase in general fund
to supplement that loss in that
transfer. Um so in in the in
essence, why the executive and
why lfc continue to make that
recommendation is one. It has
language to it. It is something
that has occurred over various
years, and it's also a way to
keep the general fund impact
low.
Granted a million dollars in the
grand scheme of General Fund
across the state is not a lot,
but when it comes to an agency
like Department of Workforce
Solutions, a million dollar
general fund increase is a lot,
especially when we're talking
about their general fund being
only 8% of their overall budget
So it's it's a sticker shock
combination of things. However,
we have discussed potentially
If there is an option to
incrementally phase that
transfer out to benefit both
departments, But, um there is a
there is a general fund impact
to that dissolution of that
transfer, Mr Chair and
representative. I hope I
answered your question, Mr Chair
and Madam Presenter raised that
question only because when we
spoke to workers' compensation,
there was an absolute, um
Discussion about an ombudsman
position and an increase in one
FTE, but it also showed I did I
deficit in their budget, and I'm
just concerned, Mr Chair and
madam presenter about taking
that funding when they could be
using it for that ombudsman that
increase in D position that
sounds like it's highly needed.
Um, Mr Chair and representative.
We have we are in discussion and
how that is going to look a
moving forward for both
agencies. There is a working
group. Currently I believe I
have talked to lfc about what
our middle ground is forgetting
the ombudsman position because
that position is required by
statute, so workers confidence
have a valid standing on that,
however, that
Recommendation for the transfer.
Uh, there There are options that
we can look at. If you if you'd
like us to get a working group
together on that, Mr Chan,
representative. Thank you. Mr
Chair presented. I think that
would be a great idea. One last
question, Mr Chair with respect
to the align alignment and
coordination of the work of the
apprenticeship program.
So the University of New Mexico
Health Sciences Center has what
they call communities to careers
program that would get our youth
more involved in careers that
would lead into areas involving,
um, medicine or some medical
field. So those schools of those
students who participate in that
program they do have programs
that start at 816 going through
24.
Would require an apprenticeship
program to continue to
facilitate their development.
And Mr Chair and Madam
Secretary. My question is Are
you working with them? Also, We
talked about ped. But now I'm
focusing on that because we
really do need to grow our own
in the medical field.
Mr. Chair, Representative
Herndon. Absolutely. So we have
identified the healthcare
workforce is a priority in our
in our plan for the next four
years under Huila, and we are
members of the health care
Workforce Task group. I can't
remember what they're called.
But there's a working group that
meets and makes recommendations
annually and we're basically
incorporating those
recommendations, including
Expansion of healthcare
apprenticeships. There are a
couple of sort of tangential
apprenticeships that already
exist like medical coding, but
we know that there's a lot of
opportunity for expansion there,
and we are working closely with
that entire group.
So thank you, Mr Chair. Thank
you, Madam Secretary because
they just take them through that
program without an
apprenticeship program to follow
up would be helpful if we were
to make it happen, And I'm so
happy to hear that you're
willing and open to doing that.
Thank you, Mr Chair. Thank you
very much Represent Herndon.
Next, we're gonna go to
represent Brown.
Thank you, Mr Chairman and given
the lateness of the hour, I am
not going to ask all of my
questions. But I do have a
couple Madam Secretary. So, Mr
Chairman
I'm a little confused about who
gets paid the $15.90 an hour. Is
it a student apprentice? Or is
it the employer?
Trainer. Whoever you want, Mr.
Chair Representative Brown. It
is the student pre apprentice.
Yes, Mr Chair, Madam Secretary.
So it's up to 400 hours. I
understand. I just heard that a
few minutes ago, so that's about
$6000. And that's rough math.
It's a little higher than that.
So that's a pretty nice
incentive.
Um Mr Chair, Um and Madam
Secretary.
The student gets paid as a
student if it's a high school
student, also received high
school graduation credit.
For participating in one of
these pre a print Mr. Chair,
representative Brown it they can
if their school offers that we
don't prohibit it, and nor do we
make it a requirement.
Okay. Very nice situation. Um
and then Mr Chair in most
secretaries of final question,
we have the numbers here. It
says that the Workforce
Solutions Department.
The idea of the program is to
Engage, disconnected and
disengaged, disconnected and
disengaged young adults.
How do you find them? Madam
Secretary, Mr. Chair, Mr. Chair,
Representative Brown. It's a
great question. This is why
having the connection to the
local offices is so important so
we can find them when they when
they come into our office, But
we really shifted a lot of our
local office priorities to going
out into the community as
opposed to waiting for people to
come into us.
So, um, you know if they come in
through the door of Leo Youth,
which requires having some
barriers and has a focus on out
of school youth, that's great.
Um, we were trying to increase
our connection with the C I f D
faster in connections programs
so that we're getting those kids
were having a presence in the
Albuquerque Gateway Center, so
that we're getting the use to
experiencing homelessness coming
through there.
Um, but it's really it's just on
the ground field work of our
folks getting out of the office
and into the community. Thank
you for your efforts. That's
wonderful. And and that's fine.
I guess. Finally, finally, Mr
Chair and Madam secretary
We have the numbers.
This program is not that old. I
understand and it looks like
204 pre apprenticeships have
been completed.
270 or ongoing or slated and
192 employers hosted pre
apprenticeships.
And so the question is Mr Chair.
How many?
Students applied. These are the
final numbers. But was there a
demand more of a demand than
what we're seeing? Just with
these raw numbers, Mr Chair?
Mr. Chair Representative Brown.
We didn't reject anyone, but we
just have sort of hit the brakes
in our recruitment efforts. And
because we're nearing the end of
the art of funding, So, um, I do
think that the demand I mean,
clearly exceeds what we
requested. So we requested, um
enough for 200, which you know
is far less than we've served
historically, and we received
for about 100.
Um, so we know that the demand
is going to outweigh the supply
going forward. Okay. Thank you
so much. Mr. Chair. Thank you
very much. Robson Brown. Uh,
we're going to go next door.
Some Garcia, then vice chair
checks.
Thank you, Mr Chairman. Thank
you, Secretary on these numbers
that you have up there 30,000
new job. These are migrant
workers or seasonal
Um, Mr Chair, Representative
Garcia. Pretty sure these are
seasonally adjusted, so it
wouldn't be, um, focus on the
seasonal workers and I don't I
don't know about the migrants.
This would only count people who
were, you know, legally present
with authorization to work in
this state. Thank you very much
during US Secretary
Um, on page four. You know you
have all these benefits for
people.
Do people are seasonal workers.
Qualify for any of these
positions. You know, there's
some young kids that are working
out there. Do they qualify at
all for any of this?
Um, Mr Chair, Representative
Garcia? Absolutely as long as
they have work authorization
where we can work with them.
And one last question, Mr German
secretary of the money collected
From people that are not
documented in the here in New
Mexico. What happens to luck?
They pay. They pay income tax
and
Working on number income taxes.
So for state taxes, what happens
to that money?
Um, Mr Chair, Representative
Garcia. I mean it to some extent
just goes into the to the
General Fund of they're paying
taxes that we know that there is
a population of undocumented
workers who pay um or his
employers pay into unemployment,
And then they're not eligible
for those, Um, for those
benefits, and, um, we do have
money in the current fiscal year
to look at some other states
programs that offer
Unemployed benefits.
Unemployment benefits to those
people who are paying in, but
are ineligible for the federal
unemployment program, so we'll
be recording that back out to
the Legislature when we've
completed that study.
Thank you. God. No more
questions. Thank you Represent
Garcia. Next, we're gonna go to
Vice chair Dixon.
Mr Chair. I have to move my
microphone away from my hippo
That's holding my, um
highlighters and pens. Um
Madam Secretary. Um Mr Chair.
Thank you. So much for your
presentation. Um, couple of
quick questions, hopefully.
For the apprenticeship
opportunities. Um
Am I correct that those are both
available through community
colleges and our labor Union
partners.
Mr Chair. Sure. Dixon? Yes, um
registered apprenticeship
programs are offered by both
Union and non union programs.
Thank you. Um And then, um,
could you identify what efforts,
Um, Workforce Solutions is
undertaking to reengage. The
adults that have left
The workforce. I know you've
talked about the young adults.
We just talked about that. But
are there other things for the
folks that have stepped out of
the workforce in the last couple
of years?
Mr Chair. Vice chair. Dixon.
Yes, Again. It's that getting
our folks in the workforce
connections office out of the
building and and going into
places where we think people who
are likely to be. I think our
work with the Tanis Um E N T
program has also been really
helpful. And what we've seen is
that since the
Child care subsidies have been
in place. We've seen a pretty
market increase in women, um, of
those in those age groups, so 18
to 24 and 25 to 3030 just 34 are
all reentering the labor force
and really good numbers, And so
we're really excited to see what
the numbers look like next year,
and when we can really see the
impact of
Of the funding that you all have
provided for early child care.
Um, but we do have that emphasis
through our town of work on
getting those moms back into the
labor force. Thank you, Mr
Chair. Thank you, Secretary.
That's very exciting news. Um,
and to the extent that it's
possible to share some of those
statistics, I think it would be
very helpful for the members.
To see that because I know you
know, we hear about programs,
but I myself really like to
know you know that it is making
an appreciable difference, so
that would be helpful. Last
question Mr. Chair and Secretary
relates to, um, sort of on
ramping some of our rural and by
park workers statewide.
And
I noticed in our volume two
Um
It talks about the special
appropriation, um, from 2023 to
assist the displaced workers.
Um in San Juan County. Uh,
Due to the Energy transition
Act.
Um, are there efforts
Outside of San Juan County in
other parts of the state to
engage
You know some of our other
underemployed communities.
Chairman. Small um Vice chair
Dixon. Yes. You know, we do have
really opened our doors to the
voice of workers. I think our
friends still back here from so
most. Yeah. So we have been gay.
We we did something different
this year with our statewide
plan. We, as opposed to just
working with our core partners.
We really opened the door to the
community, and we had all sorts
of folks.
Um, who were workers from all
different parts of the state
kind of come in and tell us what
they needed. Um some of the
things they needed are more
flexible hours in our for our
workforce Connection center, So
we're getting ready to pilot
some weekend in evening hours.
We also heard that from from
some of the young folks who are
participating in an initiative
with the Aspen Institute. But
but really what? We I think what
we're doing is listening to what
folks need. And we also hear
that there are sort of deserts
of
Training, especially in the
East. We don't have a lot of
programs, and so we've been
working with the folks who are
putting together mobile
trainings to try to get those in
the community. We also hear that
those trainings need to be at
ours and in languages that are
accessible to those populations.
We heard that again from some of
the work that that's almost did
with Professor Gabe Sanchez at
at the University of New Mexico,
So we're playing close attention
to that and making sure that
where we have funding to
innovate in those areas were
doing that.
Thank you, Mr Chair. Thank you.
Secretary. That is
I'm very pleased to hear that I
didn't know about those efforts.
But what I really like is that
you are targeting the efforts
and working with the specific
population the you know, because
a lot of times we offer
services, but it doesn't work
for the people that were trying
to serve and and so I very much
appreciate that.
Thank you, Mr Chair.
Thank you. Vice Chair. Dixon,
ranking member arms. Thank you.
Mr Chairman. I made me
represented. Dixon's question
made me think of of a question
really quick.
Am I correct in thinking, um
You all are in charge of the I
think it's called The W I 80
Yeah. Yes, Mr Chair,
Representative. Arm String wi,
Okay, we Oh, yeah. Workforce,
Innovation and Opportunity Act.
We received the federal funds,
which we then dispersed for most
of the programs to the local
workforce. Sports. Okay, Thank
you for that, Mr Chairman, and
so am I in. Can you tell me Tell
me how many private
Companies are
Um, have apprenticeship approved
programs through that.
Mr. Chair, Representative
Armstrong, so the apprenticeship
program is separate from the wi.
Oh, A, um I don't have the
number in front of me of how
many, Um they're all private in
the sense that they're they're
all, um either unions or other
types of employers, but I can
give you the breakdown of Union
versus nonunion if that's the
question
Thank you for that. I'm just I
probably need to talk to you
offline, Mr Chairman, but I I'm
under the impression that we're
not, um something is happening
with the wi. Oh, A where we're
not, um, getting that some funds
out the door and so Oh, I just
wanna I would love to talk to
you offline just to make sure
that we are
You know, using local companies?
Um, no matter what part there
from that we're helping local
companies encouraging our youth
to, uh, to work for them, so I
would love that conversation
offline. Thank you, Mr Chairman.
Thank you very much. Ranking
member, Armstrong. Uh,
Represent Allison, please.
Thank you, Mr Chair.
Um
I don't know where to start my
questions. Really? Uh,
Madam secretary, have you or do
you keep a record of all the
displaced workers that were
displaced in San Juan County?
And
How many of them
Registered into apprenticeship
classes.
Mr. Chair, representative
Allyson. So, um, we have just
started rolling out Phase two of
the energy transition act and I
know you know all about this,
but just for the benefit of the
committee faced two of the
energy transition act as place
worker program, um, allows
people to pick one of three
paths. If they're fully
reemployed, they can, but
they're making less than they
used to. They can get a one time
wage. Um, some sort of subsidy
payment.
If they are not working, or if
they just want to go through a
training path. We will either
pay for them to do training
where we will pay for them to do
registered apprenticeship we've
met with about 300 of folks, um
of the displaced workers since
we launched that program on
December 1st and so far about
100 of them are showing interest
in training and registered
apprenticeship.
Okay. Thank you for that. Madam
Secretary, Mr. Chair. Um
How much input do you have into
how the British ships are run?
Um, Mr Chair, Representative
Allyson. So we, um, run the
State Apprenticeship council and
we also have a staff. They are
in charge of ensuring that, um,
the the Apprenticeship program
meets all the standards that are
set out in our rules and and the
federal guidance and then we
also do audits of those programs
to make sure that they are in
compliance.
We also have some statistics on,
you know, completion and and
that sort of thing so that we
can keep track of it, And that's
mostly our role We have had
conversations about establishing
sort of quality standards above
and beyond the basic compliance
so that we can, you know,
similar to our early childhood
has sort of three star Four star
Five star We've talked about
whether we should implement a
system like that, with
apprenticeship programs to
really help.
The person who is participating
Pick the right program, but
we're just in the beginning
stages of that conversation.
Okay. Thanks for that. Madam
Secretary, Mr Chair. Um, I think
The type of apprenticeship that
you go to mix a lot of
difference in your future.
Um, I went through the
apprenticeship program at my
local mine.
So what I learned there was
Out of work and troubleshoot
mining equipment.
I did not learn.
How have been conduit.
Until
I started asking other questions
from other people that were
working elsewhere.
At another mind that I was
working at abroad.
Their apprenticeship consisted
of rotating or apprentices, Mr
Chair from one mind
Where they learned about mining
operation equipment, and then
they rotated them periodically
to, uh, power plant so they knew
the electric power plant, Mr
Chair, and then they further
rotated that individual to, uh,
automobile dealership so that
they could learn automotive
electrics because electricity is
so broad.
And it's just hard to learn, and
you just can't call yourself an
electrician's. If you don't know
all these fields, and then
finally, uh, the final rotation
for the prince of abroad were
into house wiring.
I have worked with some
electrician's at the my neck and
not bend conduit that do not
harm that do not know how to
troubleshoot 12 volt circuit on
an automobile.
Mr Chair at the mind that I was
working at northwestern Mexico.
We worked on everything from 12
votes to 69,000 votes and in the
coal mine. Most of the equipment
that we worked on was three
phase 480.
Or 80 votes, and then
I
The reason why I asked. We have
similar
Displaced workers were taking
apprenticeship classes they
would not
Uh,
They would not surprise me if
they can't handle the jobs in
house wiring or automotive
electrics or the power plant, So
I think it makes a big
difference if you know where to
invest all your money into the
apprenticeship programs. We need
to support the friendship
programs that would benefit all
areas. Not just the mining
industry, not just the house,
wearing
Not just the automotive and so
forth. Thank you, Mr Chair.
Thank you, Madam Secretary.
Thank you very much represented,
Allison. Um okay, Madam
Secretary. Thank you to the
analysts have a few quick
questions first. Madam
Secretary, would you be willing
to sort of interface with the L.
Not just the automotive and so
forth. Thank you, Mr Chair.
Thank you, Madam Secretary.
Thank you very much represented
Allison. Um okay, Madam
Secretary. Thank you to the
analysts have a few quick
questions first. Madam
Secretary, would you be willing
to sort of interface with the
LSC NPD around the career
counselor, please?
This is a sort of an area where
we don't want duplication. We
want to leverage pieces. Um, And
so, Yeah, I would ask if you
could work with them during this
session so that we can dive a
little bit deeper on that area.
Mr Chair, happy to the
recommendation for for us to do.
Her counselors actually came out
of that Hunt Institute report.
Um, that that l. E. S C had, I
think asked ped to put together
so we'd be happy to come full
circle Great and and we can will
will ask you as analysts and the
secretary and agencies to sort
of come back with some of the
feedback we're generating here
as a committee. Um secondly,
Madam secretary when it comes on
the pre apprenticeship side
Uh, which
Is there? I mean, can. How much
can you handle in terms of
Mr Chair. Um, you know, I think
what we've done this year, um,
has been I think we're right at
about $3 million that's going
directly to the pre
apprenticeships so we can
definitely handle that. But we
also are happy to work closely
with P E. D if if they have an
expended fans are funds that
they're anticipating getting we
can we can do that as well.
Thank you, Madam Secretary and I
appreciate sort of dimension ped
because there's sort of summer
internship programs that have
been widely used over 1000 high
school youth in Dona Ana County
Employed for a couple of months,
Bringing home dollars is
represented. Brown pointed out
that that are really
Great contributions to their
communities. So
Seeing how to scale balance and
fully and aggressively fund this
sort of area of adolescent and
gave very important to the
committee.
Uh, Madam Secretary when it
comes on the apprenticeship
side.
We're sort of told that
workforce. Um, is very
frequently one of our sort of
court challenges today. Um
I would love to appreciate the
question from ranking member
Armstrong around Rio Rio funds.
We'd love to work with you. This
session to both not only
maximize our investments in
apprenticeships across all areas
of the state, but to think about
ways to sort of pre fund work
that we know is coming up
because we we hear about very
large infrastructure projects.
we consider the infrastructure
investments were making and
You know, Madam secretary. Quick
question on that.
If the workers can't be found in
New Mexico for, say, a large
infrastructure projects.
And the money in that gets
built.
We have to assume that those
workers sort of come from
outside of the state is that
Accurate.
Um, Chairman? Yes. I think that
would be accurate. I think that
the better that the other part
of that question, though, is is
it local companies who are
scaling up bringing people to
our state, which we know we need
people to move to our state to
fill the labor force shortages
or is it out of state companies
taking the money out of state
people coming and leaving and
not? We're not really fully
reaping the benefits. So what we
would love to do is make sure
that we're giving local
companies the tools they need,
even if that means people moved
to the state.
Madam secretary. Great Point
fully agree and is approaching
our apprenticeships amongst
other tools. Sort of a core part
of that tool box, do you
Mr Terry? Yes, absolutely. And
some of our federal grant
requests would include things
actually much like what?
Representative Allyson talked
about. So we have a, for
example. Grant request out for E
V charging, um, workforce We
know that's going to be a huge
infrastructure build right and
that would include taking people
who maybe you're already
certified as electricians and
just giving them the little
topper. They need all the way to
people who don't even have their
high school equivalency and
taking them all the way through
that path.
Okay. Um, thank you, Madam
Secretary. There'll be more to
go into offline, but I think,
uh, this is great.
I'm gonna ask for that that we
adopt the Odyssey
recommendation. We know that
there are some very large
general fund differences here.
Um, there's been a great deal of
interest expressed from the
committee and a few areas we'd
ask you as analysts and as the
agency.
Including with collaboration
yes, seaside to come back to us,
and then we'll sort of committee
decide how to proceed from
there, but there's more work and
more investment.
Okay, madam.
Thank you, Mr Chair. I moved the
committee adopts the LFC
recommendation.
Okay. It's been moved by Vice
chair Dixon seconded by
represent Wuhan. Is there any
opposition to adopting that
motion for now?
I don't see any. Thank you very
much. Madam Secretary. Thank
you.
Alright, we're gonna as you
could. We're gonna go into our
public comment Phase. Um, this
is, uh, up to 15 minutes.
Uh, I was wondering if we made
the right choice with OSC and
Department of Health
rescheduling and I think we have
members unless folks want to
stay till 10.
Okay, Well, yeah, And and as we,
uh, if we could ask folks who
intend to make comment, uh, to
line up there, uh
Madam chief.
Would you point out where folks
can stand, please? Would you
help guide people there or have
a stuff are you have to go? No,
I would take this these days,
Okay, We're gonna get great and
we do have a few folks online.
Um
Hispanic right into there, Okay,
one, and it'll pick it up,
Yes, Guys
Day,
Hispanic right into there. Okay,
one and it'll pick it up.
Yes, guys.
Okay. Uh, I think what's we're
We're ready. Thank you very
much. Manda. Okay, we're gonna
We try to do about two minutes
and please go ahead.
Thank you. Thank you for letting
us know about. Good afternoon.
My name is Sylvia, My lord. And
I'm here with you almost can't
believe it and gallihue, Mexico
for 17 years and noted to grow
in a career, I need to be able
to take yes else. Classes in
Gallup. There are no providers.
Years ago where there was once
that shoot down community there
are no enough as well. Education
programs that are accessible to
us.
Not only are there not enough
programs for us to participate
and in but we also have to work
full time because our jobs are
in the starboard and under
presidents.
We will need supplemental
incomes to participate and
credit commerce and we able to
state of law.
Yeah,
Three of my grandchildren's
There are also no child scared
to stay a floor. I am car, um,
improvising and communities we
are shall we deserves so we
don't know. Have anywhere to
live our kids where we take a
credit course We need more
support.
Able to practice pay and
programs once they are graded.
We need more money to go out,
Reginald worse, because they are
the ones who are in our
communities and who they
work for us. They need to have
luxury funding to give providers
they know. Yesterday funding.
You are leaving our community
behind.
Don't forget us who have
sustained in the economy of New
Mexico.
We need the state to heel
flicks to give like silver state
funding for workers force words
to be able to innovated
expanding X x the hell it
humility and great programs
programs that meet the needs to
our communities. We need to stay
funding to go for
Workforce They believed in love
meant to our
urinals worse and to, as also
education. Thank you community
and share moments to let us to
talk to you. Thank you so much.
Thank you very much, Uh, gonna
start President Committee.
An opinion, So remember
So you're in Aria, Del Salvador.
Even some
were, uh, can we ask? Okay,
Okay,
Okay. That's a couple key.
When I started
committee is an opinion.
So you are
and Santa Fe science.
Tormented
industrial restaurant.
Get Santa Fes.
Restaurant is
No.
Opportunity meant and
some cannot go certificates.
Means Ah Community college and
we're not
Application for
continue studios, Mr and local
If the Kaaba Becca
For nothing.
Yes.
Yeah. No, thank you.
Account.
The students sufficient is
Fonda's
Important
economy, name potential
and
certifications liberal.
When I started this and your
appreciation to member committee
Juan Party.
Condado Noyce programmer's
Yes or no permit
classes. Lando professional or
Ideas but
postal Alto
No father, almost participating
programmers.
Mr
He said nothing
Marcoses.
Show your time, so you never saw
classes. English Tambien.
San Juan College.
Apology. The second most person
asking almost
but you
might
want
Consist of Achon
Get it and, um Horie's
Maestro's
persona.
I don't ask glasses
classes, but
why Paraiso?
Can happen. Specialist what
happened in there?
Is a G e D classes CDL and doing
Ninos
persona
trabajar with other
studio.
Afternoons are difficult.
This
company. I
Program. I'm not existing
channels.
Program asking for the company.
I
Thank you comedy and Mr Sure.
Hi. Thank you very much. We have
about 8 to 10 minutes. No more
than about 10 More minutes for
public,
Hernandez
afternoon.
I have live in hubs for 20
years, and I'm a member of
salmon.
I have been trying to improve my
working condition and get a job
for 20 years. But there are too
many Berries just
Start against me.
In documented, so I do not
qualify for financial help.
And that makes a hard to take
advantage of programs.
I cannot afford them, even if
they were offered.
I have lived in hospitality
years and I have never been able
to get a job because I didn't
speak any English cannot in the
eighth asked l classes because
they
Do not have any classes there.
Or not enough providers.
No space for us to participate.
I apply for a in New Mexico in
dreamers college.
Many times, but they were never
had enough room to let me take
any courses.
I have never been able to
participate in a program.
And get training to qualify for
a job.
We cannot.
Bro in our rural communities.
The leg programs and providers.
We need state money for
workforce.
Elopement.
They're accessible to our rural
in documented communities in
transition.
So we can access quality jobs.
You need the state to get more
funding to adult education
program and integrate education
training programs.
We need the state to give
flexible funding to our
workforce sports to expend
stability.
Bores.
There are once in our
communities and the ones who can
help create this problems to
crab and ramp us into new jobs.
Thank you. Community commitment.
Community and chairman. Thank
you.
Good afternoon chairman Small
and members of the committee.
Um, I'm reading this on behalf
of Michael Panera Hilaria. She
would have had to go pick up her
daughter. My name is Hillary
Martinez. I am representing L
central riches and its central
Reaccion. Albuquerque is a based
immigrant Rights and workers'
justice organization, as many of
you guys know, I'm also proud
member, um, of, um, a proud
mother of four daughters and
organize domestic workers,
including home healthcare aides.
It is in
Great spirit that I am
testifying today as our new
Mexican population age. We also
find solutions to work
shortages.
Of Ah,
Home health care aides and
others who provide care. These
positions tend to be filled by
woman, primarily immigrant
workers and women of color.
The high cost of living. Many of
our community, um, have to work
multiple jobs on top of taking
care of their families. It is
very difficult.
To afford to cut back on our
hours in order to take a
training course. Some
Some of us also face additional
barriers such as, um,
immigration status. That means
that we don't qualify for
financial aid and other safety
benefit. Um
Safety net benefits. This means
that large segments of our
communities don't have access to
economic mobility and higher
quality and paying jobs.
This is why we need to ensure
that workers on our at the table
to make decisions about how
workforce development, um,
dollars are invested,
recognizing that federal funds
is restrictive central with our
5000 members in Albuquerque
support more flexible state
funds to go into the department
of Work.
For solution.
And local workforce board.
And invest money into the
workforce development that
focuses on the workers who
contribute so much to New
Mexico's economy. We mustn't
ensure that we have an equal
opportunity for our economic
mobility. This is
Um, this would be a win win to
face workforce shortages in
Kenya, Mexican industries and a
pathway out of poverty for our
communities. Thank you.
Good evening. My name is Felix
Rodriguez, with some most
have lived in southeast New
Mexico for 22 years. I am a
former oil field worker. I
worked out building central tank
batteries.
Um, In my case, I worked Monday
through Saturday from 7 A.m. to
6 P.m.. And so how to drive back
into town just to get to the
nearest town to where I was
located. I would be home only on
Sundays, but would have to leave
at 3 A.m. on Monday morning just
to get to the job site.
I needed to work a full time job
because
It's unstable working in the oil
field.
I need to work every hour in
case there was a shutdown at my
job site and I was left with no
income.
We need supplemental income to
parse to participate in credit
courses.
I didn't have any time to
participate in credit programs,
and there weren't any outside of
oil and gas. I didn't and still
don't want to be an oil worker.
my entire life and continue
risking my health.
We need flexible state funding
to go to our workforce boards so
that we can have programs that
work with our jobs.
My community is built of
undocumented oil and gas workers
who are in transition right now.
We need stronger support
services such as transportation,
stipends and supplemental
income.
We need the state to give
flexible funding to our
workforce boards to expand
eligibility.
The boards are the ones in our
communities and they know our
hardships and the ones who can
help create these programs to
onramp us into new jobs.
We are finalizing a study with
immigrant oil and gas workers
and you and M on workforce
development. And these are the
top three main problems we
identified.
No programs are available that
are not geared towards oil and
gas. We cannot take advantage of
other construction trades or
apprenticeships, and there are
no apprenticeships in our
communities.
Workers do not have time for
training. They worked 16 hour
days and work is unstable.
They have to work overtime in
order to make ends meet, and
they need supplemental income.
if they're not going to work
those 16 hour days.
Workforce development system is
restrictive to undocumented
immigrants, women, rural
communities and other hard to
reach communities who feel the
oil and gas.
We would be more than happy to
share that report with you guys
wanted this once. It's
completely finalized. Thank you,
Comedian Chairman.
Thank you guys, for all you've
done today, and all the
discussions regarding
apprenticeship programs, I ran
the apprenticeship program for
the National Park Service For
many years. It was very
successful and sadly, Congress
cut it off. Um
I would implore you just when
you think I was a box over the
next five years of really
dramatically increasing the
apprenticeship programs.
I just retired from the
Department of Health 23 years I
was a child safety specialist
consulted with friends on
building four homes.
It's unbelievable the last three
years. Nobody has any help.
Nobody has any trained help.
I couldn't believe the number of
of plumbers, electricians and
like that I worked with that I
had to do them. Very media work
for them. They had no even to
help them.
And these and these people have
vast knowledge that we need to
facilitate them passing on to
others. Thank you.
Okay. Thank you very much. We
have three folks online. I'm
gonna limited to a minute of
peace. We're gonna start with
Olga Santana.
Okay, Go ahead, please. For one
minute. Hello?
Good afternoon.
Did you hear me? Yes. Okay.
Thank you. Hello. Good
afternoon, Mr Chairman and
members of the committee. My
name is Olga Santana. I am proud
educator immigrant mother of
poor girls and member of L.
Central body Reaction. Centro de
Waal, Dad, either they choose
and proud of the contribution
contributions of immigrants.
workers in New Mexico, including
educators. We are essential.
There are already many federal
Old phones being invested in
companies and large businesses.
And therefore we need to ensure
that we are also investing in
workers. The vast majority of US
workers need to have a full time
job and sometimes more than one
job.
For those of us living paycheck
to paycheck, it creates a
barriers to continuing our
professional development and
training in particular for those
of us who don't qualify for
financial aid. We need a state
no restrictive money for
workforce development in New
Mexico.
Which is which is accessible and
without so many barriers for our
communities, in particular
people of color and under
commended workers so that we can
have equal access to jobs,
better pay and above Oh, apart
product to professional growth.
Thank you for talking public
comment so that workers can be a
data table. Thank you. Thank you
very much. Okay, Now we're gonna
go to Nat Dean for one minute,
please.
Thank you, Mr Chair members of
the committee brain. It's not
just me. I'm on 19 of Asia,
Buddy. Yama, buddy. Um, thank
you so much for taking one
minute tonight. For this time,
The issue I wanted to bring up
was the difference between a
guidance counselor and academic
counselor.
Or a social worker, and that
that is a wide variance of
training and also access to
resources. And then I had to
connect people people to
resources. Thank you very much
for your time this evening and
thank you for your heavy lifting
hard work. Good night. Very
much. Okay, We're gonna go now
to Stephanie Welt.
For one minute, please.
Mr Chair. My name is Stephanie
Welsh for the New Mexico Center
on law and poverty. We stand in
support of the Department of
Workforce Solutions requested
increase to its budget so that
it can effectively enforce wage
theft. Mexicans should be paid
for the work that they do. Wage
theft takes away workers'
ability to support themselves
and their families.
That's why the New Mexico
Legislature has passed strong
wage laws and why it has test
workforce solutions with
enforcing those laws. Workers,
especially those working for low
wages depend on the department
to enforce their rights.
Frustrated with the lays in the
department's investigation of
wage claims, workers' rights
groups and community
organizations from around the
state asked a judge to set
deadlines in November as
Secretary mentioned. The judge
did that and set deadlines for
the department's enforcement
processes.
Now the department needs a
significant increase in its
budget to meet these legal
obligations and to uphold
workers' rights because
currently they do not have the
resources.
That they need to investigate
claims and enforced the law.
Thank you for hearing of cut
from the public today. Thank you
very much. Miss Welch. We're
gonna conclude is there Michael
Leon Guerrero for one minute?
Sorry. Can you hear me? Yes,
sir. Please go ahead.
Thank you, Mr Chair. Members of
the committee. My name is
Michael Leon Guerrero and the
sustainable economy policy
Advisor for the Center for Civic
Policy, and I'm also a
consultant to the Economic
Development Department on
Economic Diversification. Um, I
want to speak on behalf of
center for civic policy and
support of the recommendations.
That have been presented by some
awesome pueblo and Nitto. Um as
you're aware, there are
thousands of new job
opportunities that are becoming
available to New Mexico,
including Max, Ian, or coastal
Wind towers and M ticks that are
bringing over 2000 permanent
jobs and thousands of
construction jobs with wind
energy projects like Cinzia and
the Growth of logistics
facilities in southern New
Mexico.
Um, as well to ensure that new
Mexicans can access these
opportunities. We need to
provide significant support to
the training and education
Ecosystem of the state. Um and
therefore we're supporting some
of his recommendations,
including flexible funding to
DWS and the regional workforce
boards to help overcome the
limitations of federal Wyo
funding.
That are preventing immigrant
workers and others from
opportunities to qualify for
education and training that are
needed for these new industries
and also just provide supports,
like supplemental income to
workers to allow them to
effectively participate in
education and training programs.
So we also want to support
Increased funding based on the
request by the Department of
Workforce Solutions, and thank
you very much. Thank you very
much, Mr Guerrero. Okay, that
concludes for today. Thank you.
all for being here. We very much
appreciate it. Committee
members. I want to say a big
thank you. We started late.
We've gone all the way through
Excellent questions. Excellent
work could not be more pleased
and proud and appreciative of
all of you and the work that you
all put in.
Of course, thanks to staff were
adjourned for today.
Yeah, please.
What do you think I
Yeah. Please
get what he thought
of you.
