The sound is similar and then
great to see secretary designate
by the
And members we have a here.
The the the weather really
affect.
In the field we have our
different seats in front of us
there the Public Education
Department HSD code nine two
four.
More LCS when you're ready thank
you for starting this up good
afternoon Mister chair members
of the committee it's good to
see all my name is Serra homes
I'm LFC analyst with education
in here for HSD ninety for the
public education department
today
as Mr chairman should you'll see
this different sheet with you
which also includes performance
measures and what we call that
PS **** important personal
services employee benefits
calculation I have with me today
the DFA analyst Simon Miller and
also interim secretary money out
of video with PED I will get
started with an overview and
then pass it over to Mr Miller
and then our secretary.
Mr chair members of the
committee LFC recommends a seven
percent increase in general fund
for the public education
department as you'll see looking
at your different she the
majority of this is concentrated
in the three hundred category
the executive recommends a
sixteen percent and general fund
for the public education
department and you'll see that
those are distributed
differently we have a relatively
similar
Of the appropriations to
contractual services with a
greater difference on personal
services employee benefits
not neither recommendation
includes expanded FTE that has
held at three hundred fifty four
and you can see the breakdown
between permanent in terms of T.
down there at the bottom thank
you very much with that I'll
pass it over to Mr Miller.
Senator Mr chair members of the
committee on again my name is
Simon Miller and I'm an analyst
at DFA.
So as you all are well aware PED
has many responsibilities
related to the distribution and
oversight of nearly half of the
state's budget.
the executive general fund
recommendation for PED is one
point seven six million dollars
higher than the LFC
recommendation and as serious
that the majority that
difference is in the two hundred
category so for for personality
Department of last session the
legislature boosted PED's budget
for personnel which has enabled
the department to fill a number
of positions.
let me direct you to page
seventy one of LFC is volume
three that's the the funded
vacancy rate summary.
And if you look towards the
bottom of page seventy one
you'll find the public education
department.
And sorry I.
Slow down see us get there.
So at the bottom of page seventy
one.
It shows that.
when this report was run the
agency had fifty four and a half
funded vacancies.
Currently at the moment PED has
two hundred and seventy four
positions bill so that number of
funded vacancies has dropped
from that fifty four and a half
down to about eleven at the
current moment.
So now turning to the FY twenty
four executive our FY twenty
four recommendations the
executive recommendation is
about one point five million
higher than the LFC
recommendation for person so
what this means operationally
for the agency is that the
executive recommendation allows
PED the opportunity to fill
about fifteen more positions
than the LFC recommendation so
you know long story short that's
that's the big difference
between two recommendations is
filling about fifteen FTE.
Aside from person the executive
recommendation is also about two
hundred eighty thousand dollars
higher for maintenance and
support of new I. T. systems
over the last few years the
legislature has provided funding
to PED for through the C. to
process for I knew I. T. systems
PED is on schedule to finish
these I see two projects by the
summer of twenty twenty four
these I knew systems will
require bonding for recurring
maintenance and support when
they go live so the executive
recommendation is about two
hundred eighty thousand dollars
higher for that purpose.
So with that I will pass it on
over to Secretary pedia thank
you thank you Simon.
Hopefully you can hear me okay
that's good thank you good
afternoon Mr chair vice chair
Dixon and honorable committee
members I'm not a young of the
of the interim secretary as
mentioned for the public
education department and it's an
honor to be with you here today
to talk about our public at
department.
I want to take this opportunity
to to thank all of you for the
work that you do in this
committee I know that these
committees are long and arduous
and that you all take great care
in the work that you're doing.
I also want to thank Simon and
Serra and sente who is here for
all of the work that went into
building our budgets and getting
us here today.
And I if Mr chair with your
permission I would love to
introduce that PED employees
that are here with us absolutely
right now okay so I have
Jacquelyn because Seles deputy
secretary.
Greg frosted director policy and
legislative affairs on twenty
Ortiz the director of finance
and operations Rebecca Reyes
interim Assistant Secretary for
Indian and Shawna fund again are
managing director Mary Montoya
our CIO and Marion right now is
our HSD director.
I'd like to thank all the
employees at the department they
are capable and hard working
group of people who are devoted
to their service to children in
our state I would also like to
acknowledge Dr Kurt Steinhaus
who came out of retirement after
a long and distinguished career
and education to service our
cabinet secretary I just want to
take this opportunity to
publicly acknowledge him for his
service and for all of the great
successes that he built there
here at the department.
As you all know this is a new
position for me although the
work is not new I have been
leading the governor's
children's cabinet for the past
four years and have been
collaborating closely with the
department along the way
education is where my passion
and my history line my parents
were educators I was a teacher
in Albuquerque public schools
and I have three daughters here
in public schools in Santa Fe.
I know we all agree that we're
New Mexico lands in terms of
national school rankings is not
acceptable and that our kids
deserve a system of education
that unlocks more for them.
But I think we can all also
agree on is that we must
continue to build upon the
investments that will deliver a
higher quality education for
students and expand the number
of educator statewide to help
students discover their talents
and support their learning
journey journey from cradle to
career.
Our early childhood education
and care department is unlike
any other in the nation with
that bold investment that you
all legislative our youngest
learners that will support them
and carry them through their
educational years we will see
the benefits of this investment
in our K. twelve system.
We have made historic
investments in teacher pay that
have helped us retain excellent
teachers and clothes are hiring
gap by thirty four percent with
our investment in health care
coverage this session with house
bill one of two we're going to
continue to make New Mexico and
excellent state for educators.
The nation has watched
Mississippi climbed the ranks
and literacy this is due to
investments they made and
structured literacy over ten
years ago.
We have brought that same
program to to our New Mexico
classrooms and know that soon we
will see New Mexico realize
those same literacy games these
are just a few of the big
structural investments in our
education system that we believe
will bear out these investments
are creating environments where
both our students and our
teachers can thrive.
And where we will see
exponential success over time
efforts this big take time to
fully materialize but we're
committed to seeing it through
together with your support to
build a world class education
system for New Mexico students.
