Here.
Representative Trujillo here
five days a year chair small.
thank you thank you members it's
great to see Representative
Ezzell here today we would ask
if you're come on up and will
talk about house bill three
ninety as amended.
In Mr speaker I did turn my
phone off because they are
racing at Sunland park of my
ringtone for this noxious.
So.
Mr speaker ladies and gentlemen
thank you for hearing my bill
today.
About folder open here.
Of
the stuff which is no and all
this sort of grant I'm here
today present house bill three
ninety a is relating to our
races it is directing the funds
collected to the race our
testing fund and the substantive
changes to this particular field
Mr Chairman are on page two
starting in section D..
Now states that the commission
may impose civil penalty fines
upon the licensee for violation
of the provisions of the horse
racing Act or rules adopted by
the commission the reason we are
changing the next pair the rest
of that paragraph Mister
speaker.
It takes just a few bad actors
to make this industry look
terrible.
Whenever they are tied to
setting in tax revenues of over
five hundred million dollars a
year it's important that the
dignity of what we're trying to
do here is resonating through
the through the industry on
those few that are doing the
wrong thing they are deceiving
the betting public they're
putting that equine athlete at
risk they're putting the
jockey's life at risk.
And Mr chairman as most horse
owners go did not feel the same
way.
I don't mind getting be I yes of
course but I definitely do not
like to be beaten by of course
it's been drugged up.
And that's what we're trying to
trying to Mr speaker so this is
this legislative to do part of
this particular paragraph Mister
speaker Mr chairman and members.
No single provide Shelly exceed
one hundred thousand dollars per
violation however a violation
related to a positive test
result pursuant to section sixty
one a fourteen NMSA nineteen
seventy eight the financial not
exceed one hundred thousand
dollars for each violation in
addition one hundred percent of
the purse related to the
violation shall be forfeited Mr
speaker Mr chairman with that I
will stand for questions thank
you very much Representative
Ezzell we're going to go first
to the public is there anybody
here who what wishes to speak
House Bill three ninety yes Sir
please we'll have our excellent
attendance up there.
Please go ahead Mr chairman
members of the committee good
afternoon thank you for the time
John Thompson a registered
lobbyist for the New Mexico
horsemen's association.
I can't say it any better or
with anymore passion or accuracy
than Representative Ezzell did
stand in strong support of the
bill ask that you do the same
appreciate the time Mr chairman
thank you great thank you very
much.
Okay we don't see anybody else
here we're gonna next go to
online please raise your hand if
you wish to speak on house bill
three ninety.
Seeing nobody will go to the
committee we're gonna go first
Representative del Cruz than to
Representative Pettigrew.
Thank you Mr chairman
Representative.
Where is the horse racing
commission on this bill.
Mr chairman I'd I'll tell you
everybody that I've met with the
okay.
I'm met with the general counsel
for the race tracks I met with
the one of the to the general
managers for the racetrack the
executive director of the racing
commission is Matt Franco was
involved in this as well as the
gaming control board Patrick
Garrett the Attorney General has
weighed in on the changes that
were made in house Judiciary by
Representative McQueen did fall
into this round that we did and
then tried here and everybody is
good with the.
Mr Chairman representative.
Why why don't is the commission
on here not the director
executive director I'm curious
Mr chairman I cannot answer that
question.
Mr Chairman Representative how
did you arrive at these these
are some of these penalty amount
Mr Chairman it and if you will
read what I was telling you
about the first part of it the
commission may impose civil
civil civil penalty fines on a
licensing probation so whatever
you're going down to sixty dash
one eight dash fourteen that
directs them back to the A. R.
C. this is station iterations
commissioners international in
there are different penalties
for different levels of drugs
the most egregious ones that
could be the top amount the
hundred thousand dollars for for
the worst worst drugs that they
can put in the sources and then
it's it's listened as it goes
down.
You Mr chairman I appreciate the
bill I appreciate.
That there will be.
Consequences monetary
consequences Mr chairman.
That's all the questions and
thank you thank you very much
Representative a cruise we have
Representative Pettigrew than
Representative turned
Representative please thank you
chairman and thank you
Representative for bring this
bill you know.
I want so many of our of my
friends leave the horse racing
industry
specifically because of this
issue.
Mr chair and representative will
no and we're constantly one step
behind the canvas and it's hard
to keep up with that one
molecule change that we're there
were testing for and I'm so
thankful the your you've put
this in here and if we can score
finishing close the loop on this
maybe we can rebuild our race in
New Mexico the would.
Four thanks thank you thank you
very much Representative group
except Representative turned.
Thank you Mr chairman thank you
Representative for bringing this
bill my question to you is some
of centers around something that
Representative Cruz Reyes are
there other states that provide
a penalty as large as a hundred
thousand dollars in terms of
testing violations.
Mr Chairman representative
hundred yes there are and they
also work in conjunction with.
And other parameters that have
gotten big violations like this
if there was one trainer I'm
going to say four years ago that
was.
This is what they re use and it
was commonly called from to use
it was developed in South
America is brought in here of it
would these horses would just
run as hard as fast as they
could with.
They sometimes drop dead after
they cross the finish line of
those particular parameters are
no longer allowed in other
states that have
Thank you what is what I'm
looking for court up whenever
they deal with the state in New
Mexico or New Mexico deals with
these other states if they're
banned in state Texas or
Oklahoma they are also banned in
the state of New Mexico thank
thank you of Representative Mr
chair of metal Representative
how often in the past five years
has testing shows that there has
been some illegal substance in
the resources in the state of
New Mexico Mr chairman and
Representative Herman because of
the testing that is done on it
now most tracks are doing
there's three types of testing
that can take place and I have
to go over make sure I get it
right we are there's one this
done and let's implies of plasma
urine and what is the other one
that they do it and I can't find
it right now but let's see here
it is.
Of blood serum plasma urine or
other appropriate test samples
now a lot of trucks are testing
in here and they do this testing
pre race post race out of
competition testing and the
Cropsey testing as well so in
that here sample that they do
they pull out several heroes out
of the money they send it off in
the labs the specified labs that
have been approved by the New
Mexico racing Commission.
Does that the great job of being
able to identify if there is a
look illegal substance that that
our is been didn't ask for but
was given that some might think
these equine athletes do not
have the ability to say yes we
want to do that or no they don't
it's these.
Scrupulous traders that want to
win regardless and so we are
making sure that that is
happening thank you metal
Representative and Mr Chairman
representative what percentage
of those tests are showing that
there has been a violation madam
chair thank goodness that right
has really really gone down miss
that Mr chairman and
representative that that has
gone down I don't have the
numbers for the past year yet
I've.
I just left out on that but.
They have significantly gone
down if there's a little over to
on something say horses of.
At our higher altitudes that we
race at such as rid of so Sen
right park in Farmington and
Albuquerque if if forces are
coming in from the state
California.
They might bleed okay they're
giving Lasix to stop that just
because of the change in
altitude is just like if you are
familiar with Motors.
Whenever you're a race car
driver we have to put a
different peel in that to
regulate the amount of air that
gets in there in the fuel and
everything.
And.
There is they can use that but
they have to go off that
medication that is administered
through the eight track
veterinarian or license bid area
in approved by the racing
commission and those averages
have to blow it be below a
certain level so there might be
a little bit of an average there
will be a minimal provide not
anywhere near this amount.
But we are not going to tolerate
anything above those the ABC
listings of what A. R. C. A. R.
A. R. C. I. has approved as
being.
Out of out of this world test
results.
Thank you Mr chair madam
Representative to someone more
qualification if you may but
looking at the F. I. R. on this
that there's a concern that was
raised by the office of the
Attorney General and with
respect to the diversion of the
funds into the.
Raise our testing fund as
opposed to the school funding to
have a conversation Mr chair
madam Representative with the
attorney general's office Mr
chairman and Representative
Fajardo and yes I did the fines
usually the in the past online
twenty four of the bill it used
to say financial be paid into
the current school fund we
change that to the right so was
testing for the reason we did
that it's industry helping
industry these funds will pay
for future testing on other
horses that it also states that
anything above six hundred
thousand dollars at the end of
a fiscal year goes back into the
general fund.
Just for clarification Mr
chairman metal Representative
that came to us in the bill that
you provided now yes ma'am.
The so it's not something that
necessarily the attorney
general's office has agreed to
is that correct Mr chair metal
Representative Mr chairman and
Representative permanent yes it
was approved by the attorney
general's office by the racing
commission executive director by
track management and by the
track of legal counsel all right
thank you Mr chair thank
Representative thank you very
much percent hundred I will go
to Representative Montoya and
invite your text.
Thank you Mr chair
Representative
Just going back to think about
the first week.
in this committee of this year
the second week we had the
racing commission in here and
the speaker Mr Chairman
representative.
there was a big discussion as to
how
how prices were paid out and one
of the reasons.
Prices there was a there was a
discussion as to how prices were
paid out and the racing
commission at that time said
that they didn't want to change
the.
The prices because they were
using a lot of that in their
efforts to protect the forces
that there was a lot of
that the fund for testing was
the depleted often and they were
trying to make sure to keep the
horses safe so I'm not surprised
to hear that this is a bill that
they would support because.
if if those of us who are in
here can at that time I should
be able to remember that what
they were talking about was
that's the one thing that they
wanted that they feel like they
have to guarantee the safety of
the horses
at the same time the horse
racing association
Was
Trying to.
Trying to make sure the industry
survived that people would still
want to participate New Mexico
by keeping the
the price is high enough for
people who want to participate
so the big concern at that time
seem to be
the fund for testing
so I've if we're gonna be doing
a lot of testing and if this is
what the.
Racing association.
Racing commission
Just months and going back to
that testimony I think first or
second week of the session was
that they needed to make sure
that they were protecting horses
and so
I think finding them is a good
thing rather than just laughing
on the wrist.
And you can't race here anymore
being able to to find them for
cheating seems like a a good
resolution especially if we can
then.
make sure that Fund to continue
to test the horses remains
solvent and then maybe down the
road the prices can once again
be attractive enough for for
folks to want to come here to
New Mexico thank you Mr thank
you very much Representative
Montoya will go to now the by
Terry Dixon and representative
Garcia.
Thank you Mr chair thank you
Representative for bringing this
bill I am very much in support I
did want to flag it looks like
Mr chair representative that the
fiscal impact potential fiscal
impact is really quite minimal
is that correct Mr chair
Representative yes it is if you
look on the very back paged I've
also put in there the race our
testing financial be third date
thoroughly examined and audited
each fiscal year by the
independent auditor approved by
the state auditor and that is to
make sure that we are using
those funds.
For what is it what is it
intended for the like I said
earlier anything above six
hundred thousand at the end of
the at the audit it does go back
into the general fund.
Thank you Mr that Mr chair thank
you Representative I also really
appreciated that last bit about
the independent audits mmhm
thank you very much the very
should and will go to
representative Garcia thank you
Mr thanks for the presentation
one quick question when when
they do blood work and of course
the racetrack two dozen of the
Narinder of.
Mr chairman and representative
Garcia Garcia.
At each one of the racetracks
whenever they are in operation
there is a.
In a more significant racing
commission approved veterinarian
on the grounds at all times okay
whenever they do the testing of
these horses it will be it is
usually the first place our and
then any random our they just
draw number up and usually those
two horses go to the yes bar.
Excuse me.
These horses are held in there
until there is a urine sample.
Until there is a a sample and
here sample those go into a
locked storage unit inside
increase the blood sample that
is taken the urine sample that
is taken the here sample that is
taken.
That's what they call a split so
there is one for the racing
commission to send off to have
that one tested the second
sample is for that horsemen the
trainer of the orders so that
this sample over here comes back
clean that's okay this sample is
good on that same our if this
sample comes back dirty.
The horsemen then has the of the
opportunity to defend himself by
said there is no way that
particular sample is sent off to
another of laboratory that the
commission has authorized to do
that at other sampling not not
the same state not the same let.
And so if that one comes to back
dirty hi so was wrong here you
know so then it goes it's like
okay here's your I implement
they do have the right to appeal
they do have the right to appeal
there was one particular case
that was held up for more than
three years.
Three years and it was for a big
race.
And
I guess the judge finally got
tired of hearing it and ruled in
that horseman's favor even
though that to sample came back
positive.
And I was really bothered by
that because it's not my our
stand fourth place.
Four years to get that done but
that's just part of it does the
judicial system those hearings
are held in the that county of
jurisdiction where the races
sailed so.
Chairman of one last question.
No your bill is there any for in
the bill that would ban a person
from bringing a resource back in
New Mexico.
From I'm sorry I didn't hear you
yeah we're still the the come
back to you okay and positive or
whatever they're doing and doing
is there anything to keep these
people from coming back in New
Mexico and keep on doing the
same thing Mr chairman and
representative Garcia yes there
is obviously whenever they are
banned on one of these high drug
violations the C. B. and a
violations of their license is
automatically suspended by the
racing commission that our is
automatically sent out for
ninety days so it not only puts
the burden on the trainer it
puts the burden on the owner to
so maybe that owner will get the
message we're not gonna tolerate
cheaters.
Trying to harm the horses and
potentially have a job have
seven major happen to that talk.
Thank you thank you Mr chairman
thank you very much
Representative Garcia see what
else on the list we're gonna go
to ranking member Armstrong for
the motion thank you Mr chairman
I move the do pass on house bill
three OO three ninety as
amended.
Okay it's been moved by ranking
member Armstrong there's a tie
over there between
Representative Garcia
Representative the crews will
leave that for we're gonna have
a photo finish Mr chairman.
Representative.
That was quite a race and we'll
have to take a look at the tape
afterwards.
We're gonna go to Minnesota yes
the to call the roll please.
Yes.
Yes Representative Baca yes.
Brown.
Yes.
Representative electors yeah.
I know that we stick flavor
vote.
Representative.
Representative Montoya yes.
Representative Ecker yes.
Yes.
Yes.
Care small yes.
In the.
I think they're both thank you
Representative please thank you
Mr chair thank you madam
Representative as I look at the
the report on the bill one of
the things that is concerning to
me is that eighty seven percent
of the funds that are
implemented under this type of
procedure are not collected and
that they tend to tie up the
court system a great deal and
continue with the.
As per with respect to this I
think that the question that was
asked is how do you keep a horse
coming back to New Mexico who
has been determined to be a
quote unquote a dirty our one of
the things that is not clear
from here is that if a horse is
coming in that was dirty and
that makes the the state of
Texas how are we sure that it's
not dirty when it comes into New
Mexicos why we've been how do we
even keep it up thank you I just
wanted to say Mrs Mr chair
support for me to make the
statement that I think that you
have a good idea and a good
point but I do think that
there's some additional needs
that need to be made to this
bill that would make it stronger
and that's what I was to say
thank you very much
Representative Hernan thank you
Representative is the are you
have a do pass sixteen well
stick with it and I think that
to you later Mr chairman members
thank you very much C. at the
rate of C. in the winters.
Okay we're going to at work our
own Representative Garrett is
already at the table we're gonna
have we have Senate bill one
thirty one as amended.
Representative Garrett please
thank you Mr chair thank you
committee members I'll start by
saying you recieve the finance
committee amendments so on page
one of the copy that you have.
Please delete making
appropriations that's line
eighteen and nineteen.
This.
It was the wrong thing yes.
And then on page forty four line
twenty two through page forty
six line twenty four straight
sections nine and ten which also
talk about appropriations.
So
house bill one thirty one.
Which as amended by the Senate
Education Committee as amended
as this Senate finance committee
represents the culmination of
work over the legislative
interim by the public school
facilities authority the public
school capital outlay council L.
E. S. C. and our very own LFC
it's endorsed by the pap cap can
even talk anymore sorry was
endorsed by the public school
capital outlay oversight task
force New Delhi Essie it's
intended to reduce barriers to
projects funded through the
public school capital outlay
council and it does it in the
following ways reduces the local
share for public school capital
outlay council projects by one
third or in micro diskettes our
our smallest districts by half
it eliminates current and future
legislative offsets eliminates
an upcoming upcoming credit for
local revenue in the PSC OC
formula which including impacted
revenue and it requires PSS me
to adopt standards for career
technical education field
facilities which you know are
being built throughout the state
to appropriations twenty five
million for security and seventy
five million for career and
technical education
prekindergarten and local
maintenance priorities are
included in H. B. full I I which
is this year's capital outlay
bill so that's where that
hundred million is coming out of
the bill also makes technical
cleanup charges changes to
eliminate underuse provisions of
the public school capital outlay
act my expert witnesses Tim to
go from the LFC Sir if you want
to add new Mr chair just here to
provide tech technical support
if needed thank you and I stand
for questions thank you very
much with them is.
There who would like to speak on
Senate bill one three one.
Anybody but we do know that we
have are excellent
L. E. S. C. leadership here with
any questions woke that I don't
see is there anybody online the
online any question
Representative aka please start
us off.
Thank you Mr chairman and thank
you Representative for bringing
the sport I just want to ask
questions process for emphasis
Mr chairman and the
representative of their this was
vetted through the L. E. S. C.
process through the interim and
also through the LFC Mr chairman
and representative was it
communicated to the those
different committees that for
some small districts the match
was problematic into making the
necessary upgrades to their
facilities yes Mr chairman and
Representative it'll have Mr
does elaborate briefly on that
sure maybe Mr chair
representative that the local
matches become a barrier for
many districts the the formula
was put into place in I believe
it's twenty eighteen maybe
twenty nineteen by legislature
it was a transition at the time
where the state didn't have a
whole lot of money we were
relying on the districts to come
up with their own money for
projects now we're seeing that
when we did that with the
legislature did that the the.
Cost that we ask the districts
to pay became prohibitive and
and allows them not to are it
doesn't allow them to
participate projects so this
would be a policy change that
for the next three years and and
I didn't.
But in our talking points here
that this there's a three year
sunset on this to allow us to
sort of study it make sure that
we get the money moving now and
then in the future the that that
change will revert and we can we
can actually take a look at that
formula and and make some
brought sweeping changes about
the and thank you Mr chairman
thank you Representative for
bring this forward
the twenty five million really
is it in the in our changes as
we look in the FIR here it
really just moving it from one
part of money.
The general fund into the
capital outlay is that correct
Mr Chairman representative.
Sure.
Mr Chairman representative of
all the money would be coming
out of the public school capital
outlay fund so that there's no
general fund implicated here.
Thank you Mr chairman and thank
you Representative my final
question is regarding the money
is for the security of requests
of Mr Chairman representative
will those flow through the SCG
or will they be as a grant
application for districts.
Hi Mr chair representative balk
at the the money for SCG and the
money for see the the C. T. E.
and the the other local
priorities all of that money
will flow through the public
school facilities authority
through a pretty streamlined
process that similar to the SCG
where the money goes directly to
the districts so they could
spend the money as quickly as
possible thank you Mr chairman
thank representative I think
this is a good bill honest and
supportive.
Excellent thank you very much
for some Baca next ranking
member Armstrong thank you Mr
chairman and thank you for
bringing this bill forward I
think last year we had
I don't know can you tell me
with the the amount is this in
that public school capital
outlay fund.
Mr chair representative not off
the top of my head no but but
there are projections that you
have in your L. E. S. C.
analysis shows that amount was
growing rapidly over time thank
you Mr chairman and and serve I
know we we did a last year we
just did a fund a big lump sum
out of it and and did it by you
know students per for a school
because the funds not being used
I know in my small school
district of Quemado it was a
ninety four percent match and
that's why it wasn't being that
they have no way to to do the
match so I really appreciate
this I think that it will
Be utilized a lot more and and
very needed areas so thank you
so much for doing it Preciado
thank you remember Armstrong
next Representative Lujan.
Thank you Mr chair thank you
presented the bill today
To go to.
FY are on page seven.
Under technical issues.
Just trying to understand.
About.
This you know it's the the bill
does not guarantee charter
schools will receive a portion
of the twenty five million
distribution for security
improvements or seventy five
millions reason for CTE.
Prekindergarten and maintenance
funding that the SEC amendment
included distribution to charter
schools but creates additional
technical issues so see below
would be the Senate Education
Committee amendment can you.
I I guess for clarification
purposes the the at the SFC the
last sentence there amendment
strikes this provision can you
can explain that a little bit Mr
chair certainly Mr chair
representative Lujan so the
initial appropriation that was
included in this bill it was sit
based on methodology that is
representative of our strike
said was used last year they got
the money moving very quickly
the unfortunate part of that
appropriation last year was that
charter schools didn't receive
any of the funding from that so
there was an attempt made in the
Senate Education Committee to
include charter schools not
appropriation and once that
amendment was tacked on it
introduced a whole host of
technical issues having to do
with anti donation clause
charter schools many charter
schools don't own their
facilities and so they they
would have to be making
upgrades to privately owned
facilities which is an anti
donation clause issue so that
being said both both
appropriations were completely
struck including that
problematic language in the
Senate finance committee and the
we are working with the staff on
the on house bill five oh five
to make sure that the probation
that are included in the capitol
bill don't have the same
technical issues.
So there Mr chair then charter
schools would be included in the
appropriation Mr chair
representative I believe that
would be the intent that's and
that's we're working with staff
to to try and make sure that
happens and I want to add one
thing Mr Chairman representative
that education amendment set
twenty five thousand per charter
school was uniform about many of
us give us capital outlay to
charter schools for that very
purpose for security upgrades so
there's there's more and there's
more variables involved than
just a straight across the board
donation Mr chair of.
Representative thank you for
saying that but it's my
understanding that that was not
the functionality when we
included charter schools into
our.
Private public school.
And that they would be
responsible for these means.
What what part that is change Mr
chair.
Representative.
Mr chair representative rephrase
your question so Mr chair
representative what I'm what I'm
getting at is that when charter
schools came to be that they
this is included in and the
Becoming part of the public
schools charter so to speak and
that they be responsible for
their own means our own
appropriations to pay for their
facilities and so forth and now
you're telling me that we're
going to have appropriations
that are going to reverse that
is that correct Mr chair.
Mr chair representative of
charter schools receive
appropriations from the state
equalization guarantee every
year just like just just like
public schools charter schools
are considered public schools
the the anti donation clause
issue comes in when and what has
to do with their facility
because they don't on their
facilities so that that's right
and some don't on their
facilities and so the the way
that we envision sort of this
appropriation flowing out is is
really making sure that the
public school facilities
authority would have the
authority to say yes you on your
facility yes you can have this
to ensure that you have security
no you don't own your facility
so we're not going to give you
the full amount maybe you'll
you'll get enough to buy cameras
which are not permanent security
upgrades but there there's
something that you can take off
of your facility and move with
you if the school decides to get
a new facility or something like
thank you Mr chair thank you for
clarifying that a little bit
more for me I probably have to
talk to more off thank you thank
you.
Thank you very much
Representative Lujan next we're
gonna go to representative
Allison.
Thank you Mr.
Representative.
As I read through this real
quick it's the it's almost a
book.
And the I didn't see any notice
of referencing bureau of Indian
education are they considered
part of the public school or the
SCG or because I know of the
school district in my for the
schools in my district Navajo
preparatory and also safety and
yet they still receive Capitala.
Mr chair and representative the
the public school capital outlay
act is pretty specific about
what a public school isn't it
has to do with our state public
school districts and so the the
B. I. E. schools are considered
federal schools federally
controlled schools follow
outside of the scope of the
public school capital outlay act
right now Santa Fe and so Mr
chair so you're telling me that
Navajo preparatory in Santa Fe
Indian do not qualify for
capital outlay
Mr chair representative they
they'll do qualify for capital
outlay if you and if you give
them capital outlay is part of
your you know your set aside
allocation for capital outlay
they can receive it that way
they they don't go through the
same process the public schools
go through to apply to the PSC
of seed to be awarded funding
and then to receive funding
through this process and Mr
chair and representative of
Santa Fe Indian school is a
state chartered school under it
gets direct money from that in
the excuse me the land grant
permanent fund okay Mister chair
if Santa Fe Indian school is
classified under charter why
isn't Navajo press.
Maybe Mr chair representative
Allison so the Santa Fe Indian
school I believe is that a
charter school Senator I don't I
don't think it's a charter
school so so the there are
different oversight bodies for
for different schools just
depending on you know who
authorized the school to exist
Navajo preparatory it's too it
happens to be authorized by the
federal government ordered under
the bureau of Indian education
they're considered more more
more akin to a private school or
doctor failed to win the
women's.
Thank you Mr Chairman
representative Allison the
Navajo preparatory schools what
we call a tribally chartered
school the our tribal schools
typically fall into three
categories there bureau of
Indian education schools so
they're actually governor
certified by our bureau
federally federal Burke bureau
of Indian education.
Second way is there tribally
chartered and they are also
through a federal mechanism but
actually under the umbrella of a
bit bureau of Indian affairs and
then locally tribally chartered.
and then third is sort of
hybrid of the of those two
mechanisms I think one of the
things we like to do over the in
terms actually study how are
totally controlled schools
operate and how capital outlay
impacts and.
Okay so Mr chair so that late
does.
They do qualify for capital.
So Mr Chairman representative
Allison
Santa Fe Indian school can
qualify for capital outlay under
the capital outlay allocation
for you all as an individual
provided for but not through the
capital outlay process that is
the public school facilities
authority and there's two there
so there's two mechanisms right
now in terms of capital outlay
for schools the over the brought
one for our public school system
introduction public school
system that includes our
districts and charters in New
Mexico is a public school
facilities authority the public
school capital outlay oversight
task force and public public
school capital outlay council
oversee this and that mechanism
is really about matching funds
as you've heard and as well as
some distributions that go to
them such as school security
career technical education
maintenance fees so bureau of
Indian education schools in the
the Santa Fe Indian school can
receive capital outlay for me
directly but not necessarily
through this act that
established the public public
school facilities authority.
Okay Mister chair of.
Is it offline you Mr chair thank
you very much Representative
Allison Mexico Representative.
Thank you chairman and thank you
Representative for brands of.
of a little lighthearted and say
I don't remember it being a
hundred percent unanimous I
don't believe it's been
unanimous on public school
capital outlay oversight task
force but the five point.
Chairman and Representative I
believe one of the reasons why
well there are several reasons
why we talked about doing this.
One.
They're already approved the
the CDC was not gonna have to
worry about the matches in the
same there were there was an
agreement and I think
legislation CTE wouldn't have to
do this.
We have this accessing funds so
we're trying to figure out how
to do this we're trying to
figure out how to get this money
out.
Yes we have some issues with
having enough contractors enough
architects and engineers to get
the work done but we still had
to figure this out.
Chairman and Representative I
just want to clarify.
I don't remember.
When we talked about this in the
on the.
Post code capital outlay that
we're actually.
Getting rid of of the entire
offset amount.
But it.
Chairman representative is that
inside this bill.
Mr Chairman representative at
that is part of this bill and
the part of the I think reason
in our discussions with this and
presentations to the out couple
of the task force as well as
others was that
in
getting rid of the offsets and
also
relieving the current existing
off that's what we're also going
to do was get rid of the impact
the credit that we would be
taking for impacted this coming
year so if the in in a sense it
was not necessarily a trade off
of really in recognition that
we're no longer going to
actually
take credit for impact aid and
that's been a long standing
issue for the alleged.
Okay thank you for that answer
thank you chairman thank you
for.
Remember there being a
significant amount of heartburn
about that with respect to some
of the significant offset so
were built up but we still had
very wealthy school districts.
And.
And so we talked.
I felt about maybe not.
Looking at those office for
certain time frame so we can get
through that I didn't realize we
ever got to a point where we.
Wiped out Bernalillo is offset
completely.
Lovington to offset completely.
And so on so forth so.
But chairman and and
Representative and experts.
Your telemovie this bill watch
it out and.
Mr Chairman representative it
does so incidentally there was a
question I asked earlier about
the actual fund balance and I
believe it's it last time we
checked it was around seven
hundred and fifty million
dollars more or less and so part
of this was I think in terms of
staff really and and in
conversations with the school
districts and schools really
wanting to help them access.
Mr chairman and representative
what is that.
I appreciate the conversation
but I still remember I I
remember debating this
significantly during their
interim
But.
I was all for setting that aside
for a while so we could get
three use of these funds.
But the forgiving it completely.
I'm just gonna go back to my
notes so for now that's sort of
so much this the small Mike.
Having further conversation
thank you.
Thank you very much
Representative group I don't see
any other questions so we're
gonna go to reverse all.
We'll go to Representative Baca
for the motion and
Representative Trujillo for
this.
Thank you Mr chairman I move for
a do pass on Senate bill one
thirty one.
As a matter.
Twice okay there's a motion from
Representative Baca second from
representative for PO
can you please call the roll.
Out.
Yes Representative Baca yes.
For.
Yes.
Yes.
Representative.
Yeah.
Representative.
Yes and I would like to explain.
Yes.
As well yes.
Yes seven.
Representative thank you
chairman I'm sorry for causing
very hard that the phone with
can't guarantee is going to stay
the same on the floor I need to
go back to my nose to the need
to have some conversations.
Chat with with the.
About this thank you thank you
very much thank you very much
represent their that thank you
to our witnesses we're gonna ask
vice chair Dixon out to go up
for just be one seventy eight.
It will ask Mr Abbey to be there
at the table if we.
Representative.
There's an amendment so what's
the staff to pass out the
amendment just be one seventy
eight this.
Okay whenever you're ready.
Thank you Mr chairman thank you
members
Senate Bill
one seventy eight is fairly
straightforward it.
Re classifies the tobacco
settlement permanent fund as not
a reserve fund of the state.
And I think Mr chair I would
defer to director Abbey
potentially to add some comments
if he thinks there are
additional comments that would
be a useful thank you very much
bye service revenue.
Mr Chairman representative I
think this was an LFC bill and.
There was a time probably two
decades ago when the general
fund reserves were scoring the
negative.
And that the chat statutes were
changed to make the tobacco
settlement permanent fund part
of general fund reserves and at
that time that look like a good
idea because it meant instead of
having one percent reserves the
state at three percent reserves
so it was a different time and
now the state has reserve
targets which are much higher
and it if you think about it the
idea of having fun with the word
per minute and that as part of a
general fund reserve which is
intended for liquidity purposes
in that health really so so one
reason is just a little better
accounting for the purposes of
money liquidity for the general
fund verses long term investment
purposes second by pulling it
out of the general fund it makes
it easier to to and that kind of
what the conversation yesterday
about the opioid fund allows the
state investment officer to
invest these long term funds to
get a better return than the
treasure typically gets in the
short term general fund
investment so that was that was
the purpose for the LFC
recommendation right thank you
very much Mr Abbey at this point
let's go ahead we're going to
move house appropriations and
finance committee amendment
number one to house or Senate
bill one seventy eight
vice chair Dixon this amendment
simply.
Delays implementation from July
one twenty twenty three to July
twenty five one twenty twenty
four Representative Mr chair
that is correct okay is there
with kids and seconded by
Representative Trujillo
at any opposition to adopting
that motion.
Seeing the.
and is there anybody who wishes
to speak on Senate bill one
seventy eight.
Saying none online.
Seeing none
We'll go two ranking member
Armstrong please thank you Mr
chairman
Are you under the explained a
little bit I.
But is there further explanation
of why we want to.
Not to make it a.
Reserve fund.
Again but the risk of repeating
myself Mr Chairman
representative Armstrong.
General fund reserves are
typically intended to back up.
The general fund spending and
budget of a revenue shortfall
were an extraordinary spending
requirements I use the word.
Earlier liquidity you know
liquidity means what do you do
if we're short on revenues or
spending is too high you want
ready money to come in and fill
the gap.
Well so such a fund again with
permanent fund in the title the
intention is not to use that
just to keep it for perpetuity
in fact the tobacco revenues are
coming in for productivity and
have a roll of and eventually
provided a stable long term
revenue stream and a fund that
is backing up general fund
spending for liquidity purposes
is inconsistent with the fund
intended to generate a long term
permanent stable revenue stream
okay okay thank you Mr chairman
and and.
Mr Abbey and so why are we
changing the effective date.
I'm.
Thank you Mr chair and thank you
Representative ranking member
Armstrong that was done in
consultation with the Senate
sponsor.
But is there a reason why it's
being changed.
Mr Chairman representative
there's a number of things that
are in play right now that
affect general fund reserves
including rebates and Anna you
know I.
Many of the committees are
struggling with pressure to make
rebates higher they're dealing
with the Senate spending level
which is looking which is we
know higher than the house
passed and I think some of the
thinking on changing the date is
let's get all that stuff settled
sorted out and then make the
move I think that the Senate.
Thank still desires to achieve a
thirty percent reserve target
and I'm pretty confident you do
too so it just gives a little
more flexibility well there
these other moving parts in the
budget taxes even taxes they're
still coming we all know there
still conversation going on
about how much and what kinds
spending is getting close to
being resolved but I I think
that was just to give a little
more flexibility as those final
decisions are being made thank
you Mr chairman thank you David
I would have voted against the
amendment.
That's all thank you thank you
very much thank you ma'am
Armstrong Representative please.
Thank you Mr chairman
Mr Abbey you you mentioned a
liquidity.
What in terms of this fund
another actually other funds as
well what is the the rank order
liquidity safety yield what.
First one of those three rank.
Those are good words for any
investment program to the for
the treasure and for liquidity
the number one concern is to
have safety so they don't lose
money so if their demands on the
reserve fund to pay bills it's
there.
And so sacrifice a lot higher
return to ensure the safety of
the principle which they may
need that's what that wanting to
have funds liquid means they can
quickly be sold at close it very
close to par value without
incurring a loss and the ability
to count on those monies being
available back up the spending
and that's the goal of treasures
investments and and so there is
a hierarchy if you think about
the general fund reserves and
the financial summary there's
the operating reserve first in
appropriation contingency fund
which is used for disasters the
state support reserve to pack up
school funding but here's
something again with the title
permanent fund that doesn't look
like those other accounts of the
general fund that are pretty
clearly backing up spending.
Gentleman I've I've seen
situations were aggressive or
the seeking progressive yield
caused a lot of problems and so
it's kind of funny that that
balance Mr chairman.
The permanent fund is can take a
little riskier position to get
higher returns and if they lose
money in the short run it's not
jeopardizing the payouts the
pope's accounting on the
spending string.
That's.
Average time line.
That that that you want to
invest to meet all of those
three conditions so so Mister
chairman the treasure generally
doesn't invest more than five
years they buy a treasury and
other bonds local maximum
maturity of five years and
typically half their assets will
be a year or less where's the
investment office will have long
term investments.
Maybe only one or two percent
liquid cash and most and stocks
for long term bonds ten to
thirty years chairman thank you
struggle thank you very much of
Santa Cruz Representative
Garrett Representative Chatfield
and Representative Lujan thanks
here thank you Mr chair thanks
Representative and Mr Abbey so
returning to the conversation
yesterday this will once the
dust settles be return it to
part of the consumer settlement
fund list and the and the
revenues will be able to address
what they were originally
supposed to address which is
secession from tobacco etcetera
etcetera correct thank you Mr
chairman thank you
Representative yes that's
correct thank you.
Thank you very much for Senator
Representative Chatfield.
Thank you Mr chairman Mr
chairman I guess by Monday
Question deals with the the hit
compare compare will size of the
fund if we if we're at thirty
percent.
And we no longer consider this
fund as part of the reserve.
Then what we're does that leave
us.
This.
You Mr chairman Representative
Chatfield this account ended FY
twenty three with about three
hundred and three hundred
million dollars or in total
general fund reserves are in
excess of two and a half billion
so so this this is about three
percent of spending for ten
percent of the thirty percent.
The server are twenty percent.
There's a reserve target of ten
percent would include three
percent of the thirty percent
historically what come from this
more or less we're a seven
percent yes Mr Chairman
representative.
Before the legislature spent
money reserves we're looking to
be over forty percent so there
was an opportunity to to.
Move this out of the general
fund rostrum.
Thank you Mr thank you much
Representative Chatfield next
Representative Lujan thank you
Mr chair under I really like
this conversation because I'm
learning a lot more all the
funds and and everything
But on the bill on page two
One three two five one it is
three three six is it in the the
money in the fund showed you
vested by the state investment
officer in accordance with the
limitations in article twelve
section seven of the
constitution in New Mexico what
so what are those limitations if
if you don't mind me asking Mr
chair.
Mr chair representative one
could you repeat I'm sorry page
and line H. two lines.
Three through five to six I'm
sorry.
All
of.
Mr chair what I'm asking is it
just yeah yes thank you the
reputations of the constitution
are mainly about the prudent
person person rule the kinds of
assets that would qualify as a
prudent person for.
No insurance that they didn't
take too much risk and those
thank you.
Permanent funds and the
investment officer invest
department of funds and other
funds that have been designated
by statute like the early
childhood trust put in this bill
is simply putting the tobacco
fund in the same role as the
early childhood Trust Fund also
not a general fund thank you Mr
chair thank you it's just my for
me for for their understanding
and having carried the the new
of the funding that was outlined
more specifically for the opioid
settlement fund so I really
appreciate this because it came
up in debate today on the floor
and so I get to go back and tell
some of our members that this is
happening thank you so much
thank you thank you
Representative Lujan next we
have Representative.
Thank you chairman and thank you
representative madam chair by
share for this
chairman of this and madam vice
chair this is specifically for
director Abbey can I just want
to make sure the webcast caught
that could you repeat what you
said earlier about our reserves
before we start spending money.
It so thank you Mr the
representative Mistretta E. I
think maybe the question is what
we're reserves at when we came
into session what they they
stood above thirty percent what
were they at LFC had a.
Mr chairman had a budget
recommendation that left
reserves right at thirty percent
there again we know there are
many variables what sorry
Representative Pettigrew in if I
get it wrong what we're actual
reserves we we set a target of
FY twenty three reserves at
thirty percent actual reserves
were higher than that.
Of in the LFC recommendations
they were much higher we for the
spending in the recommendations
so they would have been.
Four million.
Before the legislature for
billion ending twenty three
before the legislature could
just addressed proposed spending
initiatives chairman that thank
you chairman thank you I sure
thank you director that was
where I was trying to get to you
I thought I heard.
Thank you very much
Representative Pettigrew okay I
don't see any other questions
thank you very much Director
Abbey thank you vice chair Dixon
we're gonna go to
Representative we'll go to
Representative Trujillo for the
motion Representative a cruise
for the second.
Senate bill one seventy eight as
amended.
Okay it's been moved by
Representative Trujillo signing
by Representative daylight Cruz
can you please call the roll.
Representative Allison.
Yes it looks like spend my vote.
Representative capital yes.
Yes.
Yes.
Yes yes yeah the.
Representative talking at yes.
Yes.
Yes.
Yes.
And Representative Bakit to is
explained as well.
Thank you Mr chairman and and
really I guess the main thing
about it was my question is
really about making sure that we
hit that target of thirty
percent and so as there was some
discussion regarding that I I I
wasn't sure if it was twenty
seven percent or thirty percent
I do think that we you know we
need to move forward and
anything else we can address at
a later time but thank you Mr
chairman thank you very much for
Baca they by Sir Dixon.
Okay we're gonna go to we're
gonna go to house bill four
thirty four as amended
the sponsor for house bill four
twenty five is presenting
another committee we will try to
go get their but there
not available at this time.
Good afternoon Mister chair.
Good afternoon Representative
members of the committee I bring
to you house bill four thirty
point.
And secretary Allen will be my
expert witnesses walking in a
few seconds but I can go ahead
and get started if you'd like
please okay house bill four
thirty four proposes several key
changes to the children's code
in an effort to strengthen
clarify process season the
program that was instituted in
twenty sixteen pursuant to the
federal comprehensive addiction
and recovery act which is also
known this Karen C. A. R. A. New
Mexico's implementation of cara
has been a source of supportive
care for pregnant people
affected by substance abuse as
well as coordination of services
for parents caregivers and
family members of newborns
affected by substance exposure
before birth.
House bill four thirty four
addresses identified
administrative gaps in the
program and bolsters the
services and safety net it
provides for infants and their
families.
It codifies and clarifies the
collaboration of various
agencies no the program success
depends.
And the there will be some
amendments and I will share them
with you shortly but I wanted to
give Mr chair my expert witness
an opportunity to introduce
himself right secretary please
go ahead then we'll go back to
Representative trio for the
amendments and go from there
thanks very much Mr chair
members committee Patrick Allen
secretary department of health I
hear in support of the bill
today happy to help answer
questions okay and thank you Mr
chairman you should have
received of our a couple of
pages of amendments the bottom
number is two two five nine nine
eight point one eight eight can
we move that I serve for
discussion please so it.
Great from of a vice chair Dixon
seven by Representative della
Cruz for discussion go ahead
Representative yes thank you
House bill four thirty four as
amended.
Of line I'm sorry number one
strike health and Human Services
amendment number five.
On the first page.
Then number two on page six line
twenty five strike and it's I
think the last item on the page.
Number three on page seven.
Line six strike the period and
insert in lieu thereof.
Semi colon and.
On page four.
I'm sorry number four on page
seven between the lines six and
seven and sort the following new
paragraph.
Six in parentheses facilitation
of meetings of providers who
comprise the multi disciplinary
teams by a means that ensure
ongoing and consistent
collaboration and coordination
quotation marks.
On page nine line twelve after
Department in sort of help.
It would be so it would be the
department of health.
On page nine line seventeen
after the first and second
occurrence of department in sort
of health.
On page nine line eighteen
strike may and insert include
their off show all.
On page I'm sorry on page eleven
line two.
After the department and sort of
health.
And on page eleven line three
after Department and sort of
help.
these were all recommendations
that came out of of the health
and Human Services Committee as
well Mr chairman.
And
We stand for questions thank you
very much Representative let's
go to Representative Lujan and
Representative Montoya.
Thank you.
Thank you Mr chair I appreciate
this the sponsorship of this of
this bill but as I have noted
before before with other related
legislation
And I'm looking at this as it as
something that I brought up
before is is bringing
A plan together Mr Mr chair that
springing all these agencies
together I haven't seen anything
like this except when we're
we're looking at behavioral
health collaborative that we
have in place already
my want my question I have
Mister chair is on the synopsis
of the regional house bill.
I think it's so five hundred and
we're on the we're on the
amendment right now we're still.
The that's okay all right then
I'll pass it great thank you
Representative Montoya on the
amendment and then
representative here on the
amendment Representative Montoya
please thank you Mr chair
Just just a kind of a COVID of
about us having a fairly
substantial amendment
I know we've done this a couple
of times but if we're gonna get
more of substantial amendment on
a bill
I would ask that we get at least
twenty four hours ahead like in
other committees so that we can
then read it and try
and understand it context not
the same as an amendment where
you're stripping appropriation
that that and that's it I just
and I'm listening and I'm just
gonna have to take the word of
the sponsor which I have no
reason not to take the were the
Sanchez but if we are gonna be
having substantive amendments we
should be getting them much
earlier I appreciate very much
the suggestion sentiment but it
makes a lot of sense
Representative Garrett and then
ranking member Armstrong
Representative Kerr Mr chair
representative this is the
English language question the
health and Human Services
Committee amendment
number six on page ten line
twenty says strike and a person
with and insert in lieu of the
early childhood education and
care department ordered.
So that would make it read
comprehensive addiction recovery
act navigator means a person
with the department the early
childhood education it it just
doesn't require right.
Can.
Mr Chairman I need some clarity
because I don't see it on the
proposed amendments no this all
Mr chair this is on the original
health and Human Services
Committee.
It should say means a person
with the early childhood
education and care department.
For the department of health it
just needs
the weird Department struck as
well online twenty.
You see we are a to hear but I
can't resist the editing thank
you Representative dear they
wish they were you were and
the committee them with the.
Thank you we're gonna go start
ranking member option thank you
Mr chairman
I was gonna ask the same thing
about the to strike the health
of humans.
Is that the same on that
Representative care which is
asking about okay that was just
really confusing to me and then
it that what question I have
about the amendment is.
Did you.
Where all the stakeholders
involved in creating the
amendments.
I that these were happening.
Mr chairman of.
And members of the committee
affinity for my expert witness
said to the folks that were
actually in the room when this
is all being created and would
you like to.
Hello miss Groginsky secretary
in ski to speak.
Hey Mr chair Madam ranking
member
Armstrong the we have worked
collaboratively across the four
agencies the Department of
Health taking the lead ECECD the
children youth and families
department and the Human
Services Department in looking
at the improvements to the
current program and crafting
these and.
And this bill together okay
thank you very much for that and
and thanks for the explanation
but I I to believe you know this
is the Appropriations Committee
and it's really hard to take a
such a.
Substantive amendment and this
committee thank you Mr chairman
thank you very remember I think
it's very fair point I
appreciate thing makes a lot of
sense
okay we're gonna go and I don't
see any other discussion on the
amendment is there objection to
adopting the amendment now
before we go back to the bill.
Sync please show Representative
Montoya in opposition.
And representative please as
well.
okay so you have an amended bill
let's go now to members of the
public who wish to speak on
house bill four three four as
twice amended let's go those in
support first and then those in
opposition please those in
support.
Afternoon Mister chair members
of the committee my name is
Barbara Vigil and secretary of
children youth and families
department I stand in strong
support of H. B. for thirty four
it's the result of in depth
cross departmental collaboration
and coordination to improve the
health of newborns exposed to
substances the bill would codify
our inter agency collaboration
around a prevention focused an
evidence based approach to
ensure families.
That families receive the
supports and services that they
need to ensure their babies are
healthy the bill would clarify
roles and responsibilities
between our respective
departments and support the
effective and timely
intervention of services for
these families thank you thank
you very much Secretary.
Mr chair members of the
committee my name is Emily
Martin I'm the director of
protective services at CYFD
since the passing of the
comprehensive addiction and
recovery act in New Mexico in
two thousand nineteen and the
implementation of the program in
twenty twenty hospitals in New
CIOS have created over thirty
eight hundred plans of care to
support mothers fathers
caregivers and their and the
babies that are born exposed to.
Substances a large group of
stakeholders including CYFD D.
O. H. ECECD and HSD built the
initial blueprint of this
program.
We learned a lot we have learned
a lot over the last two and a
half years where the gaps are
and what and who needs to close
those gaps this bill begins to
address those gaps and by
bringing all four agencies
together our shared goals in our
shared resources including
funding is what's going to
continue to help this program
grow thank you thank you very
much this month.
Mr chair members of the
committee my name is a lot of
dances on the medical director
of Medicaid I'm here as a
representative of the Human
Services department to support
this bill I do think there are
several improvements to this
bill that are important one is
that it puts the responsibility
in one department although we
will all collaborate there is
kind of a single leading
department which is department
of health which is I think going
to be a much better strategy
than the kind of fractured way
it it exists right now the other
thing is that there is specific
direction of what to do if
mothers don't engage right now
that does not exist in the bill
and Frank as a provider as
somebody who knows this
community it's been confusing so
now there is specific language
that a family assessment is done
and that loop is closed when
mothers don't engage so those
two changes I made me feel.
Much more comfortable with the
bill and comfortable standing up
today thank you thank you very
much for census.
Okay are we don't see anybody
else anybody online would like
to speak in support of house
bill four thirty four as twice
amended.
Seeing none anybody would like
to speak in opposition so I will
ask our excellent attendance
come back up.
Thank you committee chair and
members my nap my name is
Maryland back I am the founder
and executive director of New
Mexico child first network a
nonprofit organization dedicated
to improving the lives of our
most vulnerable children and
families and those impacted by
our child welfare systems care
has been one of our top
priorities since the inception
of care and twenty nineteen I
just wanna say is not gaps these
are children we're not talking
about data we're talking about
children.
And so I want to thank the
sponsor and the agencies for
continuing to work on this
unfortunately I didn't see the
amendment until the second so I
this morning I've been in a lot
of conversations about what was
included what is not included it
is hard to track and I can know
that there's not a time frame
for non compliance once again we
need to be talking about if
you're looking at the
regulations that exist in
statute
the current regulations which
this bill seeking to codify a
comprehensive but much of the
work in the concern that we
continue to have with this bill
as written as that the
safeguards need to happen before
the discharge of the substance
exposed and fend going home to
drag actively drug addicted and
actively drug using parents we
also want to vocalize that it
needs to be clear that when
declining Services should mean a
call to see why FTE and sky I
know for a fact that if you call
in a a drug addicted and fan at
the hospital CYFD is
unsubstantiated the call based
on sky because they're safe in
the hospital these are these
concerns are not addressed in
this and so we have seven days
and I really hope we can all
continue to work together
because these are children these
are drug exposed children at the
two generational vulnerable
model and part time so thank you
thank you very much respect.
Okay we're gonna go online.
Anybody would like to speak in
opposition to house bill four
thirty endorsed by amended.
Saying then we're gonna go to
the committee
we will come back to
Representative Chatfield who
other questions on committee
okay we're gonna start with
ranking member Armstrong we're
going to Representative Lujan
them good Representative Montoya
or recommend Armstrong will come
back Representative Chatfield
but we'll go through thank you
Mr chairman.
Thank you for continuing to work
on this when I sat on the health
committee.
This was brought to the health
committee years ago when it was
it was prodded action and a half
in this instance.
I like the word shall.
I like changing it for maybe a
shell but with that being said.
Mr Chairman representative our
baby still allowed drug addicted
baby still allowed to leave the
hospital with their mothers that
obviously are using drugs.
With no plan in place.
Mr chair madam
ranking member Armstrong amenity
for to my experts which.
Well let's go to you secretary
because I think one of the
things that we heard in
testimony about the positives of
this approach is that it does it
does place the responsibility
with department of health even
as there's obviously additional
collaborators I think anybody is
free to answer but I think we'll
be particularly interested to
hear.
In this model because the
department of health is taking
on that coordinating
responsibility yeah Mr chair
members of the committee thanks
for the question I you know I
think what underlies the the
approach to move this to the
department of health is first to
create basically a a single
point of accountability which
really doesn't exist in the
current model and second is to
anchor it in a in a public
health approach in the idea of
of primary prevention and in
trying to work to the that to
preserve preserve families to
prove that it to prevent impacts
on kids and to be able to move
this forward I think we continue
to be able to refer instances
and information about abuse
neglect to to C. Y. FTE to to
deal with those so we deal with
plans of care they deal with
circumstances of neglect we're
able to coordinate that work in
our agency to the specific
question that was just I don't
actually know the answer to that
I'm wondering if anyone else
right around here does we can.
Is in other else's.
Just.
Sure good afternoon
I'm Susan Merrell I am the
navigator at the department of
health I have been working in
implementing this program since
the inception so of about thirty
eight hundred plans of care we
only have about six percent that
decline no baby leaves the
hospital without us being
notified no baby leaves the
hospital when there are concerns
for the care of that baby
without a call into statewide
central intake.
There are probably right now
forty percent of our cases with
a plan to care for the client
kind of care that are involved
in an investigation or.
You know placed with a
designated caregiver or a
resource.
Thank you thank you Mr chairman
thank you for that answer so the
answer I'm hearing is that they
are allowed to leave.
And that they
We'll have a follow up is there
a guideline and a time frame for
the follow up.
Sure let me answer that
Representative Armstrong so and
just a quick reminder to go
through the chair I'm sorry no
you're fine so in answer to that
if there is a call to stay with
into the intake from hospitals
and that leads to an
investigation then that's a
different process if that makes
good sense
when you ask that question so
there can be a plan to care and
there could be an investigation
at the same time with a safety
plan two different things but
happening at the same time.
Then for those babies where
there's not that investigation
but that plan of care yes we get
that plan the date submitted
every day.
That then comes to myself and
the navigator at CYFD currently
ECECD.
That goes the M. C. E. O.'s care
coordinators they pick up that
plan as well so there is a phone
call there is a con you know
conversations started and.
The offer you know the work on
care coordination.
And the primary care is lived in
as well as what I like to say
thank you Mr chairman thank you
ma'am and so.
What is the time frame on that
Mr chairman and ma'am so
chair and representative it's
within you know the discharge
which is typically within twenty
four hours okay thank you Mr
chairman and and thank you ma'am
and so.
Is there a.
What happens Mr chairman and and
everyone up if if there's if a
plan of care is denied are
declined and
There's a report the reported
because it's a dangerous
situation who gets that report.
So.
Let Emily respect.
Mr chair madam ranking member
Armstrong if there's a.
First I want to say every single
family and every single
situation is different and
individualized if we do have a
situation not report is called
into this guy by the hospital
and there is a plan of care plus
the safety concerns we we are
immediately assessing that
situation the safety of the
child and if the decision is
made through is that safety
assessment that the child needs
to come in to custody law
enforcement is they are also
with us because law enforcement
is the one that has to get CYFD
the custody or we take the time
to file a directly with the
court for custody of that child
okay thank you Mr chairman and
Matt and so how many
out of those thirty six hundred
I believe is the number of plans
of care how many have to have
there been any babies that were
significantly injured or died.
Mr chair at madam ranking member
I.
I don't have that off the top of
my head that answered that
number off the top of my head at
this time but I will get it for
you I can it you know I'm just
if there's any additional please
come.
Mr chair madam regained member
around seven children this brown
seven babies.
Since we began collecting this
data in twenty twenty.
Mr Chairman.
This committee.
There needs to be guardrails.
And.
That.
Thanks.
Thank you average that we're
we're going to continue.
Really quickly at that that's
why this bill is being thank you
for that thank you we're gonna
go to Representative Chatfield
mix.
Thank you Mr chair.
Mr chairman to whoever can
answer it how many of the kids
that are under the care CYFD are
belong to families that do not
have drug or alcohol problems.
Mr chair representative
Chatfield that.
I can't give you an exact number
but what I can say is the
majority of children that are
involved in in CYFD custody
there is substance abuse
domestic violence and mental
health issues are top three
issues which it Mr chair.
I will tell you that almost
always those things going
combination.
I know very few cases where
alcoholic drug abuse are not
involved Mr chair along with the
other issues there may be the
other two issues Mr chair almost
always the alcohol and drug
abuse is part of it so in my
mind CYFD.
Is the agency.
That we have chosen.
To deal with these children.
These parents have alcohol and
drug abuse problems.
I know the other agencies need
to support weigh in do all those
things.
just yeah I think it will still
CYFD is giving over their care
of the children that have with
their parents have drug and
alcohol problems to other
agencies I I kinda thought that
was what they did so Mister.
Chairman I guess I'm confused
about and I I don't I don't to.
Understand that so help me to
understand it better Mr chair if
I can maybe talk a little bit at
chair small Representative
Chatfield I think I think we're
not talking about trying to have
CYFD cedars responsibility for
kids at risk I think what we're
trying to do is tackle addiction
and the impact of addiction on
kids at the end of my further
upstream point than we're
currently doing it by the time
CYFD gets involved things have
already significantly broken
down and what this is really
trying to reflect is the fact
that we can get involved sooner
and we can use good public
health primary prevention tools
sooner to avoid basis getting to
the point that CYFD is getting
involved in this really what
we're trying to do with this
bill.
Mr chair before three years of
ages.
Is deal is to make time that it
matters but I'm such astonished
at CYFD wouldn't be able to
intervene
At the time of burning or or
anytime before three years of
age Mr chair Representative
Chatfield I think what's so
important about this bill and
why the changes based on our the
baseline information we have is
that there's two important roles
there's a public health research
evidence based approach that we
know with ECECD and the O. H.
supporting and wrapping around
those families and the birthing
hospitals no if that families
engage in a plan of care and
they're working with their
partners that's good but if
they're not they go to CYFD so
we want to differentiate this
bill differentiates and that's
part of the confusion for
birthing hospitals for discharge
nurses is when we call CYFD how
do we get help and support for
the families the majority of
services these families are
signing up for home visiting
early intervention childcare
those are things that ECECD can
be effectively working with the
O. H. but when a family is not
complying and not engaged then
that is when the family
assessment is done and the
referral if there's neglect and
abuse is made to CYFD so we're
part we're what we're
differentiating and it's
critical so that we don't have
more babies dying who are part
of the car program.
Thank you Mr.
Thank you very much
Representative Chatfield we're
gonna go to Representative Lujan
Representative Montoya and
Representative had a meal.
Some.
Thank you Mr chairman I
understand this is always a hard
subject to to.
To come to have but I want to
say commend you for for what
you're doing with this bill and
just very specifically which
Stewart secretary because he
just said why we are separating
these two of agencies for the
benefit of having the health
care and focusing on the health
care not only the infant.
The the mother.
And I want to be I want to be
very clear that there's
substance use disorders that we
are having in our state are far
higher than what we're seeing
another.
State.
And we are looking for solutions
and this is a this is a very
compassionate way of taking in
the health care perspective and
saying we are not going to give
we're not going to focus focus
on strategies.
That integrate criminal justice
authorities and that's what
mothers that's what parents hear
when they hear CYFD getting
involved in any matter.
And that is a deterrent for
those mothers seeking any kind
of treatment.
And it studies have been proven
that when they if they think
that that's what's going to
happen or that's for this is
channel two then they isolate
themselves.
So these this is a solution to
to those barriers that are
happening those barriers that we
are have continue to.
address with CYFD.
And they are as mentioned here
that is a place that is the
functionality so to speak not
necessarily my in my purview but
that is what they that is the
stigma it is part CYFD.
If I may what we are doing with
this bill is doing is taking a
reverse approach and saying
let's focus on the health let's
focus on the well being let's be
compassionate about how we are
going to address this issue.
And help those risk factors take
down those barriers for those
those of.
Those mothers that are that are
going through whatever it is
they're going to.
Breaking that stigma and making
sure that they are having access
if they so choose and desire to
have those their needs met and
date is a different and it is a
complicated place to be and none
of us here act actually
absolutely know what that is but
some of us have been involved in
some of the care some of the
that information and some of
those.
Those families and those babies.
That come to be and these are
definitely health health risk
but we want the best possible
outcomes for both.
That mother and that that child
and so I I commend you on this
and I thank you for bringing
this forward thank you Mr chair
thank you Representative Montoya
please.
Thank you Mr chair
representative and.
Panel and room.
Mr chair and representative.
If I can ask what has been the
process prior to the this.
Mr chairman and Representative
Montoya the process is been.
When when a significant issue
occurs with that child.
If it gets Representative
delegated are relegated to CYFD.
Immediately would end up
happening is there are cracks in
the system which everybody is
admitting that there are what
this bill now is trying to do is
to rectify that situation by
bringing in all the players all
the partners making sure that
this bill doesn't allow the
status quo to continue to occur
what this is doing is making
sure that as the state as was
stated earlier that ECECD.
D. O. H. and CYFD.
HSD are all communicating and
capturing the issue before it
becomes bigger and and clearly
you know there are no easy
answers anybody was ever worked
with the children you know it's
hard work caring for the
people's kids.
And
There are lots of issues that
occur but but I believe and
which is why agree to carry this
bill is this is a step in the
right direction it's trying to
close all those gaps in
communication that of the get
existed before it may not be the
perfect solution but it is an
attempt to to try to.
Mitigate what is occurring right
now some Mr chair and
representative maybe.
Maybe to answer my questions the
better I'm gonna be able to more
specific with my questions.
So.
When a child.
Is formed.
And the child has fetal alcohol
syndrome for for drugs in the
child's system.
Who is informed at the time of
that birth.
Now.
Mr chair and Representative
Montoya so with the time the we
are notified the department of
health and CYFD care navigators.
So so thank you Mr chair.
so.
CYFD and the and.
And not the department of health
but yes the department of health
there's two of us navigators we
are notified of that baby and
that exposure so you're talking
about FAS fetal alcohol syndrome
or alcohol exposure my correct
yes I that's just an example as
an example exactly hi so what
this does is it removes CYFD for
being notified directly.
Do we will continue adjusted
again a reminder to go through
the chair on thank you
Representative my tie what it is
going to do is the department of
health the CCD have navigators
along with CYFD navigators.
So it's just solidifying that
and bringing.
Actually a larger group.
With ages.
And the managed care care
coordinators so thank you Mr
chairman and Representative
because as I was listening to
testimony what I heard was that
the department of health would
be notified.
And then there is a
determination as to whether or
not CYFD would be notified is
that incorrect.
Mr chair Representative Montoya
what happens and I think Susan
can speak to this even more is
that every family received a
full health assessment at the
hospital and so this bill is
important in that yes the O. H.
will receive the notification of
the plan of care but in that
health assessment and and what
happens before the baby's
discharge it'll be determined
whether CYFD also needs to be
contacted if the family has a
plan of care is in treatment yes
the baby was born drug exposed
but they're in medication
assisted treatment they're
engaging in services there's no
reason for CYFD to be involved
and that's an important change
in this bill and what we've been
seeing in the confusion that we
think is is contributing to you
know babies and moms not getting
the support they need so thank
you Mr chair so just if there's
thank you Secretary on anything
you want to add Representative
month the yes.
Representative Montoya I think
at the risk of oversimplifying
and people throw things at me
from behind if I do I use it I'm
is this really is I think kind
of a classic sort of pyramid
sort of a thing where you've got
at the apex of the pyramid
families that need to be
involved in it with CYFD because
of the of the risk to kids you
have lots of other families and
kids that are further down in
the pyramid that we can keep
from moving up the pyramid if we
really approach this between the
O. H. and ECECD with up with the
public health in a pandemic
prevention approach and what
we're trying to do is have the
system the probably deals with
too many people at as though
they're at the top of the
pyramid and not enough people as
though they're further down in
the chairman and try to re
calibrate the work so that CYFD
is able to do what it needs to
do with the families that it
needs to deal with but they were
able to collectively provide
better services to those who are
not at that apex of the pyramid
and again apologies if I if I
over simplified the.
Thank you Mr chairman and and
and Representative in.
Experts
I actually that's that's what I
heard and that's what I disagree
with Mr chair and representative
because what what I think is
happening here is.
As I understand it currently
every single time that there is
a child that is born with drugs
or alcohol in the system.
That CYFD is notified that
doesn't mean CYFD has to take
action but currently CYFD is
notified.
What I'm hearing out of this
today is that.
Department of Health.
Would then determine if CYFD
would be notified.
That's what I'm hearing I'm
hearing that if there is a
substantial reason.
That they would so I I don't
think it's clear in here and I
can't and and this gonna be a
big problem I think on the floor
for a lot of people both sides
of the chamber if it is not
clarified that CYFD is notified
every single time it doesn't
mean they have to take action
but if they're not in its not
clear by the if this as I've
read through it.
it does appear as if there is a
determination that is made as to
whether or not CYFD is notified
if you can show me and by the
way now that we have.
An amendment an amendment and
some of this amendment strikes
part of this ammendment it's not
reading this here today is to be
very very difficult but if you
could show me that CYFD is still
notified every single time that
a child is born.
And.
Now that doesn't necessarily
mean they have to put
potentially have to be involved
in every so a mother so the
child born with.
the fetal alcohol said that's
more than just the mother went
out on a.
Visit Bender the night before
the child was born.
And and by the way madam chair
and representative I have I have
a very close friend that has
adopted four children.
Two of them with the very very
serious complications one from
feel alcohol syndrome the other
one from eight that was addicted
to opioids.
And and these children have very
very serious problems.
And.
If there if if CYFD.
is somehow going to be out of
the loop.
In some cases by some
determination I think the
problems are going to get worse
and not better so madam chair
and and someone at the table
please show me how CYFD is is
still involved in every at least
notified of every instance Madam
chair representative on to I
think we're maybe talking past
each other just a little bit
nothing about this bill changes
that notification structure of
who gets notified other what
kinds of services so we're
really talking about is how does
the program work and get
operated when you're talking
about what is the services the
plans of care that were
delivering those kinds of things
post notification so CYFD
continues to be notified in
those exposure cases there
continues to be assessment
that's done they're able to
assess what the the risk that's
involved and take action when
they need to take action what's
what the bill does is improve
what happens next and and the
involvement of of is ECECD and
can deal weights in the delivery
of the care program from that
point going forward but there's
nothing about this the changes
that initial structure in
assessment and the action can be
taken.
Thank you Mr chairman and and
Representative I I I'm looking
forward to seeing this bill.
And with amendments in context
so I can read it.
but I'll be I bet that's what I.
I have to have before I vote for
this and and a positive.
Manner I I can't go for this at
this point because as I've read
through it it appears to me as
if CYFD no longer receives
notification it seems to read
that way so I I'm not I don't
want to continue here because
this is really a pro about
appropriations but
go but we are being asked to to
to to modify this so as we go
forward
I want to make sure work with
the sponsor to make sure.
That that is clarified and I
think many of us feel that it's
not clear if we can make that
clear before it gets to the
floor when I guess the floor
with an amendment.
that would make us all feel so
much better thank you Mr
chairman thank you very much
Representative Montoya we're
gonna go next to Representative
how to me and then
Representative Garcia so how do
we have.
Thank you Mr chair.
And sat for you today because we
had a substantial conversation
and health and Human Services
and in that conversation we
talked about.
in person screening of this
child and plan of care and we
haven't heard about that in this
in this Committee we talked
about having a warm handoff and
we didn't hear about that in
this committee and and honestly
when I at Mr chair and secretary
Alan.
That that's the part that I'm
now I'm struggling with because
there was a question that was
asked and there seem to be some
confusion and this was explained
to us in great detail in and
health and Human Services about
how this was gonna happen and
I'm so frustrated because it's
not the same presentation and I
really feel that that if we had
stuck with that and talked about
the warm hand off I have been an
early intervention provider and
now we know we know each other
we've talked on the phone and
early intervention provider for
twenty five years.
We lost the care of a baby in
Sapporo and we all know that.
I'm frustrated that this is not
the same conversation because we
were making strides we were
talking about the warm hand up
how we were going to work with
mama's however gonna work with
dad's and I don't hear that
today and I'm I'm really banking
you to tell this committee what
we talked about a secretary be
hill I would love for you to
share what we had talked about
and those changes so that.
Where's the warm hand off we
talked about Mr chair and and
secretary Alan.
Thank you Representative and I
think it's a point well no
please come up secretary Vigil
and I think what we're asking
for and what a number of
committee members asked for is
to detail the process it's being
proposed in in detail and of
course there's been questions
raised about how does that
differ now we have time in this
committee and and I think it's a
very well placed questions from
the committee to please give us
that detail.
Mr chair members of the
committee.
No one.
Wants to lose a bait.
Who is born drug addicted to a
mama in New Mexico.
The start with that premise that
start with that commitment of
everyone in this room.
Equally shared that we don't
want to lose one baby to drug
addiction in New.
The bill before you and
Representative how to me yes we
had perhaps a different
conversation the other day in
Human Services Department but
the bill is essentially the same
bill.
This bill is about a
coordinated.
Approach.
First that's that's centered
around public health.
Public health of our families of
our babies of our Mamas in New
Mexico.
And it allows for the department
of health first to determine
what is going on with that mom
after childbirth is that baby
born drug addicted.
Then what happens is that family
before they leave the hospital
has to be assessed has to be
assessed from a healthcare
perspective that said that does
not prevent anyone to call CYFD
and make of referral nothing in
this bill changes the obligation
to make a referral to see why
FTE but when you approach it
from a public health approach
first and foremost what you're
doing is just secretary Allen
described is your identifying
how to serve that family from a
healthcare perspective first and
foremost yes there is a warm
handoff when that family is
exits the exits the hospital yes
there must be follow through.
There cannot be families falling
through the cracks and this
approach enables not only CYFD
which is strapped with its most
egregious cases in New Mexico
but enables ECECD with the
department of health with these
additional navigators to follow
through with that family and
make sure that there's the
services in place and that they
are indeed engaged and if they
are not there is no one is going
to be at the front door that
house sooner than CYFD.
To take custody to to intervene
so I know we didn't start with
that conversation but nothing
substantively has changed from
our conversation the other day
and I just want to assure
everyone.
In the room today.
That was for state departments
for secretaries here saying it's
not just see why FTEs
responsibilities to keep your
baby safe it's everyone's
responsibility and that's a
shared responsibility they can
only enhance our system of care
for children and so with that I
would invite any questions about
the process.
Thank you Mr chair and and madam
secretary I I think it needed to
be heard because those are the
fundamental questions of this
committee how are we going to
protect children and those
processes are so important and
it's so important because there
are so many departments involved
and that was my concern in HFC
H. H. at age state so many ages
how are we going to communicate
so could you explain to the
committee how are how are all
these agencies going to
communicate thank you Mr chair.
It is it let me refer you to the
amendment in your your list of
amendments at page seven between
lines six and seven of the bill
before you we are we added this
after the conversation earlier
in the week that paragraph six
cents in law if enacted
facilitation of meetings of
providers who comprise the multi
disciplinary team I means that
ensure on going that ensure
ongoing and consistent
collaboration and coordination
we can't do this alone it must
involved all of these agencies
as well as the providers such as
yourself Mr chair and and
Representative Hotmail it must
involve the providers as well to
ensure that that families
receiving the services they need
thank you Sir.
Thank you Mr thank you very much
Representative Hotmail
Representative Garcia.
The five year drive.
But if Mr chair representative
Garcia I think the I think.
To the extent that I'm familiar
with one fifty I think what the
one fifty is talking about is
what happens of the plan of care
is is not complied with here
we're talking about managing the
plan of care itself and how we
actually deliver the services
and so we're really talking to
different branches topic.
Thank you representative Garcia
and we have plenty yes please
answer in whatever order you
want to answer thank you Mr
chair Representative Garcia so
our bill does what Senate bill
one fifty does except that we
move the focus at department of
health the discussion the
secretary Allen has had about a
public health approach with
ECECD coming in so everything
that's in one fifty is also here
in this bill and it complements
with the other parts of the car
recommendations that this for
HSD collaboration feels is
vitally important to improving
Kara so we we have the shall do
an assessment shall be notified
that is what is in Senate bill
one fifty and we do this other
piece we've been talking about
secretary B. Hall.
I thank Mr chair and
representative Garcia one of the
key differences between the two
bills is that this bill requires
the state through this
collaboration to conduct a
family assessment on families
who have failed to engage in the
services that they are referred
to or otherwise deemed non
compliant so they leave the
hospital if they're not engaging
in those services this requires
an assessment an action be taken
as a result of that failure on
their part to comply with the
services.
Your.
During the bill.
They are from Garcia we're gonna
go to Representative Pettigrew
next and Representative printed.
Thank you chairman then.
Thank you Representative trio
for bringing this.
Legislation.
Chairman I want to.
First.
That because some of the
comments that were made
initially.
The changes are substantial and
it is my opinion the we can
continue to have discussions.
But this bill needs to come back
to us before we vote on it.
That's my opinion among voice
one vote I think is what.
It is lately
Chairman and Representative
sectors
I've read one fifty.
Senate bill one fifty has gone
through two committees in the
sub floor with no no votes.
We can't say the same thing
about the bill that's in front
of us today and it's changed
again.
That.
Senate bill one fifty does
actually require notification of
noncompliance.
I don't want to have this
conversation in public but.
Chairman and Representative.
Last summer I had the distinct
honor of sitting down the
secretary of the hill with a
group of other people and and
Hobbs New Mexico.
We're at the time the secretary
was very clear that she didn't
want to see any substantial
changes to CYFD and to a loss
of.
And.
And so we have a plethora of two
lefty bills now and
Obviously there's there's some
of these bills are clearly being
supported by buyer secretary
that's in charge of CYFD.
they have a responsibility
Representative Chatfield talked
about the fact that so many of
these.
Children have multiple issues
either from their start from
just the way they're one but
also from the family side.
Chairman for for over the last
four years almost five years
now.
CYFD is budget is growing by
seventeen point six percent.
The CDC is growing by ninety
six.
Twenty nine point seven four
department of health.
HSD fifty four fifty two point
four percent PED one one hundred
almost a hundred to.
The four five agencies that take
up almost thirty four percent of
our budget.
And every year we're in the same
conversations about kids.
Losing kids in the system.
doesn't matter Pickett
department we're having the same
conversations and chairman I I
struggling with the fact that I
of the departments that we have
that some of our biggest
struggle.
Are the solution.
To this point.
What's the comments the if this
makes it to the house floor all
save for the house floor the
right now.
We have a of it's very similar
bills it doesn't dues
specifically everything that has
walked through every that M.
committee it that was in
addition to on the Senate side
with no no votes and left the
Senate floor with known of.
And this committee is spent more
than an hour on this and we'll
probably spend another hour on
this
Because of the issues within
this bill.
We need to take a step back and
look at thank you chairman thank
you very much
we're going to go now to
Representative Herndon please.
Thank you Mr chair and
presenters so I just want some
clarifying questions based on
these conversations that we've
been having and basically what
I'm hearing is that if a baby is
born with any type of alcohol or
other type of drug Mr chair
presenters problem that there
are two things that happen one
there is a plan of care and this
baby goes to D. O. H. and the
second is a report of abuse they
built the CYFD two separate
items that occur is that correct
Mr chair members of the panel.
This Mr chair and representative
for den.
There is nothing in this bill
that changes the referral to see
why it fifty if indeed there is
a need for referral under.
Hello of abuse or neglect.
That referral should be made to
CYFD.
Now let me be clear there is not
a requirement under under
existing law nor should there be
a requirement under existing law
that every single case re be
referred to CYFD.
So I just want to make that
clear for everyone in the room
nor does the existing law
require that to date there's
nothing to prevent and everyone
has a separate legal obligation
to refer to see what do under
any circumstance for abuse and
neglect that does not change in
this country and this is a piece
of legislation so Mr chair
members of the panel for further
clarification if this if a baby
is going with one of the.
Problems that I described as
the.
Edit report of abuse goes to C.
Y. F. the you don't have to but
if it is and.
Actually it should because the
baby has been abused the
question becomes then the
department of health actually
has a maternal child health
epidemiology section that within
takeover of the care of the
child but today we in the health
and Human Services Committee Mr
chair members of the panel we
heard house bill one oh seven
and house bill one oh seven
talked about the the custody of
the child so my question Mr
chair members of the panel is
with respect to the custody of
the child is the custody of the
child come into play right away
if the child is born with one of
these fetal
Abnormally abnormal these with
this going to be alcohol or
drugs and then at that point in
time you we talked about three
things that happens to the child
Mr chair members of the panel
and it talks about the the issue
enough petition signing an
alternative family member are
either returning the child to
the payment right then and
there.
So I think the bigger question
Mr chair members of the
committee if you could answer
now you don't have to make a
referral to the CYFD but what
happens with with the family I
mean is there is there is the
mother of the mother accused of
child abuse within that the
referral is made to CYFD is the
is the mother of the family band
the child is removed immediately
thank those things that the
specific answers Mr chair
members of the panel that the
that is been asked look at all
these bills that are now coming
before us with respect to see
what the so please Mr chair
members of the panel clarify.
Mr chair and representative
heard and heard the nothing in
this bill would change the
process that CYFD would follow
with respect to any referral of
any child who is suspected of
being abused or neglected and
that requires.
That report to be received for
an assessment immediately in
CYFD separately to be made and
for a safety and risk assessment
to be made of that family so
there's nothing in this bill
that would negate any of that
process from occurring when that
referral is made to CYFD with
respect to that family and that
child and then an investigation
is conducted and assess a safety
risk assessment a determination
of whether that child.
Place outside the home so on and
so forth so I hope that's clear
that nothing in this bill would
change that requirement of CYFD
upon receipt of a referral to
carry out that assessment and
ensure that that the child is
indeed safe so thank you Mr
chair members of the panel I
think it was just a step by step
process that occurs Mr chair
members of the panel that this
committee was looking to hear
and so you say that that would
be changed but I think people
wanted to hear what was the
process and so that was what I
think was being asked
specifically Mr chair members of
the panel and thank you for your
response.
Mr chair and representative
Herndon absolutely let me have a
our director protective services
answer that question she was the
expert this morning and one of
seven and she can go through the
step by step process that is
followed at CYFD with respect to
these these referrals.
Mr chair Representative heard it
but let me first say I think
we're all we all assume that
every single baby under this
care program is a born addicted
to methamphetamines however this
law encompasses everything a
child that is born with any type
of substance that could be
tobacco it could be prescribed
medication by a physician and so
those are the families the the
very low risk babies have a plan
to care every baby has a plan to
care but that little those low
risk babies that really we need
additional services we're
addressing poverty issues we're
addressing parenting issues
through home visiting programs
with ECECD being able to get
transportation to the medical
providers to their primary care
physicians with the help of
eight a D. O. H. in HSD those
are the babies that we want this
program to catch before they
ever ever come to CYFD now when
we have babies that are born
addicted to those those drugs
like methamphetamines and set
and all are are the heart
breaking cases and those cases
are coming to see why do they're
coming to two places they are we
are being notified at CYFD in D.
O. H. what this bill does is
notify DO wage of the.
That a child was born drug
affected and was born with a
plan of care so that we can
start collecting data and
tracking those babies through
out the zero to three years zero
to five years into middle school
and high school because before
this law came into effect we
weren't tracking any of these
babies we didn't know how many
babies were dying we didn't know
how many were impacted
throughout their throughout
their entire life and those
outcomes throughout their entire
life including their educational
well being.
With CYFD when when the report
from the hospital from the drive
from the nurse they notify it D.
O. HSD YPG of the plan of care
but they're also calling CYFD
our statewide central intake to
say we have concerns that this
baby is not safe that there is
serious drug abuse that there is
serious
Other concerns that this baby
does not is not going to be safe
leaving this hospital so that
report gets called into CYFD to
our statewide central intake we
immediately cross report that to
law enforcement and in most
cases we are going to the
hospital to get there to make
that safety assessment and
decision whether that child
needs to be placed in custody
and law enforcement is giving us
that custody.
Currently we we get what's
called a forty eight hour
administrative hold from law
enforcement and we have two days
to make a decision whether we
are going to file for continued
custody of that child the bill
we heard this morning with
Senate bill one of seven extends
that to three days or five days
if we've ever had experience but
if it's a newborn we probably
will it will probably not have
had that contact with the family
before however what we under
Senate bill to store sorry put
too many numbers in my head one
of seven we would have three
days to work with the family
work with our partners.
To to make that decision whether
the child comes into custody if
we're going to file for
continued custody or not the
employee the other thing with
the with the plans of care that
are very important is whether
that child comes into custody or
not.
The plan of care is following
that child so if the baby comes
into CYFD custody and we license
a relative or place with a non
relative care giver that plan of
care helps us guide what
services are needed what
supports are needed for the
foster parents and for the baby
both I hope that help to answer
your question thank you Mr chair
thank you present Mr Chairman
please Representative yes thank.
I wasn't with the representative
Herndon's question because that
I think maybe a Senate to
quickly earlier when I started
to talk about what the bill does
and and what it does is it
provides up in four rights into
the children's coal code that to
say that families and kids are
entitled to advocacy that the
state agencies they're all here
are going to be involved and
engaged in making sure that
those decisions occur to improve
the best outcomes for those
kids.
They're gonna shared metrics and
accountability in all those
things the gonna collaborate the
gonna have screening guidelines
referral pathways insure thank
you just to support and services
and they're going to have a time
limit to submit reports to
ensure that the recommendations
for those off comes actually
achieved
the dilemma if this bill is not
an act is that we're gonna have
the status quo as I stated
earlier and that means nothing
gets done because we don't know
the results of the other bills
thank you very much
Representative Trujillo that
we're going to go we're gonna
keep on going through we have
Representative Garrett then
Representative Brown than
Representative Baca will be
coming back to Representative
months with for a second time
that will just keep on going
through Representative Garrett
next please thank you Mr chair
thank you for bringing this bill
which I fully support I want to
make one comment people have
quoted Senate bill one fifty
Senate bill one fifty is when
there is a failure to comply
with the plan of care than CYFD
has to follow up and do a total
assessment of the family and
what I hear from this bill is
that these five departments
because PED is involved also are
coming together to make sure
that there is a plan of care
when that fails one fifty kicks
in as well as other things
I want to ask you Mr chairman
secretary programs he wanted the
early childhood care and
educate ECECD start.
Mr chair Representative Garrett
July one twenty twenty okay so
Mister Mr chair and especially
Mr Mrs Mr Secretary sorry.
Madam secretary so part of this
bill is incorporating.
The fact that the early
childhood care and education
department now exists have come
online there was a big budget to
show up because that was part of
coming online now you're
intimately involved in this and
really added to this successful
plant is that correct Mr chair
Representative Garrett
absolutely in in our FY twenty
three budget the legislature
appropriated funds to us to have
a concurrent navigator to
increase our data our data
analysis working with the
department of health around that
and we worked with Senator
Kernan she at she looked at our
bill and one of amendment at H.
H. S. C. was one of hers to take
out some of the purpose of
language to put the shall in
their that shall have an
assessment so yes thank you and
I want to just make that note to
that we have talked to Senator
Kernan M. and she has led our
amendments so and Mr and
everybody Senator Kernan is the
sponsor of Senate bill one fifty
for those who don't know it and
then the other thing is
and I'm glad to see PED included
as well Mr chair because all of
us who have been early childhood
educators meet those kids who
either never had a plan of care
or didn't follow through the
child that literally claims of
walls because they were bored
with fetal alcohol system or
drugs so I want to thank for the
comprehensive collaborative
effort because I think this is
what we really need and I think
the bill doesn't my final
question Mr chair is a good
number of appropriations hence
the appropriations have been
removed and how will you account
for that.
Mr chair okay.
Secretary and secretary please
go ahead thanks Mr chair
Representative Garrett we've
identified funding streams
across the different agencies
and through memoranda
understanding or able to flow
those funds where they need to
through the department to be
able to execute the program
thank you very much that's all
my questions Mr chair thank you
very much for percent of your
we're going to go next to
Representative Brown than
Representative Baca.
Thank you Mr chairman I I
honestly don't know where to
begin on this.
Let me ask a question Mr chair
what percentage of babies born
in New Mexico do not have drugs
are on.
State.
Thank you if if we know we know
if we don't then we can be done
in the room Mr chair that we
would need to to see if we can
find that information.
Mr Chairman hello I am a pose
that question.
In part because I think we're
part of the problem of what we
even have this problem with drug
addicted babies we know and have
known for many years that New
Mexico has a huge problem with
drugs.
And so we did the did the
logical thing and legalize
cannabis.
And I'm looking here at a
statistic from this care report.
And it says Mr chairman that
Forty per cent forty seven
percent table just reduce a
brief brief statement here
nearly half of infants with
prenatal substance exposures
involved alcohol alcohol or
illicit drugs including opioids
methamphetamines and cocaine.
The classification includes up
to poly substance exposures
involving nicotine marijuana
prescription medications and so
forth.
Approximately a third of infants
had marijuana only as our
substance exposure and the
others had multiples of drugs.
So.
I think Mr chairman that.
The New Mexico legislature
should feel responsible for some
of this I really do.
And now we're trying to solve a
problem that we have of a hand
in creating or making worse
exacerbating.
Mr chairman and Panerai.
I see some good in this bill I
really do I think collaboration
and coordination are good
things.
my question Mr chair at this
point is do we need a statute to
have these agencies actually
collaborate and coordinate could
they just do it voluntarily Mr
Chairman.
Mr chairman and Representative
Brown.
The decision by all these
organizations to work together
of compelled them to.
And compelled them to move
forward was because they they
need to have strict legal.
Guidance and the statute will do
that.
Otherwise they'll do their own
thing.
Thank you Representative
Trujillo Mr chairman I kind of
understand that I I have we
agree with that actually but I
believe people can actually get
together now and and so problems
with that law I really do.
So Mr chairman and
all of the distinguished panel
members.
What I see here is sharing of
about the development of
screening guidelines submission
of a report and recommendations
of the reports rules promulgated
to guard hospitals and birthing
centers and so forth.
I want to keep coming back to a
normal industry chairman is.
Today in New Mexico.
A baby is being born drug
addicted or in the system where
have you want to call it.
And I'm worried about that baby
today and probably that baby
will be discharged from hospital
within twenty four hours or
whatever it takes forty eight
hours whatever it may be.
And this doesn't solve the
problem for that baby.
Now Mr chairman maybe in the
future this will be helpful
information.
But then I think we'll tomorrow
baby's going to be born in New
Mexico with drugs or alcohol in
his or her system and this is
going to solve that would
either.
So.
I I'm not sure how I'm gonna
vote on this and committee I I
may actually vote no although I
understand the earnestness of
everybody involved.
but I I may change my mind and
it's
there's a post office I really
do Mr Chairman appreciate.
All of the discussion this
afternoon
Sometimes I think we make more
bureaucracy and not sure at the
end of the day really solve the
problems for those individual.
Thank you Mr chair thank you
very much Representative Brown
next we go to Representative
Baca thank you Mr chairman thank
you for bringing this forward
As this debate and or this of
presentation on I'm actually
more confused of but which isn't
too hard but I'll get to my
house if I can get to my
questions currents and concise
Currently Mr chairman do we have
a ECECD of care navigator.
Mr chair representative Bob the
I know it's out for recruitment
it we may have somebody we had
someone and then they took
another job but yes we have
eight FTE and I'm it's either
imposition of being hired or is
in recruitment Mr chairman and
and Representative of Secretary
madam secretary so that that was
funding there was funding
through the through your
department for that care
navigator to try to this
legislation Representative about
the as the legislature
appropriated that in twenty
three and we have a whole team
of people in our early childhood
comprehensive services team that
works in our home visiting and
our childcare and early
intervention team work with
them.
Thank you Mr chairman thank you
of.
Our presenters here the other
question I and I have a this is
what's kind hearted so we've
that we as we sat here House
appropriators and I have to keep
reminding myself of that.
We snow say that well this
really isn't in the budget but
now we're actually going to be
looking at and will use okay to
fund the the work of this so I I
Mr chairman I I need to know as
far as who's going to manage
those funds who is that words
that person going to be housed
and how are we going to make
sure because based upon what I'm
seeing in the responsibilities
are outlined in here.
It it's going to be not just a
one people one person or two
it's it's a group of people as
these departments came before us
through our interim through our
work in December and now through
here recommendations were made
that they needed increased
funding.
And now go to fifteen oh we have
the funding within our
department so can you.
Please tell me Mr chairman and
of presenters.
Wirth is money coming for how
many people we talking about and
how are we going to coordinate
the cooperation of the animal
use necessary to fund this
project or funds of
requirements.
Yes ma'am Mr chair
representative Baca I think this
coordination and the resources
for our exactly at the heart of
the problem our agency has has
been in a position of trying to
figure out has it got any
obligation ability
responsibility to do
coordination that we clearly
don't have resources for what
comes through this bill and the
memoranda of understanding we've
talked about for resources is
about two million dollars worth
of costs to be able to
consolidate that work in the
department of health and let us
take responsibility for and have
the resources to be able to do
the coordination that we've
talked about the so critical to
make this program work if I.
That Mr chair representative
about that there is a million
and house bill two that is M. M.
the language that they have made
the changes and Senate finance
committee now that million will
go to D. O. H. from CYFD so
there is a million of that
seventeen and that's part of two
of the exact just to clarify
thank you Mr chairman and think
of presenters.
The other question that I have
and it's not a budgetary
question but I think you could
have a budgetary impact Mr
chairman and presenters the you
said that it was earlier that
for tobacco there would also
generate a.
referral or they would also
notified the my question is is
what I got to say yes I get once
I know
There were words statute does
that have to have because if
we're talking about tobacco the
number of referrals which and
then the the the case worker the
case load is going to increase
dramatically so can you point me
here and I'm not asking you for
the statute okay and please
understand that I'm asking you
as far as where is it is is
currently required that tobacco
would generate a referral Mr
Chairman.
Mr chair representative back at
the the statute in the process
of all state that a baby born
substance exposed so that
substance exposure language is
is anything from any type of
substance tobacco Matt
prescription drugs that are are
sent marijuana all the way up to
the one we all hate the most
spent on.
Mr chair representative about
that I think that's the point is
the plan of care because we know
that children who are exposed to
smoke and are it's it's the plan
of care is where you detail the
strategies you let the family
know here's some resources here
some supports here's the effect
of having tobacco smoke around
your child it's really at that's
why I think the plan of care is
is so important to this overall
our program and that the
continuum of families that we're
supporting at Mr chairman it was
such an unfair question I have
the actuals but slightly the
statute in front of me I didn't
expect you to know that but just
understand that the statues of
prenatal drug exposure and fetal
alcohol spectrum disorders so I
do have that I just wanted to
make sure that and tell you that
I the alcohol in my opinion.
would not necessarily generate
the of make mechanism we got to
talking with that Mr chairman I
yield back thank you very much
Representative back to
Less
enrollment.
Okay we we're going to go back
to Representative Montoya.
Thank you Mr chairman and
Representative actually at that
very end of that discussion
there at the end is helpful.
Because that's what is been
unclear to me throughout all of
this discussion is.
When.
Is a child that is born of
substance in their system not
referred I think that's the
question because I think most of
us were thinking about.
About whether or not a child is
no the collected refused.
If the if the child has tobacco
in their system.
That that to me.
Shows that the parents addicted
to something that might not be
healthy for that child in the
home but will not likely lead to
abuse.
I mean other than that a smoky
how my wife has a for the
longest time just had a a
smoker's cough even though she's
never been a smoker because her
dad smoked quite a bit in her
young life so I can see how that
would be a health concern but
not an abuse or neglect concern.
But when we're talking about
anything even if it's an
addiction to prescription drug.
Even though that was prescribed
by a doctor.
If the person is having an
addiction issues with.
Drugs that are.
Potentially mood altering.
For whatever else.
At and then we're talking about
illicit drugs.
Including alcohol on alcohol.
If if it's substantial if the
child has fetal alcohol
syndrome.
That means it's pretty that that
that that that's an issue in the
household and and and we all
know that there's a lot of
alcohol in the household.
That could be a potential that's
a that's a warning sign.
Mr chair and and Representative.
Same thing with now we have
legalized.
Marijuana.
And and if that substantially in
the child's system.
Once again that doesn't
guarantee any sort of abuse
would take place we're talking
about abuse or potentially
neglect.
So.
I'm still having a hard time
getting my mind around this and
I will get to a question on this
for you to answer
Representative.
But the concern that I have is I
don't think in the current law.
For these changes I don't think
it's very prescriptive.
And maybe we can get
prescriptive but I but I'm
telling you know I I for all the
problems we've had with as many
children we've we've we've had.
As I think Representative
Armstrong mentioned earlier yes
too many already.
I need some sort of comfort as
to knowing when under which
circumstances.
Neglect and abuse would be
reported.
And if we if there's a way to
ride in the legislation
potentially that in these
instances.
This will be proposed reported
is now collecting abuse I think
or hope the prob are all
struggling with is we have no
idea.
And because.
And it doesn't sound like this
would change anything I've heard
I've heard secretary the hill
state on a couple of occasions
nothing would change when CYFD
would be reported to.
But I'm wondering if maybe we
need to make it very specific as
to when CYFD would be reported
to.
Otherwise I think maybe we're
all we're all kind of reflecting
our job so the Representative I
know you want to speak I just
wanted to see Mr chair and
representative Montoya.
The plan of care.
The the design that you're
seeking is is part of this the
the reporting of any substance
abuse in that child is is part
of that plan of care it won't be
ignored it won't be neglected
that's why that's why this is
being created and I think part
of the issue maybe the
terminology it's you know you
have to read it several times to
really get it and I decided and
the the issue here is I think
we're.
The we're.
We're creating.
Confusion.
Because some of the language is
very.
Hard to to deal with you know
you're we're we're using the
fact that little tiny infants
are being abused and that
becomes really emotional and
hard to deal with with the fact
that there is an actual plan to
deal with it and I think that.
When we do that we convoluted
the whole thing what we're
trying to do here Mister
chairman and Representative
Montoya is exactly what you're
asking for you want a
prescription this is as close as
to to a prescription that we can
give you without actually being
right there in front of that
person.
Twenty four seven to get them to
do what we want them to do thank
you for their child thank you Mr
chair I I just I think what I've
what I have to say is I I think
I think I can support this.
But I don't think I can support
it at this time I'm gonna have
to get with you offline
secretary hill and I have to get
with you offline because I need
to have what you're telling me
is there is that they they they
you can assure me.
That that that's what's in here.
I have to see that.
And then and because that's what
we all want all of us want to
know that those children that
are potentially and once again
it doesn't have to be abuse yet
but that neglect that's
potentially that that that
starts at all.
And we have a problem and and
all of us have the
responsibility back home we are
all it's not just the
department's we as legislators
are hearing what are you doing
about this and we want to make
sure we do something affirmative
in as much as possible that we.
Make sure we know what's
happening as it is right now I
could go home and explain what
we just did.
We passed a bill I think this
will help I don't think I can
get away with that in my
district today thank you the
speaker thank you Representative
Montoya we're gonna go to by
your Dicks in the I have a
couple quick questions and then
we'll.
Thank you Mr chair
Thank you Representative for
bringing this and thank you for
all of the secretaries and
experts for being here most of
my questions have actually been
answered but I did want to
confirm Mr chair and
representative that nothing in
this bill because CYFD is still
being notified we're not
jeopardizing we're not going to
be in violation with federal
capped out right.
No thank you thank you Mr chair
thank you Representative
Have we instituted universal
prenatal screenings it was
something noted in the
department of health twenty
twenty one care report.
Mr chair government
representatives no not under the
slab.
Thank you Mr chair and thank you
secretary
I think you know obviously you.
The concept and the issues
surrounding cara you know
require further conversation
Looking at the fiscal impact it
does appear that the there is
money in house bill two for this
purpose and whether it's at CYFD
or DO age the money is there for
for this purpose and can be
transferred by ammo you so I
just wanted to confirm that
Thank you Mr chair that's it
thank you very much Mr Dixon
presenters and and we'll go for
any closing comments to you.
Not quite the
And I think that.
What a couple of questions one
now for all sub exposed and
Representative group.
Yeah what thank you for all
substance exposed children there
is going to be the under this
bill there would be a plan of
care that department of health
would be responsible for and and
so there are examples of
different substances some
illicit narcotics and other
sorts of things some that still
health health plan consequences
that would be sort of a new
addition is that accurate
Secretary on Mr chair yes that
would be a plan of care for all
of for all substance exposed
kids okay thank you for that and
I know
to me that that I think that
that seems like a very positive
thing we know that there are
some absolutely
the urgency can be different but
health outcomes and I approve I
think I appreciate that now
after these conversations health
outcomes connected to any of
these substances can be
substantial we're taking a more
Health Care based approach to
all of those outcomes so I
appreciate that
secondly for
The the ways that this is
tightened up.
That there can can you just re
summarize those and perhaps
secretary Vigil on your and
changing the maintenance shall.
That mirrors what folks have
talked about was Senate bill one
fifteen Senator Kernan.
I think the senses there's
there's never gonna be enough
stop gaps necessarily but there
are additional stop gaps and
additional safeguards that this
does propose.
Madam Mr chair and members of
the committee.
House bill forty.
Four thirty four would make the
department of health the lead
agency for care.
Working in close partnership
with ECECD and CYFD and HSD to
ensure that the health and well
being of children is addressed
for care of families it durable
differentiates the reports of
suspected abuse and neglect that
would be submitted to CYFD while
the plans of care would be
submitted to D. O. H..
Number three it requires the
state to conduct affect this is
key it requires a state to
conduct a family assessment when
a family with a plan of care
does not engage in services that
are critical to the health and
safety of the incident.
And add C. ECS ECECD to the
definition of a character.
In navigator it requires managed
care organizations to report
data on plans of care service
and service outcomes to DO age
and it requires CYFD D. O. H.
ECECD and HSD to develop and
implement training to support
the discharge planners the
nurses the social workers on
when to develop a plan of care
and went to make an abuse and
neglect referral to see what
FTE.
Thank you very much Secretary
that that's it that's very
helpful and I think it it speaks
to to a tightening and
increasing and a
Yes so I I appreciate that very
much and I appreciate all the
work that's gone into it while
at the same time I think we can
all understand and very much
here that.
Under the the fact that more
babies are being we know babies
are being born under these
circumstances without these
additional pieces in place is
absolutely terrifying to
everyone as I know it is all to
you
So so thank you for that I also
so we're we are going to go to a
vote will go to the the
committee I do want to know and
expect at appreciate very much
you know we're getting towards
the end of the session I
appreciate the concerns I think
they're very legitimate when we
look at any such as substantive
amendments like we considered
here today we will we will do
that ideally it's done before it
gets here to appropriations if
we have to do that here than
those of the there in front of
folks for a lot longer I do see
that Representative sorry we'll
go to representative Allison and
then we'll go to a place to
Dixon Representative Allison
please thank you Mr chair.
We have been someone use the
analogy.
We have been.
Under examination for the past
couple hours.
And through the testimony as the
questions that were asked we
were given a prescription.
Is it safe to say that now we
are on our way to the drug store
to fill that prescription.
I asked the pandemic.
Mr chairman and Representative
Allison yes yes because if we
don't fill this prescription
the the person who is suffering
is going to get much more ill or
die.
Mr chair that is exactly my
perception and listening for the
past couple maybe two and a half
hours thank you Mr chair thank
you very much Representative
awesome okay pass I I think we
thank you for the testimony as
we we've got a long time we'll
go to we'll go to vice chair
Dixon for a motion thank you Mr
chair I move it to pass on house
bill four thirty four as
placement of.
Okay there's a motion and a
second
The so yes they can you please
go through the rules.
Representative LSF yes.
Representative.
Yes.
Representative alright.
Here yes.
Representative heard that yes
Representative other male.
Yes.
Representative press.
Thanks yes.
Share small yes.
Yep this effort kicked into in
the.
It we're gonna thirds there
we're gonna representative
Garcia Representative Brown and
Representative.
Thank you Mr chairman
I voted yes because you know
it's all about saving our kids
really is you know I have
reservations of.
What's in the bill one fifty to
do well what we're gonna do what
create more committees and more
committees to oversee the same
problem.
I don't see why the is had a
problem forever and I hope we
can fix it but that's wrong then
you know it's all about our kids
we need to save them because I
know there's a lot of problems
addictions and communal the pair
taking the kid home her in
whatever we need to make sure
that doesn't happen and you know
we get on the floor tools we
give more to the reserves and
the food was missing page thank
you Mr chair Senator
representative from please.
Representative I voted for the
bill finally.
I think CYFD is truly under the
microscope I think there's a lot
of pressure on that agency to
get things right and I'm just
hoping that
That these we have several bills
designed to get this problem I'm
just hoping that the these will
really start working in that
we're not just cranking out
reports that will sit on a shelf
somewhere and people say well I
did my job Mr chair it's about
the babies.
And from the moment it's
discovered that they have these
drugs in their system.
What we do to help those babies
immediately and make sure they
get the help they need and the
families as well thank you Mr
thank you very much purpose of
from Representative Chatfield
please.
Well I don't know how you vote
against earlier intervention you
know I can't vote.
I'm not sure this is an
intervention and I wish I felt
like it was but I would yes
because you get vote against.
I hope that we can focus on this
and to the point where we don't
have this problem thank you
thank you very much
Representative Chatfield thank
you Representative Trujillo
thank you to the experts in the
agency came members meeting
we're we're gonna go to Senate
bill for twenty five we have
Representative Romero here
members if we get through this
then we probably won't have to
meet tomorrow.
I
just put that up.
Pettigrew Mexico to this.
And members we are we do have a
quorum.
if as long as all of us are here
Representative Romero please go
ahead and explain the bill and
then introduce your expert
course and we'll go briefly to
public testimony percent of
thank you Mr chair Senate bill
for twenty five is essentially
a work in progress that had been
started back in I think twenty
nineteen and perhaps prior up my
situation with it was basically
looking at what folks that are
incarcerated situations what
medications they couldn't get
access to and that included
medication for their opioid
addictions so when incarcerated
currently and under state law
you cannot get access to that
medication which basically any
other medication I in in the
course of being incarcerated you
can I'm so this remedies that
this comes with the with the
funding appropriate and it also
and negotiation not only with
the
A corrections department with it
with an amendment that you have
for before you but also as the
New Mexico counties who are also
an agreement here on with me Mr
chair is my expert Dr Nathan
Birnbaum behind the advocacy
effort here in his work and if I
may can if if you could
introduce himself please
briefly.
Senator a good afternoon Mister
chairman and representatives my
name is Nathan Birnbaum and I am
a family physician and assistant
professor in the department of
family and community medicine at
university of New Mexico and I
just want to say that this bill
does something that's non
disputable the state of New
Mexicos corrections department
does not provide standard of
care treatment for substance use
disorder.
And at this time our state is
currently being sued by the ACLU
and disability rights New Mexico
because arguably this whole
mission of care violates the
Americans with disabilities act
we know that medication for
addiction treatment which I'll
keep referring to here as Matt
is the evidence based standard
of care and we need to remedy
the situation thank you very
much Mr Berman okay we're gonna
go to the audience anybody here
who wishes to speak on Senate
bill for twenty five please sign
up in the middle we.
The
What will pass just to to yes
sort of project the spurs and.
Thank you Mr chair members of
the committee grace Phillips
from New Mexico county of the
county role in this bill is
involved is the bill as worked
its way through this process but
we are standing up for that
purpose with both the financial
and technical assistance.
I believe in them thank you we
think it's important for people
to be able to continue the
treatment when they get to
corrections we're grateful to be
included in the regulatory
process and we're hoping that
next year you will see fit to
fund the the fund that this bill
creates that would help Moore
counties do this work thank you
very much.
Mr chair members of the
committee my name is to nollie
Wilson I'm with the ECL you of
New Mexico and the ACLU strong
stand strong supporter of this
legislation we know that no one
should ever be denied essential
lifesaving health care including
medications for addiction
treatment and that is true even
if you're incarcerated substance
abuse disorder is a disability
as a physician said denying
patients medication for opioid
use disorder is cruel life
threatening and it's a practice
that violates the eighth
amendment and the Americans with
disabilities act.
Law requires essential
lifesaving health care be
provided to patients whether
they're incarcerated or not
being incarcerated doesn't mean
that you give up your rights to
these essential life lifesaving
health care including
medications for opioid addiction
so we ask that the committee
support this legislation thank
you so much thank you very much.
Mr chairman to the committee on
Mike pulley on the chief
government relations officer for
the university of New Mexico I
know that dollars late in time
is short so I just want to stand
in strong support of this
measure I want to thank the
sponsors and all the partners
who have worked to bring it to
where it is and thank you for
your time thank you very much
miss.
Okay there's one person on
online who wishes to speak Emily
Kaltenbach Emily for one minute
whenever you're ready please.
Mr chair members of the
committee and Michael with the
drug policy alliance we also
stand in a very strong support
of this bill evidence shows that
successful treatment models in
correctional settings reduce
recidivism illicit drug use of
the spread of HIV and the tech.
It is C. on an access to the the
medications will.
The two new treatment adherence
upon re entry also this note
that this this type of program
also realize benefits to
taxpayers at all governmental
systems a program evaluation of
a report by the New Mexico LFC
in two thousand nineteen
estimated the budget to be
approximately twenty seven
million annually so again Mr
chair members the committee we
hope you support thank you thank
you very much okay that's all
that we have online we're going
to go straight to Representative
Chatfield Representative Garcia
percent Chatfield.
Thank you Mr chairman.
I'm going to ask you the magic
question do you have funding in
the house bill two do we do Mr
chair representative.
Thank you Mr chairman that's it
thank you Representative
Chatfield Garcia for the motion.
Now.
Well motion just second I just
have one quick question.
On the on this medication our
federal federally held inmates
covered in this.
Federally held go ahead no under
under this bill this is dealing
strictly with the New Mexico
corrections department under at
a current department of justice
guidance they're moving towards
in fully implementing medication
for addiction treatment and all
of their facilities and have
been doing so since the
beginning of the current
administration.
What will push Mr chair of it
this year county facilities you
know the one and and and I
believe that it's a county
facility but the whole.
Probably ninety percent federal
inmates with other inmates are
there's the will be covered.
Madam chair representative yes
again the federal inmates would
be under federal jurisdiction
under the programs that drive
long talked about this would
incorporate and perhaps reduce
costs to being able to subject
everyone to that but every you
know different facility will
have its own way of being able
to implement.
Thank you thank you thank you
very much.
Thank you work I was just gonna
add to that very very quickly
okay.
Go to the thank you thank you
for that we're gonna go to
Representative Lujan thank you
thank you Mr thank you for
bringing this for this is really
important pieces you is needed
for substance use disorder.
population just a quick question
would you be looking for since
as your.
We're not looking Mr chair any
fiscal impact FY twenty three
but as we're moving down the
road looks like we're gonna be
getting more impact
what are those sources of
revenue that you are looking to
use down the road Mr chair.
madam chair Mr chair
representative so first there's
a delayed implementation as
you've seen through some of the
previous iterations we've we've
stricken when this gets
implemented fully so that helps
with a lot of the budgeting and
being able to look at some of
the general fund state county
local funds that would be added
to this and again in partnership
with the counties in because of
the lawsuits pending this will
be a cost savings to the state
thank you that's what I want to
get out when we're looking at
the cost savings but also in the
future of of what we are
budgeting the state to
especially looking at the
cannabis of revenues that are
coming into state of that we can
look to some of those resources
thank you Mr thank thank you
Representative Lujan percent
Herndon do you have a question
we can.
I have a question like to know
Mr chair of the panelists was
the losses but it was the
defendant in the lawsuit the
department of corrections.
And Mr chair and representative
the lawsuit is currently on
going and who is L. who is that
the defendant is The New Mexico
corrections department thank you
Mr chair one of the clarifying
question so people who are
currently in incarcerated now if
they have an opioid addiction
when they are incarcerated.
There.
But can you just tell me quickly
in that one sentence to what
happens now Mr chair
representative they currently do
not get to continue their
medication so they'd go through
withdrawal effectively thank you
Mr chair and representative
thank you very much for the
furnace we're gonna go to
representative elect who's for
the motion representative Garcia
for the second thank you Mr
chairman I'm would do for us on
how on Senate bill for twenty
five as.
amended.
All right they've got a second
let's go to.
K.
been moved by
by Representative Cruz sent by
Representative Lujan and
representative Garcia.
can we please call the.
The.
Yes.
Representative.
Yes.
For.
Yes.
For.
The.
Representative Garrett yes.
Representative heard that yes
Representative what I'm.
Yes.
Representative.
Representative Trujillo.
Yes.
I think yes.
Yes.
In the
thank you thank you very much
thank you so much okay Committee
members will see everybody
tomorrow on the floor in a.
maintenance.
Yes.
