HCA as well has been extremely
responsive to our questions and
our calls. So we're on it, we're
tracking it. Um, I can stand for
a couple of questions. I'm also
available offline.
Thank you, Mr. Thank you very
much, Budget Director Riding.
We're gonna ask Director Sali to
come up, members, uh, I've been,
we've been informed and things
to know the uh webcast sound
seems to be down it hopefully
it's restored. We have had
closed captioning. That is a
function of the Legislative
council Service. It is deeply
frustrating that in the capital,
they've been unable to work
through that, that's not a
function of house technology
responsibility for the
Legislative council service, uh,
and we're gonna support them to
resolve any of those issues.
We've asked Director Sali to
come up, uh, as there are, uh,
if there are member questions
again members don't uh
This is a space where uh we have
another full presentation about
behavioral health and we'll be
breaking in the subcommittee,
but if you have questions, if
you have questions from uh
constituents, this will be a
space where we'll go to those
questions.
So with that, I'm going to go
first to represent Pettigrew.
Thank you, Chairman and thank
you, Amanda for the update.
Chairman, I have more of a
request than a question.
As we find different things like
what we just heard about with
ACA not receiving $40 million
getting clarity on what that $40
million.
Went to and how it impacted what
parts of HCA's budget would not
need to be uh, a personal
update. It could just be an
email saying, you know, this
happened, $40 million it
affected these departments and
these line items.
Thank you for the request. I
think we'll let the executive,
uh, I think more knowledge is
always better, you know, triage,
because as I understand it
yesterday, uh, different
departments were being inundated
with calls of deep concern, so
there'll be sort of a
chronological flow to that
information, but obviously this
committee believes deeply and
always understanding where our
dollars go and what they fund,
so thank you for the suggestion.
OK, are there other questions
from our committee.
OK, I don't see any other
questions. Thank you, uh,
Director Briding. Thank you,
Director. Oh, sorry.
Please
Uh, representative Hernandez.
My, my apologies, uh, Mr. Chair.
Thank you, um.
Presenters, um,
I've been past 48 hours.
Um, my office, my, my uh
personal cellphone.
Has been receiving multiple
calls, as everybody knows, uh,
House District 4, sits in San
Juan County, San Juan County,
uh, 60% of San Juan County is
federal land.
So there's a lot of federal
services that's uh there.
And um
The, uh, disregard for regular
people, you know, that the
frustration that I've been
hearing, but, um, uh, more
meaningful, uh, and, and my
question is, uh, is, does this
also impact like service real
simple services like Snap
benefits, um, and, uh, I heard
that the, the meals on wheels
and, and, and, and I guess, uh,
this might be for, for another
agency, but just to see all the
state services that have been
impacted by this is, is
important, important.
So that way, uh, we could
communicate that to our federal
congressional, uh, uh,
officials, um, the, uh,
The other question, um, that I
also want to get to is uh uh
understanding, um,
As, as, as, as a state, what,
what can we do to help, um, uh,
prevent like uh such a big
impact for for our services this
morning, a doctor called me, uh,
who was doing research in
Afghanistan.
And the, uh, the, uh, the people
from, from you and them who were
going over there, had to get
their flights canceled because
of this uh situation. So it is
impacting, um, our, our
community. So I just want to
mention that. Thank you.
Thank you very much
Representative Hernandez and in
answer to the question about
SNAP benefits and Meals on
Wheels, uh, to the witnesses.
Yes, um, and Charles, feel free
to jump in, Mr. Chair
Representative Hernandez, um,
Snap was not affected, uh, SNAP
benefits specifically were
exempt from a clarifying memo
from OMB, um, again, the
department is monitoring it
closely, but that 40 million
that is not in their account was
uh very separate of
The snap benefits, so that's the
first one, the second to Meals
on Wheels, we did hear from one
provider yesterday that they
were having issues accessing
funding, but to my understanding
that has now been resolved.
Great. Thank you very much. OK,
next we're gonna go to
Representative Silva.
Thank you, chair. Uh, thank you,
presenters, um, just a really
quick question. Um,
I, I'm wondering if DFA and LFC
are working on scenarios if a
federal freeze were to continue
or if a judge says actually this
can go through, um, because I
think it's part of this body's
job and the legislator's job to
protect the institutions that
are threatened, um, and protect
institutions that protect our
people, uh, and make sure that
they can live full and healthy
lives as New Mexicans and so I'm
wondering if there are any
contingency scenarios that
you're beginning to think
through. Thank you.
Thank you.
Mr. Chair, uh, Representative
Silva.
DFA yesterday in a very quick
fashion, put together a response
or at least uh an assessment uh
process to figure out who is
impacted, uh, in what ways, uh,
and start that process. So we've
been in, in contact with DFA
about that. I would say that uh
if something like this were to
come back, the length of time
would, would be the thing that
would be, uh, for me, the first
thing I want to know.
Because most of these federal
grants operate on a
reimbursement basis, and you're
not necessarily doing a daily
draw.
So, like, Medicaid had done a
big draw.
Um, the day before the
Went into the freeze.
So what happens like with
Medicaid is they push out.
You know, like $500 million from
our treasury.
And then they're almost
simultaneously.
Drawing down the federal portion
to replenish what went out under
uh general fund.
I don't think over a long period
of time we could sustain
floating.
Fronting the federal funds for
all of these different programs
um for a very long time with the
with the general fund with the
expectation that it get paid
back. So, but if it were, were a
two-week period that we'd have
to work around.
That reimbursement process, uh,
to make sure services don't
stop, uh, but we know that we're
gonna be able to have enough
money in the treasury, that
would be
Longer than that would be
problematic.
Thank you. Thank you, Chair.
Great. Thank you very much,
Representative Silva. OK, I
don't see any other questions,
um, members, again, we're gonna
be monitoring these very
closely, appreciate everybody's
time and appreciate our staff
along with the executive staff
and others working closely um
for members of the public,
particularly those who are, uh,
you know, utilize uh the
connection of state and federal
resources, sharing information
is deeply appreciated and we
want to be very responsive to
that.
OK, members, now we're gonna go
to our next and final full
committee briefing, which is our
behavioral health preview.
We're gonna ask Miss Ruben
Esquibel, or excuse me, Eric,
yeah, uh, and we'll ask Eric to
come up, uh, Director Sali,
please stay there as well.
Um
And uh Eric, whenever you're
ready, uh, Mr. Chen, thank you.
Oh,
go ahead,
you should have a handout that
looks like this.
It has a side by side.
Uh, comparison of uh special
appropriations in both the
executive, uh, and the LFC
recommendation. Uh, we went
through all of them and tried to
categorize uh which ones might
be considered behavioral health
related, just to give you a
sense of
Uh, what are in the two
recommendations around this
really important topic. I will
say that since 2020.
Uh, you've appropriated, um,
about $425 million in special
appropriations uh for behavioral
health.
And I think this, um, these
budget recommendations.
Represent a significant uh
increase from what you'd already
been doing in the past, which
was pretty significant. So the
LFCs come in at a total of 269.5
million in the exact 301, so
pretty close, uh, in terms of
overall size of the pie. So
let's go down through some of
these items.
The first two would be for um
communities to start at a local
level.
Uh, doing a better job of needs
and gaps analysis and planning
or how to deliver uh certain
types of behavioral health
services in concert with the
state.
Um,
There would be things like
requirements for what's called a
sequential intercept mapping,
which is an evidence-based
practice of figuring out how to
get people services in the least
restrictive environment early
on, uh, before they get deeper
into the criminal justice system
as an example. So those would be
grants that would be run through
the courts.
The second, this kind of crosses
over into um combating
homelessness as well, but a $50
million transfer, uh, to the
mortgage Finance Authority,
specifically to fill a gap that
we've identified for
transitional housing. Um,
The intersection between
homelessness, uh, substance use
disorder, serious mental
illness, uh, and even criminal
justice involvement is pretty
significant. So this would be a
very targeted way for those
behavioral health substance
abuse needs and homelessness
assistance, uh, for
The housing trust fund and the
folks at NMFA uh to work with
communities to develop that
transitional housing that could
be something as simple as
converting, uh, old apartments,
uh, to be able to have on site
staff.
Uh, wraparound services, uh, to
help people on a temporary basis
find more permanent housing.
Item 4 is a special
appropriation to administer the
9988 suicide hotline, um,
I think there's a hopefully a
bill that should be dropped, uh,
the federal government gave us a
grant to start that with the
expectation that states would
impose a surcharge to pay for
the ongoing recurring cost of
it. This is a placeholder until
that surcharge can get into
place. I think we, LFC had built
it into the base budget
contingent on legislation.
So both are both recommendations
fund continue funding 988.
The Healthcare Authority and the
executive on page 2, line 5,
recommendation for 50 million to
continue focusing uh efforts at
expanding capacity in rural
areas, uh, focused on behavioral
health in this particular case.
Sorry about that.
Um
The next is an undefined $100
million.
In the executive rec for
behavioral health expansion
initiative statewide. I presume
this could be to help with
startup costs for providers
hopefully for evidence-based
services where there's a, a need
and a gap in services, basically
help providers hire, train, uh,
get set up, uh, then be able to
bill Medicaid or another third
party, uh, for the delivery of
the actual services. That's not
defined in here, but I think in
working with the administration,
and when we get to this, uh,
those would be
Questions that you might want to
ask about, kind of what's that's
a lot of money, uh, can we get
more detail on what the action
plan would be.
Line 7, there's been a lot of
discussion this center among,
among various quarters including
advocates, uh, on the
possibility of expanding.
A new Medicaid waiver for people
with very serious mental
illness, uh, who require
essentially supportive uh
housing and other wraparound
services. Uh, would it be
feasible to create a waiver
similar to what we have for
people with developmental
disabilities. Uh, this would be
a, uh, money to study the
feasibility of, of doing that,
uh, but also how we could
package existing Medicaid
services that are already in our
state plan, uh, as an
alternative for this, um,
Small but very um challenging
population.
I
Be honest with you, uh, do not
foresee in, in this federal
environment that we're in, uh,
the federal government approving
major expansions of new waivers,
but that's why I think it would
be good to make sure that we
study our existing plan that's
already been approved and how we
can maximize it for this
population.
Uh, line 8.
These two line items are
important. So these would come
from the grow. So both of them
are very close. These would be 3
year appropriations, uh, for
Medicaid who did get uh some new
uh waiver provisions already
approved.
Uh, the first one.
would be to start working with
incarcerated individuals up to
90 days before their release to
basically plan their
reintegration into society and
make sure they're set up to
access whatever kinds of
behavioral health services that
they need and maybe even start
uh some of the, the services in
uh those particular facilities.
Uh, as well as the startup
capacity building, um, for that
waiver provision.
Like him, these would be
additional vou vouchers for the
linkages program. This is a
supported housing, uh, program.
Uh, that's been very successful
within the healthcare authority.
And then, uh, line 11 would be
for a pilot, uh, to integrate
medication assisted treatment
into primary care settings. We
know through the work that LMC
did this interim, that
medication assisted treatment,
uh, you know, basically
buprenorphine and other uh forms
of that can be very effective at
treating opioid use disorder, it
can be delivered by your family
physician, or prescribed by your
family physician. Often they're
being prescribed in other
settings, uh, besides primary
care.
and this is an effort to expand,
um,
Uh, the use of primary care as
a, as a major deliverer of that
treatment service.
The same thing in terms of
targeting, um,
treatment for substance abuse
disorder, um, prioritizing
people involved in the criminal
justice system and homeless
populations.
13 would be grants available for
local communities to um
implement uh a suite of
different evidence-based
interventions, including
assisted outpatient treatment.
These are a suite of services
that are available, um, for the
actual service provision to be
delivered through Medicaid.
For people that are not justice
involved but have serious mental
illness and can't take care of
themselves, basically, uh, um, a
commitment process to services
in the community.
Medication-assisted treatment,
assertive community treatment,
which is a new strategy for, uh,
people to get services uh with
competency issues through the
criminal justice system, as well
as outpatient and other
diversion and wraparound
services.
14 would be for um basically uh
facilities and certified
community behavioral health
clinics. This is a major
initiative, uh, for the state to
basically expand what our
community mental health system
has historically done, uh, from
a very narrow set of services to
a very comprehensive, everything
from
Mobile, uh, and inpatient crisis
management units to uh
transitional stabilization, uh,
beds, this would be money
available for those uh
organizations and, and local
governments to be able to have
the physical infrastructure to
be able to expand to meet those
needs, know those new
requirements. Uh, the service
delivery is billable to
Medicaid.
Uh, line 15, this would be for
uh supporting mobile uh regional
mobile crisis and recovery
response, uh, including outreach
teams.
Uh, in consultation with public
safety.
Line 16.
Uh, this would be to expand our
behavioral health and including
24 hour crisis response uh
through our federally qualified
health centers.
Lane 17. This is a good example
of the need for us to be very
purposeful when we do capital
outlay of knowing if we're gonna
build something or refurbish
something, uh, how we're gonna,
where the revenue is gonna come
from to operate it. Uh, you
funded, uh, an inpatient
county-based substance abuse
treatment center last session
that was supposed to build third
party, um,
Insurance companies, including
Medicaid to cover the
operational cost, uh, now that
county has come to the
Department of Health and said,
here, uh, can you operate it in
the Department of Health is
basically saying, well, we want
general fund, we're not gonna
build third parties or maybe we
will, but we need general fund
to operate it. So this is really
an operating cost, uh, coming in
as a special. There's also a big
ask for um
A recurring increase in DOH's
budget to operate that.
The last page
Now we're getting into a
supplemental request for
corrections department, uh.
That you'll want to take a look
at and get solid budget
projections where they're saying
they're going to be short $7
million in there, uh, prison
system.
19 is a related appropriation to
corrections department to
support the reintegration of
individuals back into our
communities.
Line 2021 are very similar in
terms of mobile crisis response
for through the Department of
Public Safety, including
outreach equipment and vehicles,
higher education, uh, to load up
the health professional loan
repayment program, uh,
prioritizing uh individuals
working in a behavioral health
setting, including certified
community behavioral health
clinics, uh, or working in a
criminal justice setting or
serving homeless populations. I
don't believe that the executive
rec has those narrow
parameters on the the uh loan
repayment program, so the LFC
recommendation was really trying
to target our efforts, uh, to
beefing up the workforce in in
those particular areas, so that
I'll be a decision point on the
amounts and whether we're
targeted or universal.
And then the final one, would be
for you and him and the
Department of Health, uh, to
purchase mobile health units to
deliver medication-assisted
treatment and other health
outreach for homeless persons,
uh, in Albuquerque and
statewide.
With that, Mr. Chairman, would
be happy to answer any
questions.
Thank you very much, Director
Sali. Um, we're gonna go
straight to questions first with
ranking member Chatfield.
Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Uh,
Yeah, it's part of my first big
question, and that was when we
put $50 million up for housing,
you know, what about the
services to provide for those
individuals that went in there.
Uh, wraparound services,
treatment for drug addiction.
Those types of things. It looks
like we've got some
appropriations to do that. Uh,
I guess my, the other aspect to
that question is, is there some
type of
Law that would, uh,
Encourage people to participate
in that program. I know it's
pretty hard if you're
Uh
If you're on the street addicted
to drugs to make that change
and, and maybe sometimes you
need to just be put into a
program for a while, uh, is, is
there any, is there any thought
uh in that direction.
Well, there's certainly a
throughout.
These proposed appropriations
money for outreach and and
crisis response, uh, those
individuals would be the one
that would need to develop the
skills to be able to to talk to
folks to say there are
alternatives to your current
situation, and we can help you
get into those, uh, and, and get
on medication assisted treatment
or other treatment modalities,
uh, to help uh break that cycle.
There's no law when it comes to
substance abuse treatment for,
you know, being able to
mandate that. Uh, there's
somewhat controversial, um, the
assisted outpatient treatment,
which is for people with very
serious mental illness that are
not able to take care of
themselves. So basically a civil
commitment process where you can
court order uh treatment.
Sometimes they may have
co-occurring disorders and need
substance abuse treatment as
well as um
Psychiatric treatment.
So, Mr. Chair, you know,
oftentimes drug addiction,
mental illness, they're kind of
lumped together, but they're
not, they're not the same thing.
And we have people living on the
street right now that, uh,
You fear they're going to you.
I've seen several of them almost
ran over down on, on Sirius
Road, and they, you think, man,
if I'm driving along one of
these people falls out in front
of me and then, and what am I
gonna do? You know, I, I, I, so
I was raised that freedom is the
right to do anything you wanna.
do as long as you're not harming
another person.
And I think there comes a point
to where what we see going on.
On our, in our cities, it's
harmful to the other people that
live there.
You know, people just don't
wanna.
Be exposed to that, you don't
want your kid, your children
exposed to that.
So I, I support enormously
support.
Do something about it. Put some
money there, providing housing,
uh, programs, better way of
life.
Uh, we might have to
Do something to a little
stronger to encourage that. Mr.
Chairman, there, there is, so.
To the extent
Uh, that you wanna make sure
that that's occurring, you have
an opportunity through this
process to continue to tighten
language around that. There are
other appropriation
recommendations in the LFC.
For frankly, bringing in
consultants to help us figure
out how to get at that
particular issue, uh, that
you're describing, and then
there's money again for more
outreach rather than waiting for
a problem to occur, somebody
falling into the street and
getting hurt, and then needing
to go to the hospital,
proactively going out and saying
how can we help?
Move you from this space, which
is, is dangerous and not
conducive for public safety into
a different setting that
transitional housing setting,
uh, money, um, and there's money
for local governments to be able
to proactively go out and being
able to do that, including uh
clearing uh homeless
encampments. Mr. Chair, I just
spent a year and a half taking
my wife back and forth to
Houston, for medical.
And uh she lived down there for
a year and a half.
Houston does not have a homeless
problem. Is there any chance
that we could look at
What has been done in Houston.
Or other areas.
To solve that problem. Yes, sir,
and that's the intent behind
those appropriations is to allow
the administration to work with
our communities to replicate
what's going on in Houston as
well as other communities where
they're, you know.
Walgreens calls the sheriff of
somebody's laying in front of
their doorway, passed out, and
the sheriff's office sends out a
couple of social workers.
To help the person find a place
to live and get into treatment,
and they've.
We've already got the computer
system in New Mexico, they've
got it there to be able to tell
where there's a bed available
tonight and then help start
getting the process of of that
person into a more permanent
housing situation.
So, Mr. Chair, uh, Charles,
that's good. That is something
we can, we can all stand up for
us.
You know, take care of, of a
major problem like that. And I
have one last question, uh.
I'll leave you alone. Uh,
I'm looking at uh
Page 18
Uh, corrections department, I
talked to the secretary a while
back, and they had a
They had a shortfall in their
budget that was, I think they
had the money from some other
program or something and they're
trying to get it rolled over.
I'm not sure if this is the
correct line, uh, but, uh, they
were in pretty desperate need of
it, but the money was there, uh,
from and other savings or
something, uh, and you probably
know more about it than I do.
So
When we're looking at their
budget and, and spending, we're
not seeing the shortfall.
Uh, that's why LLC did not
recommend uh funding the
supplemental, we'll get another
point in time now. We need to
make sure. And so we should all
roll up our sleeves and work
with the department to figure
out where they're at and whether
this amount is the right amount
or if they're going to be able
to live within their budget. I
would like to follow up on the,
the Houston model, um.
The governor's office, uh,
is in contact with folks down
there. They actually have, I've
just met with their housing
advisor, uh, they do have a, a
small contract apparently with
the group that helped advise
Houston to how to get their
situation under control, which
is very promising and they might
have more money under this
recommendation to do that.
Uh, they've also got a
researcher who's an expert in
this particular area and and
it's done a lot of work in
Houston, so I think that's
promising that they've already
got resources in New Mexico
starting to work on this very
issue, uh, other folks in
Albuquerque are interested in
learning more about uh what
Houston and other communities
have done. So more
Movement in this direction that
I've seen in, in a while, which
is Mr. Chair, that's great.
Let's do it. Sounds great. Thank
you very much for Chatfield, uh
remember Chatfield. We have
Lohan represent Dow Duncan, and
representative represent Lohan.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Um.
Uh, thank you, uh, Charles and
and all of our our staff and
everyone that's worked on this,
this uh portion of the budget in
Beaver health related
appropriations, excuse my voice,
I'm a little hoarse from talking
so much this week. Um,
I'd like to, um, kind of address
something that we don't have in
the budget, but perhaps could
fall along, uh, some of these
the these appropriations,
specials we're looking at, um,
in that regard, I'm, I'm
directly asking about the sexual
assault services in the
helpline.
Um, I didn't see that as as an
LFC recommendation, Mr. Chair,
and I'm wondering if it fits in
within the scope of some of this
funding that we have within this
budget because you mentioned
Um, infrastructure and
can't think I, I.
I can't see exactly where you're
talking about the help lines and
and things like that. Would that
be appropriate to, to, um,
She thinks that that would go
into the the this funding as
well, Mr. Chair.
I think that would be uh Mr.
Chairman, the 988 money would be
slightly different than I think
what the service that you're
talking about. And you'll have
an opportunity. There's lots
more.
Special appropriations uh in
both recommendations to figure
out how and where that might
fit.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. I'm, I'm
just reading the language and
I'm trying, it's broad enough
that.
It
made me ask the question, Mr.
Chair. Thank you on that
question. Um, also,
Let me get that. I have lots of
things circled and lots of
things underlined, Mr. Chair,
because it's, it's, uh, I'm
really excited about a lot of
this the spending that we're
gonna be doing and um
Yes, on the.
Was it for corrections lines
that we have Mr.
At the discharge planning for uh
we believe that's 19, uh,
correctional facilities and to
assist discharge persons to
connect with recovery support
services and treatment and
community-based behavioral
health support. We have uh $1.3
million on that line item. My
question is, are, is it, and did
I miss it anywhere where there
is a place.
Where those that are being
discharged.
Go to, how do they, how do they
have that line of communication
to providership and resources,
Mr. Chair.
So Mr. Chair, you put money into
the housing trust fund last
session, uh, again for broad
transitional housing, so
hopefully that's starting to
move to get the units, uh, set
up, uh, this money would help
corrections, uh, on their end
with the discharge planning, and
then the connection to the
actual services is through line
8 and 9 on
Line 8 on
Uh, the second page that would
come through Medicaid, that
waiver, 3 year waiver, big
money, as well as additional
capacity building to get those
transitional housing and other
uh transitional needs in place
over a 3-year period, uh, with
that.
$22 million appropriation.
Thank you, Mr. Chair, and, and
one of my concerns arise um from
talking with the the communities
and and those involved uh or
formerly incarcerated or those
um either on probation and those
that do not have a probation,
uh, time on for themselves,
where do they
Those that do not have
probation. How, um, how are we,
how are they exiting, is that
something we need to take up
with corrections to see how that
program is working, Mr. Chair.
Well individuals that are
paroled from our prison system
need to basically have a, a
parole plan, which includes
where they're gonna live.
Um, and if it's not gonna be
with family or or some other
place on their own, and they
need like a
For lack of a better term, a
halfway house, corrections does
have contractors that do some of
that, um, but there's likely
need for additional, um,
Additional, uh, beds uh
throughout the state for for
folks to successfully
reintegrate into society.
And you've got my peppered
throughout here for that. That's
how, that's how I'm reading
this, so I'm trying to put it
together. I, I appreciate the
time we're spending on this, and
I'll spend some more time with
you, Charles, just seeing where
that is peppered exactly and see
how we can really make this um
more conducive to the process
and what uh individuals are
experiencing, um, and my, my
last question goes to some of
the programs that we have in our
corrections. Yesterday, Mr.
Chair, we had a, a visitor, our
chef who is
started the the program with um
with those that are currently
incarcerated that or have more
lenient leniency in their, their
time where they're learning a
trade. Is that covered in what
we're looking at here or is that
Mr. Chairman, uh, that's covered
in their base budget where
they've been increasingly
steering money available for
programming from sort of making
it up as you go to actual
evidence-based programming. I
think they're up to almost 100%
of their program budget.
Now it's being classified as
evidence or research based.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Thank you,
Charles. That's all I have right
now. Thank you, thank you very
much. Uh, next we have
Representative down.
Thank you, Mr. Chair and thank
you, Director. Um, on this, the
part where you talk a lot about
mobile units throughout here.
Are those mobile units, they're
gonna be purchased by the state
and operated by either the
Department of Health or the
Healthcare Authority?
Mr. Chair, um, they would likely
be purchased by UNM, the health
department, or if there's a
local government or a local
nonprofit through that local
government that's gonna operate
it, uh, that would, that would
be, I wouldn't expect.
Any other state agency like the
healthcare authority.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Well, the
reason why I'm asking is because
there are service providers that
during COVID or in other, that
they have vehicles and they are
um
direct healthcare providers and
they have, I don't even know if
the eye has been floated, but
they were asking if there was a
way to have a, just like we do a
telehealth reimbursement, a
mobile clinic type reimbursement
for them going to the rural and
remote areas. Is, have we talked
about that?
I
It would probably be an enhanced
rate on top of what they are
already getting.
Uh, and I have, we'd have to
follow up with the healthcare
authority to see if there's
something like that in place.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Well, the
reason why they're asking for a
billable unit is in, and I'm,
I'm only speaking what's been
shared with me is concerns that
the MCOs wouldn't approve the
service.
And they and and it is something
that rural communities would
benefit from, especially, I
mean, there's some communities
now without a pharmacist and
without a psychiatrist and
without, I mean, so I would, I
would like to know what that
might look like if we would
consider something like that. Um
we will follow up thank you, um,
and thank you, Mr. Chair and
thank you.
I, is there anything in here
that's gonna have a set aside or
prioritize funding to rural
communities, or is there going
to be when this funds are
released a way to prioritize
underserved.
communities
Or will it just be who gets the
highest score on the proposal.
Well, there, there is some money
in the executive that does
prioritize, well, it limits it
to rural areas.
Um
The model behind the local
planning is get your house in
order at a local level and have
your plan approved for what you
need, and then that opens the
door to access.
A bunch of these other, uh, pots
of money, uh, so that it's a
coordinated strategy uh within a
jurisdiction, and we don't have
a bunch of silos.
This part may work well, but we
don't have all the other pieces
together. Thank you, Mr. Chair,
and are you having the health
counsel's coordinate, who's
coordinating that at the local
level under this LFC
recommendation, there would be a
local behavioral health
collaboratives, which are
established, uh, have been well
established for me. Um, thank
you, I have 2 more questions. On
the courts, uh, there's some
bills on increasing penalties
and is in, when I look at the
area on courts and
actions or Department of Public
Safety or basically 18 and on.
Um, is, is, I thought that all
of our prisons, jails, I thought
that they had psychiatrists and
mental health staff. And
apparently that's not the case.
Are we prioritizing any of that
here?
For basically for um restoration
services during incarceration
and
services, um, no, not in these,
that would be a county
responsibility.
OK. What is this additional
money?
Oh, this is discharge planning.
So this is only
post-incarceration. That's,
that's from prison.
The state prisons, uh, the other
uh court-related things are for
community-based.
Uh, assisted outpatient
treatment.
And those types of services, not
in prison. So thank you Mr.
Chair and thank you. So if we
get an amendment to competency.
There's no assurance in the
budget that we're gonna have
funding for
In
Well in for
Restoration services, inpatient
services during incarceration,
if we choose to retain the
people who are repeat offenders
are most dangerous.
Mhm.
Line 13 is intended to cover
that. OK.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. I will, I
will just say that um in the
local planning that's been
happening in District 38
Behavioral Health has come up as
one of the top priorities and,
and where we really need to
begin prevention, immediate
intervention, and then
Services after the fact. Thank
you. Thank you, Representative.
Uh, we're gonna have
Representative Duncan,
Representative Herrera,
Representative Hernandez, and
Representative Herndon.
Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Um, just a quick question for
you, Mr. Chair. On line number
56. Healthcare Authority and
behavioral health expansion
initiative statewide.
Um, our local county lost
funding for its behavioral
health.
Um, alternative sentencing a
couple of years ago.
Is that something that could
fall under this category right
here, Mister Chair, um,
Representative, we would need to
check with the healthcare
authority on the intent behind
that. OK. We don't have the
details, and I think the kind of
the difference you see here.
Is the executive has got a big
lump sum, 100 million and the
LFC has got a lot more detail
for exactly how the committee
was recommending, uh, for
spending on a variety of
behavioral health initiatives.
So reconciling those two is
going to be an important task
for this committee.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. So, so are
you saying that then all of that
money is already allocated the
100 million, I do not know that,
Mr. Chairman. OK. Thank you. And
then 11 other quick question for
you. Um, line 15 and line 20
appear to be really close. Can
you tell me what the difference
is between those two?
Similar types of services
delivered by different local
entities. One is more law
enforcement, uh, oriented one
would be more uh community
provider based oriented, kind of
an all hands on deck.
OK.
Uh, that answers my question.
Thank you. Thank you very much,
Representative Duncan, uh,
Representative, please. Thank
you, Mr. Chair. Thank you,
gentlemen, for your
presentation. It's very, very
helpful. I appreciate it.
Appreciate the work on this. Um,
I have a, um, a hospital in
Espanola, uh, Presbyterian.
Uh, and they got about 1.5
million to build a detox center,
which we desperately need in the
northern part of the state, um,
they, they couldn't use that
money because uh when they did
the, you know, when they did the
cost of operating it, they
wouldn't be able to afford it.
So with with this section in uh
with, with this.
I think it was.
Uh, 5. Would 5 take care of
that?
And, and, and the problem is
detox is very difficult, and it,
it's very you have to almost
have a hospital setting and and
it really is a recurring cost,
you know, that cost is not gonna
go away. So that's, that's what
I'm wondering is with these, if
you've got money here, would it
be recurring? Because if you get
it for one time, it's, you know,
it's just not gonna do anything,
Mr. Chair, um.
Trying to have large
Detox centers are long term.
inpatient is
Uh, not the current best
practice.
Uh, but having smaller, shorter
stay medical detox, transition
to transitional housing is what
would be under the umbrella, Mr.
Chair of the uh certified
Behavioral Health clinics. So as
you invest in those, that's how
you get
The
To meet the needs of that issue
in your community.
Thank you, Mr. Chair, and just
to let you know, um, uh, Mr.
Sully, we do have a rehab center
in in Espanella, we funded that
about, I don't know, 4 years
ago, and that is serving 100
patients today. So we do have
that and we also have a smaller
one in Taos, which is part of
that is my region. So that is
the practice and that's what
they're doing, but even
operating that short term detox
is a real, real specially and
very, very expensive.
But that's what we are doing and
Mr. Chair, trying to do that if
it's on its own.
That's the challenge. If it's
part of a comprehensive
System of services, that's where
it becomes more economical and
Effective, Mr. Chairman.
And Mr. Chair and Charles, that
is our goal. So that, so that,
you know, we can take care of
these people, give them long
term setting, but not at the
detox center, for sure. Thank
you.
Thank you very much. Uh, we have
next representative Hernandez,
then Representative Herndon
Hernandez. Thank you, Mr. Chair,
and uh and staff that put this
together. This is, this is um
Really, um, important,
especially for me because I just
so, so, uh, the, the public
understands that um
I worked in adolescent youth
treatment facility that was out
of state, and we did uh
placement from, from, uh,
client's instinct and so I'm I'm
very much familiar with many of
these uh services and, uh, and
to understand more about like
the um the challenges and
barriers that, um, many, um,
the, the in-state providers are
facing.
Local municipalities are facing.
In fact, um, me and uh
Representative Duncan, as well
as many other, uh, within the
San Juan County, um, uh, uh,
legislators we met with uh folks
from the from San Juan Regional
Hospital with the city of
Farmington and uh and we
definitely, uh, heard, heard
from them as well about what
their uh uh trying to establish
there and uh I apologize.
uh I think uh Mr. Duncan might,
might note that the specifics of
it, but it's like a, a triage
center because like services
for, uh, you know, like, like
the EMS or the uh firefighters
or the uh police is being
overwhelmed for these basic
services that to get these
clients into, into the care
that's needed, uh, my, my
question is, I, I see here,
Mr. Chair, I,
poses, Mr. Chair, my, my
question is, um, I see on here.
That, uh
Uh
The total of executives budget
is 301,200.
34,000, uh,
Uh, LFC's budget is total is 269
million, 5030.
2000.
Is there any money in there to
help, uh,
Help City of Farmington help uh
uh, get.
Uh, what, what, what they're
planning on, on bringing the
behavioral health partners
together, uh, established for
care.
Uh, that's, that
Thank you.
Yes, sir, Mr. Chairman, I would
highlight line 14.
As
Kind of being able to create
those hubs. Anytime you see the
term certified community
Behavioral Health Center.
That's really what the state is
trying to
Expand in a significant way, and
it includes, like I say, crisis
services, but then the triage,
could bring together multiple
partners to take on aspects of
that comprehensive system of
care locally, uh, and that this
is intended in, in one way to
help uh bring those partners
together to provide it, and then
frankly, there's a number of
other line items in here that
would fit with what I think, uh,
the county is trying to do as
well.
Great. Thank you very much.
Thank you, Hernandez.
Representative Herndon.
Thank you, Mr. Chair, and uh,
Uh, Mr. Salian presenters, what
I don't see in here is anything
related to behavioral healthcare
in schools. Where did you intend
that to apply?
Mr. Chairman.
That's, uh, typically delivered
through school-based health
centers, and they also bill
Medicaid, um, for Campbell
Medicaid for some of those
services. So that's already been
built into the system and doing
a a pretty heavy lift on uh
needs and gaps analysis this
interim really prioritized and
focused on the intersection of
homelessness, which if we added
another homelessness initiative
that the healthcare authority is
going to carry out, we'd be at
300 million in
LFC as well, but homelessness,
um,
Uh, serious behavioral health
issues and uh the intersection
with the criminal justice
system, given all the work that
you all have been doing with the
administration this interim, uh,
that was the priority.
So thank you Mr. Chair and Mr.
Sali, let me be a little bit
more specific. I'm looking at a
wellness rooms, behavioral
health care and wellness rooms.
They've never fallen under the
school base health centers, and
I don't know that they are being
looked at there, so could you
please explain to me unless
there's something new.
No, there was a special
appropriation, Mr. Chair, uh, I
believe in last session's Bill,
and we'd have to follow up to
see uh how that was, how that
was used and whether that's
something that this committee
would want to revisit or not.
All right. Thank you, Mr. Chair
and Mr. Sali, I, I didn't see
anything in here regarding uh
the ways in which we're going to
build our community health
professionals and behavioral
health professionals and grow
them. How is that being
considered as a part of this
bill?
The second, Mr. Chairman, you as
a body have been making
appropriations investing in that
expansion of the workforce
through
Everything from loan repayment
to giving the social work
programs in our state, enough
money to hire more teaching
faculty to effectively double
their, uh, the number of
graduates that they could be
putting out into our
communities like eastern New
Mexico stood up a new masters of
social work program, I think
they're already enrolling over
40, uh, new MSW's, uh, UNM
Health Science Center is looking
at expanding and we're already
seeing an expansion of, of
faculty. It'll take time, um.
And we'll probably need to still
do a lot of out of state
recruitment and continued
retention in state uh through
provider rate increases through
Medicaid, which are funded in
the operating budget.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. I have
just 2 more quick questions, one
with respect to the behavioral
health professionals and growing
them. I'm looking more
specifically at programs like
Communities to careers that are,
are in the UNM school and many
times they've been not funded
and we started at a very younger
age to get kids and, and teens
involved in behavioral
healthcare as a profession. Can
you tell me, does that fall
within the provision that's
already here.
Um, Mr. Chairman,
No, uh, the many recommendations
looking, was looking at more of
an immediate impact, like
through things like the health
professional loan repayment as a
way to attract individuals to
serve in, in the various
capacities that were a priority
for the broader package.
So Mr. Chair and um Mr. uh Sale.
How do we get the committee to
look at something else.
Uh, Mr. Chairman, that's gonna
be a process that you're gonna
be going through, uh,
Representative Herndon, uh, from
the sounds of the way that you
described that program that
seems to be potentially more of
a recurring ongoing program. All
of these are special
appropriations, either 1 to 3
years. Thank you. And Mr. Chair
and Mrs. Ali, the question that
was asked, uh, when you talked
about small detox uh facilities
where you're talking about
statewide or regional-wide?
Mr. Chair Community based.
Community based in a state
within, within a certified
community behavioral health
center full continuum of
services and I think more
regional representative than
state life.
Mr. Chair and Mr. Lee in 2022 we
passed House Bill 68 and there
was about $9 million in that
program that is sunsetted. What
happened to that program?
Mr. Chairman, Representative
Herndon, I would need more
information about, uh, the
program contained in that bill.
All right. Thank you, Mr. Chair.
I'll speak with you later.
Great. Thank you very much for
Hernon. Next we have
Representative Sanchez.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. I just
wanted to ask, uh, Mr. Salia in
terms of our FQHCs, uh,
Is any of these, this funding
going to those, I know those
places are critically important
to northern New Mexico and the
whole state.
Yes, there are appropriations
specifically targeting federally
qualified health centers. And
then my second question to jump
on, uh, Pereira and uh the other
reps questions on detox. I
sounded like you were uh
steering away from this funding
going to somewhere like
Presbyterian and Espanol. I know
you mentioned short term is the
key. Uh, is there anything that,
uh, is preventing them from
doing short term. I just say
this because, uh,
Unfortunately, I've had the
firsthand experience of having
to take someone to detox and,
uh, when you need it, it's not
available and you get put on
waiting lists.
And uh it's a huge issue, so,
um, I'm just curious what your
thoughts on that.
Mr. Chair, uh, Representative
Sanchez, yes, I believe it needs
to be an all hands on deck, um,
for communities, particularly
communities as impacted by this,
um, challenging issue is yours.
So, Mistress Lee, uh, I guess
the question, uh, is there
anything that we can uh do to
maybe, I know a Presbyterians
open to doing it and how, how do
they stop the funding to do it?
I don't know if it's still
there, but if the, the funding
is still there, is there any
long range commitment we can
make to a place like that which
would be regional, right? It
the, the whole, uh.
Central northern area.
Mr. Chairman, uh,
representative, if they've got.
beds and the facility that are
certified to do that medical
detox, they could bill Medicaid
for the ongoing service
provision, if they implemented
uh a broader set of services and
became a certified behavioral
health clinic.
Uh, they could make sure that
the full continuum of services,
not only when they finish detox
and get transitional housing,
have wraparound services,
medication-assisted treatment,
ongoing counseling could all be
done under the umbrella of
Presbyterian. Thank you, Mr.
Chair.
Thank you very much for Sanchez.
We're gonna go next to represent
Little.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Thank you
so much for the information
today. Uh, I'm very encouraged
to see what uh funds are being
um.
Directed to support behavioral
service, health services. Um, my
question has to do with
technology.
Um, as we know, our providers
are going to be reporting this
information that they're
capturing from clients, and I
was looking to see if there was
anything specific to um
technology.
Being built in here, maybe it's
not specific, but it, it's not,
it may not just happen while I
am very aware that there are
current current Mr. Chair,
current, um, challenges faced by
providers who are, whose
workload is increasing and
they're dealing with very uh
antiquated in some locations,
um,
Uh, technology that's not able
to accurately capture this, this
information, and it's not only
required uh to it is primarily
for the patient so that anybody
will be able to so that when
it's necessary to transfer them
to another provider if they've
got all the information there,
but that, that takes either the
time away from a provider, or it
will
require perhaps some staffing.
For someone to be transcribing
those into a medical record or
electronic medical record
systems, so my question, Mr.
Chair, is, um, whether
that if you're aware whether
that uh funding for technology.
Uh, is included in as part of
this, or is it somewhere
separate because I think that
My sense is, if they're already
Talented administratively with
reporting.
These are all wonderful,
incredible things that are going
to be taking place, but will
they we need to assure that they
have the tools that they need in
order to uh
meet those reporting
requirements. Thank you, Mr.
Chair.
Mr. Chair, Representative little
They're embedded
There's not a separate
standalone technology solution
for all of these individuals.
And the, the ongoing
Cost of using that technology is
something that would need to be
built into that organization's
business model as they build for
Medicaid or other third party.
Um, insurance companies for
their ongoing recurring cost a
lot of this is non-recurring,
let's get these things built up
and running, staffed up, make
sure the staff have got the
technology that they need,
trained on how to do these
things, uh, trained on how to
use the technology to send in
the reporting to get paid, uh,
and then start seeing patients
and helping improve their lives
and their communities across the
state.
Thank you for that information.
I, I, I'm just curious as to, so
what you're telling me is that
this, if I'm understand this
correctly, Mr. Chair, um, that
those entities will have are
absorbing those costs and
building it into a billing
structure is, it is uh
Not a separate IT, uh,
For lack of a better word, a
line item, um, that can be
accessed. We have, I mean, the
state's been investing in
replacing its Medicaid
information system for a decade
now that the providers will need
to interface with, uh, and they,
they will be able to do that.
Uh, so that's where the, the
state's big technology
investment has been made in into
modernizing how that system
works, and to make it easier for
providers to interact, not only
with the MCOs but with the
state.
Thank, thank you, Representative
Little.
Uh, Vice Cha Dixon.
Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Thank you. Um, I'm really glad
that we um have been given this
opportunity to go through this
early and with a focus on uh the
behavioral healthcare funding,
uh, related appropriations.
Um,
a couple questions, um, Mr.
Chair, um, and director, one of
the things that we've talked a
lot about is whether or not we
have capacity in the state, is
there any concern about whether
or not our counties, um,
municipalities have capacity to
implement some of these grant
proposals.
Yes.
I would say that there's uh
there's some
Uh, places where there are, are
more advanced where local
governments are taking a more
proactive approach at.
Either service delivery or
procuring service delivery San
Juan is a good example of that.
Uh, Berlio County is
does that and
You know, they've got $100
million that they can't figure
out how to get out the door, so,
uh, there, there is a risk with
that strategy versus the state
working directly with, uh,
providers and that's something
that you'll want to
be cognizant of and maybe
reconcile as you go through.
Uh, putting your stamp on uh
what you think needs to be
spent. Thank you, um, director,
and, uh, Mr. Chair, and that
actually sort of leads to the
next question that I have, which
is, you know, what is the
proposal for measuring the
impact and efficacy of these
efforts.
Mr. Chairman, Vice Chair Dixon,
we would need to develop
something.
Thank you. Um,
The housing Trust Fund, uh, Mr.
Chair, um, and director, um, the
$50 million. I would really like
an update on what.
Money has been spent and how
it's been utilized from the
tranche of funds that were
provided to MFA last year before
we commit, um, to
Setting out another $50 million.
I think it's really important to
see exactly how those funds are
being utilized and leveraged.
Chair and um director, um, the
question of um behavioral health
in schools, um that was brought
up earlier. Um, you know, I have
concerns that perhaps we should
um have a separate line item for
that as well, just because
Everything that sort of we hear
anecdotally, or at least I hear
anecdotally back from
constituents is that there's not
enough.
Um, behavioral health support in
schools, um, and so I would just
love for there to be a little
bit more of a
Look at that to see if there's a
gap that we can, we could fill,
um, Mr. Chair, uh, director, um,
what is the source in here for
LFC, the other funds, is that
the um opioid settlement funds
or those something different,
that would be the group, and so
that total amount is rather
large, but that's spread out
over a 3-year period.
Thank you. Uh, thank you, Mr.
Chair, um, and director, um.
Behavioral health collaborative.
So is the behavioral health
collaborative, which I believe
was established in the statute.
Are they involved in any way? Is
there an update on what what
they're doing, maybe Mr. Mr. has
been
working on that particular
issue. I'll let him answer.
Yeah, and I just, I just wanted
to mention Mr. Chair and uh
Representative Dixon next week
we'll have a presentation for
you similar format to this.
Um, on behavioral health, but
we'll be talking about kind of
the health behavioral health
landscape, it kind of gets back
to a little bit of um your
earlier question that you had on
capacity and that sort of thing,
and some of the issues around um
kind of local planning and doing
a better job of planning how
we're spending this money, um,
you know, as, uh,
Director Saley said a minute
ago, you know, we've put about
424 million in over the last uh
34 years, we've got this next
big tranche of money.
Um, a lot of the issues that
we're seeing from behavioral
health perspective isn't
necessarily money, it's it's,
um, you know,
We're needing to improve our
coordination, um, across the
board at the, the federal,
state, local, and even those
local provider entities, um, you
know, I, I know like, um,
Representative Herrera had
brought up the issue with her,
her local um
Program there
And
You know, a lot of these issues
can kind of be
helped along through better
planning
Mr. Chair Representative Dixon,
the collaboratives not met, I
think in at least 2 years and
they do not have a head of a
collaborative, um.
I would recommend the
legislature consider
Reforming that collaborative,
what it's supposed to be doing
on paper is actually really
good, uh, but organizing it in a
way that's more streamlined and
maybe has the
Um
Higher level of authority of the
collaborative CEO maybe coming
out of the governor's office, as
opposed to being like a deputy
director, uh, within a large
agency, that could be things to,
to consider in terms of setting
up the leadership capacity to be
able to land statewide and work
with local communities to be
able to.
Um, make sure these resources
are effectively used.
Thank you, Mr. Chair, and thank
you. That seems, I mean.
We've, we've sort of been
talking about the.
Um, lack of organization around
the collaborative and it being
utilized, and it seems like
that's a, right now, a very bad
time for us not to have um
something existing. Um, Mr.
Chair, um, and, um, director,
just 2 more questions. I wanted
to follow up on um
representative um Duncan
asked about lines 20 and 15, uh,
which I had also noticed were
very similar.
and I'm wondering, you know, how
are we going to ensure that
DPS and HCA actually coordinate
or where is and, and this may
just be part of the next steps,
but the coordination between
those two on something that is
very similar to make sure that
we're actually being the most
effective with those dollars.
Mr. Chairman, uh,
Vice Chair Dixon, I, I think
that's something this committee
should uh really pay close
attention to. And if that's the
right strategy or is there a
different one after further
deliberations.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Uh, last
question, um, the loan repayment
funds, um,
Did higher education, um,
disperse the entire um are they
on track to spend all of the
funds that they were
appropriated for loan repayments
this past year for healthcare
professionals.
Mr. Chairman, uh, Representative
Dixon.
I believe so, but I will double
check and get back with the
committee to, with the right
answer. Thank you. I think that
would be very important for us
to know um if, you know, if
we're meeting the demand for
those loan repayments and if
that number needs to be
increased or if um we're meeting
the demand uh with the $15
million. So thank you. And
what's an important distinction
between the two recommendations
is the 15 is a huge investment
in a narrower set of
potential providers in the LFC
recommendation, you can blow
through.
The executives 25 million very
quickly if you're, you're
changing the threshold for how
much you're gonna pay for, say,
a physician's, uh, loans.
Um, or other health providers,
you know, not
Spreading it out over 3 years,
but maybe doing it all in one
year, and that's $100,000 per
person. So the, the details
matter on how you want to try to
effect a change in this
landscape.
Thank you, Mr. Chair, and thank
you, um, to staff for uh giving
us this opportunity to go
through this.
Very important information, uh,
with such detail this early.
Thank you.
Thank you very much, Vice Chair.
Thank you, uh, Director Lee, and
Mr. Shen Ye, uh, I just want a
couple of quick things. First,
um, can the committee get the
sort of a packet around the
CCBHCs, uh, uh, those, uh, that
approach, which is live and
expanding is something that's a
very high importance to us. Um,
number 2, just a big thank you
to the committee. We've
introduced these very early.
op port un ities to hear and
engage and ask questions. And I
think this is excellent because
it's gonna show us, it is
already moving us in a few key
directions. One, Mr. Shee to the
coordination piece as we get
into um budget hearings with uh
healthcare authority, Department
of Health, and others.
I would love to see a sort of
visuals around that coordination
that you, I think, in my
opinion, rightly described as
the most important piece right
now. We're surging funding, we
have surging need, the
coordination is not keeping up
with that, and that's the place
where if we get things right,
and I think with the members and
many of the questions from
different areas, rural, uh, from
the north to the south,
that those lenses that the
members
the questions that were asked
are going to help us in our
vital for staff to help create
that, uh, understanding of where
the coordination needs to be and
how to fix it. Finally, um,
Director Sali, you said
something, well, two other
things.
Can we put loan repayment as
something that we do a bit of a
deeper dive into this budget
session and certainly going into
the summer because it is, is
directly sort of outlined there
are more uh dials that we can
turn with loan repayment and
with the resources the state
has, we need to ask questions
about how much, who over what
duration, um, and there's a lot
that we can, I think, evolve
there. Finally, um,
The,
with regard to the, the 50
million specifically for uh
link it homeless supportive
housing.
Um, right now, I think we all
know that the sort of
overwhelming challenge is being
faced in the city of
Albuquerque.
They're our largest city, many
folks are going there. It's not
exclusive, certainly in the
community that I come from in
Las Cruces and in others, rural
and urban, but the overwhelming
challenges being faced in the
city of Albuquerque, and so the
uh specificity of our language
and the direction of our funding
may need to really reflect that.
And if we need to invest more in
different parts of the state to
meet different needs. That's
something that seems like the
recommendation gives us a
foundation to do.
Would you agree, Doctor?
Is there, Mr. Chairman, I'm, I
can think of.
At least 3 projects in Las
Cruces in this space, uh, one
project only in Santa Fe.
Um, not too sure about.
Movement in this space in
Albuquerque outside of a couple
of.
Maybe motels that they're
looking at.
But a real
At the end of the day, like, Mr.
Sheer said, you need that all
hands on deck coordinated
approach, and when it comes to
Transitional housing and moving
people from the streets and into
services and and permanency.
I really think that those
appropriations that aren't on
here around homelessness are
going to be important to help us
get our our arms around how do
we do this right?
Yeah, yeah, couldn't agree more.
OK, thank you all very much.
Thank you committee. Um, OK,
we're gonna conclude this
portion, um, the, uh,
subcommittee C is gonna stay
here, thanks to the vice chair.
Subcommittee C please stay here.
Subcommittee D will go to room
315. Uh, we'll reconvene here in
a few minutes. If I want to open
up just briefly.
Is there any public comment that
folks want to make?
I don't see any.
Oh great. Uh, if there's a hand,
yeah, please come forward.
Uh
Great. Come on up, uh, and then
just identify yourself.
We're gonna have limited to 5
minutes, 1 minute each.
Go ahead. Please identify
yourself.
And let's just, we'll keep
everything as calm as we can.
So representative, we're gonna
keep, we're going to public
comment. Please go ahead and
introduce you
Introduce yourself. Thank you,
Mr. Chair and members of the
committee. Um, my name is Tanika
Sosa Gonzalez. I'm a board
certified psychiatric mental
healthcare nurse in Las Cruces.
Um, I was, I helped start AOT in
Las Cruces. I worked with CJCC,
um, I was the first psych nurse
in our detention center under
the Bravo settlement. Um, I
recently left um
A corporate job to stand up the
first state certified CCBHC and
SAMSA certified CCPHC in the
state prior 9 months prior to
the state even starting.
Um, additionally, I oversee the
LC3 Behavioral Health
collaborative in Las Cruces,
which is the most robust
collaborative in the state. Um,
I also volunteer as a board
president for Disability Rights
New Mexico, and while I don't
speak on their behalf, I bring
that lens to this and I just
have some high-level concerns.
I've gotten to participate in
two sin mappings from Samsa, and
the reason that there's the
questions around um youth is
because um it is an
evidence-based process, but
there's juvenile sim mapping and
there's adult SIM mapping.
And so there's 5 intercepts for
um there's 5 intercepts, 6
intercepts for adults, and the
intercepts for you are
different. So that's not
clearly, that's not clearly
defined. Um, also, I teach how
being trauma informed improves
the criminal justice system from
SAMSA since 2018, and I think
that that needs to be applied to
this for any member that's on
the council, and what we learned
from AOT is that robust
evaluation is very important and
evidence-based is written
consistently, I'm probably in a
minute.
That evidence all over it.
So if we can make sure that
there's um a high amount of
attention paid to evidence based
because this population is
marginalized and often um is
overlooked. Thank you. Thank you
very much. Please come up.
Good afternoon, Mr. Chair,
members of the committee, uh, my
name is LJ Baker. I'm uh the
chief human resources and
strategic initiatives officer
for Sierra Vista Hospital in TC.
Um, I've been in the state for
about 2.5 years, uh, tier C and
Sierra Vista has made a big
turn, uh, in the services and
access to care that we can
provide, specifically towards
behavioral health. We were able
to recruit a psychiatrist who
completed his residency at Duke
University.
The point that you made, Mr.
Chair, about student loan
repayment is huge. It's huge,
and I can't state enough how
that helps the state for us to
bring and retain, recruit and
retain physicians and providers
across the state. So I would
ask, as you did, that we
continue to take a look at that.
And as we expand our behavioral
health capability, we have the
people, but we don't have the
space.
So anything that we can do to
help as we move forward on those
initiatives would be very, you
know, well appreciated. Thank
you, sir. Excellent. Thank you
very much. Please come on up.
Uh, my name is Jennifer
Bokernaya. I've worked in
psychosocial rehabilitation
groups and detox and I've been a
nurse for mental behavioral
health and the homeless
situation involved in several
homeless groups. I came here
today because.
Actually have a family member
who is in and out of the
emergency room over 86 times
this last year, the behavioral
mental health part of your guys'
funding isn't really working
when it comes to identifying if
someone has, you know, like you
were talking about the drug
addiction problem or the mental
behavioral problem and how they
coincide. One of the main things
that I've noticed is a lot of
the people who work in the
hospitals, urgent cares,
emergency.
places don't really understand
that that person is mentally
Unstable and they and they get
the two and shoot a lot, like.
There's so many deaths because
of this one problem, and I wanna
be able to help kind of both the
mental behavioral health
situation with my experience and
kind of over, you know, who I,
who I can talk to, maybe after I
leave here to help, um, kind of
You guys are making decisions to
funding, right?
I have, I'm sorry, I have a lot
of really um good ideas and and
I've been working with homeless
people in Houston and other
homeless places, the whole
situation here can be, you know,
like you guys are all saying
organized and fixed and
everything. There's just a few
things that.
I would like to speak with
someone else privately. OK. Uh,
that'll conclude for the public
testimony here today, um, we'll
maybe ask our staff to get your
contact information
and ideas.
Thank you very much. OK, uh,
that concludes our public
