sitting next to me is the
executive director of workers
comp Robert to set and then
sitting next to him is or
executive analyst Cecilia
mathematics.
You can find the LFC budget
right up on page two ninety
eight in your volume to.
just going through this all go
through the
the roll out of the budget and
This Madam matches will go
through the rest.
Because the administration and
F. talked FY twenty to use
eleven point five million in
revenue from the workers
compensation administration.
And on insured employers funds
LFC is recommended revenue
levels are closer to the FY
twenty three operating budget.
The executive recommendation
increases in ministrations
Revenue nearly twenty percent
above FY twenty two.
LSE's recommendation for
personnel costs was commensurate
with the FY twenty three
operating budget that is
sufficient to fill about five
vacancies.
The executives personnel costs
recommendation would feel about
seven FTE LFC is recommendation
for contractual services was
closer to FY twenty two
expenditures.
LFC and exec both included
language for the transferring
one million dollars over to the
work force solutions department.
and and then when we're there
were performance measure target
differences the analyst reach
consensus as indicated with that
I'll pass it over to miss madam
matches for further comment good
afternoon madam chair members of
the committee moving on to
workers compensation
ministration I. P. code P. six
nine seven this is where the
majority of the changes are seen
the differences for the revenue
the executive recommended
increasing revenue from the
workers compensation
administration fund five percent
above fiscal year twenty three
operating budget the LFC
recommended less revenue because
of lower prior year
expenditures.
LFC recommended spending levels
are commensurate with fiscal
year twenty to spending levels
but included judgments for
personal cost increases.
in the language LFC and exec
language recommendations or the
same as mentioned before and in
performance where there were
performance measure target
differences the analyst did
reach consensus asked indicated.
I'm moving on into the uninsured
employers fund P. is seven
eighty there were no differences
between the two recommendations
and with that I'll pass on to
the executive director of the
fifties.
Thank you and good afternoon
first I like to introduce a
couple my key staff members who
are here we have Lee Martinez
who's a deputy director has been
with the agency consecutively
since nineteen ninety six
Michelle green our CFO in the
cold says on that we say your
name on.
Because on also thank you very
much we have the presentation
for New
on page two I just want to give
a highlight that the workers
comp ministration has six state
offices other than the
Albuquerque one and for the
first time in our history every
field offices filled with FTEs
which is a total of twenty seven
so that we're very happy with
that.
If we.
Go the slide.
Six of all our revenue just a
reminder the WCA operate solely
on revenue generated quarterly
assessments paid by employers
and workers across the state of
New Mexico workers paid two
dollars two dollars employers P.
two thirty the thirty cents goes
to our an employer sure fund so
we we receive no general fund
money the money that we collect
is what we used to run our
agency.
On page seven you see our budget
request.
since I took over last November
we've looked at ninety one
positions one of the things I
was charged with last year's
that we did give a lot of money
back in the two hundred category
so we sort of look at employees
by their education experience
how they repeat can purely to
their peers also to rest of the
state.
So far we've looked at sixty six
employees who received increases
a total of three hundred thirty
five thousand dollars we're
waiting approval of twenty five
more and we so.
We took the charge of last year
the money reverts back into
account but looking at our
employees.
So that was very important to
us.
Page.
As they've already talked about
the difference of the
recommendations of the DFA in
LFC budget
line is where we are currently
staff we're authorize a hundred
and twenty two FTEs right now
we're at twelve point three
percent vacancy rate.
Last few months we've been
hovering between a seven to a
nine percent vacancy rate we're
working hard on it two of our
governor expositions the
governor allowed us to create a
new judge position for the
southern part of the state of
the first workers comp judge
position outside of the
Albuquerque Santa Fe corridor
and we're currently in the
process of interviewing for
those vacancies and all other
thirteen vacancies that we have.
We're four posted I are closed
we're doing interviews and agree
with requests for re losses in
those are R. T. positions which
most agencies are having a hard
time also so we want to make
sure we can get the right people
and get them for what we can pay
for.
In the last few pages are just
general information of what
we've accomplished and things
that we're looking for to to so
I stand ready to answer most
questions.
Thank you madam chair.
Thank you we're going to go to
questions from the committee I
will start with representative
Armstrong.
Thank you madam chair and thank
you for The presentation in your
in the volume two on page two
ninety nine
up at the top it says the agency
requests to eliminate the annual
transfer of a million dollars
can you talk a little bit of
about a more about that please.
So madam chair and
Representative Armstrong so that
what we do is on an annual basis
we transferred one million
dollars from the workers comp
administration fund over to the
to the
Workforce solutions department.
And it's it's a million dollars
in it
basically just substitutes
general fund funding over at WSD
with this funding.
Thank you madam chairman I
thought that we had done away
with that last year for some
reason now is this just the one
ready Crowder griped about every
year
yep.
Okay I I too don't really like
that but I I I understand that
that that's really the only
question I have thank you madam
chair.
Representative Pettigrew.
Thank you madam chair
madam chair I think.
My primary questions with me
page five of the.
Have a.
Hello a doctor would
director with your pronouncing
your last name again.
That is our.
Rector
Eight five the outcome rate of
serious injuries.
An illness caused by workplace
conditions for hundred workers
as a point four.
We're looking at here one
hundred and twenty to propose
positions are we looking
statewide for.
All employers across the state
Madam chair representative is
all employers statewide.
Madam chair and.
Director.
All statewide employees or
private.
corporations as well.
Madam chair representative all.
Point forecast from madam chair.
How do we get from point five
the point four so we're saying
that we want to if the rate of
point four four hundred.
Madam chair representative.
For clarifications all the
employees employers are covered
under the workers comp Act.
Madam chair of that that will be
that just understand how.
Our.
Workmen's club workers comp and
Administration to responsible
for private companies is that
right.
Representative so you'd like
staff to follow up on and this
is the performance metric that
is okay excellent will bundle
for an interactive health I'm
accountable for somebody else's
company.
Madam chair representative part
of what we do is we have safety
consultants we have in our field
offices throughout the state
Albuquerque we look at
companies the risk reduction
program is one of our managers
here anything over one point
hello the mod in week they're
classified by like cell towers
restaurants so this part of our
charge of our statute is to do
safety consultants the goal of
the companies private and
public.
We can go and be sent letters to
make sure they that in make sure
that their safety program is
good we give them
recommendations we all turned
into ocean it's part of what
this fee is paid for Sir.
This is current share of track
and with everything that you do
externally through other
corporations I just
I struggle with that being a
performance right from a
government agency over
prominent.
That's that's a stretch and and
I get madam chair the the
You know we have a goal we want
to be able to do that in in
private business my goal is to
to not have that high incident
rate and to bring it down into
uses from room to.
Chair representative I will
definitely give you offline and
go more in detail with this
would you Sir.
And and I'm good with that I
just.
That the.
That's a struggle for me.
Thank you.
Thank you
chairman small thank you very
much madam chair thank you to
send thing analysts madam chair.
Turning to hear it page six and
our PS in the B..
And this goes to the one
difference understanding madam
chair analysts there there are
this is not a general fund
agency therefore there are no
general fund differences.
Difference we're shown an
unfunded vacancy rate in both
programs because six nine seven
seven eighty of nine and a half
and then nine point eight
percent
In a funded vacancy rate working
out of average nine and a half
percent
Madam chair of Mr first Mister
Doucette for the additional
positions in the six hundred
ninety thousand.
Would that affect the premiums
that employers around the state
pay.
Madam chair.
Representative small no no it's
a flat it's two dollars or two
dollars and thirty cents the
workers comp rates are set by
the department of insurance this
year was minus ten point seven
the superintendent need to be on
that committee so the short
answer me no Sir thank you madam
chair thank you minister to set
so that the executive
recommendation would not raise
those rates
what what are you looking to do
as a director to fill and I
guess that's roughly are those
the twelve positions in that P.
code six nine seven.
I'm here Representative
currently we have fifteen vacant
positions to our judges one is a
newly created position Los
crucis.
Out in the other is one of our
judges in Albuquerque decided to
go to a different job.
We will be doing interviews and
probably next week to fill those
to gov expositions the rest of
the positions one is filled in
started on February fourth three
have been read request we're
asking for re classes those are
three I. T. positions I have
been closed in the word
interview and and for to be
posted I've been very diligent
of being aggressive trying to
fill the positions for took over
the average was around twenty
percent and that's why we did
the re class of looking at all
our employees are we paying them
what they deserve by their
education experience as I stated
earlier we gave a lot of money
back the last few years is two
hundred category we're
reinvested back into our
employees that's why with I
believe we have not.
I was the vacancy was lower it
will get lower but our agencies
been back a hundred percent over
a year ago so even with that are
vacancy is getting better and it
will get better.
Thank you madam chair and I and
we can see especially in that
peco that you're funded vacancy
rate granted this was back in
September is is relatively low
and and is one of the lower ones
that we've seen and just last
question madam chair for Mr
Cheney a
The really the main reason that
this was not recommended from
the LESC perspective is simply
because there was additional
money that that was transferred
in the in the FY twenty three
budget.
the.
Mr chair madam chair the.
Mainly two reasons number one if
we look at the actual revenue
spending from on page two ninety
eight of lying to.
eleven point four million
dollars in total and spending
and we LFC recommended thirteen
million so you know what a
million and a half increase
above what was actually expended
the other thing is that we are
expending money out of the W.
eight the W. CAFé on and the U.
S. fund to to funded this agency
we do a transfer of million
dollar transfer from WCA Fund
over to
of the workforce solutions
department if we were to start
growing this budget it's just
kind of looking down the road
right if we start on this budget
over time we could start eating
into this fund balances and we
might not be able to do that
transfer anymore so it's it's
kind of twofold.
At at a little fact rates in the
long run to because if if it's
an insolvent Fund we would end
up probably having to either
Offset their budget with general
fund or increasing those rates.
And thank you very much for
saying Mr madam chair
That.
Without knowing what it would be
helpful to know what the
scenario that LESC sees for fund
the pollution and right impact
might be because it having that
as a possibility without sort of
having.
Parameters about what that means
makes it the why I guess we
could maybe madam chair makes
sense to adopt the LFC
recommendation now here we have
an agency that is doing great
work with their funded vacancies
looking to expand services
statewide
so frankly it maybe it makes the
the executive seems there's a
lot to be said there for as well
I would just say to that and it
Mr chairman chair that there's
also bars already that they can
have so that they can increase
the budget if they are
successful hiring all these
employees.
Okay.
Thank you very much is that
thank you very much Mr Singh
thank you madam chair.
Representative Brown.
Chair and Mr do seven health
thank you very much for being
here I have a question about
something that's in our bound
volume it's it's saying that
some.
The administration this isn't
germane to the budget discussion
today but I do want to be
thinking about this so madam
chair it says the administration
should consider whether the six
field offices are still needed.
It goes on to say that field
staffer working on cases there
back in the offices
but the public rarely visits the
field offices so you have
offices you're headquartered in
Santa Fe field offices are in
Farmington Albuquerque Los
crucis Rose Bowl Hans in Las
Vegas I just like to hear a
little bit more about how much
could you save if you did close
down one or more field offices
and I'm not sure I like that
idea quite frankly we're the
fifth largest state
geographically other people who
don't want to use computers to
to do something they want to go
in and be seen in person to be
helped in person so could you
just madam chair just tell us a
little bit more please madam
chair representative thank you
for that question I think the
field offices are important for
lots of reasons it's not the
employees are people come into
our office our offices we have
safety consultants who are out
in the field all the time we
have on both men who get calls
for the errors there were there
injury happens is we're the
judges should be so if it
happened down in Eddy County the
nearest office that's where it
should be aware the trial should
be yes less people are being
coming in with we track that but
most of the staff is of the
community learning the community
let people know what workers
comp is I get calls all the time
of that were the insurer what
we're not the insurer but I
think it's valuable and I think
it's show it's valuable for the
first time in our history that
every field office is filled
twenty seven FTEs I know that's
not larger some of the bigger
agencies that were able to track
good staff there in be part of
the community that's what we
need to do we need to let people
know what we're there the
workers comp make mission is to
help injured workers basically
get if they get injured on the
job to get him where they're
healthy enough to get back so I
I used to think that way of.
Long time ago this is my second
time here when I first came but
my my tunes change it all of my
senior staff every quarter close
to the field office talk making
sure that it's valuable when I
came in we had one FTE in Santa
Fe now we have three because
there's a need out there for the
northern part of the state so
thank you very much for reserve
for the question thank you madam
chair.
Any other questions.
I'll take a motion madam chair I
move the LFC but I'd just.
Perhaps we can just staff to
both look at the executive
positions that are contained in
here and the transfer to
workforce solutions.
do we have objections.
I see no objections that
recommendation will take that
recommendation with the
notation at for staff to help
with some follow up
great thank you very much thank
you members thank you Mr all
right so we're going to go ahead
and move on to six forty five
which is the governor's
commission on disability.
Thank you ms SQL if you want to
go ahead and introduce your
counterparts and take us away
thank you madam chair good
afternoon members of the
committee again I'm RubyAnn just
developed with the legislative
finance committee and we have
with this with the agency today
are the director of governor's
commission on disability Mr Stan
Ross and then we also have with
us from DFA budget Laurie yeah.
So with that agency code six
forty five in in in your volume
to LFC it's page three oh six.
And
Basically this this that this
commission it's a relatively
small commission and it's
composed of two programs to Pico
this that chairman
talked about P. codes earlier so
it's got both the governor's
commission on disability Pico
and then also the brain injury
Advisory Council so that makes
this that that if you look on
the summary the role of the
overall here basically.
There's a difference in how we
treated revenue the these
numbers are because it's not a
very big agency that and the
revenue component falls down
into personal services employee
benefits so basically madam
chair the LFC recommendation is
thirty two thousand two hundred
dollars less and that's in
general fund and also the LFC is
seventy thousand less in fund
balance so that's a total
revenue difference of a hundred
and two point two thousand and
you'll see that comes right down
straight to the personal the
person so
there's a difference with the
LFC lower by a hundred and two
point two so what does that mean
Madam chair so basically overall
LFC is recommending for person
of four point five percent
increase over the operating
budget.
And the executive is
recommending and thirteen point
five percent increase overall
for person so probably where you
want to flip and then is to the
your personal services sheet on
the back of that begs the
question where is the agency
with its its funded vacancy rate
so at the time this was run
which was that in September at
the HSD had a funded vacancy
rate of twenty eight point six
percent so like so many agencies
you know there have they were
about five out of five out of
six positions remained vacant so
let me a lot of agencies
struggling to fill vacancies and
you know use all that budget up
so that's a repeat theme I'm
sure the committee hearing so
those are
Really the main issues that
played out in the the two
program areas
Misaka did you want to talk
about this G. C. programmer that
there I just kind of summed it
up for is that good or what we
want to do.
Have anything Madam chair.
Maybe I don't have anything to
add.
Money going through the program.
madam chair just for the
interests of time and he didn't
know if we needed to break the
program that basically at that
high level that that piece is
let out from between the two
programs but that's basically
the overall difference
and I'll turn it over then to
that director Mr stand rock
thank you madam chair committee
members thank you for.
entertaining
can you hear me.
I understand Ross on the
director of the governor's
commission on disability as of
March nineteenth last year and
I just wanted to say thank you
for your time and
in our last meeting we we're
question about our they can see
right and I just wanted to
mention that we have.
Add it to people and that are on
staff and we interviewed a
terrific candidate yesterday who
will be here our next staff
members so that they can see of
five or six people will be
slashed in half and well we're
small agency but I think that
there's no question that we find
a a terrific program expertise
on accessibility subject matter
and I look forward to our
numbers growing and our programs
getting up to speed thank you
for your time.
Thank you director Ross do we
have questions from committee
members.
All right up seeing no questions
from our committee I would take
a motion.
Madam chair I move the LFC.
Do we need a second okay
excellent sorry and it was that
Representative Trujillo first
Representative Hermio start
excellent okay wonderful so we
have a motion and a second to
accept the LFC recommendation we
have any objections.
Seeing none we will except the
LFC recommendation thank you
very much thank you madam chair
and committee members very much.
Thank you so the public.
Do the heavy lifting.
Right and we will now move on to
six forty for the division of
vocational rehabilitation.
Thank you madam chair and the
director of the division of
vocational rehabilitation with
that today is math Casey down
Romero and that Division six
forty four division of
vocational rehabilitation me
college DVR it cannonball into
on page three oh one and a DVR
is administratively attached to
the public education department.
And it's composed of.
Four program areas.
And the there will be really run
that will focus on so you will
see madam chair members of the
subcommittee that there are no
differences in the revenue
between two a recommendation
this agency I'll take a little
step back in efforts
particularly for new members of
the committee this agency I
talked about before programs and
ensure the director of the more
about this but
Besides providing services for
us for application
rehabilitation and get people
back and and you know but you
were fourth and rehabilitated it
also does that disability
determination you know for
disability around the state so a
lot of the budget in this DVR in
federal funds now the general
fund amounts madam chair thank
you see is what we call for
maintenance of effort Emily it's
one to fund efforts in the
department but it's also to
leverage and match at and
maintain our efforts for the
federal government to make sure
we pull that federal funds so
that's where the revenues from
and then you'll see a little bit
of transfers there that the
committee may recall the
discussion we had on Wednesday
with commission Tuesday whenever
commission for the blind we were
talking about that language and
transferring the funds for back
and forth and how that works
this is that agency here DVR
self that'll get to that the
program okay so where are we
different in the two
recommendations madam chair so
the differences fall within the
expenditure level and with the
the LFC being at the slightly
lower improved health services
in place to get it out.
The executive being slightly
higher in the at other category
and if we stay here this is due
to the executive and she'll
probably be to this being making
some adjustments for increased
risk right so that maybe that
that other comparable little
higher for those risk right so
that's just you know as an
investment of about ninety
thousand dollars where I did
want to direct the committee
that tension if you well is to
pay the.
the rehabilitation services unit
page actually page three.
So as you'll see there.
We have the little different in
language.
That's the number that the
fiscal different no revenue
issues get this one out and
ninety thousand to deal with
with right and basically the LFC
is that the requested level for
all of the department what they
requested we do have a
difference in language in this
program and that's associated
with the issue hurting
commission for the blind so
they'll I try to summarize it
for the committee here
differences are noted in
language because of the LFC
language we didn't know
particularly that the funding
falls in the other financing
uses category regarding two
hundred thousand in federal
funds that's transferred from
the independent living program
the commission for the blind so
this is language that we've used
at all the past years where
we're careful to denote category
and to denote program the
executive had that same language
here that you're hurting
commission for the blind that
would add that up to language in
case revenues don't materialize
so that at a high level on a
summary for you of the
differences
Do you want to add anything.
you madam chair members of the
committee I think just give L.
did a really great job
summarizing the small
differences between executive
and the LESC recommendations I
know it is no comment.
I'm sorry I have no additional
comment at this time.
Okay now with all of that madam
chair we do have another issue
and I think.
So just trying to get to the
different team and ensure that
the director stoner metal would
be to this but
I just wanted you to know that
we had
a deviation and their budget
request for fiscal year twenty
four from the way the budget was
broken out between the programs
in past years.
So basically there was a change
of two point two million in and
it would have the requested it
because they've been trying to
do more cost allocation with the
federal government I remember I
talked about how they get all
the money for the fed so they've
been engaged in that process and
they thought that they would be
able to do a little more
Catholic patient and so they it
shifted some of their budget
around that may not happen we're
being told now this justice come
out in the last week or so week
or two and with that I will turn
it over to the director thank
you yes thank you Laurie yes so
we had requested that we move
two point two million from our
administrative services unit to
our we have services unit
Senator found out that we did
not have complete guidance so
we're asking that we just remain
the same as as last year and
keep the two point two million
in the administrative services
unit so that we can conduct our
continue to conduct an indirect
costs study which we have
contracted with an external
party which is and G. T.
consultants to review all of our
positions to ensure that we are
appropriately charging each
grant for the work that
employees are doing so that
we're doing that correctly I did
want to go through a couple of
updates from DVR this year
joining me today is crystal
right ball she's our chief
administrators chief financial
officer so I'm happy to have her
here today also Kevin Romero was
kind enough to join us in
support of the language change
with commission for the blind at
N. M. D. V. are we are committed
to ensuring that every New
Mexico with the disability
achieve their employment goals
and price in their communities
each of our program supports the
mission by providing valuable
resources in our community such
as access to disability benefits
independent living services and
services to gain or maintain
employment our disability
determination services which
processes medical determinations
for social security had no audit
findings with their on site
there.
That was social security this
year and they exceeded all FY
twenty to workload targets for
initial claims reconsideration
claims and continuing disability
reviews.
In addition NM DDS has an
accuracy rate of ninety six
point one percent they are first
in their region and fifth in the
nation for accuracy.
When I came to the agency in
January of last year we had a
wait list for vocational rehab
services which in the fall of
twenty twenty one was more than
thirteen hundred individuals
since that time we have
eliminated the weightless
completely when I presented in
October we were very close to
achieving that goal and I'm
happy to report that we have
completely and eliminated the
weightless so we can now serve
any individual found eligible
for vocational rehab services
immediately two of our projects
search sites the state national
awards this year for one hundred
percent placement of their
graduates in competitive
integrated employment those two
sites where Gallup school
district with the embassy suites
I'm sorry they have to garden in
and the Albuquerque public
schools with the embassy suites.
Internally we're facing a lot of
the same challenges as other
state agencies with retention we
have lowered our vacancy rate
significantly and we're working
to internally aligned and
appropriately place for all of
our staff we've also extended
our New Mexico ministry of code
on cancer licensure requirements
so that it's an alignment with
the federal regulation so that
we can capture additional
candidates for vocational rehab
counselor jobs
and then finally I just wanted
to point out that we've also
implemented a very strong social
media and media campaign and
encourage you all to go follow
us on our Facebook Instagram
linkedin pages we've been
featured in many news stories we
did an annual report this year
for the first time in many years
this up on our website and we're
working also very closely with
our state we have council and
they also produced an annual
report.
So with that I stand for
questions.
Chairman small thank you madam
chair thank you Maria thank you
for the analysts
Two questions first there's a
small sort of like we saw
previously of those smaller
difference in
other financing on general fund
financing director that that the
for your personal services
employee benefits.
And is that to help fill
positions is that recruitment or
retention or a little bit of
both.
Three.
We're at your request.
Okay.
And so I think that is the issue
where Laurie pointed to the fact
that we had that change in risk
rates.
Thank you so okay and then to in
this for for hi there or any of
the three maybe miss ask about
because we have both the we have
to modify this given the updated
change with where the two point
two million which is
subtracted in both the LFC and
executive recommendation do we
need to provide instruction to
to put that back in since
adopting one of these
recommendations Mr chair and
madam chair.
We could do this I wanted to
wait we could switch it out here
and just it would be a.
Federal funds as Swofford tween
two programs.
So we could do it here or I'm
looking at MaryBeth.
We could probably also do it in
the operating budget if it's
just a federal funds.
And so in my give a counterpart
for each of the vector so if you
are a that's right great we can
do that in operating budget just
to do that okay so I want to
they're the experts on that that
portion so
madam chair we could probably
retain it as is here and in the
General Appropration Act and
then we do the operating budgets
and maybe we could what do that
walk there because it's just
straight federal funds.
Okay thank you very much madam
chairman says give out that's
helpful so we can adopt the the
recommendation today
And
those are all my questions and
an understanding again that
there's no general fund
difference
there is a risk calculation
difference that slightly higher
for the executive but that
doesn't come out of the general
fund.
Thank you madam chair.
Thank you Representative bye Sir
from thank you madam to the
madam chair madam chair.
Directives press to that
increase the your social media
presence so my question to you
is has there also been an uptake
in terms of the people who may
need to utilize our services
that you're seeing in terms of
that up taking your media social
media Madam chair representative
yes we have seen an increase in
applications however we'd like
to see a greater increase we
just came off of order and order
selection in October and so I
think we've got some significant
work to continue to do to get
the message out that we cancer
individuals immediately.
Thank you madam chair that was
my question.
It.
any other questions from
committee members.
I just want to thank you for the
incredible work that you guys
too it is wonderful so do we
have a motion the manager I'd
move the executive
recommendation.
Okay so we have a a motion by
chairman small for the executive
recommendation and then a second
from Representative Trujillo are
there any objections.
Seeing none we will take that
executive recommendation thank
you very much thank you madam
chair.
Right next we have we have six
forty seven developmental
disabilities planning council.
We are we missing is Kelly Clint
yes.
Okay.
All right right in the big guns.
Wonderful.
An amateur.
Very good are you ready I've
never been with
tried.
Thank you Mr Abbey would you
like to introduce your
counterparts.
We have MaryBeth we have Mister
Liu the director of the agency.
And Committee Meredith with
health twenty differences and
I'll.
A process that would.
Madam chair but that sounds just
fine to me
Is that better madam chair okay
it's hard to tell over here I
very best inform the DFA analyst
for developmental disabilities
council
no we just started and I would
be happy to hear that over to
you.
Do you need it at the committee
finishing what they're saying.
Okay.
Your reserves it's up to you you
okay.
Thanks Kelly okay madam chair
I'll just go over starting with
a high level for you this is
agency six forty seven I don't
want to disabilities council.
so for the revenue for this
agency both recommendations to
increase general fund revenue
but the executive general fund
recommendation with nearly one
point four million dollars about
the LFC so we do have some
differences here to potentially
discuss in the base the
executive recommendation for
person for the entire agency was
five hundred thirty seven
thousand dollars above LFC this
is primarily to reduce the
vacancy rate but I will know in
here it's also to adjust some of
the fixed rates to projected
amounts to lead agency to pay
those GST and do it as needed
and that okay the LFC
recommendation for person I was
flat with the FY twenty three
operating budget and it was four
thirty seven point nine thousand
above the actuals for FY twenty
two.
Well both recommendations to
significantly increase
contractual services for
guardianship rate increases the
executive recommendation was
seven hundred and forty three
thank seven hundred and thirty
four point three thousand above
the LFC case backlog.
So previously the council had
received a special appropriation
of five hundred thousand dollars
this was for guardianship to
reduce a wait list in FY twenty
one and twenty two unfortunately
they did not spend the full
amount and they did revert some
to the general fund if I may I I
think that director where is
likely to want to address this
to you so I will leave that for
her to look LFC recommendation
for non recurring specials
included two hundred and fifty
thousand for guardianship cases
backlog it well the executive
has that funding in the the
base.
Lastly the executive
recommendation for other costs
what is ninety six point six
thousand above the LFC and again
this is is related to reducing
the vacancy rate and to those
risk rates that needed some
adjustment
to ensure that they were correct
Elissa come to consensus for
performance measures so no
issues there and lastly for
expansions there wasn't
expansion added on the executive
side it's for two FTE to support
the office of special education
I'd which may also be something
else that director requirement
want to speak with you about
I will turn it over to Kelly
madam chair if you would like to
do that first because thank you
madam chair members the
committee were on the first
P. seven two seven there's not a
huge amount of difference about
five hundred thousand dollars in
general fund and there's really
it's all related to personnel so
that first that major
differences the expansion
recommended by the executive
which was a hundred and seventy
seven thousand of that five
hundred thousand dollar
difference and then in addition
the executive also reduce the
vacancy rate by about two
hundred and seventy two hundred
twenty eight thousand sorry yeah
so this two things together made
the largest difference in person
and then there's also some
miscellaneous adjustments in the
other cost categories related to
this person remember in the
other costs category there is
funding for such as laptops
travel and things like that that
go to supporting when you bring
additional people into the
office and so really the only
difference.
Related to that FTE cost.
With that I'll turn it back over
to you more about.
Okay thanks Kelly madam chair I
will go over the other P. code
for the HSD is the office of
guardianship it's P. code P.
seven three seven this is where
obviously the the remainder of
the differences are a little
more stark the executive general
fund revenue recommendation for
the office of guardianship with
eight hundred and sixty six
point one thousand over the LFC.
The executive recommendation for
general fund was
just below eighteen percent
above FY twenty three the LFC
recommendation was an increase
of four point six percent in the
base the executive
recommendation thanks increases
the personnel costs by about a
hundred and thirty one point
eight thousand again primarily
to read it reduces it can see
right the LFC recommendation
kept funding flat with FY twenty
three operating budget levels.
The LFC recommendation for
personal more closely aligned
with FY twenty two actuals.
and again this I I noted in the
the overview or talking about
the roll up of the agency the
contractual services
guardianship costs is where the
rest of the differences really
are in this agency I won't re
hash it
But that is that is
A large a large place where
there's differences there and so
the LFC LFC recommendation again
had two hundred fifty thousand
dollars for nonrecurring
for the guardianship cases
backlog.
Well the executive I put that in
the base performance measures
have been reconciled and so with
that madam chair.
Of course I'll turn it back to
Kelly actually if I could just
get the committee is to turn the
page seven of your packet
as you know this is an
additional page we're including
this year just because there's
so many differences in the
nonrecurring recommendations and
so we're slowly discussing as we
go through the agencies and so
this just shows you the
difference between those
nonrecurring revenue
recommendations you're not
acting on those today it's just
for context of this budget and
so you'll see here the executive
have several additional
nonrecurring general fund
recommendations on top of
the recovery recommendations and
then the LFC have that two
hundred fifty thousand which we
discussed to work on the case
backlog so again reminder we're
not acting on the nonrecurring
is just for context for you
recurring recommendation today.
And with that we will through.
Can I ask a quick question for
clarification difference between
section five the LFC
recommendation of two hundred
and fifty thousand and then
the last row
section six the executive
recommendation of three hundred
and thirty two thousand.
And madam chair I can I can
answer that for you so the HSD
had put into separate requests
for supplemental funding for the
upcoming year one section six
which is actually supplemental
for the current year through
June thirtieth on the other
section I would allow them the
ability to expand over the next
fiscal year so a three thirty
two thousand recommended by the
executive is intended for the
remainder of FY twenty three the
two hundred fifty thousand
dollars recommended by LFC could
be using either fiscal year as
of the special whereas the six
hundred and fifty thousand
action change the executive
recommended is in the face so
you don't see it
with the LFC recommendation
there yes and madam chair just
for future reference would cause
you're gonna see the same
spreadsheet for every agency on
the subtitles below it says
section five and then their
title below it so if you're ever
looking using you see section
seven it says total gives you
context of I. T. systems in the
future because you're gonna be
seeing that a lot.
Thank you so much.
Director thank you madam chair
I'm very briefly a I'd like to
recognize a few people in the
room that made a special trip
appears Santa Fe for today's
hearing today we have with us
are chaired the please stand
Joel Davis of Rio Rancho New
Mexico we have our treasurer
Valentin and I. F. from Sikar
New Mexico and our staff members
CFO children.
Thank you very much and today is
also autism day in the
legislature and so we have many
friends and families here today
that are here to celebrate
autism day and to bring
awareness to
Yes.
Thank you welcome.
To bring awareness the state
about about autism and all the
things that we need to do to
support support that so
I think I will cut right to the
chase first and talk about
guardianship and so I think the
primary concern of this
committee in past years has been
the wait list reduction of the
wait list making sure that we're
providing appropriate and
adequate guardianship services
across the state
and so because of that this
legislature has supported just
affect prior years and given us
really great appropriations in
since twenty nineteen we have at
least one year is here about the
wait list every year at the
beginning of the year we really
are aggressive when it comes to
what was production and we get
to a point in the year where we
just have to stop to address the
the special appropriation of.
Big chunk of which of a little
over fifty percent was was
reverted this last year we the
agency did not have a CFO which
is our primary only financial
staff person in the agency for
seven months and that was a
seven month starting in April on
down and so we're looking at
closing out the year opening up
the new year setting up the
OpBud for the next year and
putting in that the request for
the next year after that so
because of that two things
happened one was that there was
an accounting error that was
discovered
on the July of twenty twenty two
that the special had not been
spent down despite of course my
ask of my staff you did this
happened this happened there was
a County here I want my new CFO
came in she had a lot of clean
up that she had to do and there
was we've had since put in a lot
of new procedures and policies
in place to keep to make sure
that we have checks and balances
this kind of accounting or
doesn't happen again.
Another thing that happened was
that when this this year this
current the FY twenty one I'm
sorry twenty three operating
budgets orders request was sent
in you know with the right
amounts were not put in the
right categories and so this
year we would have to do bars
into two hundred to pay for
existing salaries of existing
staff so keeping our levels flat
from this year to next year
according to up but is really
not going to pay even today
salaries.
So those are two issues that
come up but I do want to know if
that
Our agency.
Has been recognized as a legal
services agency that has
timelines we don't have full
control over and you've heard me
say this before you know we are
legal services organization so
courts often have control over
the time lines and when hearings
get scheduled and that really
different determines when we
pay for the services of our
contractors and service
providers in the guardianship
program and because of that
recognition we do have a fund
guard Office of guardianship
Fund in prior years there was
language in H. B. two that
allowed asked to you know
instead of reverting unexpended
funds back to the general fund
it would go to the fund to the
office of guardianship Fund and
we would use those funds to you
continue our services.
Because of the accounting air
and the lack of this language we
now you know don't have that
funding that we need to get
through a wait list as quickly
as we need I do want to point
out that from January of twenty
twenty two to.
June the end of June of twenty
twenty two less than six months
we saw three hundred fifty
percent increase in the
weightless when we thought we
didn't have the funds to work
through the weight loss that is
how quickly these applications
are coming in but since the
beginning of this year this
fiscal year so July first we
have now reduced it to almost a
hundred but we had to stop once
again because we just we don't
the funding so we really
appreciate the both the
executive and I'll see
recommendations giving us
nonrecurring funds to get get
through that and to help us
replenish what we had before but
I do are set the committee
really look at this language is
not reversion language
To add to make sure that the
from year to year we're not
having to do this whole thing of
services and growing up the wait
list so that's our first our
first as ask.
I do want to also recognize that
this agency since twenty
nineteen not only have we really
aggressively attacked the
weightless and reduce our fund
balance which was in the
millions down to zero because we
use them all for services but
that we have been at the helm of
guardianship policy changes and
reform they're going to reduce
the cost of guardianship and
high cost services in New Mexico
for people with disabilities so
one of the first pieces of
legislation we lead we had
agency bill twenty twenty one
that increase the oversights of
upper guardianship across New
Mexico we're currently in out in
a partnership with
administrative office of courts
to perform court visitor
functions and ensure that people
are receiving high quality
guardianship services across the
state of New Mexico we did ask
for appropriation there we
actually I didn't receive any
appropriation for that but we're
still touring the program it is
just a pilot.
And so even though it's not
funding unfunded mandate we
really think it's important and
so part of this is ensuring that
folks are in the right situation
are they in a guardianship that
makes sense for them to EDD's of
the guardians authorities need
to increase or decreases as
garnish it need to be terminated
we were finding the folks were
eight and you have a
guardianship that didn't need to
be there excuse me or state in
guardianships when they were
passed that need and then of
course we're looking at support
decision making as well and this
the second thing that we've done
in this agency that's a pretty
big is in twenty twenty one we
also I'm started the office of
the special education on but
which we launched in December of
twenty twenty one we only got
one F. T. for that and some
contractors and one F. T. E. and
three part time contractors we
serve two hundred eleven
families forty one school
districts twenty three counties
and nine out of the ten regional
education Cooper programs are
regions we are swamped and we
really desperately need FTEs to
help manage that caseload in
that work when we don't turn
anybody away we always make sure
they get what they need to order
something that we can provide
for them we make sure that
they're they're connected with
that the services that they need
so because of that you know
we're really looking at a huge
need for filling positions and
the positions that are vacant
today we have three critical
ones Representative our
receptionist the person that
greets you when you walk in the
door the person that answers for
us we actually have a contractor
working for us right now we'd
like to build a permanent
position and other is an
outreach coordinator for special
education on but so we can grow
our but volunteer program so we
can get more into our workforce
and finally our guardianship
intake coordinator again the
primary point of contact for
folks looking for guardianship
services these are breaking
vacancies today
and they were most of them were
recently vacated or happens even
been hired yet like on that and.
I wish coordinator so those are
our then asks and I.
With that madam chair and
members I stand for questions.
Thank you are we do have some
questions starting with
Representative Trujillo.
Thank you madam chair and thank
you very much for presented
today.
I think a lot of you know that I
worked very closely with
Representative Liz Thomson has
been a champion for this issue
for many many years and it was a
thrill to see that she finally
got the.
The work that she needed moving
forward but
I am really concerned that
because of these
issues that you had.
Initially that the the
perception is that the you that
that the money that was reported
was the was it used.
And that somehow there was an
unwise decision for it not being
used I guess and the and I I
think I'm not saying it
correctly but the point is this
confusion between the agencies
that are presenting today and I
think that with all the work
that you're doing that
It it's fine the start it's
state starting to move forward
people are understanding the
capacity of the work that you
need to do and how much we've
been behind in supporting this
issue.
That we need to really look at
the the highest priority that
you're because requesting for
funding to move these issues
forward because.
Again this is Liz at might here
every day I'm sorry
representative Thompson every
day and and she is really
passionate and I I've learned so
much about what's going on and I
believe that madam chair that.
We should not postpone
supporting this because there
was some what of an error.
Or I beginning not sure exactly
what happened but these folks
need supports they have been.
Undercounted and discounted for
many years and not because
people wanted it that way it's
just because I think we as
humans get confused about about
special needs folks and I think
it's important that we really
think about what we're doing as
citizens to try to make sure
everyone is is dealt with
equally and fairly so madam
chair I hope that when we finish
this committee meeting that you
will consider my request to have
us reconsider the budget thank
you thank you.
Thank you madam chair
Representative Trujillo this
Special education on bird
programs is incredible and is
you know if your dear to a lot
of people's hearts in this
we and every you every dollar
that we received pardon very
nearly every dollar that we
received from the Legislature in
support of this program has been
spent for this program.
Thank you thank you
Representative Trujillo up next
is a representative Hermio.
Thank you madam chair
it's nice to see you again and
what what many may not know is
that I have been an advocate for
children with special needs my
daughter is thirty four thirty
four thirty two and and I've
spent a career doing that I also
would like to to recognise go go
and I just who is from my
hometown and who is near and
dear to my heart I've known him
since he was born.
I am going to.
To
To also talk about the arms but
position in the schools I worked
in the schools for several years
and
I.
Have you received four hundred
referrals and is that correct
since it since its inception
we've served two hundred eleven
families and
I think that's the vast majority
of you know.
People who come to us for help
so usually when people come to
us we'll give them some kind of
help so you know within the two
hundred eleven there's different
kinds of health that we've
Find.
Thank you so madam chair can you
tell me the is there a theme of
of what you're working on when
when these referrals come in is
there a trend that we need to
look at in education and in
other areas.
Madam chair representative
Hermio thank you for the
question there is and we in fact
just published a annual report
on December first which we sent
to the
health and
Thank you Mr Chriss excuse we
have with the Human Services
committee as well as the
governor's office and I'm happy
to send it to everybody on this
committee as well so you may
read it I'm it does note some
trends some of the concerns that
were seen anything I believe are
on but is here today actually
side average revenue figures a
special education but we sell
them both are super woman is she
she has noted and she and her
her team have noted on several
trends so one of course which is
and this one is that you know
school sometimes have trouble
following the IEPs or creating
IEPs that are effective so
individualized education
programs for folks not familiar
with the lingo you know and and
it's not not necessarily a fall
of the schools but maybe lack of
resources lack of person lack of
providers in the area or
sometimes a lack of
understanding of what the IDA or
sorry federal law requirements
are around special education so
of course that's a pretty
usual tried another one that we
see is getting families and
students evaluated for special
education and so they may be
waiting years and years before
they get there for service and
special education and as we all
know children grow very quickly
and the earlier we can catch
these we can put these
interventions to place them more
successful they'll be in its
exponential you know you're
right here so we really do want
to provide services early as
possible and another one another
trend that's the most concerning
and the reason I say that is
because I think we all recognize
that evaluation and IP's our
problem but one that is
harder to tackle is around
behavioral needs and challenges
because that has a lot of
overlap on you discipline in
other areas and it also has a
lot of overlap with personal who
school personnel particularly
who don't really know about
disabilities at all and so
they're working from framework
of looking at you know which of
a student or.
child in you know from the lens
of you know
any sooner childhood we really
need to be more in develop
individualized and that approach
so one thing that we really need
to see is an integration of
knowledge and expertise and
disabilities and the ways that
we do discipline in the state of
the answers your question it is
here Representative thank you
thank you thank you.
Do we have any other one we
have.
So on.
Chairman small thank you very
much madam chair thank you
Dallas thank you Mr.
first chair Mister McCoy
you you talked a little bit I
guess the CFO some of the
challenges there at if we go if
we look at our funded vacancy
rate again this is always a
snapshot so this is that this is
last year
but the funded vacancy rate were
shown in the developmental
disabilities council there's
we're showing a forty five and a
half percent funded vacancy rate
roughly
And I say that it's a snapshot
because so this may have changed
director David McCoy and I want
to acknowledge that up front but
it seems like this is an area
where you for whatever reason
it's been difficult to either
recruit or retain the the number
of some of the the full time
employees it any sense kind of
as as we move forward was was
last year sort of aberration or
just anything that you anything
to add on that area.
Thank you for the question Madam
chair and at chairman small at
so we did hold a vacancy open it
because again because of the
accounting error we thought we
were short on funds and so we
felt that we needed to pay our
bills and make sure those
services were provided before we
did the hiring but I when we
realize you know toward the end
of the year that we you know we
were heading into the next year
we have I starting on July first
to you know start services we
did ramp up our hiring and we've
retained a lot of really quality
person including at a staff
attorney staff attorney a new
compliance officer office of
guardianship of course our CFO
we replaced our chief operating
officer who now has H. R.
experiences so we've brought a
chart in the house which is
really made a night and day
difference in what we're able to
do as far as you know filling
those vacancies in finding call
in finding and retaining
qualified candidates you're
making sure they're the right
classification making sure that
the teams are set up correctly
so that we can do accomplish our
programs as effectively as
possible hope that answers your
question madam chair
representative that thank you
madam chair thank you director
them a quick that's super
helpful and maybe madam chair
director them quite we can have
an update since this is
preliminary action
we can have an update as we go
through the session you
mentioned some of the positions
that you brought on board it
would be great for the committee
to sort of see to know that way
we can compare that snapped the
snapshot from last year and to
where we are now that would be
really helpful
madam chair director David McCoy
briefly and thanks to Kelly for
the special sort of comparison
it seems like that of the
knowledge and there's the the
LFC is slightly lower than the
executive for the special the
flexibility off.
Read through the LFC either FY
twenty three or FY twenty four
approach to the special would be
advantageous for you all to be
able to use that
whether finishing up this year
or moving into the next fiscal
year is that fair.
Yes madam chair at.
Chairman having a special would
be more flexible and easier for
us than a supplemental but also
of course the the amount is
really important as well
understood thank thank you madam
chair thank you doctor them
quite thanks the LFC and but out
a knowledge and that sort of
that amount is is important
finally
within the the special ed but
which I think is as was
mentioned representative
Representative trio it's really
a point of pride with this
legislature having supported and
acknowledging chairwoman
Thompson and so many other
leadership and it's no and it's
a particular focus for you
director
It happened you have to maintain
your independence from the
public education department
that's sort of the but approach
that said do you see more sort
of integration of the best
practices since PED will it is
they interface every single day
with our kids and you know as
with a mother in law who retired
as a special educator having on
some of the challenges that she
faced and the love and joy that
she brought and still holds to
this day.
They but has to be independent
but the changes have to be
within PED do we how are.
Do you see progress on that and
do these positions potentially
help in that area are they sent
or yes maybe you can expand
their briefly thank you madam
chair thank you madam chair at
chairman small we part of the
special education on but act was
to require and mandate that the
office of special education but
work on systemic changes with
PED and so that PED is required
by law to work with us and we
have develop to that to the best
of our ability strong working
relationships of the special
education division of the
of PED and you know we are.
Always in conversations about
systemic
systemic concerns that we see
coming up and how we can partner
together in solving those issues
whether it's an issue with
funding whether it's an issue
with you know supporting person
we've tried to be innovative in
coming up with ideas on how you
know they can best support
districts our first approach for
always because this is the most
expeditious approach for our
families and our students is to
be as collaborative as possible
and to resolve any conflicts at
the lowest possible level M. we
also recognize that there are
times when people are just not
going to agree and in that case
you know we're very clear that
our role is to support the
students and families and what
they need
and so it is you know it is it's
it's a it's a funny position to
be in but it's strong to because
we do have that statutory
responsibility both PED NDDC do
to work together on some kind of
solution we hope to see under
this administration some really
strong changes and special ed
and hoping to see that in this
legislative session as well we
did see that PED requested a
really big increase that will
support special education and I
believe that the executive and
PED are looking at what that
budget increase is going to be
spent time and you know how it's
going to best support our our
students with disabilities.
Great thank you very much madam
chair thank you very much
direction.
All representative Lente and
faster madam chair thank you
very much.
Madam director my question.
With respect to the big increase
that PED put in with respect and
special education how do you
know how much a percentage that
is applicable to those with
developmental disabilities
because that special education
also includes individuals who
are gifted.
Thank you so much for the
question Madam chair
representative hundred I'm so
we're not sure yet because I
don't think they set priorities
for that increase in what
they're going to do with it you
know we do have a general sense
I will say though that
The administration has been very
explicit about agencies working
together and sharing information
with each other and so I am
hopeful that you know as of the
executive says priorities for
some of these big funding ask
for PED you know we will be
talking about it as a group in
the cabinet and other of
leadership meetings.
Ideals.
I'm working on a bill with the
PED to clarify the the gifted
positions so that there is a
clear
process for serving those kids
because they don't get federal
funding and that's the
difference so they to meet those
support that my bill will be
dropped.
Thank you madam chair thank you
Representative question number
questions chair thank you any
other questions from the
committee
you know I just want to echo
what the chairman brought up
earlier that you know what your
organization does is high
priority for a lot of our
members and last year you know
is really exciting to see some
of the roots of many years of
labor be accomplished and so it
sounds like
there is interest from from the
committee on sort of evaluating
going back and looking at some
of the differences working with
staff to get a better
understanding and see what what
can be done
is there a motion madam chair
with your and the the guidance
for staff to look at the the
different areas I would move the
LFC with that guy.
And I said to.
Wonderful we have a motion for
the LFC recommendation with some
additional discussion and a
second from Representative
Herndon any objections.
Right wonderful I'm thank you
very much and thank you for your
guests for joining us today I do
want to make an announcement and
I apologize that I didn't see
this earlier we will have times
enrollment at the end of we have
two more presentations and so
after that we'll have about ten
minutes for the public to make
comments should they wish thank
you madam.
Next we have six sixty eight
which is the natural resources
trustee.
She's.
At Mr Sanchez could be like to
introduce your colleagues yes
good afternoon madam chair
members of the committee my name
is Scott Sanchez on the LFC
analysts for natural resources
since my left a Maggie Hart
Stebbins our natural resource
trustees and to her left DFA
analyst Brian Chavez.
So as you'll see from your
packet
we're gonna make this easy for
you the LFC would require
commendation and the executive
recommendation are identical
the HSD had received the about
four point three decrease of
over three percent funding
increase from FY twenty two but
as they continue to work on the
national projects throughout the
year they are requesting a flat
budget for FY twenty four
parties primarily supported by
the balance of the natural
resource trustees Fund and
receive support from the general
fund to cover about thirty
percent of their overall budget
which pays for the operational
costs
The LFC and exec also we're both
recommending a one million
dollar special appropriation for
the from the general fund for
the damage assessment and
restoration fund to pursue
emerging natural resource damage
claims again the executive
recommendation also included
that special
one thing of number four hundred
off my colleague from DFA if you
look at the PS cal which I
believe is page three of your
packet.
you'll see the the HSD had a
seventy five percent funded
vacancy rate and I think it's
important to note that that's a
snapshot from September and
since then the agency has gone
on what I guess you'd call
hiring spree and fulfill all but
one of their position and CPO
willing will have the last one
filled here by the end of
February.
So with that and off brand of
madam chair Scott explained it
perfectly half.
Okay and then I'll hand it off
to trustee hard sentence to
read.
Thank you Scott
madam chair members of the
committee thank you for giving
me this opportunity to
talk about our FY twenty four
budget request
I will just much right in
My name is Maggie Hart Stebbins
hi I service New Mexico's
natural resources trustee
I have really made this brief in
the interest of time I will go
through the first few slides but
I have included a lot of
information under the
supplemental information
section so if there and I'm
happy to answer questions about
all of this so I think as you
all know when Ortiz mission is
to restore natural resources
when they have been injured by
the release of a hazardous
substance for oil we are a small
HSD when we are fully funded
there are five of us
We are in the process of filling
the fifth position which was a
new FTE that was given to us by
the legislature last year I
understand you may have some
questions about our vacancy
rating which I.
Vacancy
situation which I'm happy to
address
At the end of this presentation
the third slide number four
shows the settlements that one
RT has reach sense of the year
two thousand
just this past
in the past eighteen months we
have reached for more that have
brought in about fourteen
million dollars into the agency
all four for natural resource
restoration work.
On.
At page five you will see this
that that same information
displayed out the different way
I want to point out that some of
the funds so that ten million
dollars that we received from
the U. S. environmental
protection agency and the
funding that we receive from the
department of defense for the
for Wingate injuries those will
not be reflected the trustee
Fund those were settlements with
the federal government the
department of justice asked that
those funds be put into a
federal court registry account
and so the court will release
those funds once we have an
approved restoration plan where
we specify what projects will be
funded with those dollars.
I think you can see we have had
good success since the
Legislature provided us an
adequate funding in the year
twenty twenty.
And the next slide number six
I think it's important to point
out that the funding that comes
to when R. T. does have a
significant economic impact for
the communities where it is
spent and the Farmington times
recently put it very
basically simply that
The funding that we bring to
communities can really jumpstart
economic development and lead to
long term job creation.
Slide seven shows are natural
resource damage assessments that
are currently underway when I
say damage assessment that is
the process that we follow to
evaluate a natural resource
injury and determine what it
will cost to restore those
resources in preparation of
working with the potentially
responsible party to read to
settlement we've got three
current cases Los Alamos
national labs the NASA white
sands test facility and the Rio
outcome to peer at uranium mill
and mine sites in the transfer
district we are anticipating six
new cases that we want to to
initiate
Before the end of the fiscal
year.
slide number eight is just a
quick snapshot of our workload
when we do receive these funds
it is and RT's responsibility to
develop a restoration plan in
collaboration with community
members and that we are then
responsible for making sure that
the projects are executed
properly so
the first million dollars that
we received from the mining
defendants in the gold king mine
release we have committed to for
projects the twelve million
dollars
We received an EPA and EPA
contractors we are in the
process of working with us
communities on the San Juan
anonymous rivers to determine
how they would like those
dollars to be spent and in a
slide in the middle information
there is a flow chart that will
show you our time line in the
process that we go through for
establishing restoration plan
we've got a number of
restoration projects that have
been either planned or underway
for some time and again there's
a list of the I'm going a new
assessments so this is really
what we anticipate for fiscal
year.
Twenty four.
Our appropriation request is as
Soto said we are requesting flat
budget
Most of our funding does come
out of other state funds and the
trustee fund for either
restoration work for damage
assessment work
And finally as Scott mentioned
we have requested a special
appropriation the damage
assessment component of our work
is very important in bringing
successful cases where the
natural resources have been
contaminated
we are dealing with some very
complex sites and I I put into
slides towards the fact that
show you what some of those
sites look like Los Alamos
national labs what census
facility is a very complex cases
and in some of those situations
a damage assessment can cost as
much as seven hundred fifty
thousand dollars and so it's
essential that we have the
funding to complete those also.
You know it is part of and
Artie's
process to all we seek to settle
cases rather than go to
litigation and and having the
resources to complete an
assessment and go to litigation
if necessary is often an
incentive for responsible
parties to work with us and
reach a settlement before we
actually have to go to court so
That's the short presentation
happy to answer any questions
our contact information is there
if you
you want to reach out to us
after today so again thank you
very much madam chair members of
the committee for your time.
Thank you madam tri state
Representative Armstrong thank
you for questions.
Thank you so much for your
presentation and and all of a.
Bring everyone's attention to my
area here's of the LA with the
animal you can almost see my
house from there
but I was curious on the Sapporo
Superfund site
if you could just briefly
is there any movement on getting
any kind of help on cleaning
that up or restoring that area
Madam chair representative
Armstrong I understand that the
EPA this year did allocate
additional funds for the cleanup
I can follow up with you on what
that exact amount is
but that is so to remediate that
injury so to do it a complete
cleanup
the office of the natural
resources trustee cannot pursue
a claim there because the
responsible party declared
bankruptcy and so we do not
pursue cases when there is not a
reasonable expectation of a
recovery so but I think you and
your constituents understand
what it means
That when one or two can bring a
claim for injuries like that
thank you so much I I always
appreciate your quick responses
to anything that I ask you and I
appreciate what you do thank you
madam chair.
other questions from committee
members I do have one but I have
okay great by your heard.
Thank you madam chair thank you
madam yes the hi my question
centers around the to help me to
understand in terms of when you
file a suit for purposes of a
covering damages because the to
our land do you do you not do
when did you begin restoration
do you begin once this the last
of the Senator are you begin
that before.
Madam chair representative heard
and we do not do restoration
until we have reached a
settlement because it is the
reserve the potentially
responsible party who pays for
the restoration so in R. T. does
not have the resources to begin
restoration on our own but we
would want to contamination we
have when we have identified a
camp contamination we will do
damage assessment to quantify
and then monetize the injury and
work with the responsible party
in the hopes that they will
voluntarily provide the funding
to restore whatever the injury
resource is
and but we do not have fun.
Well and when we do reach a
settlement both under federal
law and state law those dollars
can only be used for restoration
preferably in the area of injury
and so we do not have funds that
we can that we can allocate for
restoration until we have
reached a settlement.
So this for clarification for me
under the appropriation request
for example what I'm looking in
the and the slide to to find it.
this is a I'm sorry for the
probation request the of five
million that was requested so
now is that for attorneys to
bring this food to help me to
understand they re appropriation
would request that you don't
begin restoration to let you
receive money so the five
million dollar request is
funding from other state funds
I'm sorry that the for the four
point five million dollars we
are requesting that money out of
the trustee Fund those are
dollars that are already in the
fund either for restoration
projects or for damage
assessments so in twenty twenty
the Legislature provided the
special appropriation for the
assessment part of the trustee
Fund and so what we're asking
for the legislature does need to
give us the authority to spend
that so we are asking for
the I'm a million five thousand
dollars to do to continue
assessments and then the three
three point five million of
those are dollars that already
in the assessment fund I'm sorry
in that restoration fund that
will go for restoration projects
exclusively.
And and madam chair Madam to see
this for clarification for me as
I'm looking at the
your organization chart you do
not have legal status of the
state Attorney General that
handles these cases on your
behalf Representative sorry
madam chair representative heard
and you're absolutely correct
statute does dictate that the
Attorney General provided our
legal counsel.
Thank you madam chair thank you
madam yes the.
Yes Representative had
Thank you madam chair just one
question
both LFC it.
Well there's a million dollars
and in another state funds for
damage assessments if that money
is being used for director does
this revert back.
Madam chair representative group
no funding by statute funding
that goes into the trustee fund
does not reverse.
Thank.
Thank you on.
I just have one question and it
is on page three thirty eight of
our over volume two
the second one under statutory
authority this is an R. T. is
authorized to assess natural
resource damages throughout the
state negotiate and settled
damage claims without legal
intervention and manage natural
resource restoration funds can
you.
Explain to me the without legal
intervention raised madam chair
I'm glad you asked that question
because that was the type of
that was not something that we
had submitted I don't know how
that language that in there but
to be honest our process is
entirely legal.
So I don't know where that
language came from so thank you
for asking.
Thank you madam trustee and so
but to piggyback off what by
your Herndon was saying so
lawsuits are initiated through
the environment department and
then performed by the Attorney
General or.
Madam chair we are actually
independent from the environment
department we do but we are
administratively attached and
they provide legal counsel for
things like HR issues but when
there is a natural resource
damage K. it is the Attorney
General that represents us so
our responsibility what we do it
and R. T. is we prepare all of
the data we pull together the
damage assessment which is
Understanding the injury
quantifying it so it you for
example how much ground water is
contaminated with particular
contaminant how long has it been
contaminated there is been a
process we follow the rules that
have been promulgated by the
department of interior under the
Superfund Act to monetize the
injury and the Attorney General
does support us in that when we
go to settlement conversations
board eradication it would be
the attorney general's office
that would provide the legal
counsel.
Thank you thank you madam
trustee any other questions
before we take a motion.
Anyone want to offer motion
manager I'd move the executive
recommendation wonderful okay so
we have a motion from chairman
small for the executive
recommendation seconded by
Representative Trujillo any
objections yes we do have one
objection Representative
Pettigrew so if we could note
that please wonderful at thank
you very much and I appreciate
the presentation and information
in the good work you do thank
you very much wonderful but now
we have our last presentation of
the day is the office of Family
representation and advocacy so
if we could do that and we've
got Mr shin yay and then just as
a reminder once we're all done
will accept public comment on
any of the items that we've
discussed today.
All right madam chair members of
the committee again my name is
action game the LFC analysts for
the newly created office of
family and advocacy.
sitting next to me is the new
director of this pointed not too
long ago best Gillian.
And sitting next to her is
Laurie Siaka.
With that I'll move on but I
just want to mention that you
can find the LFC right up and
provide to a page three forty
two.
this again this is a brand new
agency FY twenty four is going
to be the first year that this
agency is going to have an
actual budget so when you're
looking at these different
sheets you're gonna see under
the FY twenty three operating
budget there is it's all zeros
One other thing I want to note
before I get into the different
sheets also is that one one
difference between the LFC rack
in the executive recommendation
that the executive recommended
everything through an expansion
LFC did not.
Find that necessary and they
recommended everything just as a
base increase because it's a
brand new agency
and.
There's probably throughout the
year when they start rolling
things out there's probably
gonna be changes we don't see
the need to specify exactly what
positions need to be
created.
moving on into the into the
differentiate narrative because
this is functions were
previously housed at the
administrative office of the
courts both recommendations
reduce general fund revenue to
the administrative office of the
courts by nearly five point
three million.
establishing the office the LFC
recommended a twenty three point
seven percent more and executive
recommended sixty two point six
percent more general fund
revenue that was reduced on the
AOC side so in in other words a
twenty three point seven percent
and a sixty two percent point
seven percent
Increase in general fund revenue
from those two sides.
In other transfers from federal
title forty revenue the LFC
recommended one point five
million and the executive
recommended two point eight
million.
LFC also recommended one point
five million in federal revenue
because AOC previously received
direct federal revenues in
support program.
in the base LFC recommended
establishing the office's budget
for FY twenty four in the base
as I just explained while the
executive recommended it if for
expansions.
But in total both
recommendations increased
personnel costs spending
significantly above person
spending one offices functions
were house that AOC with the
difference between the two
recommendations of about four
percent and personnel costs.
LFC recommended less contractual
spending because offices
expected to directly hire
attorneys as opposed to contract
for attorneys as was previously
done at the administrative
office of the courts.
and you'll notice that there's
no PS calculus packet that's
because this is a new agency and
there was no prior
You know data to to calculate
the personal services
expenditure on this and with
that madam chair pass it over to
Missy aka for any further
Madam chair members of the
committee I would just like to
point out the
when you're looking at the
different she.
Largest differences there in
the.
And as Mr shin aces
the office is expected to hire
the attorneys but because it is
the first year of the agency the
executive thought that it would
be smart to leave that
possibility in the contract will
category in case they do have
difficulty hiring the attorneys
and with that I will transfer
to.
Actually if you want one thing
madam chair if I could add one
little thing is I LFC also in
our recommendation are narrative
we also did recommend adding bar
language for the agency so that
you know as it's rolled out as a
a plan for things things are
probably going to change from
what they're currently expecting
and so we also recommend having
the flexibility to change the
budget around is needed.
Good afternoon madam chair
members of the committee my name
is speculation on the four day
old director of this new office
home and I'm pleased to be here
with you today I want to thank
you for your service and for
hearing about all these
important agencies before I
start I want to acknowledge a
couple of folks who are here in
the audience in the room over my
left here right chief judge
Angie Schneider from the twelfth
judicial District Court who is a
children's court judge and was
previously a youth attorney
guardian ad litem and parents
attorney and I also want to
acknowledge some young adults
who are here and who have been
have had life experience with
our state systems and they are
here in support of our budget
and then last but not least I
want to invite two other people
to join me today one is retired
judge Monica Zamora who was a
District Court judge in
children's project as well as an
appellate court judge and she
now serves as the oversight
commission chair for the office
of Family representation
advocacy and Dr Merion chaining
who is one of the key
consultants who's really helped
build this project from day one
so with that I'm going to ask
that judge some more as if you
were thank you.
Yes the judge can be.
Which you know to live by if you
don't mind me standing madam
chair members of the committee
you know I always say be careful
what would you ask for would you
complain about and as I was
sitting in the audience of
seeking it's been seventeen
years when I first joined to
support that and seventeen years
ago I complained about that the
representation for parents
because it was all done
contractually through AOC which
is exactly what we have right
now as presiding judge of my
particular division I have to
enter it I had to interview
people.
enter into contracts with them
but there was no oversight no
supervision and there have been
tons and tons of studies that
show parents and children are
more successful.
Cation when you have these
wraparound services the beauty
of Oprah Act I can get that
whole office.
And and to save time beauty is
it's like this in a rules and
cloak of services that are there
for the families you've got the
attorneys that are assigned to
both the parents and the
children you have social workers
that are there to identify needs
to work in conjunction with the
advocate for the family and they
work for that particular
families small exam very
oversimplified example family is
referred to see where the let's
say we were at they have no
housing and then I say it's a
simplified example because
housing you know in turn creates
educational lessons for kids
because we don't.
Going to be they get the
referral referral is
substantiated the attorneys will
be assigned to the parents
Turkey's will be assigned for
the children they'll get the
wraparound services with the
inter disciplinary team that's
what makes it different now and
I love it and I wouldn't have
come out of retirement in the as
the chair of like dean believe
in this process and I think it's
only going to hold help to make
families more successful
senators were successful system.
The New Mexico I used to say
that you know why was
have the luxury of a mom and dad
who what I was going to do
before I came up when we will
plan on making this online.
You know here in Santa Fe and
crosses a line where you had
three point two five kids in the
house and the whole nine yards
and every child deserves an.
Every child deserves that more.
So that you support us.
And give us the.
To be successful thank you.
Thank you judge I'd like to just
just drive setting to say a few
words about the return on
investment.
Thank you madam chair members of
the committee and very
intriguing.
I've been working on this.
what this is is the need for you
to use that.
Adult that the new office will
put into places these
interdisciplinary teams that
judge Moore just spoke about
best practice our team did this
and extensive analysis of that
model in other states on the
hand that we gave you we pick
the low end in the top and the
model results in less time care
and quicker cations Santo if we
were doing we do invest
completely in this model we will
see you of return on investment
that goes somewhere between
three point six million.
Point eight million and if you
all because of shortcomings Care
so understand that those funds
really accrued to the state
specifically to see what I have
to do so.
Good perfect thank you all right
I have prepared remarks but I'm
gonna I'm gonna cut to the chase
so last year you created this
new office because you
understood the importance of
quality representation for
children families in the abuse
in the system.
the model you adopted for this
office is an evidence based
model other states have adopted
it has led to reduce time and
care for kids it has led to
increased reunification and
greater permanency rates overall
so the bank for the box it is
high as Merion just told.
this what makes this system
different than the system that
exists now is that we currently
have a program at the
administrative office of the
courts were contract lawyers
contact with the administrative
office of the courts to
Representative children they
have very heavy caseloads they
have no infrastructure that
supports them they get very
limited training they don't have
them monitors on their quality
of their representation they
don't have supervision and they
don't have coaching they don't
have paralegals they don't have
investigators they rarely have
experts they're very heavily
burdened the model we've
designed and that you adopted is
really a correction for all
those shortcomings and those
shortcomings sorry the expansion
is that it's an expansion of a
program a program of contract
attorneys to a statewide law
office with a full
infrastructure of support and
it's that infrastructure of
support that will make the
difference and lead to the
better outcomes for kids that
doesn't come without a price tag
so what we're asking what we
asked you for originally it is
closer to the DFA recommendation
but even the DFA recommendation
will not allow us to fully
implement this model with a full
complement of social workers
family support navigators
paralegals investigators
supervising attorneys that
unable the quality of
representation of these families
need and is our and that will
provide the support through the
family support navigators to the
families as they go through this
system which enables them to
engage in the services that
actually will transform their
lives so those Kate those family
support navigators in those
social workers they are critical
pieces to this puzzle and so we
really just urge you to not only
adopt the DFA recommendation but
to really seriously considering
adding back one point.
Six three million dollars to
support those positions those
critical positions attorney
positions family support
navigators not social workers by
investigators
paralegals and there are some
fiscal managers and office
managers that were reduced and
that executives budget that are
critical so it's really we're
making a major shift in model
this isn't it we're not just
transplanting a program from the
AOC to another location this is
a whole build out of an entirely
new system that will enhance
representation and
accountability.
I
leave it at that and will stand
for questions.
Wonderful thank you.
we'll start with Representative
harm you.
Thank you for what to do madam
chair and thank you for what you
do in your presentation and and
mine is more of a COVID so as a
children's advocacy provider and
for thirty years thirty two
years
what I can really say is you're
right we have to change the
paradigm shift to how we deal
with families and children in
crisis and the wraparound
services are really what's going
to take us out of this crisis
we're in a crisis in New Mexico
and there just is no doubt and
what we must include in this
conversation our families family
units to be able to change the
generational problems that we
see thank you for the work that
you do and I do recommend that
we look at that higher I know
that we have to go with the with
the lowest but I do recommend
that we all set and and look at
the higher recommendation thank
you.
Representative Armstrong.
Thank you madam chair and thank
you for your presentation I was
curious if this could possibly
be paid for out of the CDC.
And if anyone's ever thought
about looking at that.
Madam chair and representative
are you were you specifically
talking about the early
childhood fund projects yeah I
believe it probably could Madam.
Okay thank you.
chairman small thank you very
much madam chair thank you
director think analyst madam
chair director one for same
question that ranking member
Armstrong had.
Has there been sort of.
I think staff analysis as to
what portion because it's not
going to all be in that age
group but it's a it's a great
suggestion and I would echo at
This madam chair director I
guess we are you in dialogue
with secretary Groginsky from
ECECD given that there's overlap
and of course the same question
with
with secretary Vigil from CYFD.
madam chair members of the
committee chairman small
I hesitate to speak on behalf of
any other state agency I know
that secretary Miss Vigil as my
former boss was very very much
in support of the creation of
the office of Family
representation and advocacy she
help support the passage of that
bill last year we have not been
in conversation with ECECD I
will say that children zero to
five or the largest population
in the foster care system
however the as you say they are
not the entire systems of the
trust fund is probably only
appropriate for some portion of
the funding
I also want to add that there I
think there were some
misstatement of out the federal
funding that's available for
this the funding that comes from
the federal government to this
the forty agency which is CYFD
is based is a reimbursement
formula and it depends you know
it's an up front investment on
our part and we were turn about
a point to fund twenty five
percent comes back to the state
in the LFC as Timmons it said it
had there were transfers of one
point five million for forty and
one point five for something
else there is no something else
there's no independent funding
stream for this program other
than forty I think one point
five is a slightly low estimate
we estimate that with full
funding we would have two point
five million dollar return it
for you funds but there is no
separate and independent other
pool of funding okay thank you
very much venture thank you for
that
and I you know the given the
sort of the the new nature of
this I appreciate for the
context that's actually madam
chair my next question for the
analyst if Mister chair if I
understood correctly
the LFC recommendation
technology that it's a lower
dollar amount by putting that in
the base is that the yours sent
the what you tried what you
shared want to make sure I
understand is that that is more
flexible for this new
Department new entity to sort of
program as you grow verses an
expansion recommendation which
is the executive approach they
cannot they cannot deviate
outside of the positions that
are identified.
Mr Mr chair and madam chair I
would just say that.
the agency has to be able to
grow they have to be able to
start up there are a lot of
tasks that the agency has to get
through you know this first year
and I think you know holding on
to us you know starting with the
specific
classification that sort of
thing it's it's probably not the
best way to go you know the
legislature you know it this
body here years ago I decided
take out FTE counts out of house
bill two and and that sort of
thing and so we don't typically
recommend having specific FTEs
within the bill and
and that's sort of why we took
it that way it's just a build up
the base and build the
The budget that way thank you
madam chair thank the state
thank you for that
that that approach seems wise I
deeply respect madam chair
director
the clear like the the
incredible thinking that's gone
into this and the very strong
and clear vision.
they're uniting it it's great
technology and analysts human
knowledge to that this is an
increase above the is
significant in great increase
above what these services were
receiving last year in the
administrative office of the
courts
and maybe there's work to do to
right size
front but but so and deeply
appreciate sort of the
recognition from experts on this
committee I'm not one that that
really see this as an important
step forward given the crisis I
think as we've heard so that's
very positive thank you very
much chair.
Thank you did you have in the
process.
Representative Representative
Brown.
Thank you madam chair.
This Kelly a
You may know this already but we
did hear some numbers published
yesterday from the state
investment council that the
early childhood education trust
fund has gone from an initial
funding of three hundred million
dollars the value of that is now
three point four billion in
December twenty twenty two.
Extremely well shocking growth.
So I think there's merit in
looking at if some of the
distributions from that fund
could be used for this in my
opinion madam chair is this this
is a very important at new
agency and we don't want to
pinch pennies at this time for
sure not and let's give you
everything that you you need to
do it right so I appreciate that
but I I also have one question
madam chair fiscal year on your
handout
You have in a circle of circular
circle area that you the request
for twenty twenty three the
third item I'd like a little
explanation it says are part of
the.
Funding would be claim twenty
five million federal
reimbursement on eleven million
and maybe I miss what that was
about but if you would just go
through that I'd appreciate it
thank you madam chair Madam
chair representative on my
pleasure this is the for you
federal funding that I was
discussing earlier so for every
dollar that this office spends
on enumerated list of activities
but most of this budget that we
receive so for attorney
representation for the social
work or support for the family
support navigators for training
of attorneys and staff some
administrative costs we can
claim federal for the money so
we submit through CYFD an
invoice we will do this and we
will get back up formula that
amounts to about twenty five
percent the way it works is for
every dollar
the federal government that
takes what's called our
penetration rate that's the
number of children the
percentage of children in CYFD
custody who qualify for for you
funding so it's a an economic
analysis that they do in New
Mexico are penetration rate is
fifty percent so they have they
take the dollar they divided by
the penetration rate or
multiplied by the penetration
rate and then they multiply that
by another by fifty percent
that's the return rate so it
winds up being about twenty five
cents on every dollar so that's
how we get to the two and a half
million based on what thank you
madam chair in the state is so
how long do you wait until this
money shows up to we can start
billing quarterly so what we
will one of the many tasks we
have between now and July first
when we open our doors formally
and start having clients is
entering into a joint powers
agreement with CYFD currently
the administrative and office of
the courts has that kind of
agreement it's not going to be a
novel agreement we will just
basically shifted to the new
agency I think it's really
important to say that.
It's critical that we have what
we need in place for July one
because the families that are in
the system need to have zero
experience of transition we have
a hundred twenty five or so
attorneys who contract with the
administrative office of the
courts were available to us we
think will become contractors or
employees of of this office we
have
a demonstration project that's
federally funded that well and
September thirtieth where we
have some family support
navigators already doing this
work in some search social
workers we expect them to
continue the work in some
fashion we want a seamless
transition for these families so
they can move through the system
as quickly as possible and with
as much success so that the
children are returned home and
that's where they stay safely.
Thank you thank you madam chair.
baster Herndon thank you madam
chair thank you of.
Madam directing congratulations
on your new appointment I I just
have a couple of clarifying
questions if I may so I'm
looking at your mission and it
says the mission of the call of
the office of family
Representative representation
advocacy is to provide high
quality legal representation for
children youth parents and
guardians in child abuse and the
and the black proceedings so I'm
a little confused because most
sometimes this neglect involves
the parents so I'm not sure what
you are providing their so
helped me in understanding this
mission so so madam chair and
representative frontier and the
in our children's code all
parents guardians and students
were involved in abuse and
neglect case they're all
entitled to counsel as are each
of the children involved in each
of those cases so there must be
a lawyer sometimes it's a best
interest model lawyer for young
children under fourteen it's a
traditional representation model
for fourteen and older at the
moment and each parent gets a
lawyer so they what arts and
lacked whether to fuse they go
through the same system and they
get the same representation what
we're adding is this social work
interdisciplinary component so
this office will one of the key
things that we're gonna have to
do is
Manage the come attentive
conflicts so that all of those
parties can have independent
representation through our
office.
Thank you madam chair and madam
executive director one other
question is with respect to the
way your office may work with
CYFD there's lots of
conversation here talk about the
office of the courts and the
madam chair Madam executive
director I think you most
particularly in those situations
where
children were returned to a home
where there was subsequent harm
to the child so my question
madam chair and then maybe they
could director are you working
to augment and just this the
attorneys that CYFD so that
there is the greater of.
A focus on the decisions that
are made there to make sure that
we're making the best decisions
in the best interests of the
child so madam chair and
representative Herndon.
Not exactly I guess what I would
say is this.
I think the best quality
representation for lawyers in
this particular system is a
mixed model of the most
collaborative legal advocacy and
the best legal skills in the
core a lot of what happens in a
child and abuse neglect case
happens outside of the courtroom
the bulk of the case happens in
in formal and semi formal
meetings with CYFD so there's a
tremendous opportunity for high
quality advocacy that's
collaborative with CYFD to make
sure that the best informed
decisions are made these lawyers
from the office of Family
representation can do that work
as can the social workers and
family support navigators who
will sit with our with our
clients in family centered
meetings in I PP meetings in
order with CYFD at the table to
make the most informed decisions
so that parents can engaging the
services that they need so that
they will go ahead so their
children will come home safely
so it's it's not a sort of
classic lawyers model but it is
one where there's collaboration
what I say that we're helping
CYFD yes I think it will help
CYFD in the long run but the
decision making an independent
judgment of the lawyers on this
team will remain intact on a
professional responsibility
thank you madam chair madam
secretary.
Representative Pettigrew.
Thank you madam chair I don't
have any questions I just wanted
to
Doing on this point on that
point with Representative
Herndon just talked about we
actually did try to food members
of this bill we did trying to
get to the terminology in the
best interests of the child
Put into that bill several
different times to ensure that
the decision and maybe in the
best interest of the child.
Each time we did that those were
firmly amendments so thank you
madam chair thank you
Representative.
Thank you Representative any
other other any other
Canadian
just just one one thing I wanted
to bring up director Avid it
reminded me is there was that
new federal omnibus bill that
passed and we we do need to take
a look at that and see about the
total forty funding in that bill
and see if there's going to be
an increase on that that also we
need to make sure that CYFD
madam chair and with that that
the other funds were treated the
same way on both sides on CYFD.
Thank you yes madam chair
members of the committee I would
just like to point out with the
executive recommendation
although you do see the
positions outlined defined in
the expansion the agency would
not be limited to hiring for
those specific positions that
would have flexibility to hire
different positions as needed.
I do have some questions at any
others before
Thank you director it's lovely
to see you in this position I'm
very excited about the
possibilities for a for a
Couple of questions
In our volume to and we have
we've touched on this so it's
not a new issue question
The.
Third to the last line is given
the tight labor market and the
need for more skilled labour in
New Mexico the office is
unlikely to fill eighty two FTE
in fiscal year twenty four as
requested.
I I believe in the mission and
the need for this department
and you know I think eighty to
put full time employees is great
I do wonder if it is feasible.
so I do I do have those concerns
I just you know in every other
department that we're talking to
an agency you know finding the
skilled workforce is tricky and
so I just wanted to highlight
that
I don't know if there's a
response you don't have to madam
chair I would just point back to
what I referred to earlier of
the existing pool of a hundred
twenty five attorneys were
already doing this work and will
likely just shift right on over
into the new structure as well
as the family support navigators
were in the family advocacy
program which is in multiple
counties in the state and I
would also say that the center
of innovation at and I miss you
is also producing certified peer
support certified peer support
people that are there are funny
to I I never I trip over this
every time they're called
certified peer support workers
they're producing those there's
forty one I believe license now
they're not called yet employed
and we are hoping to tap that
pool immediately and bring them
right and so I don't think we'll
actually have the trouble that
is intense anticipated.
Thank you at yes assumption I
would just mention on that
the the office currently has one
FTE fill that we.
And and there there's a lot that
has to happen over the next year
and.
You know.
I think the LFC reckless and in
some ways it's kind of a crawl
walk run type of approach right
we've we've got to get it you
know they've got to get IT
system set up they've got to buy
all the equipment they've got to
get set up through GST in their
purchasing they've got do it
take to get set up with they've
got what CPO you know they have
to set up their H. R. functions
having come from the executive
side just a couple years ago.
You know I understand how long
it takes to lake really work
through all the systems and it's
it's it's quite a bit anyway I
just want to point that out.
Thank you and I think that you
know all of this certainly goes
to the.
Question of it may be talking a
little bit more about it
you know as we.
You take that probably the lower
recommendation today but having
some time to re evaluate and and
you know it would be great I
mean it sounds like there's a
wonderful pool of candidates and
so you know we could we could do
that
My last question is actually
about the interaction with CYFD
and.
just to be clear this office
will not handle.
Complaints or concerns with.
families interactions with CYFD
is that correct that's correct
madam chair the only complaint
that I anticipate that we'll
have to monitor and we'll set up
a grievance procedure our
complaints about our own staff
but not about stealing.
Wonderful thank you very much
as their motion madam chair I
would move we had up the C.
recommendation with your
guidance.
But and with the guidance as you
laid it out to look at being as
aggressive as possible given the
agreed upon importance and
challenges and with the new
agency.
Eight so we have a motion to
take the LFC recommendation with
some additional discussion and
we have a second by
Representative Trujillo are
there any objections.
No objections wonderful up
sounds like we're good to go
thank you very much and
congratulations on day four
we're looking forward to great
things
and at this point time I think
we'll open it up for a public
comments after we sort of get
situated.
In races for.
Whether you is is we're webcast
right.
So what I think will do is if
you would like to make public
comment if you can perhaps line
up in the center and then a step
forward to the microphone and I
think that we have about ten
minutes and so I'd ask that you
try to keep your comments short
maybe it's less than a minute if
that's possible
Thank you let's go ahead.
You madam chair members of the
committee committee my name is
Valentino NAIOP I'm on the
executive board for the prompts
all that stand in support of
that council and the
recommendations I'm gonna say a
very quick story
involving my son.
At Rollins college in this April
arts college the valedictorian
was an artistic that was
speechless she gave her speech
using an augmented device to
talk.
That she was given to us like
five years old to learn how to
use it my son qualified for that
type of device when he was in
first grade.
He didn't get it till his
eleventh grade you got pieces of
it he got a device with the with
nothing on it you got sample
software then he got real
software that didn't go with
that device in part because it
was so all last year he finally
got a device and somebody the
teaching with one week left the
school.
Okay so.
The office of the but helps to
address stuff like that that we
don't have to wait over two
thousand nine Hundred Days for
kids to get services that there
and even one of the things I
want to bring out is that it
says we sent two hundred eleven
family it forty one school
districts we all know this close
to ninety school districts
right.
So we got work to do in my
opinion so with that I thank you
all for your service call the
state for their sins thank you.
Please come to that the
microphone and it might just be
beneficial if you can if you
want to line up.
Then there's.
Madam chairman my name is Greg
Ireland I'd like to advocate
for additional funding for the
office of guardianship the DDC.
I've had a relationship with the
district for quite awhile and I
can tell you that in all
fairness going back like ten
years ago there were a lot of
factors involved but perhaps the
management wasn't so great I can
tell you that's all really
turned around in my estimation
we have a very sophisticated
leadership team there now you
heard a presentation from the
analysts with respect to those
analysts
And yet when you make your final
numbers what you're going to be
doing is investing in this
leadership to and and the way
that they.
All of that money to the
streets.
Try your to your attention to
the to the wait list they got a
wait list of the year and the
wait list of the year for those
folks.
It really means some of those
folks are helpless on the
street.
With no capability no financial
ability no mental ability no
physical ability or combination
thereof so at least I mean I
heard your motion what's
approved Mr chairman to take the
LFC and add to it and if you
could at least look at that the
wait list and that that that
that be my own personal last so
thank you very much thank you.
No I'm trying to delete
And I am here to.
Asked that we.
When we go to like look at this
for over ocean
that when we look at it we do
raise it again because I mean
you and I've experienced foster
care and I think that they do
need the funding because we have
amazing people up there trying
to make these changes and if we
do see positive change I think
we should try our hardest to
support them because there's too
many youth out there that don't
get the help they need and I
think that it's an amazing thank
funding that they could be using
and I'm hoping that you will
raise it when we get the chance
re talk about thank you thank
you Mr Laney.
Next.
Hi good afternoon everyone hi
Tara.
My name is coach of oil I live
about two blocks away from here
I walked and I may passionate
special education leader in New
Mexico I'm a speech language
pathologist just like Tara.
And I also hold an
administrative of license
I just I really really would
like to see bill six forty seven
passed A. S. A. P.
there is a lot of work to do as
Mister and I pointed out and
have happening to have worked in
Sapporo and helping that
community out and four other
counties I just I really really
feel that this bill needs to be
passed I would love to be
helping out Alice and Wonderland
thank you thank you.
Madam chair members the
committee chairman small
really appreciate all take the
time Mr budget since we revamp
the DDC or what from the TV PC
to the DDCA because we do a lot
more than that in twenty
nineteen we've come out gang
busters we've had.
Andrew Miner hick up and a lot
of success
when I was first going through
the school system with my
daughter I'm a lawyer my wife's
a lawyer
We went through some pretty
traumatic experiences just
trying to get her the basics
when we reached out for
applicants there were none out
there were there was a six month
to year waitlisted and when your
kids in crisis that's way too
long to get help
like I said
you know we got a long way to go
and we need those FTEs we need
the guardianship office to be
fully funded and we appreciate
your concern and your time I
love the individually meet with
you all the seamy testifies some
of you on the floor I'm gonna
try to keep it starts at OnStar
current on some of that trauma
but a we appreciate all the time
and consideration thank you very
much for your recommendation.
You Mr Davis.
My name is terra may and I'm a
DC council member also on board
member for elevate the spectrum
and I'm a single mom with two
kids on the spectrum Michelle
has greatly helped the the but
office has greatly helped myself
and I'm in Rio Rancho school
district so it really worries me
what could happen if there is
that funding for this office up
in the rural areas so I'm here
to speak to advocate for the
funding for the but at best
thank you thank you very much
all right great looks like we
her got a chance to hear from
everyone and kept it to ten
minutes so thank you very much
thanks everyone for joining us
