Representative Garrett.
Representative Hernandez.
Representative Herndon.
Representative Herndon.
Representative Herrera.
dressing.
Representative Little.
Representative Little.
Representative Lujan.
Representative Pettigrew.
Representative Sanchez.
Representative Sariana.
Representative Sariana.
Representative Silva.
Representative Vincent.
Representative Vincent.
Vice Chair Dixon.
Vice Chair Dixon, uh, he, OK.
Chair small.
Mm.
Great. We have a quorum of
members. Thank you very much,
uh, everybody who's in uh person
online, thanks for joining. We,
we have a number of different
committees that are going today,
um, so we'll be adjusting and
working forward, um, with that,
we want to jump right in. So uh
we're at our midway catch-up
cleanup point members. This is
really exciting in the past, it
catch up, clean up all the
adjustments is done all at the
end, which um we're adjusting,
we're adding the midway.
Ketchup, clean up. We do have
Um
Some strong spending targets to
stay sustainable.
Uh, while there are many
different priorities that we
see, uh, we just cannot fill the
entirety of everyone, uh, simply
to say sustainable. And so this
midway catch-up cleanup follows
analysis that you all have uh
flag.
In your subcommittees, um, and
we're flagged by subcommittee
chairs, vice chairs, uh, and
other.
Excuse, and then,
um, these are recommendations
that we can support for major
priorities while continuing to
stay within our recurring
framework. Um, when we move into
work groups later today, members
please stay within the topics
that were referred to those work
groups for consideration, uh,
and regarding our education work
group, today's the focus is on
one-time funding. So it's not on
recurring funding once we get
into the uh education work
group.
It's on one time funding.
Uh, public safety, we've, of
course, heard many of our public
safety agencies are all of them
staff has a recommendation for
compensation investments and um
budget increases for newly
elected district attorneys, uh,
which was one of the flags that
came out of the recent district
attorney hearings. OK, with
that, we're gonna go straight to
uh director writing, Director
Sale, um, for our subcommittee
catch-up cleanup, they'll point
us to the right sheet.
numbers and we'll uh go forward
from there.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Thank you,
members of committee. Good
morning. I'm Amanda Briding,
your chief of staff will be
working off of this that says
HAFC catch up cleanup. It should
be near the top of your many
handouts for this morning. Um,
of course, I have director Seli,
um, his staff really helped us
do this analysis and he'll
answer the hard questions when I
don't know them.
So, um, we'll go ahead and start
off um with the directive of Mr.
Chair. So we'll start in line
number one. This is for the
state investment council. This
is an easy one. This is general
fund neutral, so, um, the
recommendation is to maintain
that LFC recommendation, uh, but
it was very important to the
state investment council to
switch things up a little bit,
so we're basically removing 1.2
million from the contracts
category and
moving it into the 200s
category. So that was their
request, they're fine with that.
Um, number 2, line 2 is for the
gaming control board. I know
that the um, the personnel
category was a big flag for this
one. We worked with LFC to um.
Figure out the biggest priority
there and added about $87,000
for a um a general fund revenue
for a senior gaming auditor
position.
Number 4 is for the Martin
Luther King Junior Commission.
Um, this is a 101,000 recurring
general fund revenue. For those
of you who are in this
subcommittee, essentially there
was new leadership for the
commission that came in after
the request was submitted, so
LFC didn't have time to evaluate
the new request. Um, so this
just takes it up to the
executive recommendation, which
did meet that new request.
Um, number 5 is for the miner's
Hospital. There was a bit of
confusion with um in other
revenue question on this one,
and the committee ultimately
adopted the executive
recommendation, which did not
include this 675,000 transfer
from other financing uses after
some discussion with DFA, LFC,
and the agency, they ultimately
concluded that the hospital does
in fact need that other revenue
source, so this would just add
that.
back in and bring it up to the
LFC recommendation. Number 6,
the Crime Victims Reparation
Commission. Uh, this was flagged
by our committee chair as well
as several other members. The
wreck that was adopted was the
LFC, um, the recommendation here
on catch up cleanup is to keep
that LFC recommendation for
recurring money, but then add in
$1 million in one time money uh
to fund the sexual assault
victims, which was seemed to be
the biggest priority for the
and for uh the subcommittee
chair for that one.
Number 7, Department of Homeland
Security and Emergency
Management, uh, the HAFC
catch-up cleanup recommendation
is to add 220,000 here for
personnel. I know that those FTE
that were requested were a
really big priority for the
subcommittee and for members. So
this would add 3 of those FTE.
Number 8, Office of Military
Base Planning. Again, the LFC
recommendation was adopted
there. Uh, the biggest
difference in these two
recommendations was in the
contracts category, the agency
wanted um some additional
general fund revenue to contract
due intergovernmental agency
contracts, um, to essentially
build up capacity and work with
the community for quality of
life stuff. Um, this would add
$100,000 for that purpose.
Almost at the end here, number 9
for military affairs department,
um, the LFC recommendation was
adopted here. These budgets
weren't actually that different
except for the governor's
challenge program, which was
funded in the executive, but not
in the LFC. Um, that was also
requested as a one-time funding,
so this recommends to look at
that one time appropriation
instead of putting that in the
recurring budget and have you
all consider adding some
accountability language to that
so we can really measure the
out.
comes from that program.
And then lastly, number 10, the
New Mexico Livestock Board. This
would add 721,000 for the meat
inspection division, the request
and the gap with the executive
was close to 3 million, so this
does, you know, some of that and
allowed them to build that
capacity and then you all can
come and re-evaluate um if they
need additional positions or
what you all should go to from
there. We did discuss with the
agency doing sort of a grow
appropriation for this, but
because it's an existing
program, and it's a relative
relatively small amount of
money, the recommendation is to
start with this smaller amount
in the recurring.
So that's what I have for you
from subcommittees. I do have
one more note, um, the PRC, the
public regulation commission,
uh, was also flagged by members
as having some differences.
Staff looked at that and
The PRC has brought a new budget
request since the one that you
all looked at. It's not that
new, but at the request of the
Senate, um, they were asked to
bring a request that would
really allow them to build up
new capacity. So what you all
looked at, the biggest
difference was in $200,000 for
um rent essentially so they
could rent a hearing room staff
thinks that it's better to move
that PRC for a second look into
a subcommittee, so you all can
or a working groups are.
the economic development working
group, so you can really dig in
and um work on maybe staff stuff
or capacity stuff rather than
just that, uh, leasing request.
And with that, Mr. Chair, I
think we're set and we can do
some questions. Great. Thank you
very much,
uh, Director Bri. We're gonna go
to questions starting with 4%
down.
Thank you, Mr. Chair and thank
you for the presentation. Mine,
mine's more of a learning curve
question.
Is ketchup is so am I
understanding that this sheet.
With 11 with 10 items, is the
ketchup and clean up from the
work that we've been doing since
the session started and the
subcommittee work.
Mr. Chair Representative Doo,
this is just for the
subcommittee work. So I know
that there's a lot of agencies
you've heard, uh, that have
other flags, so those bigger
agencies you all will tackle in
work groups. Uh, this is just
for the subcommittee reports
which the LFC staff will start
drafting here pretty shortly.
OK, so
Thank you, Mr. Chair, Amanda
Turl. So any of the other
concerns?
That
If, if, if there is a concern in
subcommittee,
And it was presented.
Then who decided which things
were addressed and which one I
I'm just learning like did, did,
did you guys work?
Cause I don't remember the
subcommittee, we didn't take any
action or do anything, we
listened.
Mr. Chair Representative Dao, so
the subcommittees, the
subcommittee chairs, um, flagged
things throughout the
subcommittee, as you remember,
uh, members often said, we take
the LSC recommendation but
direct staff to look at the
differences here. So LFC staff
as well as HAFC staff all took
notes on those flags, put them
together, and then we worked
with LFC to figure out those
highest priorities and what we
could um adjust within the
framework. OK, this is just
logistical for me to understand.
So, um,
Then
if we have a concern of
something that was not addressed
from a subcommittee, especially
one that I think had concerns
from both sides of the aisle,
then we would go to you, do we
introduce the bill? I'm just
asking logistically.
What happens at this point, uh,
thank you, uh, Representative
Doo, I think we can continue to
sort of bring flags, our
capacity is quite limited,
particularly when it comes to
recurring funding. What this,
so, so yes, they're, you know,
please bring it forward. This is
meant to uh wrap up the
subcommittee items, uh, a great
deal, ideally, and, and in the
past, we've
done all of this at once, so
everything we heard got done all
at once, doing it sooner does
allow us maybe the opportunity
to revisit. I do want to stress
for all of us though that our
recurring capacity is very
limited and we still are yet to
hear or we've begun to hear the
agencies for whom that recurring
capacity is sort of most.
Uh, sought after. Thank, thank
you, Mr. Chair, and then just to
follow up on that and that's my
last question. I thought the
non-reoccurring was very
limited, like the definition of
reoccurring and non-reoccurring
was changing and it felt like
there's about 2.5 billion in
what we're now calling
recurring. That was one time
money and about 860 million
that's actually new money that
we're calling new money, so
thank you Representative. I
think in a lot of ways,
actually, we have much more
non-recurring capacity. Uh,
well, no
in many ways. We most definitely
have more non-recurring capacity
for priorities than we do
recurring. The recurring limited
uh to um
Between 600 and $800 million
non-recurring well over 2.5
billion. OK, thank you. And just
one, sorry, one more question.
Um, and so then I guess the
other thing that's kind of
repeatedly come up.
I don't know how we deal with it
is someone saying there's a bill
that passed, but it didn't have
an appropriation, so it didn't
go to the appropriation
committee or someone saying this
bill had one time money, but the
bill didn't pass. And now we're
merging those or this was one
time and now we're making it
reoccurring. Is there a
subcommittee or a process that
is looking at that or is this,
is that, you know what I'm
getting at? That,
that is integrated into our
work. We also have staff who are
tracking representatives and for
all of us, we have staff who are
tracking um
Legislation introduced by
members of this committee and
also by non folks who are not
members of this committee that
has money attached to it. And
we're, we've been tracking that
to at least have that as part of
a conversation. That's a
particular area where we have
the chair and the ranking
member, so members from both
sides of the aisle that come
before us from the committees of
jurisdiction and they flag, uh,
their both legislative and
spending priorities as another
way.
For us to sort of welcome input
from members who aren't on the
committee. Thank you. Thank you,
Mr. Chair, because I, I mean,
I've been out for 2 years, but
there have been some bills that
did not pass through committee
that did not have an
appropriations that did those
bills died.
And now it feels like some of
those are getting money, not
even just one time reoccurring.
So I'm, I'm also concerned about
the public vetting and public
process of, of vetting those.
Thank you. Thank you. OK, we're
gonna go to Representative
Duncan, then represent
Pettigrew, then represent Hereta
represent Duncan. Thank you, Mr.
Chair. Um, and I to
clarification on um the, how the
process goes if we weren't in
one of those committees and um
and so I, I would just like to
say that, uh, on
Um, item number 6, the million
dollars for sexual assault
services. I've been involved
with them for a long, long time.
My wife's an RN and has worked
for them and their need is
great.
Um, the number of victims in
this state is horrendous.
And so I would just say please
look at that one more time.
Thank you very much for
pedigrew then represent Vedetta.
Thank you, Cherry. Thank you,
Director Selean director
writing.
Yeah
care since we started this
process, I think the list is
Bigger than this, and um,
for us to get this today.
And not be prepared to be able
to sit there and go through and
add the list.
Um, even if it's from, from,
from our side, sending it to our
ranking member and our ranking
member having a meeting with the
chair and the co-chair with
respect to this, I think this
is, well, this is a good list
for us to all be able to leave
with today and start talking
about this is, in my opinion,
not something that we should
even consider a vote on today. I
think there's a significant
amount of things that have been
left.
I know one member that's got a
list of 10 things and none of
them are on this list.
That were part of the
conversations either in
subcommittee or in, in full
committee with respect to that.
I know just as early as
yesterday, there were things
that were brought up that aren't
on this list.
So that concerns me greatly and,
and chair with respect to that,
we say, you know, we're limited
with respect to recurring.
We've gone through a process
where we sit there and we say,
OK, we're gonna choose this
budget over that budget.
As a framework.
And correct me where I'm wrong,
it is still just nothing but
that, the framework.
There's nothing that stops this
committee from sitting there
going back through line by line
and sitting there going, you
know, this is too much, this is
not enough.
And we can change those
reoccurring.
At any point in time through the
process until hospital to this
change.
Uh, it, there is approved from
this committee, and then we can
still have that opportunity on
the House floor, and then we
also have that opportunity on
the Senate side. So it concerns
me when we say, you know, we're
limited on what we can do on
recurring.
No.
We're the legislative body. We,
we shouldn't be limited.
We should be able to go at any
point in time and say, you know
what, $100 million for this is
crazy.
$100 million over here.
From 18 members sitting there
saying, OK, we can move this,
just like the conversation we
had the other day, $97 million
we're not that far apart. You
know what, $97 million is a lot
of money.
Especially when we have 85
million in the gap in a
different part of that budget.
So
But this doesn't even address
that conversation that we had
two days ago.
With respect to that chair, just
I hope we don't get asked to
vote on this. I hope we get a
chance to do this day by day and
to add to this list until we get
to sometime around February 20th
when we truly start debating the
full depth of House Bill 2.
Thank you, Chairman.
Thank you, uh, Representative
Pettigrew. We're gonna go next
to represent Vedetta.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Good to
see everybody this morning. Um,
I would like to, what, what is
uh the 300 category to the 200
category. Can you tell me what
that is? Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Yes, uh, Mr. Chairman,
Representative Pereira, uh,
those are those three categories
you see on your gif sheets, your
different sheets, so 200 is for
personnel services and employee
benefits, that's people, um, 300
is for contracts, that's to
contract things and then uh the
400 is the big other category,
which can encompass everything
from leases to travel to pens
and paper.
Thank you for that, um, Amanda,
and, um, I thought it was
personnel, but I was unsure. I
agree with my colleague on the
sexual assault money, I think,
uh, I think that is needed and
um and kudos on the uh livestock
board. OK, that's it.
Thank you very much,
Representative Barrera.
Represent Vaca, please.
Thank you, Mr. Chair and thank
you for your presentation.
Um, uh, many of these came
before my committee, um.
So rather than the question, Mr.
Chair, I just offer my support
for a couple of the ones that
are priority to me.
Just like my colleagues before
me, the crime reparation, um,
commission that fun in my
opinion is it's long overdue and
it's needed to help these folks
that are that are dealing with
this tragedy.
And the other thing, Mr. Chair,
that I want to highlight and
flag is our livestock board. We
heard
testimony regarding our cattle.
That are having to be processed
outside of New Mexico.
And then brought back his soul
to New Mexicans.
I think is way too far, so I, I
do support the fact that we need
to, um,
Provide this for the meat
inspection that we process our
own uh beef here which both
helps our economy, our ranchers,
and will help to address some of
the, the, the hunger issues that
we have both in our communities
and in our schools. So those are
the two, Mr. Chairman, that I, I
give my support to.
Excellent. Thank you very much,
Representative Vaca. Next we
have Representative Garrett, and
then Representative Bohan.
Thanks, Mr. Chair, and I really
appreciate this list because I
do remember a subcommittees and
um I would like to see, I wish
we could put 2 million in uh the
crime victims reparations
Commission actually, not just 1
million, I'd like to see 2
million. Um, I know that
Representative Tarana is at the
other committee. She wanted to
make sure we did the homeland uh
7 and 8.
for the military, Homeland
Security and emergency
Management. And I just really
wanna put a plug in for number
9, that's the governor's
challenge. This combined
illiteracy summer programs with
really, really challenging um
new efforts to work with our
middle school students who are
the group that gets disengaged
for education, so I think that
one time funding for the
governor's summer program is
crucial, uh, to work with.
are at risk young adolescents
and totally with the
accountability measures so we
can think of future planning by
really having that in, in place.
So great list.
Thank you.
Thank you very much. We're gonna
go next to representative Lujan.
Thank you, Mr. Chair, I would
just um echo this this
sentiments from, uh,
Representative Garrett and also
Representative Duncan, um, I
appreciate that. I think that
this is.
Um, something of great concern
right now and um.
Yeah, that, so my full support
there and I'd like to, I'll say
the uh New Mexico livestock
board. I think this is something
we've been really working on for
a long time, so I, I'd say that
that is a that is a good move in
the state investment council.
I think we answered that. Thank
you.
Excellent. Thank you very much
Representative Lujan. OK,
members, uh, so, um, let me ask
the, so director Brian, director
Lee, this, uh, this brings us
sort of a catch-up clean up on
subcommittees only. This does
not cover other agencies,
correct?
Yes, Mr. Chair, that's correct.
Great. And so, um, this director
writing or directorsle director
writing, or either.
Uh
However, we want to do uh
alphabetical order. Um, this
sort of present represents a
floor for us. It brings these
up. It limits our recurring
capacity. So if we sort of add
this up roughly.
We, you know,
Say 1.2 million of roughly uh a
15 to $20 million recurring
house house share is dedicated
in this, so we still have the
majority of the non-recurring
undedicated that this committee
has, but um, is that right?
Yes, Mister Chair members, and
as you pointed out, instead of
doing this all, you know, at the
end of our time in HAFC when
it's been 6 weeks since you all
heard subcommittees were doing
some of this work now, um,
directorli and his team will
still have to draft the
committee report that the full
committee will adopt, but this
just helps do some of that work
up front. Um, OK, and, um, last
piece, uh, I think we've heard
and, and we've heard the
flags for members particularly
around um sexual assault
survivors or sexual assault
victims and continuing to sort
of keep an eye, particularly in
uh non-recurring and specials
and other funding for that. And
I would echo the members. I
think this has been for a number
of years, the work on meat
inspections. This represents uh
or will represent should we
choose to adopt it today. Uh,
the single largest recurring
investment in that, which
is a very, is a big step forward
and a compliment to so many
members, um, so that's exciting.
OK, uh, I think I've got that.
Uh, we'll go to uh the vice
chair for a motion to adopt Mr.
Chair, before you do that, ma,
please ask a question. So I, uh,
one of the things that looking
at the subcommittees here, the
Civil Legal Services Commission.
I'm concerned about where does
that land in terms of, is that
going to be in a working group
that's gonna be particularly
important of low-income.
People have an access to justice
and to attorneys. How will that
fall into place?
Yes, Mister Chair,
Representative Herndon, civil
legal services is actually under
Department of Finance
Administration, which you all
haven't heard yet, so we did.
Some of the sexual assault
victims stuff, which is in CVRC.
It's kind of confusing where all
these different pots are, but
you all as a committee actually
haven't heard the department
where civil legal services
lives.
All right. Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Thank you for. Excellent. Thank
you very much. OK, I don't see
any other questions. We'll go to
the vice chair for a motion to
adopt our proposed subcommittee.
Thank you. I move that the
committee adopt the uh proposed
subcommittee catch-up cleanup.
OK, there's a motion.
Then seconded, uh, moved by vice
chair Dixon, seconded by
Represent Luhan, I think. Is
there any opposition to that
motion?
OK, we'll show 2 in opposition.
And with that, and rips them
down.
Yeah
OK, the subcommittee, uh, catch
up cleanup roof is adopted.
Great. OK. Uh, now, members,
we're gonna move into uh our
information technology requests.
Hi, good morning, chair members
of the committee. I am Emily
Hilla. I am the LFC analyst
going to be talking to you all
today about the section 7
information technology
appropriation recommendations.
Nicolemaus is here from DFA
talking about the executive
recommendation.
But you all will be looking for
is this key hearing issues paper
and it says section 7 computer
systems enhancement fund
appropriation recommendations.
OK, you have it?
OK, perfect. Uh, before jumping
in to members of the committee,
I would just like to direct you
to our volume 3. There are a
couple of report card pages that
we're gonna be touching on um
throughout our section 7
recommendation conversation and
so that'll be on pages 166, 167,
168, and 171 in our volume 3.
Chair members of the committee
before diving into the
differences in the
recommendation. I just want to
talk about how section 7 funding
differs from, say, Section 5
funding, Section 7 funding is
for a longer period of
expenditure. So what you were
looking at for new funding
appropriations will be for
expenditure in fiscal years 25,
26, and for 27.
Additionally, chair members,
whatever you appropriate in
section 7 does not directly go
to the agencies as Section 5
appropriations with.
They do get appropriated to the
computer system enhancement
funds at the Department of
Information Technology and
agencies have to go through a
process to certify and release
those fundings to ensure agency
accountability with the
Projects.
With all that being said, chair
members of the committee, uh,
we're just gonna jump right into
the differences, um, for a brief
overview before we start with
our reauthorization requests.
recommendations, the LFC
recommendation totals 100
million across all revenue,
which includes 28.5 million in
general fund revenue, $63.2
million in federal funds, 4
million other state funds and
4.9 million in interagency
transfers.
The LFC recommendation
recommends funding for 17
projects and focuses on closing
out outstanding projects before
funding new IT projects.
However, for new IT projects,
the LFC recommendation did fund
partial
Funding for projects that could
be phased. So that's why you're
gonna be seeing a lot of those
differences is that the LFC
phases out projects, um.
Additionally
Chair members of the committee
and Nicole will be talking about
the executive recommendation,
but their recommendation for IT
totals 195.2 million from all
revenue, including 82.6 million
in general fund revenues, 4
million and other state funds,
$103.1 million in federal funds
and 4.9 million in interagency
transfers.
Just to highlight a few key
differences between the
recommendations and
reauthorizations and new
funding, the LSC recommendation
does not support new funding nor
reauthorization for the
healthcare authorities' child
support enforcement replacement
project, which is one of the
drivers and the differences
between the two budget
recommendations. Um, what other
reauthorization?
That's the LFC does not
recommend is for 750,000 at the
public education department.
This has yet to be budgeted in
PED PED's budget since it was
appropriated in 2023.
that, I'll just turn it over to
Nicole to talk about the high
levels of the executive
recommendation before we get
into the actual differences
between the recommendations.
Thank you, Emily. um, Mr. Chair,
members of the committee, in
terms of the executive
recommendation, um, the biggest
difference is 31 projects that
was recommended in the
executive. It also includes 15.2
million in general fund with the
federal match of 30.2 for HCAs
child support enforcement System
replacement project of 5.6 in
general fund or TRD's taxation
and revenue Department to
replace its legacy tax return
software and
That concludes my, um, remarks
for the executive
recommendation, and then I'll
turn it back over to Emily to
talk to the reauthorizations.
Chair members of the committee,
uh, we have a reauthorizations
first similar to all of the
section 5 recommendations and
you'll see that if there is
language in two of the boxes,
that means that both the LFC and
the executive recommended the
reauthorization. However, if
there are blanks, that means
that the LFC did not recommend
that reauthorization. Uh, we can
go through the balances of the
projects. These balances are as
of February 6th, uh, which was
on Thursday and when we are
calculating the balances,
We are looking at just
expenditures, not looking at
expenditures and encumbrances.
So with that being said, chair
members of the committee, uh, we
can go through the
reauthorizations, um, but, um,
the only differences are going
to be on pages 45.
Which are those healthcare
authority reauthorizations.
For the child support
enforcement project, um, as you
can see on page.
166 in our volume 3, there's
some more supplemental
information about that project
status, um,
Additionally, the other
difference.
the recommendation.
We'll be on page 10, uh, for the
public education department and
with that, um, we'll answer any
questions that you may have
about reauthorizations before
moving into new funding. Great.
Thank you very much, Mila, and
thank you, Miss Macias. Uh, are
there any questions on the
reauthorization?
Representative Lohan.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. One of the
ones that I, I did bring up
during our committee hearing for
HCA was um, the child support.
Um
Enforcement, replacement, um,
technology, and I, I mean, I
gave a personal stories and
story from my constituents and
those that are are really trying
to navigate this space, and I
think that.
Even looking at legislation on
myself this year to try and
improve the process. I was not
able to miss a chair because of
federal um law in place to
prohibit me from.
A long the state, but it's a
hard navigation. It's hard to
navigate through these through
the system and if we don't have
the technology in place, it
really affects, um, especially
in our rural communities, so I
just like to say this is, this
is a piece that I think we could
really
Help our communities in a very
big way. Thank you.
Thank you very much,
Representative Baca, please.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman and
thank you for your information,
um, for your presentation. Just
real quick, my, my questions are
actually at the start of your
presentation.
So you talked about in section 7
that these monies are going to a
computer system enhancement
fund, is that correct? Yes,
Chair Representative Baca, that
is correct,
can you tell me what is the
current balance of that fund
before these new appropriations.
Chair representative Baca,
that's a great question. I'll
follow up with you on that. Um,
there should be in our, one of
our volumes, a fundal, and that
will be under the Department of
Information Technology where you
can find that from November, but
I will double check with you and
get the current balance as of
today. Thank you for that and
that's fine to, to get back to
me later. The other process, uh,
Mr. Chairman, uh, is you, you
talked about that the monies
would be in there and that.
Individual departments can
basically apply for these to get
for to draw funds from that. So
you're, you're shaking your head
no. So tell, cause that's, I
just want to know the process of
these funds because they're put
into a fund. So can you just
talk about the process or what
would be needed to uh access
those funds or access those
funds.
Um, for these projects. Yes,
Representative Baca, the process
is that agencies will go to the
project certification committee
called the PCC at the Department
of Information Technology and
the PCC is made out of do it
stuff, DFA, LFC, GST, TRD and
PRC and agencies will come to
the PCC and they'll present
where they're at with the
project, what project fees that
they are in, what contracts that
they're.
In development with or project
status and then they request the
release or certification of a
certain amount for a project,
and there's a motion to
recommend, uh, which the PCC
will vote on, and then that gets
sent over to DFA for them to
process that amount to be
released to the agency. And so
it's more of like a supplemental
information before that uh
funding gets released. However,
Um, actually, no, however,
that's just, that's how the
process works, so thank you, Mr.
Chairman and thank you for that,
and I, that was gonna be my next
question is the oversight of it.
So it is my understanding that
we have members of the
legislature through
Um
Let's see and through is
appropriations that are also
there to approve and review
these requests? Yes.
Representative Baca, that is
correct. And these meetings
happen at least once a month.
And
and if you want to add anything.
Yes, thank you, Mr. Chair and
Representative Baca, the
computer system enhancement
fund. Those funds are
appropriated through section 7,
they are general fund and um
guys are they appropriating
body, so, um,
That one gets transferred and
then it starts to administrative
process to release those funds
for those specific projects.
Thank you. So thank you. So
this, uh, Mr. Chairman, so these
funds are outside of the funds
that we already appropriate to
do it. Is that correct?
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Excellent. Thank you very much
for Barca. Uh, next we're gonna
go to Representative Pettigrew.
Thank you, Chairman, and uh.
But again, I just love getting
things 3 minutes before we get
to start on stuff.
Um
Chairman, uh, presenters.
I've been trying to go through
this.
Some of these reauthorizations
are as old as 5 years.
Uh, chairman, uh,
Is there one that I miss that's
older than 5 years.
Chair representative Pettigrew.
I think that the earliest that
we will be seeing for these
reauthorization requests will be
from 2019, which is when it was
originally appropriated, um,
actually, sorry, on line two of
page 1, there is an
appropriation, um, that was to
the Department of Finance and
Administration, um, from 2018,
however, that has a very, very,
very tiny balance.
Um, otherwise all of the.
Other appropriations are from
2019 and.
The chairman and presenters,
we're going back to 2018.
And reauthorizing these
And for the ones chairman for me
personally, I'd love to hear why
we continue to reauthorize stuff
that's 56 years old.
What the agency's reasoning is
on why this money has not been
expended yet and what their game
plan is to get it done before.
I vote to, uh, I continue to
spend, given the ability to
spend money that they don't
apparently want to spend.
Uh, Mr. Macias, if there's
anything you want to add to
that, and then if there's
specific ones we can briefly
touch on those if they're in the
audience. OK, perfect, Mr.
Chair, uh, Representative
Pettigrew on that point at a
very broad overview. A lot of
these projects aren't fully
funded, right? And so
occasionally you'll have some
balances that are unexpended
only because they, you know,
it's for specific phases of the
project, of course we will
provide you additional
information for any specific.
Arctics that you have for the
riots and we can follow up
after.
Thank you, Chairman and thank
you for that answer, but I'm
gonna be asked to vote on this
now without that information.
And that puts me
Representing 31,000 people in a
very bad place.
is
not.
That was very fair to note the
concerns, not the responsibility
of the analysts to so concerns
noted for sure. Um,
If there's just another specific
question, we can go to that, so
thank you, Chairman, and, and
with respect to that, um,
I will be voting no on this
because I don't know the
details.
OK. And, and I would suggest
That that would be the, the
proper thing to do until we get
the details. Chairman, I love
the fact that we have some of
these that aren't fully funded.
But that's not defined in any of
this.
So we have a project that maybe
he only has $1.5 million
left in the balance, but we're
waiting for 10 million, and it's
not, we're not able to connect
this to.
Uh, the rest of, uh, to the
presentation that we did section
5 section 6, section 9, 1011. We
have, we, we have no way to
connect the dots between, OK,
we're unfunded, we, we don't
have enough funding here, but
look, it's over here in the
grove or look, it's over here
and specials. Look, it's over
here. We don't have any way to
connect that dot.
And that's what I would like to
have is connect the dots for me
on each and every one of these.
Thank you, Chairman and thank
you for that. I look forward to
getting that document.
Thank you very much
Representative Pettigrew. Uh,
next, we're gonna go to
Representative Garrett.
Uh, thanks, Mr. Chair, on number
29, the public education
department, executive supported
it, LFC didn't, um, I recall
that's from uh 2023, and I
recall the discussion about
security concerns and protecting
school staff.
I would like to see that. I
don't know, do I say I wanna see
it reviewed again.
I, I would just like to have
that followed up to see if
that's something that
is being incorporated
immediately or not from the uh
PD's point of view. Thank you.
Uh, thank you very much for
that, Representative Garrett.
Miss Macias, did you have
anything to offer on time, OK, I
will look to, look to my right
now. I, I saw uh Verrera, then
represented Duncan
representerrera, please. Thank
you, Mr. Chair, and I guess I'm
looking at the 5.6 million in
general fund for the taxation
and revenue Department to
replace the legacy tax return
system that we have.
Mr. Chair, I actually think
that's very important. We're
talking a lot about spending
money here, and I think we need
to really kind of drill down on
what we need, secretary
Stephanie Chardon-Clark is
really one of the best.
The best, um, people we have in
government, if she's
recommending that, I, I really
do think we need it. I know it's
an old system, and I know
they're struggling with that,
and I would like to recommend
that we uh consider moving that
up. Thank you.
Thank you very much,
Representative Duncan, please.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Uh, I
would like to, um, to state that
Representative Herrera solved
$100,000 problem for with her
glasses so that we can actually
see and, and, you know, thinking
outside the box is a great way
to do things. My question,
serious question is, um,
representative Peter asked a
question, are any of these
getting fully funded right now
so that we can take them off the
this list for next year.
Chair Representative Duncan, um,
Can you clarify if you mean that
they're being fully funded in
the new appropriation amounts or
in reauthorizations or both,
um, chair representative Duncan.
There are very few projects that
are getting full funding, um, as
representative Ereta had pointed
to for TRD that 5.6 million,
that would be a full funding
request, um, all of TRD's
projects actually would be the
full funding request to get the
project completely done, whereas
all of the other recommendations
that you're seeing in the
reauthorizations and for new
funding is not for full amounts
of the total project cost, um.
Yes.
Thank you for that response and
Mr. Chair, I would
And, and I don't know how to
make this happen, but I would, I
would ask us to, to zero in on,
on projects that we can fully
fund and get them off the table.
Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Thank you very much,
Representative Duncan. Um,
additional questions.
OK, great. So we're gonna go uh
representative Herndon represent
Brown, ranking member Chatfield.
Um, Mr. Chair, my question is
just in the understanding of
what we are going to be doing
here. So on the first pages, I
wanna just make sure, uh, of two
page of 2 page 10, then we're
looking at uh remaining
percentages, so we are gonna be
voting on the remaining
percentages to reauthorize them.
Uh, great question. Thank you,
Representative Ferdinand. So
members, great feedback. What
we're gonna do, we do need to
adopt uh a recommendation today
to keep the process moving. I
think there's a lot of member
and it's uh well noted to that
will create an IT working group
that will have to meet next
week, um, so that this we will
uh make an adoption today, um,
and we'll have a working group
next week. So today for members
is there are concerns about
specific ones or of general flag
those that'll be what the
working group is going to be
tasked with looking at next
week. And Mr. Chair, thank you
for that.
explanation. If we go to pages
11 through 14.
Where there are we're gonna
thank you Rev is that separate?
uh, I'll jump in there. We're
doing up to page 10 now for
questions on reauthorizations
and then we'll do pages 11 and
on for explanation from the
analysts and also our questions.
All right. Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Thank you very much, uh,
Representative Brown now.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Um, my
question does apply to page 11
and onward so wait for the next
one. Thank you.
Thank you very much, ranking
member Chatfield.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. You know,
Mr. Chair, when I look down to
this list.
Uh
I know that a lot of the members
are getting hammered on for
money that's out that, that we
have gotten appropriated in
earlier uh years and, and, uh,
we sell the bonds and then uh
we're paying interest on the
bonds and we're receiving much
less than that interest on the
money we have. When I look down
through this list, I see agency
after agency of the governors
appointees that have millions
and millions of unspent, many of
them 100% unspent.
And uh
I don't know how you, how you
Adequately vote on that whenever
you need to go down to there and
look at.
Individual agencies.
And, and talk about what they're
doing. Now I like, you just
said, I probably not gonna vote
to stop it because we got, we
need the process to move on.
But I think probably we need to.
A working group to go back and
see what, why is this money not
spent? How long, how many times
has it been reauthorized. I
mean, I'm looking at
Yeah, uh 97% unspent, 91%
unspent, 100% unspent.
Uh
You know, just
Uh
14 million.
10 million
That that dwarfs a lot of our
Individual projects.
So, I hope there's a follow-up
process that would help us to
review what's going on there a
little bit. Thank you, sir. Uh,
thank you very much, ranking
member Chatfield. Points well
taken, and I think it really
highlights the importance of
that working group and also this
list and sort of our question
over the final two years of the
administration, uh, sort of what
can and can't be done. Mr.
Pacias, if you want to add
anything, and then we'll go to
the new project. Yes, thank you,
Mr. Chair and Representative
Trapfield, I would like to
mentioned that this document
that you have here does not
include encumbrances, so there
might be contracts that are
already in the system and share,
but it's not currently counted,
and that's why you have
available balances, and we will
provide you that information
during the working group, and we
would gladly provide you that
information. So thank you, sir.
Excellent. Thank you very much
for that. We'll go to
Representatives.
Thank you, Mr. Chair and thank
you presenters.
So how do we reconcile?
If it's encumbered, how do we
know that it's been reconciled,
and where do we go to find that?
Mr. Chair, great question,
Representative Mr. Chair, um,
currently within the program,
um, everything is accounted for
and share and it's tied to Z
code so we can quickly pull down
those expenditures for these
programs, and we also have our
CEOs here, um, for each of these
specific agencies, so if you
have any specific questions, we
will get you that information.
OK. Thank you, Mr. Chair, and I,
I, I, I have the, the same
sentiments as
You know, I feel like I'm
looking at a budget.
It hasn't been reconciled.
And, you know, when there's no
way to, to like representative
Pettigrew said connect the dots
so that I understand it's real
hard for me to, to vote in the
affirmative on that. Thank you,
Mr. Chair.
Thank you very much, uh,
Representative Vincent. Uh,
next, we're gonna go to
representative down. Thank you,
uh, chairman, and I think it's
another question for you,
Chairman, after the
subcommittee, they'll come back
and we'll readdress this.
Uh, great question. So the, uh,
yes, we'll, in our, the
subsequent catch-up cleanup will
be uh an opportunity to take the
subcommittee's recommendation or
the work group's
recommendations and uh address
those as a committee, in, in our
entirety. Thank, thank you, Mr.
Chair. I feel like I really do
feel like I'm in freshman mode
again, um, because I used to
vote yes because I like the
intent of the idea and of course
we need information technology
services, but I think I'll vote
no and see how this turns out
later. Thank you.
Great, uh thank you very much
for that. Uh, additional
question, like, OK, so let's now
go through, uh, let's start on
page 11, analysts and members
will treat this sort of like we
did with our first run through
the specials, uh, analysts can
highlight on a page, um, the,
the big differences or areas of
focus for either the legislature
or.
And then we can ask questions on
that page.
All right, ready? Um, so we will
start on page 11. So a lot of
these projects were certified
through the uh PCC the project
certification committee, um,
Recommendations were made by
Deit to be sent over to the
executive and the legislature
for recommendation, so we'll
start on line one on page 11,
the Gen KFI replacement, um,
project, the Legacy tax return
software, if you may, uh, the
executive recommendation
includes $5.6 million in the LFC
recommendation did not include
any funding for that. The
general, um, I'm just gonna go
into the project description
really quickly.
For a lot of these projects, um,
the gen KFI replacement project
will replace the revenue
processing divisions, um, 12
year old imaging and data
capture software for paper tax
returns. This new system will
assist the agency in automating
manual processes, reduce errors
on paper return processing and
improved customer service. Um,
I'll go now to line 2,
electronic titling, um, this is
for tax.
And Rev, the executive
recommended $1.4 million the LFC
did not include that in their
recommendation, and this system
is to purchase and implement a
system solution to replace the
manual paper-based process for
issuing vehicle titles that will
integrate with the existing
motor vehicle division system of
record.
This will allow for electronic
transfer of vehicle ownership,
authenticate.
Identify parties.
I identity of parties involved
in the transaction and update
jurisdictions, vehicle record
without printing a paper title.
Um, I'll go now to line 3, the
return of analytic system, the
executive recommended 2.5
million, the LFC did not
recommend this system.
This, this system will be used
to purchase and implement a
comprehensive analytics tool
solution or return processing of
personal income.
attacks that will integrate with
current system of record, the
Gen tax system resulting in
decreases to refund processing
times and interest paid on
overpayments.
Um, Mr. Chair, I don't know if
you want me to continue going or
wait for questions. Uh, let's
try to get to the bottom, uh,
get through that first state
engineer and then we'll go for
questions. I will continue.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Um, we
will now go to line 4 for do it.
It includes two statewide GIS
plans, um, geographic
information system plans, the
executive recommended 480,000
the LSC did not recommend this
project.
This project will establish a
statewide plan for coordinated
imagery and evaluation data
acquisition and a statewide
network of GIS data stewards and
coordinated data analytics.
These two plans will be used to
improve readiness for disaster
response, infrastructure
planning and development through
imagery data, optimized delivery
of government services and
enhanced quality or cons and
consistent.
See of GIS data standards, um,
and I will now turn it over to
Emily to talk to the Secretary
of State items. Thank you,
Nicole chair, members, moving on
to line item number 5. The
executive recommended 2 million
the LFC recommended 2.5 million
for the Secretary of State to
secure a web-based e-file
solution to make the meet these
states filing compliance, other
administrative compliance
requirements as defined by the
Campaign Reporting Act.
Lobbyist regulation Act in the
Financial Disclosure Act.
Moving on to line 6, the LFC
recommended $1 million for the
Secretary of State for its
election people property and
process management system, the
executive did not recommend any
funding for this project. This
specific request is for an off
the shop web-based software
election management solution,
and this will help the office
more effectively track on data
such as on poll workers and
their pay, training and
performance and as the LFC
recommendation currently is
doing an evaluation on the cost
of.
this tracking would allow for
the legislator to see where
state funding is going for the
cost of elections.
Moving on to line item number 7
for the gaming control board to
continue the modernization of
its licensing software, the
executive recommended a million
dollars, the LFC did not, as you
can see on the footnotes, the
gaming control board has a 1.5
million in unspent balances from
previous appropriations. This
has neither been fully
encumbered nor expended, so
that's a true 1.5 million
balance. That is why the LFC did
not recommend any funding, um.
For the gaming control board,
however, this project will, um,
Modernize and replace its
currency licensing software.
Moving to line item number 8 for
the Department of Cultural
Affairs. This is for the office
to comply with the Americans
with Disabilities Act for
federal website compliance. The
executive recommended 350,000.
The LFC recommendation actually
moved this into section 5, so it
is still in the LFC
recommendation, just not funded
in section 7.
Moving on to line item number 9
for the Department of Game and
Fish to modernize online
systems. The executive
recommended 2 million, the LFC
recommended one.
This will advance accessibility
for um
To secure vulnerabilities at the
Department of Game and Fish, um.
The LFC recommends partial
funding to primarily address
cybersecurity concerns that
could be posed to the agency,
should the moderate the
modernization not occur, so
that's why there's the partial
funding for that, and then
finally before going to
questions online item number 10,
I'm gonna turn it over to
Nicole.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Thank you,
Emily. So on line 10, we have
the real-time water management
measurement system modernization
project, the executive
recommended $3 million the LFC
recommended 500,000. The
executive fully funds this
request, um, supporting the
project, the project will
modernize and replace a current
fifteen-year real-time water
measurement.
System with a modernized
simplified architecture and it
is tied to the OSE's um
obligation to fulfill its duty
and water rights administration
through better data management
that application uh integration
and reporting.
And I'll turn it over to Emily
to provide the LFC rebuttal for
that. Thank you, Chair, members
of the Committee for line item
number 10, the LFC recommends
500,000 in general fund revenue.
This is just because, uh, the
LFC recommendation considers
other open projects at the
agency already has to replace
other legacy systems, so with
that we'll stand for questions.
OK, thank you analyst, we have a
list of questions if I don't
name you will um uh we'll make
sure you're there. So right now,
it's gonna start with silva,
then represent vodka.
then represent Garrett and we'll
keep going from there.
Represent you, chair. Um, thank
you. And also I appreciate the
uh information and
With the information I have and
I think I might echo a few
people on the committee with the
information I have in front of
me, um, I
can't see the support agencies
that have unspent balances,
increasing their IT budgets. Um,
and that might mean like there
might be a number of reasons why
they have unspent balances, but
again with the information I
have in front of me, I, I can't
make a more nuanced decision.
Um, so I just wanna say that and
um I do want to encourage um
this committee to support um the
increases to uh
and Rev and the Secretary of
State, um, I think those two
departments also just help our
state run really smoothly, um,
and really important times, our
elections and um and those
activities and when taxes are
due, so thank you so much,
Cherry thank you Representative
Silva, uh, Representative Baca
and then Representative Garrett.
Uh, thank you, Mr. Chairman and
thank you, uh, for your
information, uh, for your
presentation. You know, I, I too
kind of having a little bit of,
of heartache regarding some of
these reauthorizations. Um.
So, Mr. Chairman, and maybe I
submit that this would be some,
maybe something that during the
interim that we could possibly
get updates.
As we go along so that we can
and tracking of progress towards
these reauthorizations because
if we're going back and we're
looking at this, some may be
encumbered and that, that's
unacceptable, but is it, you
know, maybe that's just my,
maybe, you know, we could take a
look at it through the interims.
Authorizations that are made,
what are their progress on these
authorizations because some of
them, Mr. Chairman, I support.
And, and that's, you know, as I
said, there's others that I
really have, I'm having some
really questions about why we're
not able to do this because Mr.
Chairman, if
If we did this with our own
monies or our own communities,
so that money would be reverted
back to the state. So, um, I
just, that's just my, my
thoughts on it. I, I, I think uh
many of my colleagues may kind
of echo that, but I appreciate
the time. Thank you. Thank you
very much for representing Baca.
Uh, we're gonna go to
Representative Garrett and
Representative Do. Thanks, Mr.
Chair, on a number for the
department do it to establish a
statewide network of geographic
information system data, you
listed, I mean, it's related to
broadband placement to.
Transportation and roads. It it
just seems like that's a vital
statewide need and later when we
get to page 13, I will want to
know the environment department
as to modernize and enhanced
geographic information systems.
What I would like to know is if
there's overlap and relate in
any way, but it just seems
number 4 is vital for multiple
the work in multiple departments
across our state. Excellent.
Thank you very much,
Representative Garrett.
Recept doubt and represent
Pettigrew. Thanks, thank you,
Mr. Chair, on page 12 line 12
for the early care and education
department. Is that from the
general fund or from the early
childhood fund.
Chair Representative Doo that is
from the general fund.
OK.
On
Page 14 line 26, Department of
Public Safety for phase 2.
Of intelligence-led policing
project. I think that's the
integrated system where they can
share information between
agencies and what I'll ask
we're, we, let's go through page
11 and then we'll jump ahead
we'll get you back on the list
when we go forward for there,
uh, no worries at all, uh,
representative, you. OK, perfect
representative Pettigroup.
Thank you, chair. Uh, simple
question for the presenters and
one of y'all made the statement
about one of the reasons why one
of the things, one of these
items wasn't completely funded
because there was money in the
grove. Um,
Actually, you said section 5 and
specials, yeah, and so I'm
curious.
Out of 1 through 10 with the
exception of the one that was
already mentioned.
When there's a separation
between LFC and the executive.
How many of them?
May be found right now, those
separations either in specials
or grow or somewhere else in the
budget.
And which ones are they?
Chair Representative Pettigrew,
I believe that is the only
exception that we're gonna be
seeing where it's in other
places in the budget line item
number 8, for the Department of
Cultural Affairs. What you will
be seeing in the recurring
budget is for some of these
agencies that have had open
projects for more than 2 years,
you'll be seeing that built into
their recurring budget for
maintenance and operations, but
otherwise there's no other
reallocation of section 7
funding in either sections 5 or
where else in House Bill 2.
presenters
Between items 1 and 2, we're
looking at about $7 million from
tax and Rev and that there's no
funding for that anywhere in the
rest of the budget.
Uh, chair and presenters. Why is
that?
What was the, what was the
reasoning, I guess, from LSC to
say, you know, secretary, uh, we
just don't see that happening.
Representative Pettigrew, great
question. The LFC had a target
to
Give funding to projects that
are still open to get them
closed out before opening up new
projects and in turn for
agencies that are opening up new
projects, as you stated before,
prioritizing phasing of funds is
what the LFC considered and for
TRD they said for these 3
projects, these phases, uh, this
funding could not be phased out.
So that is simply why it is not
in the LFC recommendation.
However, I hear that it is a
concern of note for all of you.
Thank you, Chairman and thank
you for that. So if I was to
pull up the books on, on, uh,
um,
Oh, which one is it? Volume one
on performance. How would you
rate without me going to the
book and pulling it out. How
does the, how, how does our tax
and rev department rate are we
completely in the green and
yellow, um, the three initial
questions you ask every
department, are they yes all the
way down, and if so,
Why would we not?
Give the secretary the
opportunity to add a new
project, if she's performing
well and her team is performing
well everywhere else.
Chas represented a Pettigrew, I
hear your concerns again to
reemphasize the LFC
recommendation was just more
geared towards getting open
projects closed and prioritizing
projects that could be phased
out. I'm not too sure what the
TRD's ranking is in our report
cards. I'm sure that they're in
the green. Um, this is something
that you all as appropriators
can add into your recommendation
if that is something that you
would all like to see. However,
that is why it's not included in
the LFC recommendation.
Additionally, for your
consideration for line item
number 2.
Depending on the fund balance of
the MVD suspense fund, TRD said
that this potentially could be
funded through that rather than
general funds just for
supplemental information.
Well, I appreciate that answer
and thank you, chair, for
I mean, I'm gonna, I will say,
From the department secretary
that I have to deal with.
I may not like the answers,
especially when it deals with
me, but, uh, from, from, from my
constituents side.
What she does with constituent
services and the way she, and
the way that department deals
with that.
Um, is topnotch.
And and they continue to
perform.
For us not to be able to.
Hopefully make life easier on on
us and uh the department, I just
don't see that. Chairman on line
7, we talked about the gaming
control board having a $25
million fund balance. is it my
understanding that from, from
Because of that $25 million fund
balance, that's the reason why
LSC chose not to continue the
modernization of the licensing
software at $1 million. Chair
Representative Pettigrew to just
clarify, we did not recommend
any new funding. We do have this
as a reauthorization request,
um.
Within the 1st 10 pages. Thank
you very much, Chairman. Thank
you present.
Thank you very much. Uh, we're
gonna go to Representative Brown
and represent Vincent.
Mr. Chairman, thank you so much.
Um, I have a question.
For a panelists about uh federal
funds, and I'm looking in
particular on page 12 line 13
and I'm using this kind of as an
example.
Can we, um, we're, we're
finishing up page 11. Is it OK?
We'll ask the, the analyst,
we'll go through the 12 in
detail. I see. OK. Thank you.
Thank you very much,
uh, Vincent, please.
Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Mr. Chair, I think, uh,
Representative Heretta is really
on to something with those
flashlight glasses cause I, I'm
gonna, I think I'm gonna get me
some. What size font do you
think this is? That's my
question.
You have your flash phone.
Mr. Chair, uh, my, my question
is on page 11 and it's on item
number 10, and the office of the
State Engineer, and it's to
modernize and replace the
real-time water measurement
system, is that the, the water
system that's in the rivers
measuring CFS or what is that
measuring, Mr. Chair.
Um, Mr. Chair, uh,
representative, that is correct.
Um, we do. Thank you very much.
I know that the, the monitors in
our rivers in um in Lincoln
County due to the floods have
really taken a beating and um
we, that's how we are able to
watch the river and see if it's
gonna cause us any problems, so
I appreciate you bringing that.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Great,
thank you and great question
from Vincent. OK, let's turn the
page, uh, let's
Go through 12.
This goes through page 12 and
then um we'll have some
questions here.
Perfect. Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Um, members of the committee on
page 12, line 11, we have the
water administration technical
Engineering Resource System, the
waters modernization project,
uh, the executive recommended 11
million the LFC recommended
500,000, um.
This water systems will display
every historical transaction for
a particular water rate on the
transaction side and displays
the status of the water right.
It was created almost 30 years
ago to aid with water rights
administrations, the OSC will
contract professional services
to design, develop, test and
deploy the system and train
users. OSE will host, maintain,
and manage to support and
customize the system in-house
using existing OSE IT
infrastructure.
And we'll go now to line 12, the
family infant and toddler
bit case management application.
The executive both the executive
and the LFC recommended 500,000.
This uh system will establish a
case management application to
access screen evaluate, track,
and process claims for ECCDs,
early childhood, family, infant
and toddler program.
Um, and then I'll go now to line
13, the Medicaid management
information system replacement
project, the executive
recommended $61.9 million. This
is the overall total, and the
LFC recommended 50 million. The
difference of 11.9 million, um,
and $1.8 million general fund
difference, um, in this project
is going to continue execution
of the Medicaid.
management information system
replacement project to replace
the existing MMIS um communicate
with modular solution and a
platform that can be extended to
the rest of HCA's Enterprise
offering components leveraged by
other state agencies, and I'll
turn it over to Emily to talk a
little bit more about this
project. Chair, members of the
committee looking online item
13. This is one of those
projects that does have
balances, balances and
Eencumbrances, this is an open
project since 2013, however, the
HCA is making progress with this
project. It launched its yes
andM website where Medicaid
users and TANF users can all
access everything in one
database and it'll allow for
Medicaid provider enrollment.
Uh, the HCA receives a 9010
federal match for this project
and the LFC just is lower in
general fund due to the uh
balance that the HCA is
requesting to reauthorize.
Moving on to line item number 14
for the child support
enforcement system replacement
project, which we kind of
touched earlier with the
reauthorizations in total, the
executive recommends 7045.9
million um across federal and
general fund revenue. The HCA
receives a 66% federal match for
this project. Again, I can touch
on more detail about why the LFC
did not recommend this. However,
with that, I'm gonna move on to
line item 15. Both
recommendations fully support.
The HC's request to continue its
facility electronic licensing
information system exchange.
This system is an open project.
It communicates with it's um
minder system. It just does a
lot of integration, so both
recommendations support that,
um, the LFC did not recommend,
however, line item number 16 for
900,000 for the HCA to implement
a digital imaging solution. Uh,
this is just so that way the HCA
can focus on open current
projects as opposed to starting
out.
new projects.
Um, moving on to line item 17
for the department or for the
workforce solutions department.
Uh, there are no differences in
this recommendation. This is for
the department to continue it's
uh upgrade of the unemployment
insurance application, um, this
actually the system was way
ahead of the nation when the
pandemic hit and so New Mexicans
who were on an unemployment were
still able to receive that,
whereas in other parts of the
nation, this was not the case,
um, there is an increase in
general fund revenue as opposed
to what you all appropriated
last year and this is just
because
There was less realization of
federal revenues from what was
appropriated to the workforce
solutions department.
With that chair members of the
committee and Nicole and I will
answer any questions that you
all have about page number 12.
Fantastic. We're gonna start
with Dow, and Representative
Brown, and then keep going from
there.
Thank you, Mr. Chair and thank
you. I, I guess I'm
processing
Other
funds that I've seen from the
early care and education, and
I'm wondering why.
There's this for half a million,
and I think I saw 100 million in
the executive, like why are we
what how is ECECD experiencing a
shortfall. This might be a
Charles's question, or yeah, why
are they experiencing a
shortfall from their funds.
the permanent fund, the early
childhood fund, the rainy day
fund, how are they still needing
over 100 million from the
general fund.
Um, chair Representative Doo,
um,
We can follow up with
supplementary information on
that, Nicole and I are not in
the world of early childhood
care. We are just talking about
the IT projects, um, so if
there's any questions
specifically about the IT
project, Nicole, and I can
answer those for you. Thank you,
Mr. Chair. It's coming from the
general fund,
I think you said why,
why that's just how they
requested it chair
Representative Dao, however, you
could in um.
The HEFC scenario just put this
into other state funds to use
that early childhood balance
that you're talking about. OK,
thank you. Thank you, Mr. Chair.
And then on the phase 2 on page
14 on phase 2 for the Department
of Public Safety. Um, how many
phases are there and was the
request for more than $3 million
or is this what they asked the
Department of Public
Representative Doo, we will get
to that when uh we get to page
number 14 sorry.
I'm actually ahead of set of
behind on what. Thank you.
Look, all good, uh, thank you,
Representative Dow. We're gonna
go to Representative Brown, uh,
next.
Thank you Mr. Chair. I think
Representative Dan and I've had
too much caffeine this morning
Very good. Well, Mr. Chairman,
thank you. Um, I want to go now
to line 13 on page 12.
Excuse me.
And this is an IT project for
the Healthcare Authority.
And I'm, uh, my big concern at
the end of what my, what I say
is I want to know if we're in
danger of losing any federal
funds if we do it a certain way
and not another. So, um, on this
line item.
Uh, the executive is, um,
recommending, uh, it looks like
68 6.8 million for a general
fund and federal funding of
basically 55 million. On the
other hand, Mister Chair LFC is
suggesting
Uh, 3 million less general fund
money and 45 million of federal.
So first question, Mr. Chair,
is, um,
Are these federal funds already
in hand?
Or are we waiting to see if we
get them.
Mr. Chair, Chair Representative
Doo, I believe that we are
waiting for the general fun
match in order to receive the
federal fund revenue, so it is
not currently in hand.
Thank you, uh, Mr. Chair, so I,
I guess.
That concerns me just a little
bit, um, if we're gonna program
in some reauthorization here
when we, I guess we don't know
that we have a federal money for
it. Um, I noticed also, Mr.
Chair, there's a footnote
regarding line 13 that says
The healthcare authority has
basically 61 million in unspent
balances for its Medicaid
project.
Um, is, is that perhaps the
reason, Mr. Chair, Emily,
whoever, uh, that, uh, this is
why we see the difference in the
exact and the um uh uh LFC uh
regarding the federal funding.
Representative Doo again that
61.5 million, it's Brown.
Oh, sorry,
sorry, um.
Chair Representative Brown.
Uh, great question. That balance
again, it is um.
Including encumbrances and
unexpended amounts. That is why
we are seeing the difference in
the recommendations from the
executive and the LFC is just
that the LFC encourages the HCA
to spend down previous
appropriations before
appropriating big lump sums of
money for this project.
Thank you. So, Mr. Chair, I
guess, uh, the final bottom line
is we're not in jeopardy of
losing federal funding, either
way, uh, chair of Representative
Brown, I do not believe so, no.
Thank you.
Uh, excellent questions, Doctor
Brown. We're gonna go to
represent Luhan, ranking member
Chatfield.
from there.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Um.
And, and, and, and this is, this
is a um a great.
And, um, longer price or more
segmented prices, which I
appreciate, um.
But I want, I'm gonna go back a
little bit to uh page 11 and and
then into 12 regarding the
office of the state engineer,
um, particularly lying 10 and 11
on page 11, Mr. Chair, um, the
request for $3 million and and
we are giving the 500.
Um
I just, I just want to just
strengthen the the arguments, if
you will hear Mr. Chair without
the data and information for our
water.
It really is going to inhibit
our our growth potential
economically, we have to have
the data, we have to know what
we have, you know, when I'm
hearing from
A med students right now that
aren't going to be staying here
because they're they're afraid
of putting down their roots in a
drought, uh, written state, it's
concerning when I relate back to
them that we have we have water
in certain supplies in certain
ways, we're trying to to recoup
some of our, our water in
different ways. I think that
this is just really um really
extremely important for our
state. Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Great. Thank you very much,
Lohan. Ranking member chat.
Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Uh, my question is once again on
process, and I thank you.
did a little bit a while ago. We
don't know what's encumbered
here.
Uh, so that gives me a little
bit of lack of ability to, to
judge.
What's left on the table.
Uh
The, the first part is very
different from the second part
as you've uh recognized a couple
of times.
So, number one, are we gonna
vote on this all at once, the
first part and the second part.
And number 2,
Uh, there's things in here that
I really
Like, and there's some things I
don't like so much.
And I, I would say that if you
went around the table, you would
get that same reaction from
everybody sitting here.
So how do we sort through this
thing and see what's worthy and
what's unworthy. Uh, if we vote
on it all at once.
Are we going to a committee
later on to a work group is I
think you said a while ago, I
just wanna be real clear about
the process, so that I will know
uh whether I'm gonna vote yes to
keep the process moving, or if
I'm gonna be vote no and try and
kill some things that I like a
lot, you know, so that's what
I'm trying to decide. I think
that's what everybody's here is
trying to decide. Thank thank
you remember Chatfield, we are
definitely gonna go to a work
group, the work group I've been
in touch with director writing,
the work.
will have to work through things
next week for us to sort of stay
on our schedule. So we're,
we'll, we'll definitely go for
the work group. I'm eager for us
to get all the way through this
so that we have the full
committee as much as possible
with folks in and out to other
committees so that we can hear
the entirety of both the
reauthorizations which we've
heard, and then the new request.
One way to think about this is
that the reauthorizations,
that's money that's already been
spent, that's money that's
already
been dedicated that's out there
working either well, a little
bit or not at all for its
intended purpose in these new
projects, this will be new money
that the committee would have to
dedicate, which will reduce
obviously money that goes to
other priorities. And so that's
a bit of our choice right now.
Um, so we have a work group. I'm
still inclined for us to adopt a
recommendation today, although I
think the work group should
expect to um
see basically this entire sheet
and take the input from members,
uh, that, uh, particularly on
the areas that they flag as
priorities, which I think a
number of members of members
have done also as some members
have done, saying, why are we
going to reauthorize money
that's been
Out there for a very long time
and maybe.
So
That's where we are for right
now. So Mr. Chair, on the second
part,
Uh, you have the executive rec
and we have the LFC rec, as we
often do. Are we gonna vote the
exact or the LFC on that second
part. Uh, great question,
ranking member Chatfield. I
think we would, uh, I will ask
for the LFC recommendation to be
adopted, which gives us the
most, most flexibility were we
to adopt the executive
recommendation, it would be a
significant amount of new
general fund spending, and all
reauthorizations in the exact,
in the
recommendation, um.
We have the, the work group will
have much more capacity to sort
of look at things with a little
bit more creativity.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Thank you.
OK, uh, we have Representative
Duncan and then represent edit.
Thank you Mr. Chair. Um, just
one question, uh, panel, on page
12 line 13, and it'll kind of
dovetail with uh representative
Brown's questions. Will the LFC
recommendation give them enough
to complete this project.
Chairs representative Duncan,
neither recommendation is in
line with what the HCA had
initially requested, which was a
total of 145 million across
federal and general fund
revenue, so the answer is no,
just to keep it as a phasing of
funds year over year.
Thank you. Thank you for that.
Thanks, Mr. Chair. Thank you
very much, Representative, uh,
Duncan. Next, we have
Representative Herrera, then
Representative Vincent.
Uh, thank you very much, Mr.
Chair. I, I want to go back to
912.
The early childhood education. I
hope this is the money.
What happened is we are not the
only ones that live in a world
of kind of stovepipe funding.
There was a huge mistake uh made
by the early childhood um
division where they didn't put
enough money for the fit
program, and, and it really
penalized a lot of nonprofit
services special hearing down in
um
I don't know, uh, um, Rio Rancho
this summer, where we tried to
uh it it affected a number of
our districts, of our house
districts and and Senate
districts and and we were all
there to testify that we needed
to help restore that funding so
that agencies that were
delivering fit programs, um,
weren't penalized in that
process. Is that what this money
is about?
I believe it's just to assess
chair representative editor.
Would you like to step in?
Uh, Mr. Chair Representative
Herrera, John Courtney LFC, uh,
no, this is strictly for, for
the IT project, the, the problem
that you're referring to, um,
should be addressed in the
budget.
The, the general fund recurring
budget, um, I know that, uh, the
LFC rec has money in to address
that problem.
Um, well, thank you very much.
Thank you for that, um, Mr.
Chair, and I guess I too wanna
um
talk about the uh the office of
the State Engineer, and again,
Uh
It's gonna be a tough water
year, everybody, and uh we need
these systems, uh, desperately
and uh and I recommend keeping
that in. Thank you.
Thank you very much for
observing. And next we're gonna
go to Vincent. Thank you, Mr.
Chair.
Um, panel, if you would.
On page 12.
Line 13.
So representative Brown almost
asked my.
In its entirety at the bottom
when it says H HCA has 61.5
million.
Unspent balances.
So you're saying 100% of that is
Encumbered
Mr. Chair.
Uh, no chair representative
incident is not 100, but when we
get to the working group, we
Nicole and I will provide
encumbrances versus expenditures
for these appropriations, um.
And so we can provide the
breakdown of what was um
encumbered versus what was
expended, however, that's just
the total with encumbrances and
the unexpended amount.
Thank you and thank you, Mr.
Chair, and you sparked a
question, Mr. Chair, when you
said authorized monies have been
spent, have they been 50% spent?
Have they been 100% spent.
Mr. T.
Chair representative in so we
can also follow up with that,
uh, during the working group.
OK. Thank you. Thank you, Mr.
Chair.
Uh, thank you very much, uh,
Representative Vincent. We're
gonna go to represent Pettigrew
and then represent Herndon.
Thank you, chair. Um,
as we go through the, the work
group.
I would ask that when we talk
about
Questions like what
Representative Vincent just
talked about.
We also compare that.
With the ask for this year.
Either in specials and grow, and
everything else, so we can, as
we look at
61.5 million in unspent balances
and 16.3 for child support
project.
We, we have a way to go back
through our books and, and the
information you provide, chair,
um,
To determine whether, wait a
minute, we have 61.5, they're
asking for billion.
Is that 61.5 really necessary?
From our perspective, not from
the authority's perspective, not
from the executive's perspective
and not from LSC's perspective.
But as an individual person
trying to review and understand
the depth of what you're telling
us.
I would greatly appreciate that.
Chair within the
context of what uh yourself and
our ranking member just talked
about.
I believe I heard you say Rio,
the reauthorization piece is
money already spent.
And I would ask you,
I the the reality behind that is
not necessarily
It isn't money already spent.
this money appropriated.
OK.
So
Because when you gave the 3
different ways, they're doing
really good or they're not doing
good at all within those guard
rails. That's, that's the piece
that I think some of us are
missing if they're not doing it
well, why do we continue down
that road?
And, and I'm just making sure
that I'm understanding all the
words and everything everybody's
saying and trying to connect it
up you're 100% right on and I
think it's very 100% accurate.
Thank you. Thank you. Uh, OK,
uh, representative Herndon, and
then we'll go to the next page.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. And I'm
looking at item 11 on page 12
and I'm asking for an
explanation. So this is the
Office of State Engineer and
it's to modernize water
administration. So if I
understood you correctly, Mr.
Chair, everything in page 1111
going forward is new money. Is
that correct?
Uh, yes.
And, and you can, yeah, analyst
can answer, but the answer is
yes. So thank you, Mr. Chair and
Mr. Chair, if I look at this
project and with a $1 million
ass board, but the LFC is
asking, is saying 500,000. Mr.
Chair, my question to you,
analysts, is this this uh
500,000 based on, on some
evidence-based information to
show that the 1 million was
incorrect.
Chair Representative Herndon,
the 500,000 for OSC for line
number 11. That is just
considering how many other open
projects OSC currently has, in
addition to funding new
projects, and so the LFC
recommendation, as you can see
on page 11, line 10, also has
500,000 to OIC and so it was
mostly just about looking at
capacity with agencies and the
number of projects that they
have and then how that
correlates to what that
appropriation amount is in the
LFC recommendation. So it was
considering open projects and
then new projects.
requests. So, Mr. Chair and
Madam Manalist, so let's get to
go back and look at item 10, and
they have an amount there, uh,
the amount was reduced. I mean,
but you don't base this on any
evidence on what the project
actually costs, and Mr. Chair,
and I'm asking that question.
Yes, Chair Representative
Herndon, again, the LFC
recommendation focused on
projects that could receive
phasing of funding. OSU said
that these projects could
receive phasing of funding, and
they also have open projects and
so the LFC.
is using this as a starting
amount to then re-appropriate
new funding next year depending
on how the project status is.
Um, so, Mr. Chair, the only
thing I add with respect to that
is if this is a new project and
new money, and if they got to a
point that they're ready to
finish it, but they don't have
it only because they only have
half the money, then they have
to wait a whole year in order to
complete the project. Is that
correct? Uh, Hernan, I think
that'll be a great, it'll be for
the working group. I think in
the situation you described, the
answer likely is yes.
And it sort of considering this
in total and trying to look at
the reauthorizations first were
seeing sort of the track record
over time of being able to
finish out projects and also uh
start and then finish new ones.
So, answer to your question.
I, yes, and we have to sort of,
there, there are, that's in a
best case scenario where
assessing over the over time,
how well they've done in the
work group is going to be able
to ask more technical questions,
and I think get a great deal
more information about some of
that history that should inform
their recommendation or if there
are some priority areas to, to
maybe recommend more or in some
cases less than the LFC.
You, Mister Chair, and just one
more clarifying question, if I
may. So I understand that the
LFC is looking at a number of
projects that are in, uh, that
are in existence and how many
could absolutely be used. It's
the executive recommendation
based on evidence-based re uh
amounts that it would cost to
produce this project without
regard to how many other uh
projects that are in existence.
Is, is it based on an
evidence-based amount.
presented to you for
consideration.
Yes, Mr. Chair, uh,
Representative Herndon, it is,
um, and then a lot of these
projects, especially for OSC,
right? It ties to the 50 year
water plan, and those um metrics
to um obtain the, the governor's
50 year water plan initiatives.
A.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Thank you
very much Representative
Herndon. OK, uh, let's go now to
page 13.
Yes, chair members moving on to
page 13 line item 11. I'm gonna
just start us off. There are no
differences between the
recommendations for the
workforce solutions department.
This project actually came from
an LFC LFC evaluation earlier
this year, um, that's all that I
will touch on before turning it
over to Nicole to talk about um.
Line number 19.
Thank you, Emily, uh, Mr. Chair,
um, members of the committee,
you'll go now to line 19, the
website modernization and
rebuild project, the executive
recommended 2.
$18 million the LFC did not
include that in their
recommendation, um, this will
system will replace DOH's legacy
web technology with a.
Modern web platform, um, and
then we
Excuse me, uh, project objective
and expected outcome is to
improve staff efficiency,
decrease contractor reliance
through centralized user
management, simplified
integration of third-party and
legacy systems and assist with
content management, of go now to
line 20 the environmental
chemistry LIMSrovement Project,
the executive included 250,000
in the LFC did not include that
in the recommendation.
Um, this system is through the
scientific laboratory, um, it
conducts a chemical testing of
air, soil, drinking water,
ground, waste, and surface water
for environmental monitoring and
compliance of law and
environmental regulations for
New Mexico Environment
Department.
Yeah.
Um
And then I will turn it over to
Emily to talk a little bit more
about this specific project.
chair, um, members of the
committee.
Uh, as Nicole stated, the LFC
did not recommend any funding
for DOH, uh, that goes back to
her representative Herndon's
point about evidence-based um
requests, the department has 6
open projects. They do have a
considerable amount of balances
in their reauthorizations as
you'll see for other open
projects, so the LFC did not
consider new projects. Moving on
to line items 21 and 22 for the
Environment department, the LFC
recommended 250,000 in general
fund for the environment
department to establish and
implement.
A new compliance and enforcement
platform, whereas the executive
recommended 3.2 million, um, for
both recommendations, the LFC is
under the, the executive, and
that goes back to the point with
the OSC, uh, the LFC considers
how many open projects NMED has
currently, so.
Uh, that's why the LFC is under
the executive for those two
projects, um.
With that, I'll turn it over to
Nicole really quickly to just go
over line on line item number
23.
Thank you, Emily. uh, Mr. Chair,
members of the committee, um,
this is for CYFD, um, the line
23 is the licensing
certification authority, um, for
this specific project, it will
regulate compliance in
accordance in Naco to state and
federal regulations. Um, this
includes accredited residential
treatment centers,
non-accredited residual
treatment center service, uh,
group home services crisis
shelter.
multi-service homes and new or
innovative projects.
Um, the executive did recommend
668,000 the LFC did not
recommend any funding for that
and um.
I will turn it over to Emily to
provide any additional comments
for this specific project. Chair
members, I would just like to
say this leads into line item
number 24 in the LFC
recommendation. The LLC did not
consider new projects for CYFD
as it is encouraging the agency
to close out it's open project
to replace its family automated
client tracking system. You
might have heard this called
Zwi, this project, or NM impact,
um,
You're seeing differences in the
funding for line item number 24.
This was just, um, it's a little
bit complicated the way that the
LFC got the request and the
recommendation. It showed that
the office was requesting the
use of fund Balance, um,
however, that was not the case
and so the LFC lowered general
fund amount because it believed
that it was using Fund Balance,
however, clarifications with the
department, that is not the
case, um, and so for this
project for moving into the
working group, either we.
can consider, you all can
consider an increase in general
fund revenue or uh an adjustment
in uh federal funds and a
transfer.
Um, to match a general fun match
for that project, um, and then
moving on quickly to line item
number 25, there are no
differences in this
recommendation for the criminal
justice Information System
modernization at the Department
of Public Safety with that
chair, Nicole and I will answer
any questions about page number
13. Fantastic. Thank you very
much. We're gonna go first time
ranking, OK, uh, I don't see any
questions on this page.
Double, oh, sorry,
Representative Here please.
Thank you. Can you expand a
little bit on the um uh line 21,
the environment department. I, I
know that we have underfunded
the environment department for
years. So I, I'm just curious
what this would do.
A chair representative Verea,
that's a great question for line
item number 21, that would, um,
it's sort of a merger with the
environment department's
compliance and enforcement
programs. It's compiling all
that data into one system for a
unified repository to access
permitting, licensing,
inspection, um.
For all things that are related
to compliance and enforcement at
the department.
Thank you for that, Mr. Chair,
this is really an important line
item, um, we, we really don't
have enough people out there
doing this work and um I think
it's necessary. Thank you.
Thank you very much for Verrera.
OK, uh, let's go on to page 14.
OK, chair, members of the
committee, I'm gonna start us
off on page 14, Representative
Doo, we will be getting to your
questions now about
intelligence-led policing, um,
what you're gonna be seeing
online item number 26. There is
a 1 million.
Difference between both
recommendations. The executive
recommended 3, LFC recommended
2. This is for phase 2 of the
intelligence-led policing
projects, um.
This is also based off of
previous appropriations and
balances and closing out phase
one of the intelligence-led
policing project before fully
funding phase 2. With that, I'm
going to turn it over to Nicole
to talk about all of these
public education departments
recommendations. Thank you,
Emily. uh, Mr. Chair, members of
the committee will go now to
public education department,
line 27, the individualized
education program, IEP portal,
the executive recommended $4
million the LFC did not.
Um, include this in the
recommendation. It's a web
portal for the office of Special
education and local education
agencies to monitor, share, and
transfer, um, individual
education plans for students
with disabilities. I'll go now
to line 28, but the executive
and the LFC had $4 million. This
specific project will have other
state funds appropriation from
the educator licenser fund, um,
and then if you go now to line
29, the local education
agencies, dashboards and
reporting portal.
The executive included $1.1
million in the LFC did not
include them in their
recommendation. This system
would implement a Google Tool
solution to generate focus
dashboards and data reports
using information contained in
the Nova system or LEA to
provide school districts the
ability to identify and help
students in need.
Um, if you go now to line 30,
um, student assessment data
collection, the executive.
500,000 for this specific
project, LFC did not include any
funding for this, um, this
specific system will um generate
data and dashboards reports to
track an increase student
success through implementation
of an E5 application program
interface to upload school
assessment data to PEDs Nova
system. Um, I will go now to
line 31. This is for higher
education department. This is
for the collaborative.
Or higher education, shared
services program, uh, the chess
program, um, and student
information project, the
executive, um, included $5
million and the LFC included $2
million in general fund.
This specific project, um, I
know we talked about this last
night, uh, right during the
higher education, um, HSC um
presentation. It's a
collaborative for higher
education shared services,
enterprise planning, um,
replacing the student
information system functions at
Clovis Community College, CNM.
Santa Fe Community College,
Northern New Mexico College,
Luna College, and San Juan,
providing an improved student
application experience, uh,
improve access to coursework and
student services, uh, for
example, a student at Santaean
Community College, also taking
out CNM could easily track
classes in the financial data as
opposed to using multiple
systems, um, this project was
requested at $20 million in
front of the PCC committee.
In October 2024, the chess
project did state after the
recommendations were finalized
that they only needed 10 million
this year to cover the project
and they will be asking for the
remaining $10 million in general
for next session to fully cover
this phase of the chess project,
and I'll turn it over to Emily
to provide any additional
remarks.
Thank you chair Nicole for line
item number 31, as Nicole was
talking about. This is one of
our open projects right now. It
is funded through HTD, but
however, it is a nonprofit work.
Um
What's this project, it's one of
the most general fun invested
projects that the state has, uh,
that's why you're seeing some
language here in the item, um.
Explaining what it is for, as
you can see that there's
language that says um contingent
on institutional match and
release of funds by the project
certification committee at the
Department of Information
Technology. This is just to
ensure additional oversight and
accountability for how these
funds are being spent since that
has not existed previously, um.
But, um, with that, I understand
that there were some concerns
and questions about this project
last night, but with that chair
members of the committee, I will
stand for any questions with
Nicole.
Outstanding. Thank you,
analysts, really great work.
We're gonna go first to ranking
member Chatfield and go from
there.
Well, Mr. Chair, uh, you know, I
just, I've been listening, but
I'm going back through some of
this stuff first, and, and a lot
of the stuff that we are
authorizing or not reauthorizing
is federal money.
If we don't reauthorize it, then
we lose the federal money. Uh,
And there's things like the
state engineer's office, which
is dear to my heart, uh, there's
the state police, which is dear
to my heart.
And then there's the chess
program that you just talked
about that very important to my
colleges.
So it puts me in a position of
having to
Well for some stuff that I don't
like, so I can get some stuff I
do like, and I know that's kind
of the process. I understand
that, but I think it would be a
better process if we had to
fight first and the vote second.
So we could have the review
committee first and go item by
item and
fight it out and then decide and
then vote for the entire thing
is a, after we've
Rustled it out, uh.
And I don't know how to do that.
I'm not the chair, and, but
that, that's my observation.
I'll probably vote yes to save
some of the folks that I see
sitting out there that are
That I worked hard with for many
years.
But I'd like to have the fight
first and the vote second, so
that's my
Statement. Thank you.
Thank you very much, ranking
member Chatfield. We'll go next
to Representative Pettigroup and
then Representative Garrett.
Thank you, chair, and uh
I'd like to, uh,
Agree with, with uh
representative and, and ranking
member Chatfield's concept of
fight first and
Work it out. It would have been
great that each of these we'd
had the prepared documents, we'd
had time to review it, and then
we could have that, that
discussion today. It takes us
into tomorrow. I'm good with
that because it is that
important.
With that, I do have some
questions. Um,
chair on line 27.
As I understand this, this is a
web portal.
For the special ed departments
to be able to share plans.
If, and if I stated that wrong,
please clarify that, but are we
sharing plans within one school
or we sharing across the uh a
school district or we sharing it
statewide?
Um, Mr. Chair Representative
Pettigrew for that specific one,
it's a web portal for the office
of special education, and they
will share information with
local education agencies, um,
and transfer that information.
OK. Thank you very much for
that.
Um, chair on line 27, I think I,
I.
It just completely missed the,
the, the whole description of
what this dashboard does.
Chair Representative Pettigrew,
oh, chair Representative
Pettigrew, you're asking about
line number 28, correct?
Um
No, I'm 29 for dashboard for
reporting from local education
agencies.
The data that Nicole and I have
about that specific project for
line item number 29. Um, it's
for PED to implement a Google
Tool solution to generate
dashboards and data reports for
local education agencies to
provide districts, um, the
ability to identify and help
schools in need. That's all of
the information that Nicole and
I have at this moment, but we
can follow up if you need
additional information.
Thank you, Chairman, and yes, as
we go into our work group, I
don't know what details on that.
I, I think I've heard parts and
pieces of that within the, the
first look at PED but I'd like
to hear a little bit more.
And we don't have to do it
today, we know we're going into
work group. So I'm, I'm good
with that. I'm just asking for
the clarification. Chairman,
this 1 may be easiest answered
by you. Um,
Line 31.
Do you recall what, I think it
was 2 years ago when we were, we
were looking at the way
Higher Ed was was distributing
funds within the college
departments and, and the lack of
communication between the
departments. Is this the basis
for that or is this coming for
something different?
I don't recall. I think we're
gonna, um, we'll probably need a
little bit more information.
Does the executive know when
this uh
Yeah, it, it could very well be
that there is also a
longitudinal data project that
this likely falls on in the
longitudinal data project is
very much intended to track
across all levels with this.
Extra relevance for higher
education. I see the executives
shaking their head, so.
Broadly, yes, in longitudinal
data is the focus of it.
Thank you very much. So as we
come back together on this one
on 31. I'd like to see how the
conversation we had 2 years ago
with, with healthy, we, cause we
had a higher ed committee that
that
Put some guardrails with respect
to how higher ed was
distributing funding to the
different schools, and then also
how with all the different
funding sources, let's just pick
water.
For at least 3 colleges, how
well they're collaborating and
that's this part of this, I'd
just like to understand that.
But thank you very much, chair.
Great. Thank you, Representative
Pettigrew. We're gonna go next
to Garrett.
Uh, thanks, Mr. Chair, and, and
yeah, I agree on that some of
these public education
department projects are vital
for transparency, um, with the
new individualized IEP, um,
uniform statewide form, these 4
points, 27 to 30 are all vital,
so I think they really do
benefit from a deep dive, and
the chess project on number 31,
which I think is led by the
Independent Community Colleges.
It's actually powerful.
Ultimately money saving effort,
so I think a deep dive will
really benefit on us to
understand that. Thank you.
All right, great, thank you,
same.
OK, I don't see any other
questions, uh.
I want to ask a couple of quick
questions. First, is any of the
LFC or the executive analysis,
does it ever ask the question,
what can be done, uh, in the
upcoming fiscal year, is that
part of the criteria?
Chair, um, that's kind of the
conversation that happens
through the vetting process when
agencies initially request.
C2 funding they have to go
through a vetting process at the
Department of Information
Technology, and so those are
some of the conversations that
are had during those meetings.
Uh, got it. OK, thank you.
Anything from the executive?
Great. OK. Uh, so, uh, uh, let
me just say great questions by
the members first, 2nd, this is
a, seems like it's a, an easy or
sort of a fruitful process for
the executive to share their
important ideas about
technological modernization.
We've yet to find other members
I want to compliment the members
for really focusing on the
accountability portion of sort
of delivering on that.
Easy and understandable to want
that technological process.
But
Uh, unclear what um
accountability rests with our
executive agencies if they don't
finish a project.
And Miss Mabra Midas, Missus, if
you want to add anything to
that, or, or any thoughts.
are welcome, not required.
Good morning, Mr. Chair and
members of the committee. I will
be brief. My name is Cecilia
Mavramatis and I'm the local
government division director for
DFA, so not necessarily with
these analysts, but in regards
to the questions that were
received for the federal funds,
um, looking at the bottom of
your page, you see there's a
difference of about $40 million
between the LFC and the
executive recommendation in
relation to these federal funds,
um, we have shared with our
presenters here today at DFA uh
DFA presentation that was given
to the house.
Judiciary Committee, I believe
last week in regards to those
federal funds and some of those
questions that were presented,
um, it is important to note that
no federal grant is created
equal, and the majority of these
are also reimbursement basis, so
if there are questions in
particular to these federal
funds and these drawdowns, it's
important to get with those
agencies because one Medicaid
grant is not the same as the
other, but we will have that
presentation for you to go over,
Mr. Chair, and it'll detail that
and um it was done with the
state controller's office. Thank
you.
Uh, great. OK. Um,
OK, thank you very much, uh, Ms.
Ma Romias, uh, so members I
wanna actually stress again this
point.
Some of the members brought up
that, and I think it's a very
well taken point.
That
The accountability for the
executive agencies in the long
time frame for projects that
have been out for a number of
years and reauthorizations is
really challenging for the
committee to reckon with, while
the committee, I think, is
broadly across a number of
different priorities,
acknowledge the importance of
this technological
modernization. I think, uh,
hearing ranking member Chatfield
Sam Garrett and others, we can
go ahead um we will treat this
as information today.
We're gonna ask our work group
to go into it next week for the
executive, the executive should
not expect to get new money for
something they can't do in the
next year to 18 months.
Because that is kicking it into
the next administration, and it
would be if there's
Concerns about sort of our
fiscal responsibility. Further
members, I would hope the
committee finds reauthorizations
that might better be repurposed.
Uh, or at least ask that
question uh of our executive
agencies. Otherwise, we're stuck
in a world of additional
recommendations for
technological upgrade without
the ability to sort of over the
year, although representing Boa
had a great suggestion to track
it more closely over the rest of
the year, so thanks everybody,
thanks for a great hearing.
We'll have some announcements on
who that work group is. A big
thanks to our analysts,
especially.
Uh, OK, let's go ahead, we're
gonna pause here for 5 minutes,
then we're gonna do a bar
informational, uh, hearing and
we'll be back.
Thank
Yeah,
appreciate it all.
If we can go ahead and get uh
members back into their seats so
All right.
We are at 11.
We're ready to go. So, um,
Members, we are gonna have a
discussion about uh the budget
adjustment Authority.
Um, and, um,
Madam Chief, am I correct that
we are not taking a vote, but
this is informational, this is
an opportunity for members to
have a pass through of some very
dense information so that we
have time, we can ask some
questions. We can ruminate up
and see, we've already got a
question there. And um
Then we'll be able to come back
and take a vote later. Uh,
Representative Herrera.
Thank you, Madam Vice Chair. I,
I heard the number 6% and it
kind of went like that over my
head, and I know it's an
important number. Would you tell
me what that refers to.
Chairman Small uh brought it up
the other day. No, out of the
window, OK, OK, uh,
representative, are you
referring to the, uh, increase
the 6% increase in recurring
appropriations. Um, that is,
that's what I'm referring to.
OK, so we, we are recommending
overall, a 6% increase in
recurring funding, and that is
600 and 800 million.
Yeah, um.
Representative, um, yes, at this
point, the LFC framework came in
and the recommendation was 6%,
um, and if we keep it within the
that 6% um area, um, then
It, uh, permits maximum
flexibility and stability moving
forward in, in subsequent years.
Would that be, Mr. Mr. Director,
do you want to add anything to
that?
That's correct. You're moving
into an era.
Of being able to have
sustainable budget growth.
Uh, at that level of spending,
as opposed to 10 to 15%, which
Will blow through the surplus,
uh, very quickly and you'll be
building budgets that only grow
3% sooner than later.
So if you can
Get down into what's still a
pretty healthy budget growth
rate of 6%.
Then
You know, that conversation that
you had with the healthcare
authority, it's a lot easier
than if you were to only grow
3%.
Madam, Madam Vice Chair in
Charles, thank you very much.
That's very helpful to me.
Wonderful. Thank you. uh,
Charles, would you like to take
us up we're gonna talk again,
this is informational for today,
for you to take back with you if
you want to get into the weeds,
but this is budget adjustment
authority.
What in the world is that?
You're building a budget
recommendations for all the
agencies, and then this allows
them to make adjustments to
what.
You're gonna adopt. And in what
ways would they be able? The
first historical way that they
can adjust the budget is that
they can move money between.
Uh, categories of spending.
So, say that they believe
they've got a, a, a need for
additional contractual spending,
they can move money from the
other category or from personal
services and benefits. So the
historically they've been giving
that transfer authority, uh,
since we've some of this,
frankly is coming out of
solvency where.
Uh, you want to give flexibility
for being able to move money.
The other way that they can do
uh adjust their budget is a
blanket.
Uh, increase to their other
state funds.
Or to their uh other transfers.
Of up to 5% of whatever those
categories are.
So they're bringing in extra
money.
From fee revenue, for example,
uh, historically, you've given
them authority to increase their
budget, uh, to bring that in.
Uh, for spending up to 5% of
whatever's in that category.
Then there's other situations
where you provide.
Specific adjustment authority
above uh that amount.
And usually we recommend, it
should be for a specific purpose
and a specific amount, not just
unlimited, otherwise, why have a
budget?
Uh, and so
These are for things that
Normally should be for things
that are unanticipated.
Uh, cause otherwise we'd want to
put it into the budget if it's
happening every year. If they've
got, uh, an earmarked revenue
source to support dredging of
the Rio Grande.
River and they're doing a budget
adjustment every year. I'm
telling my analysts, try to move
that into the operating budget.
Uh, so we don't have to do all
this. So those are, and there's
two different types of budget
adjustment Authority. One is,
we're in the middle of the
fiscal year right now, so you
can give them additional
adjustment authority, it's like,
look, we've been bringing in
more revenue.
Uh, then we thought, here's how
we'd like to build that into the
budget for the rest of the
fiscal year. Maybe that helps
you avoid the need for like a
supplemental appropriation or
some other uh type of issue.
And then there's budget
adjustment authority to kick off
the new fiscal year.
In FY 26 on July 1st.
So 2 sets of budget adjustment
authority midyear.
Uh, let's see what's going on,
what's happening, uh, let you
adjust your budget to finish the
fiscal year versus right out of
the gate. Here's the authority
you've got to adjust your
budget.
So what you have before you is a
set of um requests.
In the detail page.
Whether that was in the LFC
recommendation or executive uh
recommendation.
Uh, and then a scenario for you
to consider for HAFC that
reflects what LFC had.
You also have a page.
Right behind this one. This is
the
Um
Broad authority at the beginning
of the section in House Bill 2
for budget adjustments. And
this, we're recommending
changing this from what LFC had
recommended, uh, coming in to
the session, and the
recommendation is for next
fiscal year, starting out the
fiscal year, not allowing
category transfers.
allowing increases to other
state funds at the beginning of
the fiscal year. That would give
you the ability to come in
during mid, the middle of the
fiscal year to see if you really
need to move money from salary
and benefits.
Uh, to contracts and.
What the, what the need is for
that.
Part of the rationale for this.
is what we're seeing some budget
activity amongst agencies right
out of the gate at the beginning
of the year.
In this case, moving money into
salaries and benefits out of
contracts and others, because
they were giving outsized raises
or hiring more people than what
the 200 categories could
support.
Creating budget pressure for you
to build next year's budget by
them saying we still need the
same amounts.
But it's not a, not cutting the
3 or 400 category.
Or right out of the gate, do we
really need to spend all that
money.
Um, from other state funds
before the legislature can
determine whether uh there
should be other priorities on
that money. You may have heard a
bar objection that I did for the
Environment Department, where
they wanted to spend.
A bunch of money out of a, uh,
out of an earmarked fund.
Um, before you had the op it's
the best use of that, or if
there's a different one. So
that's something to consider,
uh, that was different than
coming out of LFC would
basically be deleting those
provisions in the, the bar
section.
With that, uh, Madam Chair, I'll
turn it over to um.
Doctor Miner for comments, and
then we would stand for
questions.
Comments.
Really, uh, that's the first
time hearing of this, uh,
proposal but, so I would rather
or so would appreciate the
opportunity to uh consult with
executive leadership and we'll
certainly, uh, prepare a
response for you. I'm sure there
will be, there will be concerns
from agencies across the
spectrum of government with its
proposals. So we'll, we'll
prepare something in in.
All right, um, we're ready to
take questions.
Yes. OK, great. So we'll start
with Representative Chatfield,
then Herrera, and then down.
Thank you, Madam Vice Chair.
Uh, thank you, Charles.
Uh
Me vice chair, I'm
Concerned that we may need to
look at some type of rulemaking
that limits the time when these
bars come in, because I know
that we've had a, a problem with
one agency that always brings a
bar.
Right after the last meeting of
the LFC and before the
legislature.
is able to deal with that that
bar, so it's automatically
appropriated and uh
You know, I don't think that's
appropriate.
And uh
And there's only one agency
that's been violating that,
unfortunately, we all pay the
price. Uh, is there some type of
rulemaking or something that we
need to do to make sure that
these bars are, they all get
reviewed by the same process at
the same time and that we don't
have that problem.
So Madam Chair, uh, as a
legislature you have passed
statute setting up uh the
process.
Or actually processing and
reviewing budget adjustment
request.
So it starts with an agency
submitting a bar to DFA.
TFA will notify us of that
initial submittal.
And then when DFA approves the
bar, they will notify us again.
And then LFC has 10 days to
review that bar before it would
go into effect.
And the statute delegates uh to
the LFC director, the ability to
object to a bar.
And if the bar is objected to,
then it goes into basically a
holding pattern for I think up
to 30 or 34 days.
35 days.
Uh, and the LFC can hold a
hearing between that objection
date and the time that it would
go into effect to, uh, discuss
the bar, but there's nothing
that uh I can do as director or
that the committee can do that
would prevent it from going into
effect. And the issue that um
Representative Chatfield is
bringing up is if you're
submitting a bar, let's say at
the beginning of June, you may
not even have a chance for a
hearing before that would go
into effect, um.
Um
At the end of the fiscal year.
So
Uh
Thank you, Madam Vice dear.
Charles, but you didn't really
answer my question. What can we
do to keep the system from being
worked like it has been last
year, like it was the year
before last. I'm not sure about
the year before that, but I know
it's been
Got
Abused at least 2 years.
Prior to this.
Mr. Madam Chair, Representative
Chatfield.
Uh, it's up to you whether you
want to give an agency authority
to adjust its budget.
Including, uh, bringing in that
revenue, uh, that was brought in
at the end of the fiscal year
and and put into a different
fund. You can restrict that and
not provide authority to be able
to do that. You cannot provide
authority to
Move money around the budget,
you can, uh, not
Um, provide authority to
increase in agency's budget as
well.
So, and vice chair Charles, I
would hope that you would help
us understand how to do that. I
don't think there's anybody
sitting here on either side of
the aisle that doesn't know what
I'm talking about and it
doesn't, uh, it's not.
Kinda
Disappointed in it. Thank you.
And by chair.
Thank you, Representative
ranking member Chatfield, uh,
Representative Herrera.
Thank you, Madam Vice Chair. Uh,
thank you, Charles.
I guess I'm worried about the
other side of the picture.
You know, um,
We, we have people that manage,
you know, we have people that
manage, I know the director of
aging, um, uh, secretary of the
Aging told me that, you know,
she was happy with the amount,
it was static and but but she
wanted to move things in
different categories. They just
weren't in the right category,
so she wasn't asking for more
money. She just wanted the
authority to move those around,
uh, because that's kind of what
her agency needed, and I, I kind
of worry about hiring competent
managers and having.
good people in government and
let's just assume that 95% of
the people that work for us do
the best job they can. OK, let's
just assume that. And, and yeah,
you're always gonna have these
outliers, yep. Are you always
gonna have that? Yeah, but, but
I worry about how we
How we let people in management
positions.
Be flexible with that budget,
not that they're asking for a
lot more, but can they, can they
move that money around within
and without having to go.
Through all of these steps to
make, I mean, I, I managed a
budget of, you know, 5 million.
I.
I frequently was a budget's a
budget. It's just that, you
know, your guiding, it's your
guideposts, but.
But you might have, you know,
you might spend less than one
category and be able to move
something to another category
where you really move it and
then the next year you can
change that budget to reflect
the reality, but it really is,
it's a guidepost to get your
best information and, and it's a
continually evolving project.
So I guess I'd just like to hear
your response to that.
So
Madam Chair Representative.
About 25 years ago.
Uh, the legislature dramatically
altered.
How House Bill 2 looks.
Um
And it was part of the
accountability and Government
Act changes, which basically
said, we will give you as an
executive branch agency, a lot
more flexibility.
In exchange for us focusing on
performance and outcomes that
are important to the people of
New Mexico. And so,
Your predecessors back in the
90s would have been sitting down
looking at specific line items,
15 different line items.
How much are you going to budget
for in-state travel versus out
of state travel, how much are
you gonna budget for pencils and
paper. How much you're going to
budget for, I mean, really kind
of in the weeds and you've
collapsed all of those into the
three broad categories that you
have today. Uh, and in exchange,
you want to focus on, well,
what's that buy for the people
in New Mexico.
So I would say that you've given
a lot of flexibility, uh, in the
budget, uh, thus far, and you
still historically have provided
even more to move money across
those categories. The
recommendation today is
Is that still necessary at the
beginning of the fiscal year.
Is it, do you really need to
move that money around in.
September
And so that's the, that's a
policy decision that's we're
putting in your lap to decide
on, on, on whether that's, you
can still change it during the
year.
Uh, when you come back next
session.
Not at the beginning of the year
just not in the beginning, OK,
that, that's very helpful. Thank
you, thank you, Madam Vice
Chair.
Thank you, Representative.
Representative Doo, please.
Thank you, Madam Chair and thank
you, Charles, for the
presentation and I, I totally
hear what you're saying. And as
a former recipient of a
nonprofit that received grants,
our budget adjustments weren't
always, I mean, they had to be
approved. And they, they were,
and they had to be justified.
And it was, it was pretty
complicated process for whether
it's CID, ECECD, DOH, whatever,
uh, they pretty much made us
stick to our budgets. And so,
um, what I'm hearing you say is
that even though they're
coming before us with these
broad level, there's a lot of
trust in the process. You guys
may have been in the weeds, that
bar adjustments are already
being requested in the 1st
quarter. So that makes me wonder
when someone puts in, we want
this new item for contractors.
Can they move that line item to
new employees? Correct. And so
they could go from a contract to
growing the permanent employee
situation at the state.
Correct.
Thank you, Madam Chair, and when
we said, uh, the other day when
we made a
a small change and we
recommended raises for the state
police. If we leave their, their
request for real-time, um, the
intelligence led uh real-time
crime response if we leave that
flat and they can't even do
maintenance. Could they forego
the raises for the state police
and then because they have to
We left them flat on the other
or didn't provide the money for
the other. Madam Chair, uh,
Representative, theoretically,
what could have happened in
that, uh, budget as well. The
reason why the recommendation
was to increase their fuel and
maintenance contracts or
spending was that's where they
end up spending their personnel
budget at the end of the fiscal
year.
And so why not just start out
the fiscal year and put it where
it was needed because they were
going to get raises in a
different part of the budget
anyways. Thank you, thank you.
Thank you, Madam Chair, and
thank you, Charles, and
Gosh, it, it, it, OK. So,
Yeah, I'm, I'm just gonna have
to be in agreement with
Chatfield and it sounds like he,
he asked if it was a rulemaking
procedure, and it sounded like
you said it needs to be more. I,
I think what you mean is
statutory or a bill or an
amendment. Well, Madam Chair,
it's this recommendation that
you have before you to.
not put in those provisions that
allow money to move around at
the beginning,
thank you, thank you, Madam
Chair. OK, I for some reason I
didn't get that form, but so we
would just strike language and
House Bill 2, it wouldn't be
present.
Rather than putting prohibitive
language that could be vetoed.
Correct. And um
OK, so what I'm believe that
would do in a thank you Madam
Chair, in an $11 billion budget
and some of these agencies that
didn't even exist a few years
ago, would have to be a little
more intentional with their
budget preparation and in
working with you in the interim.
That's correct. And thank you,
Madam Chair and thank you. I'm
sorry, I'm, I do need more
coffee. Thank you.
Um, representative, thank you
for your questions. I think
those were excellent for all of
us to just make sure we were all
on the same page, um, and if,
uh, if a member does not have
this handy dandy uh word
document with the proposed
language, um, changes, uh, let
staff know and we'll get you a
copy.
Um, OK, we are going to proceed
with um questions, um, we've got
a couple more members and then I
do want to let folks know that
we will um have Charles provide
us with some high levels on the
Um, the spreadsheet that's in
front of folks with, I think the
proposed bars, you're just gonna
go through some of the key
points, correct? And then
members can look at um the
Information in detail before we
even vote because we're not
voting today, right? We're not
voting today, so I would leave
it to members to go through it
at at your leisure, uh, knowing
it will come back before you.
And if you have any questions
between now and then, that would
be.
Good to uh follow up with me or,
or Emily.
Great. OK, so we are gonna
continue with uh Representative
Pettigrew Silva, and then
Duncan.
And we'll go from there.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Thank
you, Charles. Emily, and
Andrew, Andrew, I'm gonna get
your name memorized. I'm sorry.
Um,
For that.
Madam Chair Charles, who's the
appropriate authority in New
Mexico.
The Legislature, madam.
So, Madam Chair Charles, that
means that when it comes to
funding sources and spending the
money. There's 112 people that
have that.
That authority
Would that be correct? Yes,
that's correct, manager.
Thank you.
Madam Chair and Charles, what
percentage of
Bars
Occur in the last 45 days of the
fiscal year.
I miss Madam Chair
Representative, I would need to
pull that data, but we.
We have a database that would
allow us to go through.
LFC reviews, uh, bars every
month.
At its, at its public hearing.
Madam chair and, and uh Charles,
thank you for that. Would, would
it be safe to assume it's
greater than 50%?
Uh,
I, I need to consult the the
data. All right. I'm, I'm good
with that.
And Madam Chair and and Charles,
if I understand correctly, DFA
has the authority to
Approval bar
Within statute.
And really the only thing LFC
has.
This is the authorization to
object to it, and even after an
LLC hearing where there's an
objection and, and we sit there
and say, you know what?
Now let's see, we agree with
you.
There's still nothing that can
be done about it. We have no
authorization over DFA to
reverse that mark.
Correct? That's the correct,
that's the way the statue is
constructed today.
Madam Chair and Charles with
The changes that
then suggested in section 13
striking items C and D. Did we
sufficiently remove that
capability from the DFA.
Uh, that would not change the
underlying statute, Madam Chair
Representative, uh, for DFAs.
Madam Chairman Charles with
respect to that out of section
12 and out of Section 13. Is
there no piece of language
inside of that, that we could
strike.
Not having house built to
That removes that ability to be
solely on the executive branch.
Madam Chair, Representative, we
could look at um other
alternatives.
Uh, a drastic one would be not
providing any bar authority, um.
that you see before.
Madam Chair and Charles, thank
you for that answer. I just, uh,
we
Yeah, this last year
specifically, we, we had a
pretty
Healthy debate about something
that happened, uh, in one of our
departments.
I think it was at the August LFC
meeting.
Where the DFA approved the bar.
Uh, you guys went through a
review process, but at the end
of the day, we have nothing to
do with it. And if I remember
correctly, Madam Chair.
We just agreed that there's 112
people that have authorization
for appropriations.
And have the appropriation
authority in the state of New
Mexico, but we willfully gave it
up.
25 years ago.
chair and Charles, would you
agree with that?
Um
Madam Chair Representative, uh,
the, the timing of it, I would
say that each year you
delegating uh the ability of the
executive branch to change the
budget that you're putting
together, uh, in specific ways.
So it's an annual decision that
you're making.
Thank you, Charles, and thank
you, Madam Chair. So if we go
back to your 25 year ago
statement, our population was
around 1.8 million.
And now we're
2.1, 2.15 million.
17% increase.
Over that same time frame. I
think we can all agree. Well
just in the last 5 years, our
budget has grown by over almost
65%, right?
So our population's grown by
17%, but our budgets
grown substantially greater than
that. And then that's just Madam
Chair and Charles are recurring
peace if we just look over the
last 3 or 4 years are
non-reoccurring pieces grown by
over 300%. Would that be a fair
number?
It's a very large number. That's
correct, Mr. Chairman. So,
Madam Chair and committee
members, Charles, I, my concern
is, is that we continue to say,
you know what?
We don't really care. We don't
want to work that hard.
Executive branch, you guys take
care of it because we trust you.
There is a level of trust.
There's a level of
accountability.
The
The majority of us that count
numbers for a living, take time
and verify.
And for us not to have, Madame
Cherry and Charles to have the
ability to verify and to
disapprove.
To give up our authority.
To say, you know what, no,
that's not a good enough reason.
For you to make that choice.
says that we just don't want to
work that hard.
Oh, I need to pay. I need to get
paid. Oh, I need this. I need
that.
At the end of the day, I
appreciate the language that you
put together. I wish it was a
little bit stronger. I'd love to
get to the point where, uh, we
were pretty
2000. And yeah, there was a
group of people that
Got paid for DM to sit down and,
and review that stuff with you.
But we are where we are. I
appreciate the language that we
have today. Like I said, I'd
like to see it reach a little
bit harder.
And, and change it in such a way
that it can't just be line item
vetoed.
So, thank you very much. Um,
Thank you, Madam Chair.
Thank you, Representative. Uh,
next is Representative Silva.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Thank
you, Charles. Um, I have two
questions. Is there an average
of bar adjustment monies that,
um, get approved.
Madam Chair.
All of the bars that DFA
approved go into effect.
And, and.
On occasion, we will flag
something that we feel, uh, at
the staff level is not within,
uh the authority of what you
laid out into law, for an agency
to do, and usually we work with
DFA on that and the agency, uh,
and on occasion, most of the
time with the threat of of a bar
objection, they'll pull that
back. Um,
But other times they've moved
forward and I think that's one
of those was what Representative
Chatfield is referring to that
this agency is continually doing
that each year.
Got it. OK, thank you. And so,
is there a, a dollar amount
though that every
fiscal year, there's an amount
of bar monies that get approved.
Yes, madam Chair, it's north of
billion dollars.
Worth of changes, either moving
money or bringing in additional
revenue, including federal
revenue, which the statute
allows for them to bring in uh
federal revenue into their
budget.
Yeah, excellent. OK. And I
understand the need to adjust
things as revenues change, um,
especially federal dollars,
right, they come in or they
don't, um, and are these
requests found in our volumes,
cause I, I haven't been reading
with that eye towards it, um,
they are not, um, but we can get
you the monthly, uh, budget
adjustment reports that the LFC
reviews, if you'd like copies of
those. Yeah, that'd be
excellent. Thank you.
Sure.
Thank you, Representative. Uh,
next we have Representative
Duncan and then Representative
Herndon.
Thank you, Madam Chair.
Madam Chair, I'm gonna come at
this from the private sector,
um, as a body, we're getting
played.
I have 3 businesses, and if any
one of my managers came to me
within the 1st 3 months or even
in the last 3 months of the year
and so we've got to make drastic
changes to our budget. They
don't know their job.
Occasionally I understand it.
We're getting played as a body.
And from my private.
I'm looking at my lens as a
private businessman. That's
exactly what's happening.
And I agree with Representative
Pettigrew, this body should have
the authority to do that.
And when we cannot trust those
department heads.
That should be doing what they
should be doing, um, what a
shame. Thank you, Madam Chair.
Thank you, Representative
Representative Herndon.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Thank
you, Mr.
Presenter, I just want to
understand, Madam Chair and Mr.
Presenter, the CND that's uh
Spike the stricken, those are no
longer would be a part of a, a
budget adjustment uh.
Our statue. Is that correct? Is
that what you're proposing,
Madam Chair Representative, only
for next fiscal year.
In that that authority would
not.
Be there for the beginning of
the fiscal year, you could
change that.
So it would be striking their
ability to do a bar at the
beginning of the fiscal year.
For those blanket reasons.
They would need specific.
Oh, OK, which are all the
detailed pages behind it. OK,
thank you. Um, and, and Madam
Chair and Mr. Suly I.
So you're saying that if we
come, if they, we have approved
the budget as of July 1, the
beginning of a fiscal year.
You're saying as of January, I
mean July 1, you can't make any
uh bar adjustments.
Starting 2026, unless you're
going to give them specific
unless you get specific
authority. OK. So,
But it doesn't apply till later
in the year. Is that correct,
Ms. Madam Chair? So if 6 months
later if I need a bar if you
came back next session and said
we will allow you to move money
in and out of these categories
for the remainder of the fiscal
year, that would be a decision
you could make next session.
To allow that flexibility.
Oh, so, Madam Chair, Mr. uh
Sali, you're saying this would
apply for a whole year. They
couldn't make these budget
adjustments. Well, it would
start out that way, but you can
change it when you come back
next session, because you'll be
in the middle of the fiscal
year.
So, um, Madam Chair and Mr.
Sali, um, with respect to some
of our smaller agencies and
organizations, mainly
commissions and others. They're
often underfunded, but they do
have a provision within their
statute that allows them to uh
utilize uh obtain funds through
a nonprofit.
process. How is that put into
their budget and is that
considered a budget adjustment.
So you are are limiting their
ability to bring that money in
from those funds to up to 5%.
And in this provision, that
would be eliminated.
So Mr. Chair, Madam Chair and
Mr. Seli, you said it won't be
able to happen under this at the
beginning of the fiscal year, it
would not, correct. You should
be budgeting it in their regular
operating budget, you should
know that. So for example, like
the Commission on the Status of
Women just submitted a bar.
To take general fund money that
you appropriated last session,
and to put it into a
non-reverting fund to save for
next fiscal year, that then they
would try to bar out um for the
same thing that they're asking
you to give them general fund
money for.
OK. And Mr. and Madam Chair and
Mr. Sali uh don't mean to beat
this, but I just want to make
sure I'm understanding your
words. So at the, the beginning
of the fiscal year would be in
July. We, this committee meets
all year long and then, um, if
someone comes to us in the
middle of July of 2026.
And they say, we want to make a
bar. You're saying, well, that
would have to wait till the next
fiscal year because in this
fiscal year, we have made the
decision that no bars can occur.
That's correct, unless you give
them unless you get this
specific baby. That's correct.
So, thank you, Mr. Chair. I, I
don't, uh, Madam Chair, Mr. Lee,
I'm just wondering how we are
able to make that determination
because it was indicated a
budget is just an estimate, and
sometimes the estimate is
incorrect, and we need to make
adjustments to make these uh to
make our operations within these
agencies work well and Madam
Chair and Mr. Sali, it
We, if they don't move the money
and it.
Uh, it's not allowed to be put
in the category where they need
it, then it becomes a reversion,
and then they are punished
because they didn't utilize all
of their funds. So Madam Chair,
Mrs. Sali, how are you
addressing that issue?
Uh, Madam Chair Representative,
that gets to the point that uh
Representative Duncan just
raised that we should have
better estimates for what the
budget needs are at the 1st 6
months of a budget before we
allow changes to, you're sitting
here day after day making
determinations of how much money
needs to.
Categories based on the request
and the recommendations.
Let it ride for at least 6
months before you allow an
agency to move it around.
OK. Thank you, Madam Chair.
Thank you, Mr. Silly.
Thank you, Representative
Herndon. Uh, we're gonna go back
to Representative Dao for a 2nd
time, and then I'll have a
couple questions I see
representative Brown also has
some.
Thank you. Thank you, Madam
Chair. So,
If the language is not there,
then there's no other they they
couldn't go to LFC for an
amendment.
For bar adjustment?
Madam Chair, no, not unless you
give him some other specific
authority in these pages,
Madam Chair, thank you, Charles,
but yet now it's really not a
budget adjustment request. It's
a budget adjustment notification
because it's just
I mean they could put every
dollar in one line item and just
make adjustments throughout the
year. It's a request.
Yes, to DFA and DFA has the
approval authority and LFC which
is um which is executives and we
are legislative. So once we set
the budget, theoretically.
Once we say yes on House Bill 2
or House Bill 2 passes, then,
then there's $11 billion of
money that can be theoretically
can be moved around
between those categories between
those well those categories
cover 100% of expenses.
That's correct. OK, thank you,
Madam Chair.
Thank you, Representative Brown.
Madam Chair, thank you.
Um, I think I really do
understand the idea behind
having a adjust adjustment
request.
As a feature of our of our whole
um state budget.
I, I think there's a one of my
favorite Latin phrases comes to
mind that abuse is not an
argument against proper use.
But Madam Chair, it seems like
there has been some abuse
happening as in particular with
one agency and that
Just, I would say it spoils it
for everybody else, but I think
that's not quite accurate. What
it does is say we as the
legislature, need to take a much
closer look and try to get
Uh, start using the reins a
little bit, so those abuses do
not occur.
Um, so Madam Chair, I, I do
think we need to scrutinize this
very, very closely.
And um, and yet still maintain
uh some flexibility because
circumstances do change even in
the 1st 6 months of the budget,
for example, and so, um, I, I
just wanna endorse the idea that
we will
Uh, do some, I don't know if we
can get a statute passed in
time, but, uh, statutory change,
but at least to get the language
right in house too. I think we
have a duty to do that. Make you
out a chair.
Thank you, Representative. Um,
just wanna flag this has been a
great conversation and I'm
really pleased that we're able
to do this, um, so early in the
process. Um, for folks, just a
reminder that um these are the
proposed, uh, the spreadsheet
before us has all of the
proposed our language. So, you
know, if you're interested to
see what.
You know, we're all we're
considering uh to include, make
sure that you read through this
thoroughly. It's by every agency
and some of it is particularly
specific.
Um
Charles, um, am I correct that
in our volume 3.
Um, beginning on page 154. Uh,
we can get a sense of, uh,
Sort of habitual barring uh from
agencies yeah
that's correct for agencies
moving money out of the uh
salary and benefits. And and
there's been a flip on what
we've seen, it's almost um
It's not as relevant to this
year's budget development as it
has been in the past, where they
were basically we had overfunded
salary and benefits, and they
were moving money out on a
constant basis. What we're
seeing now is that, and you've
seen that where agency has like
a negative.
Um
Projection in there 200, and
they're moving money in.
Um, so,
It was more relevant in in the
past than it's been for this
year's budget development, but
that is in your vault. Great,
thank you. Um,
And then I also wanted to uh
just draw everyone's attention
to the the key hearings issue.
He hearing issues page, um,
because I very much, um, Charles
and stuff appreciate the
examples that you've provided of
uh what LFC and what the
legislature would consider
appropriate recommendations for
bar language versus what we're
trying to avoid, um, you know, I
think that's really helpful for
our new members. So it's on the
back of your, your blue and
white sheet. Um, and then I
think just for
one, you want us to take a look
at the spreadsheet with the
language, and then if we have
questions, we can reach out to
our budget director, um, LFC
staff, um, Mr. May, um, and
others.
In between now and when we come
back and review this and vote on
it. Correct. Yes, ma'am.
Excellent. Wonderful.
I think we're good. Thank you
very much. Thank you.
Uh, sorry, Representative
Pettigrew. Thank you, Madam
Chair. I, uh, hopefully a simple
request.
Can we get this digitally in a
format that's easily edited so
that we can put our edits to, to
our thoughts instead of having
to write, write down what's on
there, and then add our thoughts
to it. Uh um. I almost said, Mr.
Chair. Um,
Representative, um, we can talk
to staff to see what is the best
way to do that. Um, I think we
would want to avoid trying to
compile uh 18 different sets of
edits. So we'll, we'll figure
out the best way to get that to
folks. Thank you. All right.
Yes, Representative Dell.
Oh, it's not. OK. OK. I think
we're ready to move on to our um
agency hearing. Is that correct?
Right, OK, members, we're gonna,
we're gonna move on to, um, we
have a budget hearing with our
um Indian Affairs department.
How to get our um analysts up
here.
Um, and staff is going to be
passing out a handout for folks.
All right, I think we are all
getting settled, uh, members,
you're gonna have a, a larger
packet and then a supplementary
packet, uh, for the presentation
from our secretary, um, but, uh,
Mr. Ortega, you want to kick us
off and get us to the correct
place.
Yes, thank you, Madam Chair. Um,
members of the committee, my
name is Antonio Ortega. I'm the
Indian Affairs department, uh,
LFC analyst. Joining me today is
Nicole Macias, the DFA analyst
and cabinet secretary Josette
Monet.
Members, please reference pages
249 and 250 in the LFC budget
document Volume 2, as well as
tab 6 agency code 609 in your
binders.
Madam Chair members, as you all
are uh referring to the
different sheets, you will see
that the LFC recommendation
maintains a flat budget with the
FY 25 operating budget, while
the executive recommendation on
the other hand, proposes a 7.7%
increase.
Over FY 25.
The uh to break this down a
little bit, the executive
recommendation, uh, includes 200
and $89,000 over the LFC
recommendation in personal
services and employee benefits,
uh, to support a contract
attorney.
Office clerk and chief
procurement officer.
The executive recommendation
also includes an additional
$100,000 in the other category.
And with that, Madame Chere
passed it to Nicole for any
additional comments.
Thank you, Antonio.
Madam Chair, members of the
committee, I just wanna kind of
touch on the um executive
recommendation and just kind of
touch on the other transfers
portion, um, the recommendation
also includes we're both the
same for LFC and the executive
in the amount of $249.3,000 and
that is for tobacco cessation
and prevention projects, that's
a transfer from DFA, um, from
the tobacco settlement program,
um, I don't have any additional
comments other than the
additional 3.
Of TE for the department, and I
will turn it over to secretary
for additional comments. Thank
you.
Thank you. I'm Madam Secretary.
Good morning, Madam Chair,
members of the committee, thank
you for having us this morning,
so I'm just gonna, uh, briefly
go through the presentation you
all have, pages 56, and 7, which
is the supplemental supplant the
56 and 7 that you got, um, with
the presentation, so you can go
ahead and just ignore the 56,
and 7 in the full packet. Um, I
just, it's just updated
language, and there were some
typos and stuff, so I apologize
about that.
Moving on to our um to our
presentation on page 2, you'll
see our organizational listing,
basically our our structure for
IAD, uh, you can see the, the
light blue colors are vacant
positions right now, but I am
working to fill those positions,
uh, as quickly as I can for
those positions are currently
being advertised, uh, and we are
looking at doing some
reclassifications of one of
those positions so that we can
ensure that we have appropriate.
staffing at our agency.
Moving on to page number 3.
This is our appropriation
request, um, and thank you to
Antonio and Nicole for just
going over those, but
essentially what we're asking
for is exactly what the exec is
asking for for this 3 positions
for the Indian Affairs
department along with the
$100,000
added on. We have, uh, the 3
positions.
You, you can see it, we got
flatlined by the recommendations
from LFC and what I've been
trying to do at our agency is
really build up our agency to
ensure that we have adequate
staff to serve our constituents,
um, so moving on to page 4,
somewhat of a similar
reiteration, but you can see the
differences again between the
executive recommendations and
the LFC recommendations. So, um,
moving on to page 5, this is
where I'd like to talk a little
bit.
about the positions uh and
explain a little bit more about
what we're asking for, and so.
3 positions that were asking to
be included uh for a total of
$289,000 in the 200 personnel
category. The first one being a
contract attorney, which would
be a person an attorney who
would be able to focus on
contracts at IAD and I'm sure as
many of you know, IED, um,
pushes out several hundreds,
hundreds of IGs
intergovernmental agreements
with nations' publics and tribes
throughout the entire state, and
we've got.
one general council right now in
that general counsel reviews all
of those IGs when they go out.
She also reviews all of them
when they come back in. And so,
um, and I'm sure some of you may
know this, I did start out at
the agency as the general
counsel and so from personal
experience as well, I know how
burdensome that can be, and I
think it would be extremely
helpful for IED to have another
attorney who can focus on those
contracts so that my general
counsel can really help us focus
on some of the other legal
questions we have.
throughout the agency.
Uh, the second position that
we're asking for is the chief
procurement officer, so that we
are in line with the statute we
do currently have a CPO, one of
our staff, uh, did take the
training so that she can do it.
Tanya Lansing, she's sitting
here today, but she is um doing
double duty and so.
that we are effectively
inappropriately, um, doing what
we're supposed to do for a
procurement and again because
IEDs also, uh, we, you know,
we've, we're learning the
process and ensuring that we're
getting out moneys effectively
and appropriately underneath the
procurement guidelines as well
as like doing RFPs and such and
so, uh, ensuring that we have
that statutory role in place.
And then the 3rd 1 would be an
office clerk, we right now have
a, I did reclass the position
this past year to ensure that we
had an executive admin, but what
we don't have is a general
office clerk and so our office
clerks, uh, I'm sorry, my
executive admin essentially
serves as the office clerk for
the entire office, which
sometimes gets a little
burdensome, and so, uh, we'd
like to have another office
clerk who can serve as that uh
outward facing person for the
agency and then allow the
executive, uh, uh.
Admin to really work with the
executive and ensure that we
have everything that we need.
Um,
So those are that those are the
recommendations are the requests
for, for the positions. Again,
my goal is to really build out
the agency and solidify, and I
think um those those are always
to help us.
The
And briefly, I'm sorry, I'm
gonna go back to page 5, and I
don't recall if it's in another
area in my um in my slide, but I
wanna just briefly talk about
the $100,000 so, uh, the
executive recommended $50,000
for um space.
For IAD and is $50,000 for
training and ensuring that we
have all the supplies, etc. that
we need. Uh, the
If, if you've been over to our
office at the Wind Delcino
building. You have seen that we
are on the 2nd floor and we are
um completely filled out. I, we
don't have any extra room to
grow. We did this last year, put
in a lot of cubicles to ensure
that we had space to, uh, for
all of our employees, but if we
are given the opportunity to
expand it all, we won't have any
physical space left and so
we're, we're gonna need to
figure out how to get that space
and so, and if you haven't been
office, I encourage you to come
visit us over there and you can
see our office space.
Moving on to page 6.
For specials under section 5 or
uh or for a supplemental
request. We're asking for $2.5
million for an appropriation to
uh be able to get out to nations
clubs and tribes some money for
comprehensive community
planning, as many of you know,
uh, many all of the nation's
pueblos and tribes do
infrastructure requests, so
they're getting capital outlays
as well as sometimes applying
for the tribal infrastructure
fund, uh, this fund will be
intended to help them.
able to do a more comprehensive
planning so that when they're
doing those requests for capital
outlaying tribal infrastructure
fund, they'll have some guidance
or some idea on how they're
looking for the next couple of
years. That is the hope with
that. Um, we did have on there,
we, we were doing $50,000
requests for American Sign
Language interpreter as well.
Uh, we have recently learned
that we will no longer need that
funding, um, it's not absolutely
necessary.
So, um, that's, that's where
that is. Uh, moving on to page
7, and I'm assuming this will be
a question. I know it's a
question that we've had in the
past about vacant positions and
um we are, so IED has has grown
in the number of physicians over
the last couple of years, and I
know we've we've often had
vacancies, but I think our
vacancies have changed over the
last year in terms of, you know,
we've had a lot of movement, but
we've, we've been able to fill
those positions and so the
positions.
that are vacant haven't remained
the same vacant positions for
this entire time, and so, um, we
did this past year when we
started looking at our budget at
the beginning of July, saw that,
uh, and we're doing our budget
projections, seeing that it
looked like we weren't that we
were gonna be um over expended
and so we decided we would hold
a couple of a few positions, 3
positions were a little bit to
make sure that we had enough to
cover all of our personnel for
the year.
We have since, um, even that out
and we're, um, we will now be
looking at filling these
positions or reclassifying those
available positions so that we
can get those positions filled
as well with the appropriate
staffing that we need at IED,
um, so if you look at the 2nd
bullet point, it talks about for
the 1st 7 months of FY 25, we've
averaged between 5 to 8
vacancies, which is, if you're
looking at that same time period
in FY 24, we were averaging
between 9 to 11.
vacancies at that time, so, uh,
one of our big, um, one of the
huddles that are um that we've
had to hurdles that we've had to
really get over is finding a new
CFO, we've had some difficulty
getting a CFO and so we've been
using a mobile CFO from DFA,
which has been amazing, but
it's, it's been a challenge for
us to try to find a CFO so that
position has been vacant for a
while, but we are actively
looking for a CFO still, um.
So you know anybody who wants to
be a CFO. Please send them our
way, um.
We have on page 8, again, it's
just an overview analysis, a
chart of the vacancies and you
can kind of see how they've
moved over the last 7 months in
comparison to that same 7 month
period from last year.
Moving on to page number 9,
reversions, so looking at our
historical budget versus the
reversions and you can see that,
and, and you'll see in a couple
of slides, we have like our
budget expenses, but.
You'll see that right now, we
have $3 million left in our
overall budget.
But we're only, that's in our
1st 7 months and so looking at
that over the next 7 months, and
you'll see on page or I'm sorry,
on slide 11, you'll see how we
have most of this money budgeted
and accounted for and in ways
that we're hoping to get it
expanded from our operating
budget.
Um, again, just moving on to
page 10, similar to the, to the
previous page that just kind of
shows that how much um how much
was reverted from previous
years, but I, I think we're
making significant improvements
this year based on some of these
data and these charts, and we
really have an amazing staff who
is working to get all of this
money out and ensure that we are
getting it out for the intended
purposes.
So moving on to page 11, you can
see this is our operating budget
and our recurring funds, and you
can see um in the various
columns, um, what our budget is
and how it's laid out for each
of the different kind of line
items within those, those
categories and how much we've
expended. We haven't quite
expended as much as I would
like, quite honestly, but we
have encumbered quite a bit of
money, so it is encumbered we
are working with all of these
different entities to ensure
that we are making.
Contact and um having phone
calls and seeing what we can do
to provide any technical
assistance is necessary so that
we can ensure that this money
gets expended, uh, before the
end of the year, so, um, that's.
This is uh
To me this really shows how much
and how how focused we are on
moving forward in our budget and
getting those, uh, money is
expended.
Moving on to page 12, I know
it's a little different than our
budget, but talking about grow
funds, you can see, um, I think
we had 77 or 8 different grow,
uh, funds this past year and
what the budgets were. So you'll
see that most of that money has
been encumbered in the 3rd
column from the right, how much
has been encumbered or is either
pending through a purchase order
or an IGA. We do have one
project.
that we believe that we still
need to do an RFP for that we're
working on and that again we
needed a CPO to be able to
assist us with that, but
otherwise most of that money
has um has an intended purpose
and has been sent out in some
capacity. Um,
And so, and then moving on to
the special appropriation, so in
2023, IED got $25 million. We
were able to get that $25
million in specials broken out
by these uh areas here labeled
on the left-hand column, uh we
were able to, we asked for an
extension last year, we did get
the extension the legislature
gave us the extension and, um,
we've been working to get this
funding out so you'll see we had
federal matching funds for
federal infrastructure grants.
Native American teaching
statewide expansion of tribal
serving healthcare, um, and that
was broken up into several
different buckets of funding as
well, and but out of that 25
million, assuming everything
gets expended appropriately and
we get all the purchase orders,
we've got roughly $3 million
remaining in that right now, so
we are working diligently to
bring that down as well.
Um, page 14 is just our annual
financial audits, uh, just.
For the record that we did have
one material weakness due to um
$185,000 restatement from a
prior year due to improper
recording accounts payable
accrual for capital outlay
funds.
That includes my presentation,
Madam Cha.
Thank you so much. Uh, let's
see. I'm sure that we've got
some members with questions. Um,
shall we start with
Representative Hernandez.
Thank you, madam. Uh, Madam
Chair, or Mr. Chairman
um.
Uh, thank you, uh, secretary,
Madam Secretary, and, and
appreciate your staff being
here.
Uh, I do have
Um, multiple questions, but
I'll, I'll keep them, uh, um, to
the, to, to this budget.
Related, um.
Does, does these new positions,
and, and again I, my, um, Mister
Chairman, I, I really appreciate
IEDs, uh, community engagement
that I've been seeing,
especially in Northwest New
Mexico with the Navajo Nation.
Uh, I, I've noticed, uh, uh, you
know, more, more, uh, on the
ground and my question is, um,
are you, are you having to spend
more money, uh, doing that
community engagement now cause
I'm, I'm seeing an increase of
that.
Um, than before. Thank you, Mr.
Chairman.
Mr. Chair Representative
Hernandez, uh, you know, I don't
actually have the number of how
much we've expended just in
getting um our staff out, I do
know that we've calculated to
some extent how much we're
spending for per diem and
mileage for staff, but we do try
to often use, we have 3 state
vehicles that ID that we, um,
that we lease and so we use
state vehicles as often as we
can, and so, and hopefully
generally try to keep it within
with
In the working hours, um, but we
do ensure again, thank you, uh,
representative Hernandez for
acknowledging our, our outreach.
We have been working at it
strategically this year.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman and
Madam Secretary. I've, I've been
to your,
your guys' location and I was
really quite surprised, Mr.
Chairman, how small it is and
how big a footprint, um, your
agency has for our, our state,
not, not just the, uh, not just
on, uh, on tribal land, but also
in urban areas, and, and I, I,
uh, Mr. Chairman, I, I, I also
feel I, I'm hearing other
agencies.
talk about, um, moving into
bigger spaces, and, and I, I
just wanna flag that for, for
our, you know, future reference,
you know that that this is a a a
need when
When I bring tribal leaders to
the office, how compact.
It is to, to be comfortable. uh,
Mr. Chairman, I'm, I'm gonna
switch over to a previous, um,
Uh, funding that IED has
historically been sitting on,
um, as you know, uh, the energy
transition Act allocate Mr.
Chairman, uh,
Um, money to this to the Indian
Affairs department for uh uh and
this is reference to the sex
section 16 funds, um.
Mr. Chairman, Madam Secretary,
um, what is the, the status of,
uh, and, and uh, and I was
chairman, I, I appreciate the,
the RFP being posted online, um,
and the attention that it it it
is that is getting, uh, Mr.
Chairman, there, there was a
situation where there were 5
entities that previously were
awarded, uh, funds from
The previous secretary of Indian
Affairs and he and Mr. Chairman,
that secretary had to, had to
step back and publicly, um,
Um, let, let those five entities
know that 5s, community
organizations know that, that
they, they're not gonna get
awarded
what's the status of, of, of, of
those five entities that were
promised money from Indian
affairs, uh, with the energy
transition Act funds. Thank you,
Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Chair Representative
Hernandez, so we have been
working with those 5 entities.
We have gotten some money out to
them, um, you know, we are
confined by certain amounts that
we can, we can really allocate,
but we did find some work that
they could help ID with through
professional service contracts,
and so we did work with those,
but we did the large chunk of
money as you spoke about
Representative Hernandez is uh
available via an RFP right now,
the RFP closes tomorrow. We are
watching the.
number of, um, proposals that
come in and in the event we, uh,
you know, don't get any
proposals or um don't have
enough we might consider
extending that, but we have been
making active efforts in order
to make sure that those are
getting out to the that that RFP
is getting out to the community
in San Juan region so that they
know that that's available and
to apply, so it's been out there
for about a little couple of
weeks now, um, so our hope is to
get that out, uh.
One thing that we have not, uh,
fully fleshed out yet is whether
or not IED needs to request like
an extension of that funding,
quite honestly, we we've been,
uh, you know, we got it and we
kind of extended it last year.
We really have hoped that we
were, we would be able to get it
all out and get it fully
expended, but we do also realize
that at this point.
Have the RFP out and we're
seeking proposals, we want to
ensure that the constituents
have the time to fully expend
the money in a way that's
appropriate, so that might be a
request.
Thank you, Mr. Mr. Chairman, um,
Madam Secretary, you had
mentioned that they had till the
end of the year is that end of
the fiscal year.
Mr. Chair Representative
Hernandez, yes, that is correct.
Mr. Chairman, um, the, the
amount we're talking about and
Madam Secretary for
clarification, is this 1.5
million?
Mr. Chair Representative
Hernandez, yes, it is 1.505.
Mr. Chairman, the remaining
balance of what I think it was
300,000 to the 5 entities that
still uh set aside for those
five entities.
Uh, Mr. Chair Representative
Hernandez, the money has been
most of those have gone through
through contracts already. I
believe we have 2 that we have
been waiting for the entities,
one of the entities has been
non-responsive, but we are
continuing to try to work with
them to ensure that we're
getting that.
Mr. Chairman, um, in House Bill
2 of last year, I understand
that, uh, Mr. Chairman, that the
governor allocated additional
ETA funds to workforce
development for the uh um uh
displaced workers fund, but
there was also additional
funding for IED, um, Madam
Secretary, can you clarify that
additional money that the
governor put in, uh, House Bill
2 of last year.
Mr. Chair Representative
Hernandez, that funding
actually, so the original
funding that we got back in 2023
said, um, actually it was from
2019, I believe, but it was an
amount up to up to $2.5 million
and so the fun that we get for
the ETA is a percentage of what
the overall amount is from that
fund and so the amount that IED
actually was entitled to the
amount that actually came
through based on the percentage
was the 1.805, which is
Why, and so when the language
was uh extended or reauthorized
last year, it just said it said
$2.5 million however, that's not
how much we actually got from,
uh, the funding source when the
percentage actually came
through, I think we get 0.5% of
the overall amount and so the
amount is 1.805.
determined what uh might have
like with the deadline tomorrow.
Will your agency also be
following the similar process
that, uh, economic development,
uh, did when they issued out the
$6 million on, uh, I guess
betting, vetting these projects
and, and Mr. Chairman, that was
a really successful project. I
mean, process, and I really, uh,
uh, uh, appreciate, uh, economic
development department for
taking it's, uh, the initiative
in that process. Representative
Hernandez.
We are following the RFP process
is is required by the state, so
that's the process that we do
have uh a committee at the
agency that I'm not part of that
is vetting projects, um, and
we'll, we'll be using that to
look at what the projects are
and uh making awards from that
system, uh, and just uh for
clarification, Mr. Chair
representative, uh, are the
funding that came to IED out of
those funds works different than
it does for the other two
agencies.
Mr. Chairman, uh, Madam
Secretary, what happens when all
the fun gets expended and uh
what, what happens with this,
uh, this, uh, fun, uh, uh, does,
does it just go away, my, uh,
Mr. Chairman, or will you, is
there an opportunity to
repurpose it, uh, uh, Mr.
Chairman, because the successful
of of of this community money
for the uh community that's been
impacted.
by the closure of San Juan
station has been really
successful and Mr. Chairman,
we're just, I'm just curious
about what's the next steps for
this, um, section 16.
Mr. Chair, uh, representative.
To be completely honest, I'm not
sure that I have an answer for
your question. However, what I
can say is that by statute, the
um, the energy transition states
that there will be funding
available for these 3 agencies
based on closures around any
closures around the state, so it
doesn't just specifically apply
to this one specific one. This
one was specific for the San
Juan region for the closure of
the facility there, um, but IED
by statute gets 5% is what it
says for affected.
Like, like in my, my, my last
question is, is there, uh Mr.
Chairman, Madam Secretary, is
there technical assistance for
um entities for applying for for
this money.
Mr. Chair Representative, do you
mean, um, for doing the RFPs for
it. I'm sorry. Can I get
clarification? My, my, my
apologies, Mr. Chairman, um, uh,
I, I guess cause, uh, seeing the
um the economic development
department.
Uh, go through its
implementation with their with
their $6 million
I, uh, heard back from from some
of those entities just the um
The, the, the, the need for, for
the, the awardees to to have
that, uh, follow up of, of
technical technical service for
compliance with uh Mr. Chairman,
and and I I'm just wanting to
ensure that there that Madam
Secretary, Mr. Chairman, that
there, they're, they're being
helped throughout this, the, the
process of getting the award.
Mr. Chair Representative
Hernandez, of course, thank you
so much. Thank you for the
clarification. ID always will
try to provide technical
assistance anytime we can, we
work with our entities if they
have questions, they are more
than welcome to contact us and
we will do what we can to try to
assist them, and if we're unable
to, we will connect them with
somebody who can help assist.
Absolutely, thank you, Mr. T.
This German, that concludes my
question. I just wanna again
appreciate all the work that you
guys are doing there.
Thank you, Representative uh Her
Hernandez and a big thanks to
Vice Chair Dixon, um, we're both
straight to represent Brown and.
Um, I, I would like a little
more information about this
material weakness that was found
in the 2024 audit. I'm not sure
I understand. It had something
to do with
The way uh capital outlay funds
were reported. Could you give us
a little more information,
please, Madam Chair, Mr. Chair.
Mr. Chair Representative Brown,
um, if you don't mind, if can I
defer to our CFO to assist us in
answering that she understands
it a lot better than I do, thank
you.
Mr. Chairman, uh, Representative
Brown, so that was in reference
to, um, unfortunately we had a
restatement at the end of the
fiscal year, 4 $185,000.
Where in the previous fiscal
year that amount had been
reported and then it was never
paid out.
We had to restate that in order
to correct that, um, and so
that's.
All it was, it's just it comes
in as a material weakness
because for that particular
fund.
You don't normally have a fund
balance.
So when you're making any kind
of adjustment, it becomes
material when so, but it was
only $185,000. It's a one time
thing.
Yeah, thank you for the
elaboration on that. I, I guess
what was throwing me was the
phrase accounts payable accrual,
but I think I get it now, so
thank you. And then, uh Mr.
Cherry, do you have one other,
um, so thank you for the answer.
I just wanna, um,
the, the, uh, the agency for the
salaries that you're you're
paying right now, um, in 2020,
the average
Salary was 73,000 and uh in
2024, it's up to 98,000, so that
that's pretty good for state
government, Mr. Chair, and um
Uh, I'm sure you all deserve
every penny that you're, you're
paying your staff.
Um, could you just tell us the
low, I don't need to know the
high, high end on, on uh salary,
but what's the low, what's the
entry, the low level for celery,
please.
Mr. Chair Representative Brown,
I believe we have a position,
uh, uh, pay on 60 position that
starts around $55,000.00 you
know what I, I let me stand
corrected. I apologize about
that. We are executive admin is
a 55 pay band and so she is at
the midpoint for that.
Well, again, Mr. Chair, those
are pretty nice salaries for
state government, so, um, it's
nice to see you. Thank you.
Thank you, Representative Brown.
Uh, next we have Representative
Garrett, and then Vice Chair
Dixon. Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Thank you, Madam Secretary. Um,
I believe there's 2
requiredtrial consultations on
education with state government
and the tribal education
leaders. But those organized by
your department or by the
governor.
Uh, Mr. Chair Representative, we
IED does assists our sister
agencies, the education agencies
with putting on those, we call
them G2G uh and on behalf of the
governor, so we do assist the
education agencies and work with
them to help with that on what
IED does put on every year
pursuant to the state tribal
collaboration Act is the annual
state tribal leader summit,
which is focused more broadly on
topics that interest are applied
to nation's publics, and tribes.
Thank you and, and just my final
question is, does the funding
for those come out of your
department?
Mr. Chair Representative, no, we
have not, uh, put forth, um, any
specific funding uh in unless
we, you know, there's something
that we can assist with in some
capacity, but generally that's
not covered by our budget. Thank
you very much.
Thank you Vier Dixon.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Sorry, I
just put a Jolly Rancher in.
Um,
Madam Secretary, I am really
impressed with the.
Work that your department is
doing.
Um
And I had a couple of questions
about economic development and
energy. Uh, Mr. Chair, Madam
Secretary, one of the areas that
I've, um, spent a lot of time
focusing on is
The energy transition and use of
uh emerging technologies for
economic development and climate
change. And what I have um
What has come up is in
conversations that I've had
with, with just a few tribes.
Um
There's they have indicated a
little bit of hesitancy.
Around a lack of technical
expertise.
And so I'm wondering.
If you could talk about if, if
there are any initiatives.
That your department is looking
at or ways that your department
Coordinates with other agencies.
To help our
Pueblos and tribes.
And the Navajo Nation, um,
leverage some of the emerging
technologies that can bring new
jobs, um, and offer, uh,
New revenue streams.
Mr. Chairman and Vice Chair,
thank you for the question. We,
uh, I can't think of anything
specifically that we're doing
specifically other than like
there's a, let me just say that
we of course work with our
sister agencies for anything,
and we do try to assist with
leveraging funds and letting
tribes, nations, publics, and
tribes know when there's there's
funding available or if there's
technical assistance at another
agencies, we, we work with the
tribal liaisons from each agency
to try to ensure that we're
aware of those updates and
connecting tribal leadership.
of our tribal programmatic
service directors with those um
tribal and so they can get that
we do have an environmental
justice specialist at IAD and he
has been sitting on, um, dozens
of various sports and
commissions and committees that
IAD sits on to try to ensure
that IED stays informed, but one
of the things that, uh, of
course, you know, going back to
kind of our funding stuff, you
know, our pay for our salaries,
we do have pretty, um,
specialized.
expertise amongst our staff in
working with nation's publics
and tribes in these various
areas and so looking at how that
impacts us and so, um, uh, you
know, Indian affairs touches
every area of everything, so
it's a vast, um.
Entity of all these things, and
I would say we're not the
experts generally, uh, we, we
work with our agencies who are
the experts in the area and we
try to keep up to date and
working with our agencies on
what are the services provided
that we can help assist, um,
providing information to
nations, pubs, and tribes so
that they can get.
they can get that understanding,
they can figure out if there's
funds to be leveraged or such
now that said, if there's ever a
way to build out IED in the
future, always, you know, moving
forward, um, I think there's
ways to look at how IED, you
know,
Decade from now or something is
really able to expand, um, but
for right now, you know, we work
very closely with.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Thank you,
Madam Secretary. Yes, and I
would be very interested in
continuing to have the
conversation about how to build
that capacity and um with your
agency and just make sure that
uh we're providing maximum
support, um, and liaising with,
with various um companies,
nations of those tribes,
agencies, um, to get, you know,
to do as much as we can. So,
thank you very much, Mr. Chair.
Thank you very much, Madam Vice
Chair. Thank you, Madam
Secretary. Uh, first, the with
regards to this, uh, our special
session,
I've heard that it's going well,
Madam Secretary, working with
Mescalero on uh the emergency
funding that's under your
purview.
Mr. Cher, yes, we did send out,
um, IED was given $10 million to
administer to uh to Mescalero.
We got that money out to them
right away, they are working on
drawing down on the money I've
talked with Vice President Duffy
and President Pad Walsh, um,
about ensuring that that money
and they have assured me several
times that it's gonna be fully
expended by June 30th of this
year. That's great. Thank you
very much for that, uh, Madam
Secretary, on the sort of the
getting
In the department, um, squared
away from sort of the people
perspective and what I mean
there is, is sort of staffing up
and reclassifying.
It's reading here, you're
looking to add a couple of
positions. How is the
reclassification going, and do
you think that there's a way,
Madam Secretary, sort of to um
reclassify and then add like,
can we?
Yeah, we want to help you and it
seems like the CFO position,
man, is one that you've really
highlighted that you don't want
to reclassify, you want to keep
that position there.
Are there other positions so
that uh with vacancy savings and
reclassification can help you
staff up in the areas that you
need.
Mr. Cha, thank you. So on our
organizational chart, you'll see
under um our PR coordinator
position, so we are under that
line, so on page 2 of the
presentation is our org chart.
You'll see that we actually just
uh reclassed the go exposition
to create a CIO go so that we
can really have really good
communications and ensure that
we're meeting the needs of our
constituents, uh, and then we've
got a couple of PR coordinator
positions under those. I
actually, um, did, um, I'm doing
some moving around, but one of
this this PR coordinator
position at the very bottom
there did actually is getting
reclassed right now as we speak
into another position.
Um,
and so it'll be, um, it's a
management analyst position to
focus on different areas and
I'll be working underneath our
policy director Amandazzi, and
then also, um.
So that's one the other.
PR coordinator position, we
might be able to look at, um,
Reclast maybe to something
that's more appropriate. Other
than that, every physician,
every other position on here are
absolutely positions that we
need and and Mr. Cher, if you'd
like, I'm, I'm happy to go
through and explain that. No,
no, that's great. I, I
appreciate it, Madam Secretary.
um, I think really making pro
progress on the
reclassification, uh, gives
builds confidence, obviously
allows you to do what you think,
what is needed for the
department, um, and hopefully
allows us some space to continue
to work really closely, which
has been in I think echoing
comments from the members seem
strong progress during your
tenure along with your team, so
I wanna thank you for that. And
I think the openness to sort of.
Address new challenges and, and
be the best partner is.
OK. I don't see any other uh
questions. We'll ask for the LLC
recommendation right now,
understanding very much sort of
the focus on that uh on the
position piece.
members of the community, thank
you so much. Thank you. Mr.
Chair, I would move the
committee adopt the LFC
recommendation at this time. OK,
it's been moved by Dixon,
seconded by uh ranking member
Chatfield, any opposition to
that motion, saying none, uh.
We've adopted that. Excellent.
Thank you very much.
OK. All right members we're
done.
Except for the working groups,
uh, uh, first, let's do, is
there anybody in public who
wants to give public comments,
saying that, uh, OK, anybody
online?
I don't see anybody. OK, so
that'll conclude our meeting for
today. Uh, we have LFC staff
here along with Director Bri.
We're gonna break into our
different work groups. Thank you
members for a great morning.
We'll keep on trucking with the
