Agency code 208 New Mexico
compilation commission Being
concise. It's good to see that
there aren't any differences on
the recommendation. Mr Chairman.
Good afternoon, the New Mexico
compilation commissions
responsible for publishing the
New Mexico statutes, annotated
the opinions and rules of the
court and attorney general
opinions. The commission
maintains a computer database of
each publication.
And they also assist in the
publication of the secretary of
state session laws and are
authorized to prepare and keep
Current parallel tables of New
Mexico statutes, as mentioned
both recommendations from the
agency's requested increase of
1 67.8000 in the personal
category and the reduction of
the contracts category about
182.
0.8000. Both recommendations
recommend the slight increase in
the other category.
And I'm gonna pass it off to Mr
Davidson. Davidson Barrio. Mr.
Chairman. I think Barry did an
excellent job. I have nothing to
add.
Okay. Thank you very much.
I'm Loretta Barilla. Excuse me,
the executive director of the
Compilation Commission, Mr Chair
and members of the Committee.
Hello.
The commission is the official
legal publisher for the state of
New Mexico. We publish all the
annotated legal content on our
website and Mexico. One source
dot com free of charge to the
public.
We submitted a flat budget for
FY 25. The general fund that is
within that budget is used
exclusively for personal
services.
And benefits. You can't hear me.
I'm sorry.
We have six full time Ft, um,
one of which is a vacant term
position.
That we hope to fill this July
after our legislative session
work has been completed. And
with that extend for questions.
Great. Thank you so much. Mr.
Varela is Are there any
questions on the budget? I don't
see any. We go to the vice chair
for emotion.
Thank you, Mr Chair. Um I moved
the committee adopt the
Executive recommendations.
Okay. It's been moved to adopt
the executive recommendation. Mr
Sammy glow with a
It's been moved by Vice chair
Dixon saying. My representative
dela Cruz. Is there any
opposition to adopting that
motion?
Saying none.
Thank you very much. And thank
you for what you do.
Okay, We're gonna go out to
Agency to 10, the judicial
standard.
Thank you, Mr Chair. Members of
the committee. You can find the
agency code, which is to 10
under tab to agency to 10 that
the LFC and executive
recommendations both fully fund,
the agency's request. Both
recommendations from the slight
increases in the personnel
contracts and other category.
And the analysts reached
consensus on all performance
measures and targets. I now turn
it over to my D F a counterpart,
Mr Chair Committee members.
Austin and I reached consensus
on performance measures. So
without further ADO will
introduce Miss Phyllis Dominguez
from the Judicial Standards
Commission.
Thank you, Mr Chairman, members
of the committee. I appreciate
your time today I am the
executive director. Thank you
Judicial Standards Commission
and with me today, Travis.
And since it's I don't know if
you'd like me to break it down.
Excellent. Thank you very much.
Mr Mendez. Uh, we appreciate,
uh, represent good.
Thank you, Mr Chair. Thank you.
I have one question on Page
seven of volume two. It talks
about the State Ethics
Commission Act.
Uh, um, wanted to include an
according to the ethics
commission, the only means by
which these employees may be
brought
Within the commission's
oversight is by public vote is
that an issue for you that you
want to have a dress? Not
Talk. It was his doing it all
day.
Yeah, no worries. Make sure only
one is on a time. That's okay,
Mr Mendez. Go ahead. Please. Mr.
Chairman represented Garrett. I
appreciate the question now.
That's not something that we
need to have addressed. This was
brought up in a statute. I mean,
in an amendment ministers we had
that struck down because it was
unconstitutional. The only
Way out. Jurisdiction can be
amended as through
you're not looking for Thank you
very much Represent carrot.
Okay? I don't see any other
questions. Remember? I'm Sean.
Thank you, Mr Chairman.
Hollywood move the LFC budget.
It's been moved by ranking
member Armstrong signed by
represent Brown. Is there any
opposition to adopting that
motion in please, let's take a
Um uh, Let's do a quick roll
call, please. We're going to
have one member who's or this is
the vote adapt. Sorry. This is a
vote to adopt the LSC
recommendation for the Judicial
Standards Commission. Yes.
Sedative, Garrett. Yes. Heard
done. Yes.
Excellent. Thank you very much.
Thank you, Mr Miguez. Thank you,
okay.
Hmm.
We'll invite Mr Brown to come on
up.
Mr Mr Bauer Apologize.
Okay?
And Mr Bauer, please. When we
get to you please feel free to
Yes.
Cool.
Oh, Mr Chair Committee members.
This is agency to 80, the public
defender department also called
offices, a public defender.
Um
Under revenue. The executive
recommendation is $2.5 million
higher than the LFC
recommendation.
These differences are found
predominantly in the contracts
category and within the agency's
expansions within the base
personnel recommendation is
$448,000 higher than the
executive recommendation.
Executives. Contracts
categories $3.4 million higher
than the LFTs recommendations.
Those recommendations fulfill
the agency's request increases
in the other category.
The executive expansion
recommendation is $1.5 million
higher than LFC recommendation.
The LSC funded the agency's
experience in requests in the
personnel category in the base,
while the executive kept them as
expansions.
Um, but if you look at the
sheets, you'll see the FTP
account is the same. Pass it off
to Mr Davidson for performance
measures and to introduce our
guest.
Thank you, Mario.
The analysts reads consensus on
all performance measures and
targets and now like to
introduce the chief public
defender Ben Bauer.
Thank you, Mr Bauer. Please go
ahead again Introduced members
of your team who are here and
great to see former Speaker
Sanchez as well.
Thank you and Mr Chair since
it's about two o'clock we have
till about 430. Is that
I will continue more. Please
take the time that you needed no
witty retort, but I love the
sentiment.
Thank you for that. First of
all, And you already recognize
the vice chair of our
commission. Mr Raymond Sanchez,
former speaker.
Who is here on behalf of the
commission. Thank you.
We also have district offender
from the first judicial
district. Julie Ball, Uh,
sometimes Deputy Chief public
Commander, Philip A lot of great
day, Uh, Deputy Chief of
Administrative services. Sydney
Sanchez, Deputy Chief of
Contract Counsel, Legal
services, Randy Chavez. We have
Teresa Edwards. Who's our
budget? Um
Guru.
That may not be the legal term.
Ah R T F O W O Dell and Robert
Cardone, budget director
Um
Thank you, Mr Chairman. Members
of the commission. Uh, you've
heard from the courts and I know
many of you have heard from our
department before, So I will
just do a quick summary of the
background. We are a state
agency. We used to be up until
2013 were. We were an executive
agency. Under the governor.
There was a movement towards
creating independent commission,
which would give us the ability
to advocate
Ah, both on issues relevant to
the courts and also for our
budget needs, which I think
sometimes were stymied by being
under the control of government.
So we have been independent for
just about 10 years we
consistently came in front of
the Legislature. I think,
telling the Legislature about
needs that we had
We also went in front of the
courts back in 2016 and 2017,
because, as lawyers we have an
ethical duty to provide
effective representation or
clients, representation means
that you do the things necessary
for your clients so that they
have so that they have a good
attorney. So that, uh, you know,
we can do please trials as
necessary and and so that
clients who are indigent have
Representation. That should be
just as good as those who have
money to spend on on attorneys.
We do this in two different ways
around the state. One is through
13 different offices with staff
attorneys that represent
individuals and the others
through private attorneys on
contract with us, and we
believed that when you look
Each client hopeful and
effective representation, But I
think as you've heard our
conversations, we feel that no
matter how hard our attorneys
work, that is not always the
case. Which is why we come to
you with. Um I understand what
looks like a pretty sort of
budget recognition budget
request, which is just about
20%.
Um, last year, we also requested
20%. And we got just about 10%.
And if you recall, there was
there was a workload study that
we had done about 2.5 years ago
by the American Bar Association
and some national experts that
showed we needed almost three
times almost three times the
attorney hours that we currently
have. We've made strides to meet
that, and we created a five year
plan, which I know there's links
in your materials to that.
Um, we know that we would not
get there today. We will not get
there this year. We wouldn't get
there frankly, in five years,
but what we want to do is
basically it's like like a math
program. Problems show you our
work, right? Be very transparent
about our needs our plan and how
to get there. And that includes
both, hopefully cutting down the
number of people coming into the
criminal system and also more
resources so getting to this
request.
I'm in here in a couple of days
ago, 11 of the things that
really struck me was risk
management rates, um, for next
year are changing, and I just
kind of want to jump to that
from all the other issues.
They're increasing really
substantially.
And they haven't been changed
for a few years. And so I
understand that it's you know,
very important to pay lawyers
who are representing the state
of New Mexico in civil lawsuits
is important because we're a
capitalist economy and you need
to pay market rates for people
to provide services to the
state. They are increasing the
rates.
Up to $150 an hour for somebody
with 0 to 2 years experience,
Uh, And for 10, plus years, $225
you all probably have seen the
charts about how much we pay in
generally base rates to
attorneys on on contract with us
to take cases.
Either conflicts in the larger
cities or in the rural areas
where we don't have offices.
That is our only representation
of indigent clients. And when
you increase the rates to what
should be market rates for
people doing civil work. I'm not
sure how we are going to bring
in and, frankly, the district
attorney's office and I know the
president of the association is
behind me here.
Yeah, and they many of their
offices because they cannot
hire, particularly in rural
areas they are bringing in
people on contract.
To do this work. Um and so when
the market changes, all of us
have to be able to change. Um
some of the calculations that
we've done we're at what we
considered a pretty assertive
rate of 124 $25 an hour. I can
tell you suddenly that doesn't
look
Very high, especially because so
many of our attorneys in rural
areas have been practicing for
1520 25 years they would be
making $225 an hour if they were
doing primarily working in their
office, Um, writing draft
emotions and appearing in court
remotely and the lawyers that
represent indigent clients who
have to go to court houses
around the state.
Um, pretrial conferences, plea
hearings, jury trials and going
to the jails.
So I see this crisis is
potentially getting worse for
us, Um
And so, uh, there are
recommendations from the lfc
and, uh, from
From the executive. They are
obviously under what we're
asking for. I hope that you will
look at our performance measures
and the work that we have done.
I think we are and we strive to
be a very transparent agency
again. We show our work.
Um
Are
Our in house. Uh,
Mhm rate of vacancy is, um
Been reduced substantially. We
are now at, um statewide 11.5%,
which I think considering the
economy and what's many state
agencies are at. That's
excellent. Our attorney vacancy
rate is 15.4, or non attorney
rate is 7.6.
Ah, and so the help that you
have given us through, um, money
to increase salaries. We have
recruitment and retention
bonuses that we've gotten either
in our base budget or through
the sentencing commission grants
recruitment retention grants. We
have gone through the processes
and really assertively
recruited.
Um, for attorneys. Many of them
are coming from out of state
because we tend jobs. There's
because we we recruit online
because I think our reputation
nationwide is a public defenders
agency has really grown over the
last few years, and so people
come to Mexico to do this work
primarily in rural areas, which
is which is where
The work is most needed.
Uh and so
Again. I don't want to take up a
lot more of your time, but I
would ask you
Okay. You know, too. I think we
need to do some things out of
the box and understanding that
you will probably vote at the
end of this hearing to adopt a
lower recommendation. We really
hope to work on both one time
money, for instance, that would
fund pilot projects in rural
areas, and we have some
recommendations for that. Do you
pay hourly rates in the fifth
Judicial district?
In the eighth judicial district
and some other places to break
in people to do the necessary
work to keep the court system
running into represent our
clients. Um, that's my kind of
short bill, Mr Chair and willing
to go into more detail. Thank
you very much, Mr Bauer. Thank
you for your member of the team
who is here again? Great to see
you, Speaker Sanchez.
Um, we're gonna go straight to
questions first to represent
Chatfield, then the
representative Sanchez go from
there.
Thank you, Mr Chair.
Um, Mr. I'm looking here at
personal services and employee
benefits. It looked like you.
You transferred 4,200,000.
And I also that's 10%.
Of your budget.
I also see every version of
almost $2 million
1.9
So transfer out of personnel is
primarily going into contract
council.
Legal services and just to
explain how this works,
sometimes especially in some
districts, where we have high
vacancy rates and the Roswell
office. I think we were staffed
for nine and for a while we had
three lawyers.
Um, we
Have to get representation to
people and we have to do it
within a very limited period of
time. Um, you know, within the
days, weeks or months that the
court that the court demands and
so we pay cases that would
otherwise be, um, handled by
people in house. Uh, we we have
to pay contractors, and so we
have to transfer that that money
from personnel into contracts.
So that we can basically get the
help where it is needed. Um, and
that's the primary reason why we
transfer money out of personnel
into contracts, and Mr Chair,
Representative Chatfield the
reversion was approximately 1.9
million.
Um, about 3% of the budget. But
800,000 of that, um, total
amount was actually expired
Funds from fiscal year 2022.
That had not been reverted
timely, so it
What we see is the actual total
amount of 23 funds reverted was
1.1 million.
About 1.7%.
Thank you, Mr Chair. Thank you
very much for observed Chatfield
represent Sanchez. Thank you. Mr
Trump is going to be real brief.
I just want to thank Mr Bauer
for his responsiveness. I know
he's uh, answered my call for
several issues that have come up
and I want to thank the office.
Quite a few of the people from
my area, utilize the public
defender and, uh,
With the resources they have
They do a great job, so I just
wanted to make that comment.
Thank you, Mr Chair. Thank you
very much. Representative
Sanchez. I don't see I'm going
to go straight to Vice Chair
Dicks. Thank you, Mr Chair. Um,
thank you, analysts. And thank
you, Mr Bauer. Um
Oh,
I appreciate that You
highlighted the work.
The workforce study from a
couple of years ago. It's
something we've talked about,
and I know we worked last
session to make progress on, um
ensuring that we were increasing
the number of folks, um, in the
public defender's office and on
contract. Um, I do see that.
You know, Um Lfc is
recommending another increase.
Um, but I am curious.
It's you.
If you think I mean it's not
going to go far enough, right
for what you'd like, Um, but if
you could just talk a little bit
more about that, so
Because I'd like to know what
the
Downside is of going with the
LFC recommendations.
And what particular I'm sorry.
Just the the F T. E s.
Uh, First of all, Mr Chair and
Vice chair, Dixon. I believe
that our vacancy rate right now
shows that we're pretty good at
filling FTE that there was about
two years ago. You know, the
market was hard for everybody.
Our vacancy rate was almost 25%.
Uh and we've been able to
substantially cut into that. So,
uh
If we get FTE added to us, we we
can fill it. We are pretty
aggressively going through
recruitment or retention. We've
created retention bonuses, um,
basically moving expenses for
people who are coming from, you
know, out of the district or
from out of state and those
kinds of things that have
already helped.
So I think that we can absorb
the money both for that and for
pilot projects and funding to
increase contractor rates.
Thank you, Mr Bauer. Thank you
very much. Vice chair, Dixon.
Um, the I guess I would.
Briefly asked Mr Bauer there and
see the
Turning the page 144 in our
volume one, which sort of shows
the performance measurements. It
seems like the the in house
attorneys. It's a speedier
disposition of cases. It's a
Prep much more preferable
situation for the public
defender's office. Maybe you
could spend just a quick second
sort of sharing. We've heard a
lot about how the justice system
really relies on all sort of
components. Why is that speedy
or disposition helpful in the
justice system?
First of all, is that reporting
measure? Um, specifically, I
think they're two different
reasons. That could be first of
all, uh, contractors. You know
that covers again some rural
areas Where where we don't have
offices, and sometimes it takes
some time to get somebody
appointed. Um
There could be problems with
reporting. I mean, when you pay
somebody incredibly low flat
fees, they don't always fill out
all the paperwork. It doesn't
mean that that person that that
attorney isn't necessarily
providing effective assistance.
And so I think our contractors
can be everybody. That is good,
However, when they are so short
handed, um and when we are so
shorthanded, for instance, in
Roswell
Within the last couple of
months. We had some attorneys
with over 200 felony cases each.
That's 200 people. Individuals
that they are representing, that
are depending upon them, a good
percentage of which are in jail,
which cost the county money. Um
and so the ripple effect of our
not being able to do this work
timely.
On the courts, Um, on the
district attorneys who are
waiting. You know, if they do
make a plea offer, you know, we
have to get it to our clients.
We have to respond to them and
then you know, the public
defender's office is not just
lawyers. It is the other people.
That's the social workers. The
paralegals, the support staff.
We've tried to bring about more
holistic defense into our
office, which is social workers.
So that we can hook people up
with services so that there is
less recidivism, and we feel
that if we can staff up uh that
kind of holistic defense, uh,
the public defender's office
maybe the best place in many
areas to really help our clients
because there is a relationship
that we build with them. We hope
not to build too much, because
that means they're coming back.
But but we are really the agency
that can help stabilize some of
these folks and then get them to
services. And so if we are not
staffed, you know, even
somewhere close to and you
brought up the workload study
amount of vice chair
Uh, we're not going to get to
that workload study anytime
soon. But the closer we can get
the better the system, the court
system as a whole works. You
know if you want swift and
certain justice, um certain
means correct.
Also, then you need an
adversarial system that is
funded for all three parts of
it. And, you know, we don't
control our caseload.
And so we take the resources. We
have spread them around as best
we can, um
Uh Hmm. We asked the help us do
that. We're doing the best we
can. But the more you can give
us the better. The system is
going to work. Excellent. Thank
you for going. Thank you for
going briefly into that, Mr
Bauer. So I think, um, we don't
have any other questions. I
think we'd like to look with our
analysts, particularly on some
of the recruit the non recurring
recruitment opportunities.
To continue the work there and
we, you know, note that this is
almost a $4 million
recommendation from the LFC. I
think we want to continue to be
really good partners were
We don't want to. I don't want
to over commit us on increased
General fund, although it's
clearly you're putting this to
good use with very low funded
vacancy rates and a lot of
progress, But we can definitely
work on the non recurring side
and try to work on other areas.
We appreciate that and we and
will be creative with you about
how to use non recurrent money
as well. Thank you very much.
Okay, then. Advice, sir.
Thank you, Mr Chair. I moved the
committee adopted the LFC
recommendation.
Has been moved by Vice Chair
Dixon second by represented
Luhan. Is there any opposition
to adopting that motion? None.
Thank you very much, Mr Bauer.
Okay, Committee that takes us to
the conclusion of today. We got
a very heavy day. Uh, members as
we recall, there will not be
committed tomorrow or HFC
committee tomorrow. Um, we're
please stay tuned. No. Ah, I
apologize.
Um, is there we're going to go
to zoom in? First of all, Is
there anybody in the audience
who wants to give public
comment?
Saying, and, uh let's go to
zoom.
Nasty.
Uh, okay. Nat Dean.
On zoom. We're gonna go to
public comment.
Thank you, Mr Chair, Madam Vice
chair members of the committee.
I'll be brief under tab to 18
for the administrative office of
the courts. Um, the, uh
Excuse me the backfire of the
intention of house Bill 139
Removing these versus planning
to relieve a social justice
issue. At this point in time, it
may be creating a larger social
justice issue by
inaccessibility to some of the
services and supports that those
funded
Um, I do understand that some of
that was in the budget planning
for replacing funds that would
serve programs Excuse me, Serve
individuals in programs through
fee funding, but it's just a
picture of larger advanced
planning and understanding of
the implications of making a
policy decision. My apologies
for being a bit distracted at
the moment. I have an emergency
client that I
I'm trying to help. Thank you
very much for your time again. I
always say for the heavy lift
because I really do understand
It's not easy, and Mr Chairman
and vice chair, members of the
committee and any advocates. I
appreciate all of your efforts.
Thank you very much now.
Okay, Committee. I think that
does it for public comment were
wrapped up for this weekend or
what will be coming in the
weekend. Please expect next week
to be extremely busy that this
is sort of a big week for us as
we move towards the budget, and
there will be work not only in
committee during our hearings.
But outside of committee for
many
With that. Thanks, everybody for
your time and work and diligence
and great questions and hope you
have a great and safe weekend.
We're adjourned.
Yes.
