Excluding one here that I don't
have the number for we have
somewhere around one point four
million to between one point
three and a one point four
million dollar cash balance
between session expenses non
session expenses clerk's office
House clerk CENIC clerk LFC LAFC
LCS.
and other expenses public safety
military affairs for capital
security
database law this database of
laws and administrative office
of the courts if we put all that
together we have somewhere north
of one point three one point
four million dollars just in
those four years if an and if
that's the case and it's in the
cash balance and the lawsuit
that was created by the way the
the redistricting occurred.
One side has to pay for that out
of private funds the other side
just use government funds I
can't Mr chair we reduce the
number of four million but at
least one point four million.
Because the cash balance already
exists.
Of the question Mr chair.
Mr Chairman Mr Burciaga.
Maybe Mr chairman of.
The cash balances as I mentioned
is used for redistricting for
special sessions the other thing
we use it for is for the upkeep
and maintenance of the of the
building.
We don't ask for capital outlay
money we at we use cash balances
so when we did our the
construction on the leadership
offices on the first floor when
we did some changes over capitol
north
when we've had that have
major purchases
for the building etcetera we use
cash balances again the
legislature has traditionally
allowed cash balances to grow so
that we can use that money
through an appropriation for.
Redistricting for special
sessions extraordinary we if we
ever have another one capitol
building upgrades and the like
and so we allow cash balances to
grow we we've had cash balances
usually we.
It's hard to say how much money
is in there right now because
some of that was appropriate
last year some of those expenses
are are ongoing because of
construction we just finished
So I'm not exactly sure how much
is in there but the idea is not
to level at office to allow to
grow because at any given time
we may need something for
extraordinary Xfinity for
special sessions and for
building upgrades so we there's
times we have three million in
there yes we have five six seven
million in there and then we go
to the facilities review
subcommittee to advisable what
engineering.
As we're gonna make in the
building and they authorize us
to do that and then we put that
money into the budget so we can
do those upgrades need.
Thank you Mr chair
As as I go through the
breakdown.
I look at some of the things
that that are listed out here
and and.
I'm gonna do that that we
probably need to do some digital
upgrades on how the house in the
Senate floor boards look we need
to look at some other things you
know I. T. expenses actually
having working video systems and
audio systems and all of our
committee could committee rooms
I get all that the session
expenses like I get.
for the most part it is
confusing for me with the costs
of fuel and and the additional
money that Curtis gives for for
mileage right now that we only
have a hundred forty dollar
increase in the mileage expenses
for session.
A hundred twelve legislature but
legislators about the nort but.
Again it's not a debatable issue
for me but I am concerned about
is that in two thousand nineteen
our expenses were ninety four to
twenty six million dollars and
change.
For our for government to serve
hundred twelve legislators.
The two thousand twenty three
budget is estimated at fifty
seven point five almost fifty
seven point five.
Million dollars almost double.
For the same hundred twelve
legislators I think this is a
perfect example of growing
government just a little too far
too fast thank you Mr chairman
thank you very much
Representative Pettigrew next
we're going to go to
Representative Montoya.
Thank.
Thank you Mr chair and
then later.
I I'd have several those similar
questions as to as as a
Representative Pettigrew
brought forward
Just I'm not seeing FTEs number
of full time employees in here
is there and it's going to be an
increase to full time employees
are full time staff that's
included in this budget number
because I'm seeing once again
I've seen numbers have really
from two thousand and twenty
one.
Two thousand twenty one we spent
the.
Thirty million.
And now we're at fifty at fifty
seven point five that's that's
nearly doubling in two years.
so I'm seeing some increases
I've heard some of the.
rationale behind that but that's
that's nearly a that's that's
nearly doubling in in two years
time.
And I'm just wondering are there
any new FTEs as part of this
figure.
Mr chairman and Representative
Montoya for the Legislative
Council Service there may be and
part of that has to do with the
additional seven hundred twenty
thousand dollars that is in the
budget for the Legislative
Council Service because as I
mentioned to a number of
legislators and leaders we need
to get the drafters and staff
attorneys out of the committee
process event planning.
And have them focus on legal
research and drafting the other
thing I would add is part of
that sizable increases of nine
point five million dollars
appropriation for a new
legislative processing system
that we use in our P. and that's
going to cost about ten twelve
million dollars total that nine
point five to supplements what's
already been appropriated.
So Mr chair and and Mr Burciaga.
so then as I just a figure that
got split between the house and
Senate and added to.
That number that line that would
essentially be personal services
and benefits.
Personal services a budget for
four of four the cost of.
That the increased cost of
setting LFC staff
on the road as it were to
committees are to interim
committees I mean I'm I'm trying
to see because what use what
you're saying is one specific
increase for Legislative Council
staff but I'm I'm looking across
the board every.
every everyone's asking for a
similar percentage increase.
And I'm not I'm trying to figure
out why are we talking about the
maybe that because it because
maybe you answer my question up
for Legislative Council but that
doesn't answer my question for
across the board by the
increases so much Mr chairman
and Representative Montoya I'm I
can only speak Legislative
Council Service the other mounts
we get our amounts that the
chief clerks and the directors
have discussed with the risks
respectively ship I would if if
the chair permits and if there's
time I would defer to Mr Abbey
agency but it Warniment and
either the chief clerks if
they're here thank you Mr
Burciaga that they are so
monthly we're certainly mindful
of the time if there are
specific questions about the as
Legislative Education studie
Committee or legislative finance
committee for the directors who
are here we can absolutely have
them come up we just want to be
fund thank you that will thank
you Mr chairman this might be a
better question for for Mr Abbey
is I'm I'm wondering are there
besides for Legislative Council
staff would there be an increase
for legislators for.
for new FTEs that I'm not seeing
in the bill but I'm trying to
find out figure out drill down
as to what the big increases for
so thank you Representative
Montoya this is here please
director Avid if you want if you
wouldn't mind coming up.
The request for the legislative
finance committee and members
can find this on the back of
your FIR if you look under line
one twelfth under the H. B.
house bill one summary director
Avid.
Mr Chairman representative
Montoya the eleven apercent
increase for LFC would allow us
to additional FTE and at this
point that would of the thinking
we would be capital outlay
analyst and economist to Daschle
F. T. bring the total forty it
would also provide a contractor
that would do special studies
especially in the area of health
care that was discussed at the
committee meeting the other day
that was that would hopefully be
about seventy five thousand
dollar contract and finally
there will be a modest amount
for targeted increases for
retention purposes as LFC is
recommended for the region's.
Thank you Mr chair thank you Mr
thank you Representative just a
couple more questions Mr chair
the cash balances and
I guess this question also for
Mr Burciaga it sounds like some
of this money has to be
allocated.
through an appropriations but
some of it is up to the
discretion I I would say I would
sing of yourself this okay so
you you mentioned certain things
that who then just that directs
that money.
provided Legislative Council.
Mr chairman and representative.
Number one let's let's the cash
balances has to be appropriate
so it has to be in a bill
somewhere and then once that
money has been allocated depends
on the purpose and what the bill
says of how it's going to be
spent so when it's appropriated
for example redistricting we
work with the Legislative
Council to say we're gonna put
out an RFP for these the council
approves our selection or
reviews it approves it and then
we spend it but it it often it's
either written out in the law
itself or it's at the direction
of the council once it's been
appropriate thank you Mr chair
and and Mr Burciaga you
mentioned specifically though
the remodeling that took place
that I don't I don't believe we
have an appropriation
Mr chairman and representative
that you do goes in house bill
two under special appropriations
it's usually up I am out say a
million two million dollars for
capital upgrades maintenance and
repair its broad because it
depends on what things we need
to do anything from an H. back
to new carpet two new chairs
etcetera.
So Mr Mr chairman Mr Burciaga so
that is at the discretion of
yourself and Legislative Council
that is usually at the
discretion myself in
coordination usually with a
facilities review subcommittee
which oversees major upgrades in
the like to to the building.
Okay
that Mr chair just I guess more
of a statement I'm not sure why
we would just refer to revert
the dollars back to the general
fund if they have to be
appropriated anyway index I.
putting into a general fund that
and can be directed by.
I'm not sure who.
because it's so broad as a
concern so
Okay I I think that's those are
my questions it just seems to be
that that that those dollars if
you're gonna have to be
appropriate anyway I I don't
know that I like appropriating
dollars.
To a funds that could be spent
if we have as we have
redistricting coming up that
could be appropriated in the
prior session that we know
what's coming which is a major
expense but just to let it sit
there most most legislators
don't know it's there and that
those dollars can just be spent
it's looks like a select few and
so I'm I'm concerned about that
thank you Mr chair thank you
very much Montoya next we're
gonna go to Representative
Lujan.
Mr chair of.
Questions I didn't.
It stood out from where some
things are discussed looking at
the.
That line for two point five
million dollars for legislative
district staff office studies in
combination with the constituent
service platform so I'm gonna go
to the platform that I
have a million there Mr chair.
What exactly what is the system
and what is the need if we are
if we as legislators use our
clerk's offices for constituent
services.
Madam chair and Representative
Lujan the purpose of the
constituent services platform is
to have a an application network
based up on our servers that
allows legislators and or staff.
To to have a platform to uses no
right now the chief clerks have
something but it was the
leadership offices both the
minority majority who got
together discussed kind of a
platform they needed they issued
an R. P. they selected somebody
and that's what this is going to
cover thank you Mr and miss if
if district offices are created
that would actually be expanded
to those offices thank you I'm
putting those two things
together Mr chair and how that
that is being enero appropriated
here my question is so our
leadership will have those it's
essentially a database correct.
Madam chair.
Mr chairman and Representative
yes that's correct thank you so
what we as legislators have
access to that database Mr
chair.
Mr Chairman representative I'm I
believe you would that was
initially expected does affect
thank you I appreciate that
answer I.
No question goes to the.
Interm Committee expenses in the
three hundred percent increase
their.
And then that is a combination
for me also Mr chair with
interim committee and
operational support so we're
looking at you know four million
seven hundred and twenty
thousand dollars essentially
there so I mean so can you break
that down why we're having such
a huge increase their Mr chair
the second Mr Chairman
representative as I mentioned
why that four million was I'm
sorry I I'm I might not have
heard Mr it it includes an
ongoing redistricting lawsuit
okay additional
investigations lawsuits that
we've encountered we haven't in
the past and just the growth of
Intrum committees the seven
hundred twenty thousand dollars
a specific to Legislative
Council Service because we're
trying to refocus the staff no
infirmities so that the drafters
spend more time on the
researching drafting and not on
event planning for the
committees I really appreciate
that thank you Mr chair I see a
great value specially in and
that portion.
Thank you very much
Representative thank you very
much Representative Lujan next
we're gonna go to represent Baca
please.
Thank you Mr chairman I thank
you madam leader of for your
presentation my question really
is is very simple very direct
because that's about the
legislative process and system
we we talked about it we briefly
covered it about the increase of
about a billion dollars can you
just tell me what activities are
what will this thing is this
your Legisla- out let's that
what product would is a
processing system do.
Mr Chairman representative Baca
this processing system creates a
centralized fully integrated
state of the art.
Legislative processing system
that incorporates everything
from the receipt of a request to
the rules and and grow seen done
by the chief clerks so the bill
can be sent to the governor said
basically is bill drafting at
eighteen pulling in the statutes
to update in the like are
creating information for the
standing committees for the
committee secretaries for to
create
committee reports for example
substitutes in the like for
activities on the floor
everything relating from the
chamber to getting information
displayed on the board getting
information published on the
website sooner faster less
manual intervention more
automatic intervention security
based on user
it's something a number of
states have done I would say
over the last twenty years or so
and we issued our P. last year
we had two point five million
dollars seed money to start
it'll end up costing between ten
and twelve million that is the
reason for the nine point five
million dollars thank you Mr
chairman just a real quick
follow up question
so this is basically it's a it's
like bill tracking as far as
bill dropping it does not
involve the Legisla- process
that we use for LFC and the
question as far as the RP the RP
that went out
as it gets a Kernan got out we
are to have somebody is selected
or where we with the R. P.
process thank you Mr chairman Mr
chairman and representative we
issue the R. P. this summer we
had I Act.
Who responded I introduce our
state companies we selected one
to one and they have started
because we have the seed money
to get it started.
Thank you Mr chairman to for
questions thank you very much
Representative Baca I don't see
any other I have fought my
apologies that Representative
Brown takes.
Good morning Mr chairman
Representative Chasey good to
see you
I want to go back to the
question of interim committees
how many interim committees do
we currently have.
Mr chairman and representative
Including legislative finance
committee let's have Education
Committee which we do not staff
there are twice about twenty
interim committees it has
generally.
Average between eighteen and
twenty four interim committee
depending on what's created by
the city council thank you for
that answer Mr Chairman
Representative Chasey and Mr
Burciaga so we've had
discussions in the past about
perhaps melting or eliminating
some of the interim committees
that might be a budget savings
for us if it's possible to do
that I don't know of any
movement right now to do that
but I think it's something we
need to keep in mind see if we
can economize just a little bit
Mr chairman Representative
Chasey
I have been in the legislature
I'm starting my seventh term and
I have participated in interim
committees and I have observed
that the staff members work
extremely hard just getting
committee meetings together
getting equipment done all those
things that they have to do
and there have been times in the
past I I know there are drafters
as well I didn't really reticent
to ask for bill drafting
services because I know how hard
they're working already and they
really don't want to be asked to
do anything because they have
too much on their on their desk
as it is so Mr chairman I
I kind of have a roll of my own
that I don't ask you for October
but that's almost often times
too late if we're going to have
really good bills really good
legislation we need a lot of
months to to work on it get
input I think will improve our
process if we if we
can that add staff to you know
kind of bifurcate the functions
so Mr Chairman representative
Chasey are we've talked a bit
about the seven hundred twenty
thousand dollars proposed for
inner interim committee and
operational support I'm not
clear yet on the answer to the
question how many FTEs will
seven hundred and twenty
thousand dollars I.
Mr chairman and Representative
brown.
I don't know because it's going
to depend on whether we're going
to hire contractors experience
full time staff that we can use
specifically for interim
committees that then we can use
for example in places that we
need to hire session staff
capital outlay process it is an
example so I I don't I don't
know I can't answer that.
Could in there it is is the idea
that if we need additional
contractors consultants like we
provided for CCJ and LHS we
might be able to use some of
that money as well so I I I'm
sorry I can't give you a an
exact number I can certainly
keep of Council praised of a
prize I should say of what what
we're doing with that money
thank you for that answer Mr
chairman and Representative
Chasey so if of if this is
approved in the seven hundred
twenty thousand is now in play
will that be reflected in the
future feed bill under PS very
personal Services employee
benefits that kind of convert
into that line item.
Mr chairman and representative
contractual it would be if in
personal sources are contracted
rate and where we hire those
people and if we need that much
maybe maybe we don't need that
much but we just need to have
something to ensure that we've
got the staffing needed.
To get your request much sooner
rather than later okay Mr
chairman thank you.
Thank you very much
Representative Brown great
questions
I don't see any other questions
from committee Madam leaders
Burciaga I just have a couple of
quick questions one Mr Burciaga
to go to
the staffing study you mentioned
that that that entire amount
need not be
spent that that's sort of a
ceiling in order to do a
thorough and it's a public
through R. F. P. study for the
best way to serve the state is
that accurate Mr chairman that's
correct thank you Mr Burciaga
And it's really going down you
know we can see some of the
upgrades here and and this
committee room I know others
have we see really the largest
increases Representative Baca
pointed out around the
legislative processing system
Certainly around the interim
appreciate very much the the
points about how hard the staff
works during the interim and the
ability to better support that
and and bill policy
And the it's great to see Mr
Burciaga I just mentioned you
know we've had challenges in the
past around audio visual I think
we're able to see this year
fully open up with expanded
capacity reach New Mexicans
because of your work in the
guidance in the bipartisan
guidance of the body about
investing in better serving New
Mexicans
one brief question Mr Burciaga
the better the the legislative
processing system.
More fully quickly and
transparently doing that work
will allow for that just more
transparency for the state that
is as there are
is that fair to say.
Mr chairman if you just are you
just about the nine point five
million dollars yes yes I'm I
will choose were transparent
because any requests that we get
from any legislators
confidential so until that bill
is actually introduced for all
legislative chooses to make up
discussion draft available for
others it's it's confidential
are we're focused on making it
More robust and faster to the
extent possible but bill
drafting still is is I would say
it's a specialized area of law
understand thank thank you very
much Mr Burciaga
and thank you also to Madam
chief clerk for your incredible
work and the difficult
circumstances that you and your
staff of faced and your
continued service.
I don't see any other questions
with that I think it do we have
a motion for H. B. one Mr chair
I move that we approve HB okay
there's a.
Okay it's been a proper motion
proper second
was from Representative Lujan
Representative Cruz
Madam mystery estate would you
please call the roll.
Representative Allison yes.
Representative Armstrong now.
Representative Baca no.
Representative Brown.
Representative Kathy Rapp.
Representative.
Representative.
Representative Garrett.
Representative program yes.
Representative.
How do you yes.
Representative Lujan yes.
Representative.
Going to.
Representative Sweetser is.
Representative I have yes.
Representative Trujillo yes.
I.
Yes.
Yes.
And you would like to.
Okay by a vote of fourteen in
the affirmative for the negative
house bill one has been approved
settlement later.
first to Representative Montoya
and Representative Pettigrew
briefly.
Thank you Mr chairman
your last question was about
transparency and and and Mr Mr
chairman I I actually think that
money reverting to cash balances
and then essentially I believe
that as was explained
Legislative Council could
directs a lot of those dollars
to go to something as long as as
it as it is.
I generally.
covered in house bill two.
Under expenses that that could
be just about anything and I
think that would be much more
comfortable voting for this if
we had allocate dollars and it
was this to all New Mexicans how
we're spending our tax dollars
thank you Mr chair.
Representative.
Thank you Mr chair my no vote
has New.
I have no desire to to make you
feel like I don't appreciate the
services that we get during
session.
I appreciate the staff I
appreciate everything staff
does.
what I don't like is not what I
see no session expenses.
Things that I think should go
through true appropriation
process.
You should go through through
true vetting process with
respect to that too many times
today Mister chair I heard.
I'm not sure exactly what we're
gonna be able to get with that
amount of money.
And.
If I had a team member the work
for me that came and tell me
that they would get it done.
A lot of being able to explain
the expense that you want.
In depth in detail.
Thank you Mr chair thank you
very much okay members member ID
is thank you all for being here
today will be back at one thirty
four of revenue update until in
a believe that members were
headed to the four beginning at
ten thirty so thanks everybody
for your efficient work thanks
everybody for being here we'll
see everybody and will reconvene
at one thirty.
