uh, and our health and aging
work group.
And for members, there is a
handy dandy sheet on your uh
spot, but it, the work group
includes representatives
Herndon, Little, Sanchez,
Vincent, and Chatfield.
And for those of you not in the
working group, feel free to go
get some coffee.
Have some fun. I believe, I
believe you can, you might not,
Just as a reminder for work
group members, this is informal,
so you don't need to go through
a chair, um, but I will stick
around to try to keep us, uh,
running on time and um.
Any other procedural.
Items needed.
All right, madam chair, are we
ready?
I think so. Why don't you give
us uh some introductory remarks
as our two other members are
getting their coffee.
OK, uh, Madam Chair, members of
the committee.
Um, so we
The HCA had a January budget
projection which left us with a
lot of room.
Um, within the budget to kind of
maneuver.
We were able to get a lot of
stuff done within um you'll see
with this document in front of
you, the HAFC scenario.
We're able to get um almost
everything kind of from both
sides, um, done within this
scenario, and so, uh, you'll see
as you go down.
I've highlighted different lines
on here, um, where we've made
changes from the LFC
recommendation. You all adopted
the LFC recommendation with um
the stipulation that we come to
this um work group and uh work
out everything else. And so this
scenario here, um, kind of gives
us uh a little bit of the best
of both worlds from both the
executive side and the LFC side.
So starting off on line 6,
you'll
see that the uh pace, the
program for all inclusive care
rates. We took that to the
executive level at 53 5.3
million.
Um, same thing for assisted
living facilities, we took that
to 2.5 million, there was a lot
of uh discussion.
During the HFC hearing, um, on,
on these.
If you skip down to line 11,
you'll see also that we did the
nursing facility, rebasing at 9
million, and so that's, that was
a big point of discussion during
the HAFC hearing and so we were
able to uh take, take care of uh
part of that. Um,
Line 20. This is another big
piece of discussion, and it was
also just a a big uh part of the
secretary's ask.
Um, was to be able to fill
vacancies and do some of these
uh salary adjustments within uh
her department, and so we added
some uh funding there to take it
to the exact uh moving on to the
next program, developmental
disability Support Division, uh,
for provider rate adjustments,
we brought that up a little bit
so that the providers uh have a
little more of the rate
adjustment in there.
Um, I'm just hitting the
highlights here.
Uh
Moving on to the next page
lines.
Uh, there should be on the back.
Uh oh.
Um,
OK, members pause I had
double-sided copies.
If you guys
Have my originals.
OK. Give us just one moment to
uh locate that second side.
We
Um, no, you know, well, you
know, we do need the money, but
um I think, I think the big
thing that I can
So what we might do while we're
waiting for the second side is
um to see if folks have
questions on some of the
adjustments that have been
highlighted thus far. And thank
you so much for putting it in
yellow.
Uh, that is very helpful. Madam
Chair, the 2nd page is very
simple as well. It basically the
scenario goes to the executive
rec for the income support
division.
And then for program support
adds 600,000, which is what the.
Um, the executive had division
division of health I mean the
division for health improvement.
Um, to replace some provider
fees that was in the executive
record. So, basically, the, the
things you'll see on the
backside are moving to the
executive rec on those priority
areas for them.
Thank you. OK, uh,
Representative Herndon, yeah,
just go right ahead.
So thank you. um.
Could you please tell me they've
been for purposes of what we're
looking at, there've been a
couple of bills that have been
put in and one was referring to
reimbursement for vagus nerve
stimulus and the other was for
uh parody and reimbursement for
A birthing centers, so I am
trying to figure out how does
that uh reflect in what we are
doing.
Uh, Madam Chair and
Representative, so we do have
language, um, for the.
I believe we have language, we
do have language for the uh.
Um, birthing center parody, uh,
that was already included in the
LFC recommendation, uh, the
vagus nerve syndrome, um, we
don't have anything in this
scenario for that.
Was there a reason it was left
out?
Couldn't have been a
I did this man of chair
representative but wasn't part
of the agency request.
Um, we need to take a look at
the bill to see how much that
would impact Medicaid. This is a
Humongous multibillion dollar
program, and they might be able
to absorb those costs within the
existing appropriations.
OK, so just for clarification,
with there need to be language
in the um in the budget for the
agency itself for it to be taken
care of, or am I to or are we to
have a conversation with him
about where it would come. It's
not a lot of money, but it does
affect people's health
significantly.
We need to take a look at the
bill and have a conversation
with the agency, and if it's not
a lot of money, I would say that
it probably
Wouldn't be noticed within,
wouldn't need language within
House Bill 2. OK, thank you.
That will be a non-recurring and
that will be a discussion uh
after we finish this up.
So
Did you call me? Lie.
Uh
Does this mean that Medicaid,
Medicare spending is actually
going down.
Yes.
Mr. Chairman, that's correct. If
you look at the uh the HCA
January Medicaid budget
projection column there.
The, yeah, we've um
Medicaid spending is
gone down quite a bit. It looks
like we have that 2nd page now.
And that's because the number of
people on the program has
declined and the department has
revised their estimate about how
many people will be on the
program.
Next fiscal year providing
savings that can be reallocated
for these other.
Thank you.
Great. Um, if we want, it looks
like we all have, um, our second
page now. I know that you did
give us a little bit of a, a
high level, but, uh, why don't
you go ahead and walk us
through, um, the income support
and um division of health
improvement. Yeah, so it's, I
mean, it's uh pretty, pretty
simple line 68 through 75, we
took it to the executive
recommendation. This was a big
request from uh the department,
uh, the secretary.
was really um fighting for
these, and so we took it to the
executive site on that.
Um, and then going down to the
division of Health Improvement
line 94, we added the 600,000 to
replace uh for fee replacement.
Um, and with that.
Sta questions. So all these
Changes were done within the LFC
General Fund total. So no impact
here, bottom line, as you build
House Bill 2.
Could you say that again?
All of these changes were done
within the total general fund
allocation at LFC had, so it
doesn't cost you anything on a
net basis.
Thank you. That's great. That's
wonderful to hear.
Do we want to move on to the
next item, and I'm sure.
Let's see. Um, any further
questions on this or shall we
move on to our next item?
I think we're good to move
along.
Oh
Just to confirm, do we have a
handout for?
OK.
All right. Give us just one
Everyone has it, the health work
group sheet.
Raise your hand if you don't.
Oh
OK.
OK. That's fine. You can follow
along if we haven't, oh.
Yeah, OK, that's why.
All right, so you see the first.
Can I wait?
OK, I'm sorry, uh, director
writing toana.
OK. Thank you for bearing with
us, members. A lot of work
groups today. We got a lot, a
lot of paper. We're gonna work
through it. So, um, for health
behavioral health and aging, you
all have heard uh several
agencies and several legislative
proposals, so the first box on
your health, behavioral health
and aging work group, says HCA
budget review. That's what Eric
and director Sali just went
over.
So the line right under that is
for aging and the uh chair
direction or consideration today
is adding additional money to
the Kiki Savera senior dignity
Fund. That was a flag for many
members. So the proposal before
you is to add 5 million to Kiki
Seedra.
And I can take any questions on
that.
Or we can just move along.
It should be on your little work
group page.
Yeah, just that little one.
Any questions or just move right
along.
I have some questions. I have a
question.
We approved some, some spending
out of the Kiki serrated fund
yesterday and uh
So
I'm trying to weigh in my mind
how much was in the fund, how
much we spent yesterday, and
what this, what this kicks it up
to and so how much is left after
those, those changes because
Um, I don't have all those
numbers just floating in my
brain, but I do know that we
spent some yesterday. Uh, we had
some and we're putting some more
in.
And a chair, you'd increase the
fund balance to 10.5 million.
After the spending item.
And, and what was it previously?
9.5.
And it initially it only paid
for pilot programs, we were
gonna do some wording changes so
that we could uh use it to
continue some programs that was
working, did that wording ever
get changed last year. The
funding that comes out of it is
appropriated by you, so you make
those determinations as a
legislator. All right. Great.
So, um, it looks like we're good
on that. I'll go ahead and move
on to our next item on your
sheet here, which is healthcare
strategic recruitment program.
Uh, this is a one time funding
consideration, so sort of like a
pilot. It won't be formally in
the gross section of the bill
because there's lots of
different evaluations um that
are required for that section,
but this would live in your
non-recurring section, um, and
the staff proposal here is $2
million for a strategic
healthcare recruitment program.
This would track doctors who
have left the state, doctors who
are coming back from the state
and try to figure out really
what we can do to.
keep our doctors here, and this
is attached to legislation.
That all sound good to everyone?
Yes, that sounds good. I just
have a, a question. So just
recently, um,
The UNM lost its um
Eurogynecologists and so they
don't have one anymore, so it
need to, it would need to be
replaced. So this, there's no
timeline other than now once we
pass this for the use of these
funds. I just want to make sure
that that could be used now
because I think the university
is in need of some support.
OK, Representative, so it sounds
like you're flagging, um, an
additional appropriation for UNM
OK, Representative, so it sounds
like you're flagging, um, an
additional appropriation for UN
them
under their healthcare, under
this.
So I'm, I'm sorry. I, is this
only for health care for it, it,
you and him could not utilize
this money for purposes of
recruiting, I just need to
understand. I think
Representative Herndon that this
specific $2 million is tied to
specific legislation, but I can
do some more research, um, as to
other appropriations that UNM
would be eligible for for
recruitment
Madam Chair Representative
Hernon.
I'm sure that the hospital has
regular turnover of medical
personnel that they're
constantly.
I have resources set aside for
recruitment and retention, so I
would see that as
part of their clinical revenue
budget, uh, with the hospital to
be able to uh fill that
position.
OK, thank you very much. I was
very much aware that they were
losing that doctor and then
we're gonna lose two residents,
that's 3 medical professionals,
which is really not good for our
state, but thank you for letting
me know that. Any other flags on
this stuff? If not, we can take
a quick intermission and move on
to our next work group.
Sounds lovely. All right. Oops.
Ma, are we going to talk about
aging at all or if that was just
But that was the only thing
we're gonna cover the he kiss of
vera. Did you have an additional
question on aging? No, I just, I
know for the aging network, uh,
the LFC had recommended uh quite
a bit more than the executive
and I think we ended up taking
the executive.
Uh, I know that, uh, AG Network
does a lot of programs for
seniors, uh, so I just wanted to
ask about that.
We have our analyst here, so she
knows a lot more than me. Right.
Mr. Chair, members of the
committee, um, the executive
recommendation did have
increases for the aging network
as well. It was just kind of
hidden in the
space because of the way they
did their transfers to create a
new pe code, um, but I believe
it's, I believe it's like a $2
million increase, but I could
follow up.
Yeah,
not sure because I I think the
recommendation was 3.1 million,
the executive was 690K. So
you're saying that was made up
somewhere else?
shuffle, but let me follow back
with you on the exact wreck. I
can't really speak to the that
right?
Um
But for
We'll follow back up with you.
Thank you.
OK, I think we are good to go.
We're good to wrap this work
group. We don't need to take any
motions because this will
um happen on Monday.
Yep.
All right, fantastic.
Thank you all. So, um, brief
intermission. When do you want
the economic development group.
Excellent. And just as a heads
up for folks, um, economic
development, uh, working group.
Oh wow, we are an hour and 10
minutes ahead of schedule, uh,
Dickson Garrett Sanchez Lujan
Brown Baca Pettigrew.
