Representative
here.
So thank you very much. We'll
begin our subcommittee meeting
by looking at
Uh, 6 and uh
6:32, uh, and the workers'
compensation Administration. So
would you please come forward?
And I'm gonna have the analysts
introduce themselves and thank
you. Um, Madam Chair, members of
the committee, good afternoon.
My name is Rachel Mercer Garcia.
I'm the LFC analyst for the
Workers' Compensation
Administration, um, we're gonna
be looking at agency 632 in your
binders, um, and if you want to
follow along, um, in volume 2,
you're gonna turn to page 299.
Uh, with me at the table, uh, is
Heather Jordan, the director of
the Workers' Comp Administration
and Skystone, the DFA analyst
for workers' comp.
Um, what I'm gonna do is, uh,
give you a little bit of
background about the WCA and how
their revenue is generated, um,
cause that's relevant to their
budget in particular this year.
Um, I'll walk you through some
key differences in their
operating budget and then my
colleague from DFA will point
out some differences on the
non-recurring side, though you
all aren't talking about that uh
or making decisions on that
today. And then we'll turn it
over to Heather.
Um, so you'll be looking in your
packets, and I will be talking
through the different sheets,
um, and I will note for workers'
comp we've included an extra
document for you all, and that's
a fun balance, uh, both history
and projection for the workers'
comp administration,
but I will mostly be talking
from the different sheet that
looks like this, just white.
Um, so background for you all in
context related to the the two
recommendations. Uh, the
workers' compensation, uh,
Administration generates revenue
on a basis assessment per
employee. In effectively a
payroll tax, uh, that was
established in 1993. It's $4.30
per employee paid every quarter,
uh, and historically workers'
comp has not received general
fund.
Um, for a long time, the revenue
generated by that assessment was
significantly more um than the
expenditures to operate the
agency, and this is actually one
of the funds that over time, um,
you all have swept because it
tended to to carry a large
balance, um, in the last few
years in particular, the revenue
into the fund is now less than
the expenditure, so the
expenditures for workers' comp
have grown faster uh than
revenue into the fund.
Um, and so for that reason, um,
in the next year or so we will
see that pin is effectively, uh,
the balance is quite low. And so
in both recommendations and Sky
will talk about this a little
bit, is a one time transfer into
the workers' comp fund, um, on
the revenue side.
So I'm gonna talk a little bit
about the differences between
the LFC recommendation and the
executive recommendation, um,
they are quite close together
and try to limit kind of
expenditure growth because of of
that kind of revenue, um,
flattening with expenditure
growth. So both budgets are
trying to kind of um address
that challenge.
Overall, um, the LFC
recommendation is 111,000 less
than the executive budget
recommendation, um, because the
LFC budget budget's a little bit
less in fund balance from that
workers' comp fund.
Um, both the LFC recommendation
and the executive uh
recommendation maintain the
transfer from the workers' comp
fund to workforce solutions. We
talked about this when we heard
workforce solutions, but reduce
that amount down because of the
fun balance. So both
recommendations maintain that
transfer, um, but take it down
to 750,000.
Um, in addition to that, the LFC
recommendation minimizes
expenditure growth and so
budgets about 99,000 less
overall in personnel. Um, that
would fully fund the agencies's
existing 18 positions, but it
wouldn't allow them to fill
additional positions, um, or
provide additional compensation
increases, um, outside of what
might be in the compensation
package. Um, the, uh, executive
recommendations is a little bit
higher and might allow them to
fill.
an additional position. Um, the
LFC recommendation also takes
down uh the FTE at workers' comp
by one and they are carrying
currently a variety of unfunded
unfilled positions, and so the
LFC recommendation takes the
total approved FDE to be closer
to the amount that they actually
have the funding to fill.
Um, and then the LFC
recommendation is also a little
bit lower in the contractual
services and other category, um,
across the two different
programs at workers' comp.
And those are kind of the big
picture differences in the
operating budget. I'll invite my
DFA colleague to point out any
specific differences um in the
two programs within Workers'
comp as well as to talk to you
about the non-recurring side of
the workers' comp budget.
Good afternoon, Madam Chair,
members of the committee, uh,
thank you, Rachel, for that
introduction. Uh, as Rachel
previously stated, um, a
worker's compensation.
Fund has
Uh, dwindled over the past few
years. So both the executive
recommendation and the LFC
recommendation uh include
A non-recurring uh fun infusion.
That differ by a million. The
executive recommends, uh, uh,
recommends 5 million as a
supplemental and the LLC
recommends 6 million as a uh
fund transfer.
Um, the only difference between
these, uh, in essence is that
the supplemental would allow the
agency to uh use the fund.
Balance, uh, in FY 25. And with
that, I think, oh, and we've
also uh come to consensus on
performance measures for this
agency. So with that, I'll pass
it off to Heather Jordan, the
director, or anything further.
Madam Chair, committee members.
My name is Heather Jordan. I am
the new director of the Workers'
Compensation Administration.
I would like to take a moment to
introduce a few people that I
brought with me today.
David Mota is our acting deputy
director.
Alexis Armijo is our acting
operations administrator.
Dean Torres Montoya is our CFO.
And we have two special guests
with us today.
Sarah Rainey and Courtney Ehorst
are members of the Workers'
Compensation Advisory Council.
I will do my best to multitask.
I will do my best not to read
the slides.
Um, the WC mission statement is
there for you to read at your
leisure.
Um, Rachel
spent a great deal of time
explaining the workers'
compensation assessment fee.
How it is, um,
Collected
It's a quarterly assessment fee.
Um, we have it broken down on
the slide for you, so you can
see the workers' contribution of
$2 a quarter.
Through a payroll deduction and
the employer's contribution is
$2.30.
On a quarterly basis.
30 cents of that goes towards
our uninsured employer fund.
Slide number 2 will show you a
map of the state of New Mexico,
and where all of our
Offices are located. We are
headquartered in Albuquerque,
and we have 6 field offices.
Farmington, Hobbs, Las Cruces,
Las Vegas, Roswell, and Santa
Fe.
All of our offices offer an
ombudsman program.
Um, to assist unrepresented
individuals, whether it's
workers or employers, um, to
help navigate the workers'
compensation system and answer
questions and assist them in
piling their documents and our
our court system and help them
get in contact with.
Adjusters or other stakeholders
within the workers' compensation
process.
We also offer employer
compliance, safety, and return
to work programs.
I've included the names of our
field office managers and the
phone numbers. So if you or any
of your constituents have any
questions, please feel free to
pass on that phone number and
we'd be happy to assist and help
answer any questions.
Slide number 4.
The chart on the left will show
you.
Um, exactly how our revenue and
our expenditures.
Um, look, these days, um,
It, it demonstrates that our
revenue no longer supports our
expenditures, um, and just what
shape our, our fund balance is
in.
The chart on the right.
Um, just shows the cumulative
transfers from the WCA fund to
other states.
Um, agencies since 2005.
Slide number 5 is where I'm
going to spend most of my time.
The WCA started fiscal years 23,
24, and 25 in a deficit in our
200 category.
Um, we have had to exercise our
5% bar authority in all three
fiscal years.
Um, to cover salary increases
and rising costs of contractual
services such as security,
nurse case management and
utilization review.
You'll see in the charts what
we've requested, what we were
appropriated, and the amount of
our bar requests for each of
those fiscal years. We
currently, as a couple days ago,
have 14 vacancies, which is
about an 11% vacancy rate.
We continue as we have over the
last couple of years to
strategize in determining which
positions positions to fill,
based on agency needs and fund
availability. Over the last
couple of years, I worked with
the previous director to
evaluate all positions across
the agency.
To review everyone's experience
and education and ensure that
everyone was appropriately
placed within their pay bands.
At one time, we had some
individuals in the agency making
up to $10,000 more a year.
When they have less experience
and education than someone new
coming in with a college degree.
Because of that project, we were
able to put about a little over
$667,000 back into employees'
salaries, even though it took
about 2.5 years.
But we took a lot of pride in
the methodology in which we use
to.
A few years ago when we had job
postings, we would occasionally
receive.
2 to 5
Applicants per posting, um,
since we have been able to
increase salaries, we are now
seeing 30 to 40 applicants per
posting.
Which is a record number for the
agency. I've been at the agency
for 10 years, and this is the
most applicants we have seen per
post.
Again, we're maintaining around
an 11.
to 12% vacancy rate.
If we had the funding available,
we could fill every position in
our agency and we could probably
hover around a 4%.
Slide number 6.
I will not read.
The figures because it's right
after lunch, and we don't want
everyone to fall asleep. Um, so
please take a moment and look
um.
The, the gold bar is, what is
the agency is requesting.
This is a joint request for both
the WCA and UEF funds, um, so
it's $14.3 million.
FY 26 requests seeks to pay our
employees and maintain our
operational costs. Short and
sweet, and I now stand for
questions.
Thank you very much.
So we will um.
Now go to the committee.
Uh, for questions.
So I have representative Dow. Is
there anyone else? Thank you.
We'll begin with Representative
Doo. Thank you, Madam Chair and
thank you for the presentation.
Um,
So I, I didn't know that you
represent employers, so an
employer can ask for help.
In what, what do you do on
behalf of employers?
Madam Chair, committee members,
um,
Employers that are
unrepresented. We have, we offer
a lot of programs and services
for employers. Um,
Employers, if they're
unrepresented in a worker's
compensation case. Our ombudsman
program can assist them.
If they would like to file a
claim in our court. Our
ombudsman program can assist
them in filing through our court
system and helping them to
navigate the work comp system
through the mediation process.
Once the case is in our formal
adjudication process.
They, we encourage them to seek.
Representation or they
And they will have to handle the
case on their own. Thank you.
Thank you, Madam Chair. And
would that be someone who's,
would they be uninsured?
Um, manager, uh, members of the
committee, um,
There's
They could possibly be, um,
unrepresented means that they
don't have an attorney to
represent them through the case.
We do have employers that don't
have a worker's compensation.
Um, policy and our employer
compliance bureau will work with
that employer, um, to help them
get a policy, and we work with
them.
60 to 90 days sometimes, the
longer they go without a policy,
the more at risk the employer is
should a worker.
get injured on the job. So we do
try to work with them to get a
policy quickly, um, and then
once they're in compliance, we
just monitor that and maintain.
If they do not get a policy,
then there's a referral to our
enforcement bureau and we, we do
still try to help them.
Um, thank you, Madam Chair, and
thank you for that. And then
you're, you, you have a lot in
here under contracts. Can you
tell me like maybe your top 5
contracts and what is your, you
do an RFP? Who are you
contracting with?
Uh, Madam Chair, committee
members, um, we have, I think
our, our top contracts, um, our,
our security for our Albuquerque
building.
Um, we have our nurse case
management that and utilization
review, those are two separate
contracts that um support our
medical cost containment bureau,
um, and those are for injured
workers. Um,
And I am drawing a blank on some
of the other top ones. Um, we
can get our top 5. OK, OK, thank
you, madam chair.
Thank you, Representative Doo.
We'll now go to Representative
Silva.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Uh,
thank you, director, uh, your
staff and special guests, um,
appreciate the presentation, um,
and all the hard work you do,
um, I am wondering, um, I'm
looking at volume 2. It looks
like employment is higher than
like higher than pre-pandemic
levels, but revenue into the WCA
remains flat. What are the
biggest contributors to that? Is
it more claims, um, like are
there higher
volume of claims or costs going
up, um, what's the reasoning
behind that? Thank you, Madam
Chair. Uh, Madam Chair and
committee members, as unusual as
this sounds, um.
During the pandemic, our revenue
dipped slightly, um, as you can
see on the chart.
But historically, the revenue
has remained relatively flat,
despite, um,
Increase in workforce. Um,
It's something that the agency
has not been able to, to
pinpoint exactly. Um, we have an
economic research bureau that
tracks this diligently year
after year, um, and we've even
worked with DFA and LFC to
analyze this together because
it, it was something that
We expected to go up when the
workforce increases. However,
it, it has remained relatively
flat. Um,
And, and it's, it's just
something that we have not been
able to really pinpoint why.
Um
I hope that answers your
question. Thank you. uh, thank
you presenters, Madam Chair, um,
I
That it that it remains a
mystery is um a curious to me,
and I'm not putting blame or
anything, but um, just really,
um would love like PSA, um, and
your team to look into like why
can we figure this out so that
there's a strategy so that um I
want the WCA to remain a as
solvent as possible. So thank
you presenters, Madam Chair.
Thank you, Representative Silva.
We'll now go to Representative
Baca.
It's evening
Duncan.
Thank
you. Thank you.
um.
sure the question, let me start
off this, with this question.
Uh, we were in a meeting a few
days ago and we talked about
those that are sitting in the
sitting on the sidelines, the
workers that could be working,
but they're not working.
Do we think that that is a cause
for where our funds dipped and,
and not being able to replenish
this fast because of that
significant group, not a small
group, but a significant group
of people that have chosen not
to seek um employment, or are
those the ones that have been um
taken off, but just have no
desire for employment and, and
is it that group?
Or is it a combination of both
of those?
Madam Chair committee members,
um, I, I think, I think that
would be an interesting piece to
to dissect and in part of this
research, we, we have
A return to work program. Um, it
is not a statutory program, but
it is a program that the agency
has implemented and we have to
return to work specialists in
our agency. They work primarily
with employers, um,
To implement a process in which
injured workers
And obtained the medical care
that they need and
Instead of
staying home and prolonging the
time off of work, um,
Implementing some kind of light
duty or ability for those
injured workers to come back to
work.
There, there are studies that
show that the sooner a worker
can come back to work, even on
light duty, um.
The better it is for the worker,
obviously the employer, um, so I
think it would be interesting to
consider that factor when we do
the research and, and try to
find out if there's
Um
If if that chunk of of of
workers that are out, and I
don't know if you're referring
to unemployment or if it's
A, a separate group of
individuals that we could, could
factor in, um, we will
definitely make note of that and
include that in our research.
Thank you, Madam Chair. I would
love to um hear the results of
this. um I, I think that group
right there is significant, and
I think it's probably a cause of
uh why it's dipped as well
because we don't have that,
those funds coming in because
they're not working.
So, um, can you teach me a
little bit about the, uh, madam
chair, can you teach me a little
bit about the uh uninsured
employer fund.
Madam Chair, committee members.
The uninsured employers fund,
um, again, is funded by that 30
cent employer contribution. Um,
it was created in 2003.
Employers that are required to
have a work comp policy, but
choose not to. Um, that fund is
there to protect the injured
workers if the employer doesn't
have that policy. They provide
indemnity and medical.
Um, benefits for the injured
worker.
Through either the mediation or
the adjudication process.
Once
Once those uh funds are paid out
and the case is settled, the
uninsured employer fund will in
turn.
Go to the employer and try to
recover most of those funds as
much as those funds as they can,
um.
Sometimes they are successful,
um, and that's why the UEF fund
is more substantial because they
pay out.
Um, quite a bit right now, the
UEF
Mhm
cap is at 60,000 for indemnity
and 60,000 for medical.
Um, it will go up July 1st to
75,000 indemnity and 75,000 for
medical. So it, it does, um,
Cover a significant part of our
injured workers, um, and ensure
that the workers receiving their
medical care timely, um, and
that they're receiving indemnity
benefits so that they're not
just sitting and waiting for
their case, um.
To to be settled. Thank you,
ma'am. So let's, let me follow
up that uh line then. Can you
tell me how many people have
been, uh, in this category in
this last year and what was paid
out.
Madam Chair, committee members,
um, I did not bring that number
with me, but we can get that to
you. OK. Would that be an
increase or a reason for those
numbers to be so different.
This Madam Chair committee
members, this particular slide
only refers to the WCA fund and
not the UEF.
OK. Yeah, I, I'd love to see
what those numbers are as well
and and uh how they do that. And
then how is your compared, uh
how is your pay in your office
compared with the private
sector.
Madam, Madam Chair, committee
members, um,
We, when we hire an individual.
We compare.
Others
In that same pay band. We also
do a state average, but that's
compared to other state
employees within that pay band
within that same.
Similar position.
Um
I, I think.
I, I know Spo is working on some
projects now that will hopefully
align different positions or the
positions differently, um, and
ensure that
I don't think they've divulged
everything about the
architectural diagram that they
want to throw out there, but um
we have done the best that we
can with the funding that we
have available, um, to ensure
that at least within our agency.
Um, individuals that have.
30 or more years of experience
are paid.
Towards the higher end of their
pay band, um,
We've done our best.
In most cases to pay employees.
At least at or above midpoint
based on experience and
education. There are some
classifications that um
We have not been able to bring
everyone up to midpoint because
of our funding availability.
Um
I think we are.
In line with other state
agencies based on our analysis
when we hire someone we're on
target with other state
agencies, um, as far as private
sector.
Um, we don't normally do that
analysis when we hire someone
and we stick
Usually with the state average.
State employee average.
Thank you, Madam Chair, and you
know, I, I think that we need to
pay our, our state folks, as
much as we can. I also realized
that we've got a great
retirement over here as well,
and that has to be factored in,
and I don't know what's, how you
go about doing all that stuff,
but I, I think we, we need to
pay them, you know, as much as
we can and, and uh stay within
the, the parameters that you've
given your office, so.
Thank you, Madam Chair. That's
all the questions I have.
Thank you, Representative
Duncan. We'll now go to
Representative Brown.
Thank you, Madam Chair.
This comment is not really for
uh the panel today, but it's for
the LFC and chair.
I have never set eyes on a state
pay band.
I think it'd be kind of helpful
for the committee if we were
given a little bit of
information and they actually
look at a few.
Some of the agencies have um
rather high vacancy rates, and
maybe it's due to pay band and
I'd like to be able to see that
for myself. Uh, so if that's
possible, Madam Chair, I think
that would be educational for
us. So thank you, Mr. Sully. Is
that possible that we can take a
look at that pay band.
A bands for our state.
Yes, Madam Chair, uh, the state
actually has a fairly
complicated uh compensation and
classification system that we've
been working with the state
personnel office in a um
Consultant over the past year to
move into a more modern, uh,
simplified, uh, and broader pay
bands, uh, and we've got a
contract right now to start
mapping everybody onto the new.
compensation plan. They also did
a market rate study for all of
these to make sure.
That the new pay bands are in
line with uh
Market for the competition
reasons that you've heard.
So we can show you what we've
got now and we can show you what
the state's moving towards.
Uh, it is a funding item, uh
make sure that as we move those
pay bands up, if people are
falling.
Outside the minimums that we
bring them up to the new
minimum.
Gonna be really important for
this committee and, and Senate
Finance and others and and the.
The Administration to understand
that when we move to this new
pay band,
People's
Placed within the pay band they
call it a compo ratio is going
to change, and we need to get
out of the, the model of we need
to be at the mid we can only
hire at the midpoint.
The whole point of a pay band is
to start at the low end and give
yourself.
A career to move up if you're
staying in that same position.
That's gonna be an important
mindset um for us moving forward
with this new compensation.
Thank you, Mr. Sully, anyone
else from the committee have any
questions?
Representative Vincent.
Thank you, Madam Chair. And just
when you're talking about those
pay bands, are you, are you
trying to line that like the
federal government does in GS
numbers. So whenever somebody
comes in, then they will be
given a number of code and
that's what they're paid under,
I'm sure.
Yes, that's correct. And then
there will be specific uh ways
for folks to progress through
their career. LFC, we've got.
You know, fiscal analysts and
eventually a principal analyst
advertise.
In a way
So that work is being done
right.
And Madam Chan, you said that's
gonna make things less
complicated and then whenever we
do get a read out of that, that
we'll be able to follow that a
whole lot easier. That's
correct, copy. Thank you. Thank
you, Madam Chair. Thank you,
Representative Vincent. We'll go
to Representative Lujan now.
I'm sure, I moved the adoption
of LFC budget. Oh no.
I'm sorry. Just a moment before
you make that motion.
Uh, madam, um, Miss Jordan, and
um and Rachel, I have a question
for you, just for clarification
in terms of talking about the
money being moved into a fund
for the, for workers'
compensation because of the
additional uh expenses. I just
need clarification on the money
that's also transferred out on a
regular basis to the Department
of Workforce Solutions, and how
does that interact? Sure.
Uh, Madam Chair, I'm, I, I'll
take that question and talk it
through. Um, so I'll start with
the transfer out and then I'll
talk about the the money in, um,
so, uh, because you can see in
this chart historically the
workers comp fund carried a
pretty significant balance. It's
a fun that you all as a
legislature put to work and kind
of workforce related purposes.
There has been different amounts
over time in the last few years,
the transfer was a million
dollars.
Some workers' compensation to
the workforce solutions
department where it was
primarily used to fund
apprenticeship programs as the
fund is declining, the LFC
recommendation and actually the
the executive recommendation are
the same to start scaling that
transfer down. So this year in
both the LFC recommendation and
the executive recommendation,
the amount is $750,000. That's
the transfer out for um
This is a finding that you all,
Madam Chair, have swept over
time. And so both the LFC
recommendation and the executive
recommendation also put money
back into the fund from the
general fund, um, and it's to
address the fact that the fund
is depleting and they're they're
using funal right now for
operating expenses. It gives you
a few years time, as long as um
expenditures don't grow too
much. The LFC recommendation is
a $6 million transfer into the
fund and.
In hospital 2, it would be a
fund transfer, so the agency
would not have the authority to
spend all $6 million but it
would be a one time transfer
from the general fund to the
workers' compensation
Administration fund to basically
replenish the fund.
The executive recommendation is
a one time $5 million special
appropriation. The difference is
a special appropriation in
section 5, typically has
appropriation language that
would allow the agency to spend
the money, um.
Uh, in one year, so, um, just
slightly different kind of
technical solutions, but both
recommendations have putting
money back into the fund as this
is one that has both depleted,
um, and has been swept over
time.
Thank you very much for that,
uh, explanation. And now I'd
like just to clarification from
Miss Jordan, when I look at the
FTE positions and uh you were
asking for 1022, the executive
was asking for 123, but you had
11% vacancy rate. So just for
clarification for us,
why were you asking for an
additional uh
FTE when you have an 11% vacancy
rate.
Madam chair, there.
Last year we in our request for
FY
25. We requested an additional
FTE.
By statute, we're required to
have an ombudsman in every
office. We requested the
additional FTE to bring us up to
123 FTEs.
To place an ombudsman in our
Santa Fe field office.
Um, that was approved.
Um, but again, it's
It was approved in FY 25, um, to
meet our statutory requirement,
but due to our budget deficits,
um,
It remains an unfunded position,
um, so,
I'm not quite sure how to answer
that question, just because of
the shifting around of, of the
positions and the funding.
So the the position is filled.
In Santa Fe, so that we made our
statutory obligation. Um, and so
because of the funding we are
holding other positions in the
Albuquerque office.
Vacant because of our funding.
Um, Madam Chair, members of the
committee all add you have the
PS calc form in your packet,
that might be a helpful one in
this case. Um, what you'll see
is that they have a 100 workers'
comp currently has 123 FTE in
their budget, um, both the LFC
recommendation and the DFA
recommendation would provide
them with sufficient funding for
108 positions. That's how many
positions they have filled right
now. It you'll actually see
they're underwater in their
personnel.
Um, because they have done some
additional compensation
increases. They're actually
underwater and personnel. Both
recommendations take them up to
fully funding the positions that
they have.
Because, um, they do not, they
actually have unfunded unfilled
positions, the LFC
recommendation um is, is to make
their FTE a little bit closer in
line with what's funded and so
what you're seeing, Madam Chair
is the LFC recommendation is
actually um to close one FTE
though it doesn't necessarily
have to be the ombudsman
position, but one of the several
unfunded and unfilled positions
that they have sitting on their
books to be closer in line with
what's actually funded in their
budget.
OK, thank you very much, but
just for clarification with
respect to the positions that
are not being filled in
Albuquerque, and you've
mentioned that the ummbudsman
position is very important for
Santa Fe and Field. What about
those vacant positions in
Albuquerque that are on field.
How is that affecting your
operations?
Madam Chair, um,
Currently, the, the vacant
positions um include
As I mentioned, David Motta is
our acting deputy director, um,
uh, we don't have the funding
right now to build the deputy
director position. Um, we have a
bureau chief position that is in
charge of our ombudsman that we
have been holding off on.
Uh, we have an IT position.
We have 2 legal secretaries. We
have a safety position in
Albuquerque that we're holding
on, and we have a couple
clerical positions that we're
holding on.
Um
Again, we are strategizing when
we have a vacancy.
We determine whether that
position needs to be filled or
If we can't fill that position,
can we fill one of these others
that have been sitting vacant.
So whenever a vacancy occurs in
the agency,
We look at what's
And open for a while, and again,
it's, it's about strategy and
what funding is available.
All right. Thank you very much.
Um
Um, we'll go to representative.
Little.
For a question.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Thank
you for the presentation this
afternoon. I am, am curious in
relation to the topic of uh
vacancies when I took a look at
the map, I noticed and, and it
might be I'm missing it, so
please point it out.
But um the field offices.
are scattered around, uh, and,
uh, throughout the state, but
I'm noticing, unless I'm
mistaken in the southwest corner
of the state, there is none, and
in Catrin.
And uh
And Socorro Counties, those
areas, I'm, I don't want to
presume. I was thinking maybe
they go to Albuquerque, but uh
Is there a reason that that posi
the that that area, the
southwest area of New Mexico is,
does not have a field office.
Madam Chair, committee members.
We, we have our Las Cruces field
office, um, it may be the
coloring of the map that is
Um, shading out the, the yellow
or the red dot, um, but we do
have a field office in Las
Cruces, um, and our field
offices.
Cover regions, so they are
expected when they do outreach,
when they conduct safety
inspections, um, and when they
do their their field visits to
their their expected to cover
regions, so they leave the Las
Cruces office, and that's why
that area is red.
They're expected to cover that
area. Yes, that wasn't explained
at the beginning, so I did. I
was checking it out. It makes
perfect sense now that it is
regional.
Um, so my next question then,
Madam Chair, is to ask, um,
having been in human resources
before and working with
different departments who are
coming forward with their
requests for staffing and FTEs.
Um, it, it, it is uh
It's a bit concerning.
That
If for many different reasons
and
It does not.
I'm trying to articulate my
question, Madam Chair. Thank you
for a moment.
The is the
Client load.
Lowering are they dropping off
and I think a representative
Duncan asked this earlier for
some data. Is that why the
Positions remain vacant because
the other concern that I would
have had and recommended to our
administrators.
I
How are those if the need is
continuing, how are those?
Um
Requests by the clients being
met. Are you pulling from
different regions? Are you
forwarding them out or how are
you?
Uh, how are these clients?
These um former employees, um,
getting the assistance that they
need.
Thank you, Madam Chair. I think
that's my question, Madam Chair,
committee members, uh, thank you
for the question.
We
Again, it's when we fill
positions and we're
strategizing, we ensure, because
our field offices are much
smaller than our Albuquerque
headquarters. We ensure that our
field offices are staffed. Um,
The Albuquerque office, for
example, has 3 ombudsmen, the
field offices have one. If
there's a vacancy in the field
office, we ensure that the field
offices are fully staffed.
Um, as an example, um,
We have one vacancy in one of
our field offices right now, and
that is a clerical support staff
member in our Santa Fe field
office.
Um, are obs office our field
office manager retired, and we
filled that position and that
field office manager just
started this past Monday.
Um, we do ensure that our field
offices are staffed because
they're expected to cover
regions and we want to ensure
that our customers are served.
Thank you very much. That's um
helpful, uh.
To hear how that's happening. It
still is of concern, as was
expressed earlier that there
those positions that are vacant.
Um,
or not they can because there is
not a need. So, uh, I appreciate
the information. Thank you,
Madam Chair.
Thank you, Representative
Little. Are there any other
questions?
Seeing none, I will go to
represent Luhan for the.
Motion.
I'm sure I removed the adoption
of the LFC budget.
Recommendation.
It's been moved by
Representative Lujan that we
adopt the LFC budget. Is there a
second?
It's been seconded by
Representative Dixon. Is there
any objection to the motion?
Seeing none in the motion
passes. I do want you to know,
um, Miss Jordan, that we hear
you about your vacancies and
about the work that needs to be
done. Maybe that's something
that we can look at our
responsibility is to accept a
lower budget right now, but I do
also recognize the importance of
clerical help and support for
the people who are working in
the field.
So we'll make a note of those
things and thank you very much
for your presentation today.
Thank you, Madam Chair and
committee.
As we continue, we will go to
agency 644, that's the division
of vocational rehabilitation.
Mhm
We have analyst Ruben Escobel to
lead us off and then you can
introduce the rest of the team
and thank you.
This Escovell, one of the things
that you might do because we
have new people on the
committee. What does it mean to
have such a loud voice made me
realize I was doing thank you.
Thank you for that. That, thank
you so much. I didn't realize.
Pardon me for not pushing that.
Um, so, uh, the agency I think
can speak even further to it,
but I was just trying to think
of some other ones that were
administratively attached and I
can't think of any others right
off the top of my head, but um
that's the main thing that comes
to mind, Madam Chair is your
audit is their audit is
connected to the public
education department audit.
Um.
Thank you. Um, all right, Madam
Chair.
So the for DVR in your packet,
there are 4 P codes, so 4
programs, um, the
There's the administration
administrative services.
There's the rehabilitation
services.
There's the disability
determination.
And there's the independent
living. So in for purposes of
today's different sheets of
those 4 programs are only
differences between the LFC and
the executive in two of the
programs in the disability
determination and in the
rehabilitation services. So I'll
just
At a very high level touch on
that because I'm sure the
director will speak more but um
administration that's sort of
obvious what they do there for
independent living, um, they,
they work on independent helping
people to get rehabilitation,
vocational revocational
rehabilitation services such
that they can be independent and
then rehabilitation services,
self-explanatory, and the last I
I think this is interesting. You
may not realize that the
disability.
determination, you know, when
people apply for federal
disability.
That's what this this division
is. So I think that's kind of
interesting. You may, may not
have realized that, so that's
this, and the funding for this
DVR is a composition, a
combination of both general
fund.
We had some transfers in from
other agencies. This committee
when you heard two days ago,
both the commission for Death
and Hard Hearing and the
commission for the blind, you
may recall they were talking
about, oh, we have, we get
transfers and we leverage
revenue and for vocational
services and rehabilitation
services, and they talked
commission for the blind talked
about the pre-employment
training services, the director
talked about their pre-ETS
services, that's all.
here too. So these agencies are
interconnected with the money
that flows back and forth, they
send money, they leverage
federal revenue and it's all to
try and get help people and
assist them with um vocational
rehabilitation such that they
can get back and into the, you
know, working and into the
community as best as possible.
So I thought it'd give you just
that little bit of an
introduction, so it kind of sets
the stage for what we're
talking.
about a little bit as we go
through this agency. All right,
thank you, madam chair for that
indulgence. And with that, I
think I'm in a, since I've
yapped enough here I'm gonna
kick it to go over, we'll we'll
skip the two that we don't have
any differences, so that was for
admin and independent living,
and I think we'll go, do you
wanna do disability since you,
you that was the area where you
had the, the change.
Disability in in um employee
personnel.
OK, we're gonna start kind of at
the back of the packet and be a
little different. So if you'll
flip to your program here for um
disability determination.
That's where we have the biggest
difference and it's with the
executive, so.
Go for it, Laurie.
Good afternoon, Madam Chair,
members of the committee, um, P
511 disability determination is
100% fully funded with federal
revenues. The largest difference
between the LFC and the
executive recommendations are
going to be in the personal
services category and the other
category.
Excuse me, uh, the
Difference there is $417.6,000.
Um, the LFC recommended the
requested amounts for personal
services and employee benefits
and the requested amount in the
other category, um, representing
a 10.3% increase in personnel
and 10.2% decrease in other
operating costs.
Um, the executive recommended a
6% increase and a 1.6% decrease
and that difference is mostly
for.
The executive not being 100%
sure that the Social Security
Administration that kind of
dictates how many FTE the agency
can hold in that program.
would be able to
Um, would be approved for the 9
FTE that were requested. And at
that point,
The executive recommended
funding for 5 additional FTE and
put the remaining balance in the
other category for care and
support, understanding that if
the Social Security
Administration did come back and
give authority for beyond the 5
FTE, um, although it is frowned
upon, they would be able able to
leverage bar authority to move
some of that additional funding
from care and support back into
personal services. Um, with
that,
Oh, and, um, differences in
performance measures have been
reconciled and are noted. And
with that, I will turn it back
to Ruby and for rehabilitation
services.
Thank you, Miss Jake.
All right, so the committee,
madam chair, would flip to
rehabilitation services program,
which is on
A.
Where is it?
You page 4.
Thank you for that.
All right.
So Madam Chair, members of the
committee, you'll see for the
rehabilitation services program
that the LFC is lower in general
fund, the, the disability
determination program that Ms.
Yaa just spoke to, of course,
was 100% federal funds, but here
in this rehabilitation services
program, we do have both general
fund and leveraged federal
funds. So the LSC is, is
slightly
at uh uh $25,100,300 lower in
general fund and that has
Falls down within the
expenditures as the commensurate
reduction in personal services
and in the other categories. So
basically,
For the um the LFC
recommendation, we see that it's
slightly higher in personal
services and employee benefits
and slightly lower the offset in
The other category. So, OK, so
with the question is why? What,
what are we looking at here? So
one,
I should note that all of these
recommendations do have an
increase over the FY 25
operating budget, so the
increase in LFC is just a little
bit over 3%, the executive
numbers are a little, a little
bit higher. So in this category,
this is where you see the
leveraging for the the federal
rehabilitation services. So in
the LFC they're trying to um
address this whole issue around
personnel and, and providing the
funding.
for personnel to that that's
always a struggle is to hire
personnel here in this agency
and retain the personnel. So
that's been a long time issue,
just sort of like what you were
hearing for the workers'
compensation Administration
beforehand, so ongoing issue,
but the other important issue
here, and I think you're seeing
that in the executive and I'll
let um Miss Jaa speak to this
also, but this is the area where
we try to maintain funding and
maintain general fund is as much
general.
fund is we can provide here,
then we can leverage with
federal revenue. So it's a
question of
You know, how do we, how are we
able to do that within budgetary
constraints. Um, so,
To synopsize those comments
basically LSC is lower in
general fund, but it's putting a
little bit more into personnel
to try and assist with um new
recruitment retention, um, the
executive is a little bit higher
in service provision for this,
for this program.
Miss Yaka, do you have anything
to add?
Um, Madam Chair, members of the
committee for this program, the
But that large difference uh in
the other category.
The total increase that the
executive is recommending is 5.2
million of that only 451.3,000
is general fund and the
executive is
Um, recommending the requested
amounts to fully
Uh max to maximize the federal
funding opportunities available
to the agency to then put into
uh direct services for
individuals in need.
And with that, I will pass it
over to interim director Carp
for her presentation.
Good afternoon, Madam Chair and
committee members, um, as
mentioned, my name is Kendra
Karp, and I am the interim
director for NMDVR. I'm joined
today by some of our key
leadership for NMDVR including
Jeremy Bangs, our CFO, and
Antoinette Holmes are deputy
director of rehabilitation
Services.
Madam Chair and committee
members, I think we're ready to
start with the presentation.
Thank you for your patience. Um,
I just want to quickly review
the mission of DVR because it's
really at the heart of
everything that we do. Our
mission is to ensure that every
New Mexican with a disability
achieves their employment goals
and thrives in their
communities.
So moving on to vocational
rehabilitation services, NMDVR
offers career counseling, job
placement assistance and resume
development to help individuals
achieve their employment goals
for youth aged 14 to 21 are
pre-employment, transition
services, build skills and
confidence, uh, for the future,
and we also provide workplace
integration through supported
employment, assistive
technology.
and on the job training to help
uh people be successful.
At an NMDVR we empower
individuals with disabilities by
providing personalized
vocational training,
post-secondary education support
and cutting edge virtual reality
job training to build essential
skills for the workforce. We
also offer critical resources
including interpreters,
specialized occupational tools
and comprehensive small business
planning for employers, we serve
as a.
ed partner offering uh expert
ADA guidance, valuable tax
incentives and ongoing
post-hiring support to create
inclusive and successful
workplaces.
This slide is an overview of our
performance metrics or
performance, um.
Uh,
measures, I think.
We also refer to this as, um,
this table exhibits
Some information that I don't
want to take up too much of your
time, so, uh, I think, um,
are supporting federal funds
have really been able to
leverage a lot for our clients
and as shown in FY 24, we have
uh accomplished over $15 million
in wages earned by our clients,
uh, which is really driving
reinvestment into communities
and strengthening our economy.
So our FY 26 budget request, um,
includes
451,300.
Dollars in a in additional
recurring state funds to fully
match our federal vocational
rehabilitation award.
The executive supports our full
request, as mentioned, um, at
6.6 million, while LFC, uh,
their recommendation of 6.4
million leaves a critical gap of
$251,300 which is risking
federal funds and limiting
services.
So moving on to VR Grant, uh,
federal award re allotments.
This graph highlights missed
opportunities to leverage $6.5
million in federal funds over
the last 2 years with NMDVR
encountering an approximate $3.5
million dollar increase in
client service costs in FY 24,
securing this additional funding
is even more important.
So this slide, um,
Reviews
How insufficient funding
jeopardizes essential services,
career support and access to
assistive technology for
individuals with physical and
other disabilities.
So we do have a strategic
partner, partnership funding
model here, which is highly
effective.
It's important to understand
that with every $1 in state
matching funds, uh, the feds
will, uh, match up to
approximately 4 times the
amount.
This graph clearly shows how
cost effective the executive's
recommendation is for the state
and NMDVR.
So
Should the LFC recommendation
stand, uh, due to a shortfall of
the amount we just covered, uh,
NMDBR will lose over $900,000 in
VR federal grant funding, which
is a lot of money. So in
closing, we respectfully request
your support of the executive's
recommendation for an additional
$4,510,300 in recurring state
general funds, with your
support.
we can continue empowering
individuals with disabilities
fostering independence and
contributing to a more inclusive
and thriving.
New Mexico.
So thank you, we stand for any
questions.
Thank you very much.
We'll now go to the committee
for questions.
Thank you, we'll begin with
Representative Vincent.
Thank you, Madam Chair.
And I was gonna look on your
slide.
It's gonna be this slide right
here. OK.
And
I was just wanting to know when
it says, uh, we forfeited
approximately 6.5 million in
federal funding due to
insufficient state.
Matching funds. Would you
explain that to me?
Madden chair representative, um,
I believe that uh.
We receive uh the money upfront
and then we have to give back
what we can't match.
So, is that correct?
Yes, OK.
So, um, in other words, uh, we
could have had $6.5 million if
we would have had enough state
federal funding to support the
match that is required to obtain
that money. So for every $1 that
the state puts in, the federal
government will give us almost 4
times the amount. It's truly an
incredible opportunity to
leverage funding and what I'm
not understanding is, was that,
is that um employee.
Pain or employer paying.
What is the state match? Is this
state money?
Yes, yes, sir, um, it is.
The uh
the state match that we are
requesting right now, so from
general funds.
Thank you, Madam Chair.
Ruvian, uh, is there anything
else you'd like to offer with
respect to the matching funds
question.
Um, Madam Chair, members of the
committee, thank you for that.
I think in the case here of DVR.
It's true if we put in
additional general fund, then we
can pull down more federal
funds, so that is correct.
However, we're limited by
The amount of general fund we
can do in this case, so you'll
see here in the LSC
recommendation. There's a 3%
increase overall in general
fund, um, also specifically for
rehabilitation services when you
look at the service other
category, LFC is at a 38%
increase over FY 25 over the
operating budget, the executive
is at a 43.5% increase. So you
see substantial increases.
In both of these budgets, Madam
Chair, um, it's just not to the
level that was requested and to
look historically for this
agency, um, every year the
agency comes forward and asks
for for increases to to to do
just this to leverage the
federal funds, and every year,
unfortunately we're unable to
provide the full amount of
general fund, having worked on
this budget for many, many, many
years. We've never actually been
able as a legislative body, I
don't.
I don't want to say ever. I
can't remember off the top of my
head any year that we ever gave
them the full request for
general fund, so.
That's the situation, Madam
Chair, um, and I think, uh, it's
a question of what, what we can
afford as a legislative body at
any given time. So it's a little
different situation, Madam
Chair, than and uh a mandated
entitlement program, for
instance, Medicaid. So, you
know, that's a, this isn't an
entitlement program, but as much
as we can put in then we can
leverage additional revenue.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Thank
you very much.
Representative Benson, is there
anything else?
All right. Thank you. We will go
to Representative Lujan.
My question's been answered.
Thank you. Thank you,
Representative Wuhan. We'll go
to Representative Brown.
Thank you, Madam Chair, and um
I'm a big fan of um, OK, um what
you're doing uh for disabled
individuals.
Um
One of the first things I did,
Madam Chair, is a new legislator
was visit the DVR in my
community, and I was
really impressed, and they
needed more funding. Could have
used more funding, but I do have
a question, Madam Chair and
Madam director regarding
something on, and I don't see
the page number, but it's
talking about the services that
are offered, and there's a
statement here that
Student pre-employment
transition services.
I was surprised to see that you
work with uh individuals as
young as 14.
I was not aware of that. So I'm
just wondering if you just talk
to us a little bit about
What you're doing for 14 year
olds is at school connected, um,
is it stem? Is it whatever,
what, what's happening there and
how many 114 year olds, Madam
Chair, in that age range, which
shall we say, are you actually
helping?
Madam Chair and Representative
Brown, I'd like to introduce um
our RSU deputy director. She is
very involved in all of those
details. So I think she can give
you a very good answer here.
Thank you, Madam Chair and
committee, um, yes, New Mexico
division of vocational rehab
does provide pre-employment
transition services to students
as young as 14, and there is a
set of 5 core services that are
required to be provided by the
VR program, which is why we have
15% of our federal allotted
funds go to pre-employment
transition services and those
activities, um, they are based
around, uh, post-secondary
planning, a vocational planning,
enrollment opportunities, work
based.
Learning experiences, um, and
workplace readiness and so we
work with our staff to get um
into our schools we're in our
IEP meetings, we are working
with several school districts
who to establish who have
established work-based learning,
um, and we provide student
stipends, we provide that
education and support eventually
our counselors become the
guidance counselors that will
be, um, not accessible after a
student leaves their high
school.
And so we want to make those
connections early so that we can
have that student in connection
with their community and their
resources so that we can support
them and we don't lose them in
transition out of high school.
Um, so we are doing a lot of
exciting things, um, our interim
director Carp did mention about
our virtual reality, we have um
dipped into providing work-based
learning experience, reality rea
readiness through virtual
reality, um, and so we have
dedicated staff that are
in our communities working with
our schools that strictly only
provide pre-employment
transition services to students.
And um the follow-up question,
Madam Chair, is how many 14, say
15 year olds are you serving
right now? Yes, so the exciting
thing about pre-employment
transition services that makes
it unique than the other
services that um DVR provides is
that they're potentially
eligible for services and so
they do not have to go through
the whole eligibility process
regardless, we provide them that
support. So that number can
fluctuate based at any given
time because our initial contact
can be at an
IEP um versus somebody signing a
consent form for us to provide
services. So that number has
fluctuated over the past few
years, probably between 1500 up
to 2500 students, um, that we
are outreaching to. We have been
able to dedicate.
Um, I think it's 11, um,
counselors, primarily just to
reach students and work with our
contractors as well to provide
those services statewide when we
include our contracted numbers,
we have been up over 7000.
Thank you. Um, and just, I
guess, out of curiosity, I'd
like to ask if
School school personnel or
officials are fully aware of
what service you offer here for
these students.
To make sure those connections
get made.
Yes, um, Madam Chair, thank you,
um, for that question. That is
an ongoing education we are
consistently working with our
LEAs to educate them about our
services we do extensive needs
and collaborations with all the
school districts, uh, we have
connections with all the school
districts, including charter
schools, uh, we really make
continuous efforts to educate
the staff at the schools as well
as to make those connections on
a year basis.
Um, much like state government
are, you know, schools often
transition personnel, so it's a
constant re-education, probably
every academic year to inform
the school personnel about the
value of our services and to
allow us into their schools to
meet with those students. Thank
you, Madam Chair, I find this
really good information, so
thank you.
Thank you, Representative Brown.
We'll go now to Representative
Duncan.
Thank you, Madam Chair. You
know, there's some agencies that
I wouldn't have a problem
cutting 50%.
Yours is not one of them. Shame
on us for not uh funding you
fully. We need to take a hard
look at ourselves.
Um, and, and find answers to
this. I
Um, of all the groups.
Yours is it. Um, one quick
question, Madam Chair. Um, 38%.
Or when anybody comes and says I
want to raise 38% with me, I
just kind of go, uh, but you,
you said it, you explained it as
direct services. Would you
elaborate on that a little bit
for me if you would, Madam
Chair.
Madam Chair, Representative, um,
I'm so sorry. I thought we were
going for a question for the
interim director, it was for
you. Oh, for me, and that's what
I was afraid of, um.
I don't have 38% I mean, I was
wondering. I was like, wait a
minute, no, but then I didn't
remember my percentages. Um, so
I, I do apologize, Madam Chair,
Representative, the 38% with
that increases for in disability
determination.
That, um, like I said, it's for
direct services that the agency
might provide to the
constituents throughout the
state that need them. As far as
what those direct services are,
I do think it would be better
answered by the interim
director. Thank you
man, in all fairness,
Representative Duncan, I think
it was me who said that 38%. So
I'll just give you that
reference so you could see that,
um, if you look on page.
5
Right here in in rehabilitation
services in the, the other
category, we're saying here that
the legislative finance
committee recommendation for
funding overall for that
category, which includes these
direct services is a 38%
increase and the executive
recommendation was a 43.5%
increase. So that that's
probably where that number stuck
in your head, madam chair uh
represented Duncan, and
Mountain Chery had one other
piece of information that I
failed to to share with the
committee around all of these
issues, um, of course, you all
heard yesterday about budget,
budget adjustment requests BARs,
and I know there's concern about
that, and if we, you know, that
practice and how we want to
address that and if we wanted to
continue to the same extent.
However, um, for this agency DVR
division of ocational
rehabilitation.
We have provided them
consistently for several years
now, the legislature has
provided them fairly.
Fairly extensive, fairly open
somewhat uh.
Ability to transfer funding
between categories, and the
reason why is because I was sort
of alluding to it earlier, Madam
Chair. This agency, like so many
others, struggles to recruit and
retain personnel, so right now
their vacancy rate is very high.
Um, you're looking at over, you
know, 20%, it's a high vacancy
rate they have requested
funding, um, for 300 and some
they've got about 281 current
films.
musicians, and I think the
director has those exact
numbers, but the point is for
several years, this agency
struggles to, to recruit and
retain, and it's an issue
particularly with those 100%
federally funded programs, but
all of the programs because you
want it, you have to timely get
in people's um disability
determination packets and
applications per federal
requirement. So that's why you
see in the LFC recommendation
and effort.
To fund their request for
personal services and employee
benefits for personnel, but
recognizing in the BAR language,
the budget adjustment request
language that they oftentimes
every year I've had difficulties
done with that. So we've given
them a little bit of money, a
little bit of leeway rather to
transfer revenue down into that
other cost category and leverage
those federal revenues for
direct services. So that's a
really salient piece of
information, madam.
forgive me that I forgot to add.
Thank you, and I can turn it
over if you have any follow-up
questions, Madam Chair
Representative. Thank you, Madam
Chair. That's some great
information, but really what I
want to know is what are those
directed uh direct services.
Tell me what they are. That's,
that's what I'd like to know.
Well, um, Madam Chair
Representative Duncan, uh, I
think if we go back to the
slides that we went over, uh,
for a vocational rehabilitation
services.
Everything that um
Uh, Miss Holmes recently shared
from the rehabilitation unit,
um, these are the most common
services that we provide.
career development, student
preets, um, workplace
development, education, skills
building, specialized resources
for employers, uh, specialized
resources for individuals.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Um, I
think that I'll, I'll let that
suffice what it is. I just
wanted you to expand a little
bit on, on this, but that'll
work. Thank you, Madam Chair.
Thank you, Representative
Duncan. Let's now go to
Representative Little. Thank
you, Madam Chair. Um, to, I have
a follow-up question to that,
which was just asked. When you
say then direct services.
Those are the services that are
performed directly by the
employees of DVR. They are not
contracted out. Is that correct?
Am I correct in that? Thank you.
OK. Thank you. That, that helps,
that clarification. I see heads
nodded from your stamp. Sorry,
Madam Chair, Madam Chair
Representative Little, uh, we do
use some contractors, uh, but
when we say direct services, I
believe uh it's services that go
directly to our clients,
provided, uh, Madam Chair,
provided by the Employees of
staff members of DVR because I
see the contractual pieces is
separate.
Hm
Um, mountain chair
representative little, the
agency, the, the agency does
utilize contractors. So
contractor just do assist in
different portions of of service
provision. So it's, it's both
employees and some contractors.
Thank you, Madam Chair, and my
second, uh actually it's
probably more of a statement
than than it is a question, but
um I
Like a little uh several others
that have expressed this, um,
have such respect and and
support for DVR in the mission
that you all have and that
you're fulfilling to the people
of the state.
That, um, it is my hope and my
intention to request uh the LLC
and DFA um staff would be able
to come together to bring uh
this request for example, the
451,000.
Much closer, so, um, I'm sure it
will be noted.
But um I would like to express
that. Thank you, Madam Chair,
and that's it. End of my
questions.
Madam Chair, if I may, um, the
451,000. That's not.
Actually, the difference, the
difference between the two
recommendations for general fund
is only 251.3.
Thank you Madam, I stand
corrected, so it's a lot better
than it seemed, Madam Chair.
Thank you.
Thank you, Representative
Little. We'll now go to
Representative Dixon.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Um,
thank you, uh, for the
presentation. Uh, just a few
questions. Um, I noticed in our
volume 2, that the agency has
had a significant deficiency
audit findings, um, and I just
wanted to check to see if we had
made improvements on that.
Madam Chair, and.
Vice chair, uh, this is Jeremy.
Things, uh, our CFO Madam Chair,
members of the committee, I'm
Jeremy Bings. I'm the chief
financial officer at DBR. Um, I
joined DVR last January, so I've
been, um, at this agency for
about a year. Um, unfortunately,
um, whenever I came to this
agency, um, we did have some
challenges with um qualified
staff members, um, that we were
trying to train up as far as
their reconciliation skills with
Cher, and then our external, our
external um client management
system.
which is the wire system. Um,
so, um, it took me, um, a couple
of months to get used to, um,
having that external system,
which then, um, develops a
payment load out of the share
financial system. We had some
reconciling items that we needed
to work with, um, and then
unfortunately, I lost my um
Federal grants and budget
manager and my general ledger
manager, um, right at fiscal
year end, so we were able to
meet our audit deadlines, but
they were a little delayed.
Um, just as far as reconciling
those items. We have since hired
some qualified staff recruited,
some qualified staff, um, we're
looking at, um, policies and
procedures to make sure we're
doing reconciliations more
timely. Um, so we fully expect
that these reconciliation items
identified in RFY 24 audit will
be resolved for fiscal year 25.
Thank you, uh, Madam Chair.
Thank you very much, um, it,
that's wonderful to hear and,
and very much appreciated. Um,
looking at um vacancy savings.
So, um, this past year, um, DVR
had $1.9 million in funded
vacancy dollars. Is that
correct?
Yeah.
Madam Chair Representative, I'm
gonna try to take a stab at
this. I'm looking at the funded
vacancy rate summary from the
LFC Volume 2.
Um
I believe
Well, actually, I will let Ruby
in cause I don't have that. OK,
well, I'll finish my thought.
When I look at the funded
vacancy cost here, it says um
$1.4 million so close to 1.9,
but 1.4, I'm gonna let Ruby and
expand on that. Thank you, thank
you, Miss Yaa, um, Madam Chairs
representative Dixon, I believe
you're looking at the PSA for
the committee, which is on page
10, and um I'm trying to show
um.
they don't have that, so that's
where they, OK, so then you're
correct, uh, Madam Chair
Representative Dixon, yeah,
they, if you look on um under
age, the funded vacancy rate in
dollars was 1.9. Thank you,
Madam Chair. Thank you, uh,
Ruben. So sort of back to the
discussion of bars.
Um, so is it
Feasible then that the agency
could actually use some of the
funded vacancy savings.
And bar those to leverage
federal funds.
Madam Chair Representative
Dixon, yes, that is correct, and
that is why in the past the
legislature and the legislative
body, this committee has acted
to give them a little additional
um budget language B our
language.
Thank you, um, Madam Chair.
Thank you, Ruby, and I think
that's actually very helpful for
for folks to hear, um, so that
there's an understanding that
the committee has actually, um,
there is a, a mechanism for the,
for the agency to do some
maneuvering. Um, that being
said, um, Madam Chair, um, in
our volume 3, on page 156.
Um, in fiscal year 24, it looks
like DBR um transferred out of
PSE and B um 500,000.
Is that correct?
OK.
Yeah, that's correct, Madam
Chair.
OK, thank you. And
Do we know what it, I mean, was
that maybe leveraged or do we
know? Do we track that? Yeah.
Madam Chair, members of the
committee, um, we had a
significant uptick in direct
client services through care and
support in the 400 category. Um,
specifically, I think we spent
$11 million in fiscal year 23,
um, and that the specific line
item actually increased by 3.5
million in fiscal year 24. Um,
so whenever we were looking at
the demand for client services,
um, we felt it was necessary to
bar that um funds that unused
funds in the 200 category into
The 400 category to support
those direct client services.
Great, thank you, um, Madam
Chair and thank you, uh, for
the, for the explanation. So
that is, you know, in the grand
scheme of things, I guess
500,000 isn't a huge amount, um,
but it's good that there's some
flexibility there. Um, and just
also wanna note that um there
are versions, um, very.
Well,
um, 12,000, is that right?
Madam Chair, that's correct. So
just to the point, Madam Chair,
that to the committee about the.
You know, leaving un leveraged
federal funds on the table,
Madam Chair, just to that point,
so the difference is 204024, 251
between the two recommendations,
the agency before bar did a bar
and moved that fence for 500,000
to make sure that they can
leverage those federal funds, so
basically, um, that's why we're
trying to retain that language
and and to deal with just this
issue.
Thank you, Madam Chair. So it's
a little bit like potato and
potato, right? OK. Uh, thank
you, Madam Chair.
Thank you, Representative Dixon.
Representative Lujan
Thank you, uh, madam. I actually
have a couple of questions that
I did.
Recover from my mind.
Um,
one being, um, I participated in
the center for advancing Policy
on Employment for youth Cape
Youth, and I was wondering if
you had any updates. I know
you're new, but if the agency of
the, yeah, if you had any
updates on on that um that
program it's a national program,
um, Madam Chair, and um, yeah,
we'll just start there.
Uh, Madam Chair, members of the
committee, um, DBR has continued
our work with that program, um,
we have a dedicated transition
director that oversees that
activity has been a core partner
with public education department
to develop those, um, in New
Mexico and those strategies.
I want to commend you.
I think that's one of the most
important thing and we just left
power. Are we OK? Are we still
online?
Thank you. Sorry, there.
We've been having glitches. I'm
sorry, man, I'm sure. Thank you.
Again, I want to commend you on
that. We brought this up, I
think about a year and a half
ago, um, or maybe 2 right now,
uh, so thank you for that. And
um, I would ask, um, maybe we
can ask LFC if in the PED um
budget where we have workforce
development for the youth, or
maybe you can answer now uh how
that is if that is transferable
or that all at all is being used
through um or directed
DVR, Madam Chair.
Um, Madam Cherry, I believe I
can answer your question in
that, um, there's no transfer of
funds from PED for us for that
purposes.
The funds that we utilize for
youth are truly 15% of the
federal grant award received by
DVR and so that piece and all
the activities related to that
are under that, should we expend
that we have the opportunity to
use general funds to provide
other services to you, but that
is particularly there's no other
additional. Thank you so much. I
appreciate that answer. Thank
you, Madam Chair.
Thank you, Representative Lujan.
Have we missed any other
questions?
Right, we will go to uh a
representative Silva, please.
I was gonna make the motion. Go
ahead.
Um, I moved the adoption of the
LFC recommendation knowing that
there are other conversations to
have, uh, in round 2. Thank you.
It's been moved by
Representative Silva that we
adopt the LFC recommendation. Is
there a second?
OK
There is a second by
Representative Lujan. Thank you
very much. You do have an
adoption of your budget. I do
want you to know that we will,
we've made note of some of the
items that you have uh brought
to our attention and we'll be
able to look at those a little
bit closer, but for today, we
need to adopt the lower budget
as we move forward.
Thank you.
Right, we are moving forward to
agency 645.
What I do?
I'm sorry, uh, are there any
objections to the passage of
that of that motion.
I see no objections, we have a
passage and uh the last sentence
still remains. We'll be looking
a little bit closer.
At the items that you have
brought to us.
Thank you.
Um,
it should be.
It's my young millennial.
Good afternoon, Madam Chair,
members of the committee. My
name is Doctor Lagerrnandez. I
am joined today by my DFA
counterpart, uh, Miss Laurie
Siaca and director of the
Governor's Commission on
Disability to Stan Ross, and we
will be looking at business unit
645.
In general, the LFC does not
recommend a general fund
increase given historical
spending. Instead, the LFC
recommends using a $255,000 from
the fund balance to support the
ramp or residential
accessibility modifications
program and the technology
assistance program, including
50,000 for personnel, uh, which
Mr. Ross can go into greater
detail about what those two
programs do.
The LFC's recommendation for
personnel costs provides a
modest 1.3% increase in order to
fully fund all 13 positions
within the agency. It does not
recommend the funding of a 14th
FTE in contrast, the executive
recommendation fully funds the
agency's existing 13 FTE and
provides funding for an
architect that has historically
been unfunded.
In the contractual services
category that LFC's
recommendation aligns with
historical spending, which you
can see in volume 2 and is on
page.
Uh,
6437, excuse me.
Um, and the agencies's request
and allocates $193.6,000.
Finally, in the other category,
there's a modest increase of
$2000 to align with the agency's
requests totaling $7,999.5,000
which is a $20,900 difference
from the executives, so most of
our differences lie in the PSNEB
uh.
Category and I will now turn it
over to Miss Taka to go over the
two pea coats.
Madam Chair, members of the
committee, uh, we're gonna look
at P 698, Governor's Commission
on Disability.
The LFC recommendation does not
fund a 13th position within the
Governor's Commission on
Disability. Instead, in
alignment with his historical
spending, the LFC recommendation
right size the budget based on
past expenditures.
Um, the LFC recommendation
provides a 1.4% increase in the
category of um personnel
spending in order to fully fund
all field positions, the LFC's
recommendation in the
contractual services category
allocated 135.5,000, and in the
other category allocated
707.1,000 aligning with
historical spending and the
agency's request. The executive,
however, does fund uh the 13th
position that
Historically unfunded architect
position.
And provides 122,000 to fully
fund the existing 12 FTE.
Um, in alignment with the
agency's request, the executive
supported that, plus provided in
a, an additional 800 to adjust
for uh an audit rate that was
not properly calculated in the
request.
And then for
T 700, the Brain brain injury
advisory council.
The LFC recommended a 3.8%
increase for the brain injury
advisory Council.
Um, in that,
The the LFC recommendation fully
aligns with the agency's request
and fully funds the one FTE in
this uh program.
Uh, uh, 93.6,000 in the
contractual services category,
the LFC recommended a decrease
in services which aligns with
the agency's request, and the
executive's recommendation and
actual expenditures.
The recommended allocation is
58.1,000.
And then finally, the LFC
recommended a 23.7% increase,
um, or recommended
An allocation of 92.4% in the
other category, um, the
executive.
Provided 19.1,000 for helmets
for the helmet distribution
program, increased risk rates
and increased travel, um, and I
think the majority of that
$1.4,000 dollar difference is
just in that helmets
distribution program.
For performance measures, um,
differences have been reconciled
and analysts have come to
consensus.
There were no expansion
requests, nor were there any
non-recurring special requests
submitted by the agency, and
with that, I will turn it over
to Director Ross for further
comment.
Thank you and thank you, uh, uh,
Madam Chair and commission
members. I'm a little bit soft
spoken, so you'll have to uh
wave your hand if I drift away
from the microphone.
I, I want to talk about our
programs.
Um
And I'll start out with our
mission is improving the quality
of life of all New Mexicans with
disabilities by addressing
social integration, economic
self-sufficiency and full
participation in the benefits of
life and rights of all
individuals.
I want to go through our
individual programs a little
bit, um.
We have a um a program called
the Quality of life, and it's a
a grant program which enables um
entities.
that are managed by persons with
disabilities to um uh provide a
that are managed by persons with
disabilities to um uh provide an
opportunity um to create a
business, in effect.
I'm gonna go next to our access
unit, which is my favorite part,
and I'm, have been in the access
side since I have come here.
By trade, I'm an architect and I
have
A resonated with the Americans
with Disability Act because it
is largely a building code, it's
easy to for me to make that
transition.
It's technical uh in regard to
the building code because the
building codes originated for
safety for the general public.
Fires, buildings collapsing, and
so forth.
And
Uh, the ADA enlarges that to
facilitate
The access to work and living
opportunities with regard to
buildings, um, and
From the parking lot to the
bathroom.
And so on. Um, the access staff,
they provide technical
assistance relating to ex
accessibility standards, uh, we
have a, a voting seat on the um
Um, international code uh
counsel, um,
Uh, seat, which is the committee
that is writing the new um uh
regulations that will go into
the ANC, which will be adopted
by um our uh state uh
construction industries
division.
Uh, plan review, we get uh
drawings from, um, that are
related to the um
Oh, any kind of subject matter,
but uh we review and we will um
make suggestions regarding um
accessibility issues. We do site
inspections, uh, and anybody can
call us up and and talk about a
site that they believe is um not
accessible or that there may be
working on a project, and we
will help them with their plans
and compliance with the uh the
regulations. Um,
The ramp is a residential
accessibility modification
program, and that is a um
Right, a program where we
provide modifications to
Persons with disabilities,
homes, so they typically we do
ramps to get into the home and
or uh modifications to the
bathrooms, and that's usually uh
altering the, removing the
existing bathtub and putting a
walk-in shower with a grab bars
and um uh accessible fixtures.
So, um,
There's a lot of people falling
as they get elderly in their own
homes, and that's that's a
source of um.
Um
Injuries.
And that takes us to a brain
injury, uh, advisory council,
uh, which is dealing with
people.
2.8 million people sustain a
brain injury annually.
That's 1 in 60 people.
Um, so it's advocating for um
Awareness and education and
community-based initiatives,
prevention partnerships, and the
biggest part of the program is
uh a bicycle helmet distribution
program.
And I have to admit, when I came
into the office the first day,
there were boxes of helmets all
over the place.
I thought, what are we doing
with handing a helmets, but
Um, over the years, I recognized
that.
Um
Oh
children falling without a
helmet is a major um source of
brain injuries and
It can follow you into the rest
of your life, and now they're
correlating it with Alzheimer's
and dementia is an increased
risk.
So I admire that, um, the
program.
Uh, provided last year.
Visited 15 counties provided
education to 1,264 students in
distributed 3,0351 helmets.
And now I say, if only one child
is saved by this program, it's
worth it.
Um, are, New Mexico technology
assistance program.
Is um
Uh
Provides information and on
technology assistance, and it's
a broad spectrum of, um,
Are from
Uh, simple, um, acts such as
Answering the front door and
hearing the doorbell ring,
talking on the phone, uh,
devices which help you, uh, use
your basic
Um
Implements for eating or
brushing your teeth to
sophisticated software, which
is enables people
Who have developmental
disabilities, and there's a, a
beautiful program, and you may
have seen
It has 9 squares on the screen,
and they represent a word or a
uh uh image or something and it
allows people to uh speak by
putting it together, um,
selecting the one of the um the
squares, and then it escalates
to 18 squares to 27 squares, so
it becomes complex.
And
Uh, one of the major things they
do is they uh do demonstrations
on these available devices, and
they also do short term loans of
these devices, so, uh, people
will be able to test them out,
see if it works for them, and a
lot of this stuff is pricey, so
they don't have to, they can
send it back and it'll give you
an idea whether it's um fits for
them and is worthy of the
expense. Uh we have a
partnership with the New Mexican
Because DVR and it's uh uh with
um regarding getting jobs and uh
providing excessive
to evaluations.
We also have a partnership with
the New Mexico Agriability
Project with New Mexico State
University, and the goal of that
is to uh bring, um,
Farmers and uh agricultural
people who have been hurt or
have acquired a disability in
their field to get them back out
and in action, if they, if
they're anxious to do that and
who wouldn't be. So, those are
the, the major um areas that we
cover and I may have forgotten
one or two, but
Um
It's really, I talk about it as
we're caring more than we are
caregiving, we do not do a lot
of individual, uh,
caregiving, but we do interface
with people and our residential
accessibility mod modification
program.
Um, it is for persons with
disabilities.
Uh, to make their homes safe to
live in, and
Uh, I think it's the best
program and I'm biased, but
You get to visit the persons in
their homes, most of them are
elderly.
And most of them are living in
trailers.
And they've got that 36 inch
climb to get into the home, and
you'll find people climbing.
On their hands and knees to get
into the home. So if you are
familiar with
A typical uh mobile home.
You step out and it's on a 10
inch step and down at, you know,
3 or 4 steps. So it's
Um, it's scary and we put in,
typically a, a little dag.
Um, and a star and a ramp.
And I always make the deck big
enough so they can sit out there
on the front porch, and that
becomes their
Um
Uh, opportunity to be out in the
yard, so to speak.
A lot of these people, they
don't get out of the house.
Uh, they have modification, we
do.
Primarily the
The bathtub modification, and
some of them, there's some
variation. I won't say every
situation is different.
But it's probably goes um to a
Um, a larger degree as far as
the risk of fall.
A lot of these people are in
wheelchairs.
And the doors in the homes are
24 inches wide, the wheelchairs
26 inches wide.
So you'll go in there and he
will have cut out.
Uh, part of the door jam, right
where their hand goes to get to
a wheelchair. So door
modifications, um,
It's a um
Uh, I think it's a wonderful
program, and
It's uh the same we have in the
agency is
If you live long enough, you're
gonna have a disability and I
don't think about it, but
Uh, we all get there and it's
really appreciated by our
consumers.
the projects now are in the
number of, uh, it's not massive,
we're doing in the twenties to
the 30s, our best year we did 60
projects. So, um, I just want
want to uh uh thank you, uh,
your mission chair and committee
chair and committee members are
listening to my, my words.
Well, thank you very much. Is
there anything else, Mr. Mendez?
Uh, members of the committee,
Madam Chair, there is not.
Right, we'll go to the
committee. We first have a
Representative Lujan.
Excuse me, Madam Chair, thank
you very much for the
opportunity. Thank you for being
here today and all the things
that that the the commission
does, um.
I'm sure I have a question
regarding a bill I'm sponsoring
I'm sponsoring house, uh, one.
20 requiring the state agency
accessibility and establishing
an office of accessibility and
makes
The most sense to me and to
those who have been working on
this, and we have been in
conversation with you, um, with
the commission.
Um
Because of your agencies, uh.
Um
Expertise and understanding of
what what this means for um our
disability community, um, what
if you can comment, would you,
um?
Uh, see as a sufficient amount
uh or need in the budget to have
the a chair.
I, I thank you, Commission Chair
and um,
It's a
Uh
It's, I think it's an important,
um,
Issue and I don't know if
everybody got the letter from
the governor compliance with the
Americans with Disability Act.
Uh, and
To some degree, we are advisory.
With regard to compliance and
this um
position, um, I think.
It's a tremendous um
Opportunity
It's also a tremendous amount of
work to be done as far as we are
a small staff.
It would be
Mm
Um, a few years back, we, we
sort of, um,
The subject came up a little bit
in a different format when uh we
have a, I didn't mention a uh
ADA, um, training program, and
it goes to the University of
Missouri, and it's a national
program where um
Um
People are certified as ADA, um,
Uh, inspectors, in effect, uh,
they were experts and
Um, and back in the day, every
entity that had 50 employees or
more should have an ADA or is
required. Now, I haven't ever
heard of it enforced.
Um
Uh, and I had met
Um
During the pandemic with the uh
deputy director of um
RLD.
And it was on the subject.
The
Staff architect the highest
architect in the state, um,
Martin Cuzio, who I know, he's
retired now.
Um
And uh, with one of my staff,
Jimmy Shell, who is um advocate
and is
Um, present our ADA
coordinators so um
And the um deputy director asked
me or asked Martin and I, who
was responsible for assuring.
The buildings in the state,
state buildings were uh
Compliant with ADA of
requirements.
And Martin spoke up first, and
he said,
Uh, the TV or um,
GST.
is responsible for the city of
Santa Fe and
That the cheese recovers
commission was responsible for
the rest of the state.
And I,
you know, uh, I don't see that
in rule books anywhere, but the
um
I think that the point is
How do we create a structure or
a way to accomplish that. And I,
I don't see an army of um in
within the GCD of experts going
out and um just um
TSTS 750 buildings, and
They sent the first email in,
how do we approach this and
Um, I actually contacted the
international code, one of the
experts, and yeah, a lot of that
is about
Um
Digital accessibility and
Uh, it's been talked about for a
few years, um, and how to
Uh, unite really in effort in
this state. I think that
Um
There may be a
Um
A, a relation back to the ADA
coordinator certification
program.
Uh, when it went into effect.
A lot of agencies had an ADA
coordinator, maybe because they
had to.
Uh, but they
We
at the bottom of the pyramid as
far as having Rabitas authority.
And
Um, and I told them.
The way it would have to work is
someone at a very high level it
would have to have either the
certification or the ear of
someone who had certification
over the other way around, had
their ear that they understood
what needed to be done. I think
we're not ever gonna be big
enough to do the whole state,
uh, but I
I would like to reach out to the
uh various um
Entities of the state and try
and go back through that sort of
door of the ADA coordinator
certification and uh it may take
some kind of a more
I, I'd like to have someone
higher level in the agency
involved and I, I think if you
get a, a notice from the
governor saying you've got from
now I wanna report and it better
be good uh that.
It may provide a little more
receptive atmosphere within uh
the various agencies. So my
angle is
To approach it that way, um,
Uh, and I'm interested in
discussing the subject. Thank
you, Madam Chair, um.
I'm, I hear, I hear where you're
going. I was, I was going
through the process of being
certified as an ADA coordinator
for the state, um, during COVID
and COVID hit and I wasn't able
to complete the course. Madam
Chair, um, thank you for
allowing me the time to ask a
question. This deserves a longer
conversation, but I'd like to
say I'd look, I'd like us to
look a little closer at the
budgets and the uh the
additional um funding that has
been asked by the executive
understanding that we're going
to move forward with the LFC
recommendation. Thank you.
Thank you very much
Representative Lujan.
Let me just say that we have 3
more, uh, agencies that we have
to hear from today. So it would
be all right if you shorten your
answers, and uh you are very
thorough and we greatly
appreciate that. We're gonna
move forward to representative
Vincent.
Thank you, Madam Chair, and I'm,
I'm gonna try to make it quick,
but this is, this is a feel-good
story, and I appreciate what
you're doing. Uh, not everybody
wants to step up and do things
like this, but.
I've got a little story and then
I've, I've got a question behind
it.
So the technology we're talking
about that enhances people's
lives, especially the ones with
disabilities, I take people
hunting.
That are in wheelchairs and they
don't have mobility in their
arms or their legs.
And they, they operate weapons
with their eyes.
And without this technology,
they would never get to
experience.
What we get to experience in the
field.
And we're able to set these
folks up.
And this is bucket list stuff.
They want, this is one of the
things they want to do.
And at the end of it,
They can't believe what they've
done, and there's not a dry eye
in the whole place. So,
It's called Holy pursuit Dream
Foundation.
And we try to take kids and
adults, so
I just want to make a little
plug in there for anybody that's
listening for the technology,
keep on bringing that technology
because it does enrich people's
lives.
And um
The thing, the other thing I
wanted to know was on the
residential accessibility
modification program, does that?
Do you guys operate on tribal
lands.
Yes, OK, perfect.
So since you operate on tribal
lands, whether it whether it um
was, you know, in my district,
or it was in one of my tribal
areas.
If somebody wanted to apply for
that program, how do they go
about it?
Uh, give us a call, we'll send
an application out. Perfect.
Thank you, Madam Chair.
Representative Dow.
Thank you, Mr. Chair and thank
you for the presentation. How
often do you guys meet with the
governor?
How often does does the
commission meet with the
governor?
I've never met the governor.
Interesting.
Um, thank you, Madam Chair, and
I was wondering how does it
work? You had mentioned ADA. How
does it work with the, um,
Like Santa Fe, existing
buildings, historical buildings,
existing building waivers. How,
how do you get around that when
someone has an ADA issue.
Madam Chair, committee members.
Uh, it's a 400 year old city.
It's full of ADA violations, um,
people, uh, register a complaint
with the city, and they uh put
it on their list of um
Thank you, Madam Chair. And when
you say list of improvements, do
we provide resources for the
improvements? I mean, you
mentioned some things, but.
Well, um, a lot of, um,
Uh, you know, typical thing
might be a a an intersection
with that curb ramps.
And we had one over here love
Asada and uh it ended up.
Um
We wrote a letter, but they
haven't made idea a coordinator
within the city of I, I, I don't
know if it's been completed yet,
but I, I think it has, so
they've got a billion dollars
worth of work to do there.
Thank you, thank you, Madam
Chair and thank you for that. I,
I'm thinking more of like
private business or if we're
helping businesses become
compliant if they've received
some sort of waiver under
existing building or historic
building, I don't know if that
exists or not, any of the
committee members or presenters
there are, um,
Uh, the, the, the philosophy is
that
Everything must be accessible.
It used to be a list of what
needed to be accessible.
Now it's a short list of what
does not have to be accessible,
and that's like lifeguard
stands.
That walks. Um, it's a
complicated um question I'd be
happy to. Thank you. Thank you,
Madam Chair.
Thank you very much. Um, just
one quick question for you. I
did receive a text from someone
who's listening online, and they
were concerned about the ramp
program. They said the
application is not online. And
uh can you respond to that?
Uh, thank you, Madam Chair. It
generally is online. I'll have
to go back to the office and and
look into it.
But typically it is. Um, it,
pardon me.
Um, I'd have to double check it
was fillable online, I have to
verify that if it is fillable
online now.
And the other question that was
raised uh was whether or not
there was a printed version they
could just pick up if they don't
have the ability to use their
computer.
Uh, thank you, Madam Chair.
Absolutely, we have them
available in the office or we
can mail them out.
All right, thank you very much.
Are there any other questions of
the from the committee?
But I see no hands, then I will
accept a motion.
Uh, Madam Chair, I moved a
adoption of the LFC
recommendation for the
Governor's commission on
Disability.
Thank you. It's been moved by
Representative Joy Garrett, that
we accept the LFC
recommendation. It's been
seconded by Representative
Silva. Is there anyone in
objection to the motion.
Saying no objection to the
motion. We have passed.
LFC budget, but we have made
note of the additional items
that you have, uh, brought to
our attention, and thank you for
your presentation today. Thank
you, Madam Chair and committee
members.
All right, we're gonna move to
agency 647 Developmental
Disabilities Planning Council.
We're gonna ask our
analyst Ms. Garcia, would you
please, uh, start us off and
then introduce us to the rest of
the team. Um, Madam Chair,
members of the committee, good
to see you again. My name is
Rachel. Um, I'm the LFC analyst
for the developmental
disabilities council, it's
agency code 647 in your binders,
um, with me at the table, uh, is
Alison McCoy, the executive
director, and then Laurie
Sciacca, the DFA analyst, uh,
for DDC, uh, in this case, there
are some different
is at the program level, um, so
I'll talk you through the big
picture as well as the
differences um in this specific
programs uh within DDC uh and
then Laurie will in particular
point out differences on the
non-recurring side because this
is one of the agencies where
that's some of where kind of the
action is happening in the two
pieces work together.
Um, so overall, uh, DDC has 2
programs, uh, one is the Office
of Guardianship, uh, that is the
program that oversees
guardianship services for people
with developmental disabilities,
and then the second program
within the agency is the
developmental disabilities
council program, which oversees
a variety of programs, kind of
as well as the operations of the
agency.
Um, overall, the LFC and
executive recommendations
provide DDC with some of the one
of the larger operating budget
increase recommendations that
you'll see from agencies as a
term of in terms of the percent,
um, the LFC recommendation
totals 11.2 million, uh, a 6%
increase over FY 25, but the LFC
recommendation is 789,000 less
than the executive uh budget
recommendation.
Uh, so now I'll point you to the
two specific programs in your
packet, um, I'll start with the
P code or the program that's the
developmental disabilities
council.
In that program, uh, the LFC
recommendation totals 1.48
million, um, but it's 227.8,000
less than the executive. Um,
this program has several
unfunded, uh, filled position,
so they are underwater, um, in
the personnel category and so
both the LFC um and the
executive recommendation fully
fund the existing positions uh
that they have, and that's 12 in
that program and then on top of
That the uh executive
recommendation funds an
additional position in the
agency requested in HR.
Um, and provides an additional
163,000 in contractual services
and others, and that's to
support a few initiatives that
the agency requested, including
um the Office of Special
Education Ombudsman, as well as
some operating cost increases,
GST rate increases, and
And rent, the LSD recommendation
did fund uh the GST operating
costs that the rate increases,
um, but didn't in uh provide
increases in the other
categories and instead
recommended um uh appropriations
and budget that were closer to
FY 24 levels.
Uh, so that's the developmental
disabilities council program.
The second program can run the
next page, um, is the Office of
guardianship. This is the office
that provides uh the direct
services for people who are
informal guardianship. The LFC
recommendation provides 9.03
million, which is an increase of
6% relative to FY 25, the
executive recommendation um for
this program is higher, uh,
562,000 more.
In general, fund revenue, uh, in
personnel, um, both
recommendations again fully fund
personnel there, um, DDC is also
kind of underwater and the
personnel category in this
program as well, um, providing
an increase of 522,000 to fully
fund the existing positions in
FY 24 and we project in FY 25,
DDC will have to do one of those
budget adjustments, moving money
out of contracts and into
Personnel to cover the positions
that they have, and when they do
that, they have less available
in contractual services to
provide direct services to
people on guardianship, so
that's what that that increase
in personnel does, um, and then
on top of that, the executive
provides an additional 24,000 in
in personnel within the Office
of guardianship.
And then in the contractual
services line within the
guardianship program. That's the
line that funds the direct
guardianship, uh, services, the
LFC recommendation provides a
total of 7.53 million in
contractual services, that's an
increase of 270,000 relative to
FY 25, uh, and given that the
agency shouldn't have to
transfer into personnel.
Um, our projection for the LFC
recommendation is that they
should be able to find that
1,249 active guardianship cases,
um, that's an increase of about
17% relative to the active cases
in FY 25 and then allow them to
process about 285 new
applications um from the
waitlist. I will note Laurie
will mention, um, this is a
place where the LFC
recommendation also provides
some non-recurring, uh, as does
the executive to work through.
the wait list, um, but it's on
the non-recurring side. Um, in
contractual services within uh
the operating budget for
guardianship, the executive
recommendation provides 519,000
more, and that would allow a DVC
to also process 285 new cases,
but fund 1345 active ongoing
cases. Um, both of these
recommendations, as I mentioned,
also have a special
appropriation non-recurring
peace that would help the agency
on the.
weightless side. Um, those are
some of the bigger differences
between the two recommendations
in the operating budget. I'll
invite Laurie in to provide
additional details on the
programs as well as talk about
the non-recurring and and.
performance measures.
Madam Chair, members of the
committee, uh, first, thank you,
Rachel. Um, I don't have
anything additional to add about
the operating budget, the
recurring side, Rachel did a
great job summarizing our
differences there.
For the non-recurring side,
there are several key
differences between the LFC and
the executive recommendations.
The agency had submitted a
special request for the Center
for Self-Advocacy and Policy
contracts.
Uh, this
is the state jobs program and
Uh, director.
Mc, I'm so sorry I'm not feeling
well all of a sudden. Uh, we'll
elaborate a little bit more on
that, but the agency had
requested $75,000 for this. Both
recommendations fund it, but at
different levels, the executive
fully funds the request while
the LFC only provides 60,000,
which I believe is flat to what
they currently have for that,
but included in that request was
to update the federal grants in
human resources policies
throughout the agency.
would be that $15,000 additional
ask on top of what they
currently have.
Also a key difference is the
Office of guardianship waitlist
management request submitted by
the agency. The executive is
funding 650,000 while the LFC is
funding 500,000. I will note
that there is a supplemental
request that was submitted by
the LFC to also provide an
additional 300,000 for those
purposes, uh, that the executive
was not aware of and did not
fund for that reason, because it
was not.
by the agency.
Going onto that, the agency did
submit a different supplemental
for their personal services
category, um, it's for the
Office of guardianship.
Uh, the executive is funding
171.1,000 of that request while
the LFC is not supporting any of
it, there's no support for that.
And then for
In grow funding, I apologize,
the executive recommended
660,000 for the Office of
Special Education Ombudsman for
additional contracts that the
agency would want to do, um, to
promote additional outreach,
training, and advocacy with um
public school students.
And through the legislature, um,
the executive did 660,000. The
LFC did not support that and
grow at all.
And finally, the
Executive is recommending
$150,000 for a training
institute and a family
guardianship symposium, which
the director can speak to a
little bit more. The executive
is funding 150,000 while the LFC
does not include support for
that in growth funding or
anywhere else.
With that performance measure
differences have been reconciled
and noted, and I will turn it
over to the director for
additional comment.
Thank you so much, Rachel and
Laurie.
It's kind of very briefly, um,
Give an overview of our agency,
the programs within it to give
some context to our budget
requests.
Um, we have 2 program codes as
our analysts have discussed, uh,
our first program code is the
developmental disabilities
Council program code, the DDC,
the DD councils are in every
state. Uh, they are authorized
by federal statute and required
by federal statute, we also have
a state law that enables our DD
council here in New Mexico.
Excuse me. A lot of things are
going around these days.
The primary mandate for DD
councils around the country is
to work on advocacy systems
change and capacity building to
improve the lives of Americans
living with developmental
disabilities and uh to that
mission, we at the DDC uh have
one of the first and um it's
been copied around the country
when the first centers for
self-advocacy, it is a
leadership training for uh
adults living with Didi.
Um, and hopefully some of you
will hear from some of our um
CSA fellows during the session,
as there are various bills that
are disability community is very
interested in.
Particularly our DD community.
Uh we also have a brand new, I
still call it brand new,
although it was established in
2021 Office of the Special
Education Abed. Um, and that was
the growth funding that you
heard about earlier from, um,
from Laurie. Um, so this office
of special education on bed,
they are the only state agency
program that focuses
Solely on students with
disabilities and their families
and supporting those folks. Um,
you know, we have a lot of
excellent, uh, programs in our
various education departments,
um, but they have
A lot of different stakeholders
that they they serve and answer
to, whereas our office only
serves and advocates alongside
students and their families and
um.
And of course, we have our
federal grant administration
from, um,
Or
From our from Congress. And the
biggest part of our budget is
the Office of Guardianship. This
is the biggest part of our total
budget, as well as um our state
general fund. Um, it is
We serve um over 1000 people
here in New Mexico, and I'll go
over some of those numbers.
Historically, uh, the Office of
guardianship has gone through a
lot of um funding struggles, um,
under different directors. There
was a struggle on how to
adequately, um,
Determine amounts, um, how much
this agency needed and so it
took many years, but we have
dialed in pretty well, how much
that we need. Um, we did not
have a reversion at all last
year, the year before that, we
actually had to go to the state
board of Finance to ask us to
cover for the remainder of the
year and before that, um, we had
a deficiency. And so we are
really dialing it in, um, and
trying to push out as many
services as possible.
Um, I
I would like to have this slide
for you for your further
reference, but I'm not going to
speak on it anymore since we
talked about it earlier. Um, I
want to jump right into our
biggest chunk of um state
general fund dollars and how
it's being spent, um, the
numbers around it. And so I, I
hope that you have, um, paper
copies, but if not, um, I hope
you can see it's, it's a lot of
numbers. I wanna emphasize first
of all that uh we have currently
uh 1130 individuals with
disabilities were receiving
office cigars.
Guardianship services. There are
two kinds of services that we
provide in the Office of
guardianship, um, we provide,
uh, professional guardian
services, so for folks who don't
have people in their lives that
can serve as guardians, um,
They need professionals and the
state funds these professionals.
This is an ongoing expense that
is indefinite. It, uh, the
expense ends when a court, a
district court, terminates the
guardianship for whatever
reason. If a person passes away.
But otherwise there isn't a set
time. So when we are asking or
discussing our um budget levels.
Um, we are really talking about
Indefinite adds to the recurring
budget. And so as we work
through our applications, um,
the other kind of service that
we provide an initial service
that people get from officer
guardianship are legal services,
so these are attorneys, um,
Including petitioning attorneys
and guardians ad litem, as well
as uh court visitors who are
typically social workers, um,
who are part of a, uh, team that
petitions for guardianship. This
is required under New Mexico law
to have this team, you cannot
get a guardianship without all
of these professionals in place
and reports that the courts up.
Required
For them to submit. And so we
pay for all of those services
here at Office of Guardianship
for income eligible New
Mexicans. So those are usually
one-time service, one off
services, um, occasionally we
have cases go back to the
courts. We tried to handle those
internally with our staff
attorneys instead of contracting
those out before petitions
usually, especially new
petitions for guardianship. We
have a team of contract
attorneys that we use in um
contract court visitors as well.
Um,
So those are typically one time
expenses, but once a person is
in a professional guardianship,
um, they
Now are depending on the state
or funding to, to, to continue
providing these services until
the guardianship is terminated.
Um, we are at an all-time high
in all of these services, um,
our all-time high number, um
receiving professional
guardianship services was
actually July of this year. We
had 1,0079, um.
We are actually at a historic
all-time high in our wait list
at 306 applicants on the
guardianship waitlist, um, this
is, uh, just for context, this
time last year, or actually, I'm
the lowest number that we had in
FY 24 was as low as 125
applications. So they've more
than doubled since last fiscal
year. Um, we didn't have a
really big increase from last
year to this year. Um, we did
predict this, um, type of growth
and we're seeing it now.
Um, so on this applicant
waitlist, it's uh important to
note that 145 of these are a
request for professional
guardian, and again, these will
be ongoing expenses for the
state, um, and then 161
applications are to appoint a
family guardian. This is
actually great because, uh,
historically, we've had 2/3 of
our applications come in have
been for professional, um, now
we're seeing over half are for
family guardian cases. And so,
um, we are trying to prioritize.
those because they are one time
expenses, um, to help manage
our, our budget.
In um
So one other, I'm not gonna read
every single one of these stats.
I, I'll leave it for you, but I
do want to, um, emphasize that,
uh, in fiscal year 24, we
averaged 36 new applications per
month, with a total of 431
applications. Um, that is
360% of pre-pandemic levels. So
that's really, really high. Um,
we are seeing a little bit of a
dip, um, this year. So far we're
averaging about 31 a month down
from 36, but that's still really
high, still about 300, over 300%
of pre pandemic levels. Um, we
are calculating when we project
our uh fiscal year 25 and fiscal
year 26 budget we are projecting
with a 15% reduction, um,
Because that's historically what
we've seen is 15% fall off, um,
due to any number of reasons,
you know, guardianships are
terminated. And so as we're
making these projections, we are
taking those types of um
information into account.
Uh, so at the, uh, our estimated
wait list at the beginning of FY
26 is uh 514 unless we receive
additional funding this fiscal
year, um.
That was assuming uh about a 30
new application per month rates,
um,
So
I'd like to also emphasize that
uh we have this year only
petitioned because of funding
limitations. We've only
petitioned for 44 guardianships
so far this year. That is down
from uh the context last year,
we did a total of 200, and at
this time last year, we had
already petitioned for 147. So
that is
Going to compound throughout the
rest of this fiscal year.
Um, I'm just giving you a
historical visual on um our FY
23 and FY 24 applications, um,
as you can see, they do, they
have grown.
Um, and this is, uh,
applications for fiscal year.
And this is, uh, this shows you
how many ongoing professional
guardianships for funding, um.
Throughout uh FY 22, uh, sorry,
excuse me, FY 23 and FY 24, um,
as you can see, they've gotten
higher. I, I hope that we stay
pretty stable, um, this, this
school year, um, but it really
does depend on
Um
How many new petitions that we
can file.
Um, and also for context, the
courts, um, really determine our
ability to spend dollars within
a specific fiscal year. So when
we start guardianship cases
later in the fiscal year,
basically any time after, um,
March or April, there's no
guarantee that we can spend that
money this fiscal year, it might
be an expense for next fiscal
year, so we try to do all of our
spending upfront, but because we
have run into um liquidity
issues with our uh with our
budget, um, you know, we've been
slower on um pushing out
applications, but typically we
usually do a lot at the
beginning of the year. Um.
To ensure that we
Serve folks as quickly as
possible.
So, um, very quickly, the Office
of Special Education, I just
wanted to give you this
information. I'm not going to
spend a lot of time on it, but
we were launched in December 1st
of 2021, and since then we've
served over now 334 families and
73 school districts, um, a lot
of these, uh, were done by just
a very small group of people.
We're all over the state. We
serve every public school
student and family that comes to
us, whether it's, um, as small
as, uh,
advice over the phone to
actually attending uh school
meetings and disciplinary
hearings with the students and
families. We do provide that
level of one on one support for
families. Um, it is, uh, an
incredible resource for families
because it is free. There are
advocates who work out there,
um, they do charge money and
we're the only free service out
there for this.
level of support. Um, I do, uh,
the last thing I wanted to
discuss in our office of
guardianship, or sorry, Office
of Special Education budget was
that there is, um, a provision
in the law in the special
education Abed law, um, that
created this office that
requires um that there's access
to legal counsel that was never
that kind of, um,
Support was never put into the
DDC budget and we really do need
it for legal liability reasons.
Um, we've tried to pull funding
from different places. Um, but
it's not really working out for
us this year. So we've had to
pull from services directly to
students in order to to fund
that. And we'd rather not do
that. We want to be able to pull
um serve every student, every
family without having to worry
about, uh, being able to afford
it.
Um, so this is just, um, a
review of the different sheet
which, um, our analysts have
done a really great job doing.
Um, so in our budget requests,
and our increases, um,
I think uh we've gone over this
pretty well, um,
I do want to note that we're
requesting a minimum that the um
that the
Subcommittee adopts the
executive recommendation, it
does go a long way to help
support all of these different
asks that we're making and to do
the work that we do.
We appreciate the, uh, special
and supplemental preparations
that are recommended by both the
executive and the legislative
Finance Committee, um, and we
especially um appreciate the
grow recommendations as well.
Um,
At this time, I'll stand for
questions.
Thank you very much for your
time, Madam Chair.
Thank you, um, miss uh.
Garcia, was there anything else?
Um, Madam Chair, members of the
committee, the only thing I
would add is, um, in your
packets, um, the guardianship
services numbers can be a whole
lot of numbers. So in the very
back of your packet is sort of a
spreadsheet that backs into um
the LFC recommendation for a
guardianship services if that is
helpful to you.
And yes, we stand for questions.
page 13.
All right, thank you very much.
We are going to the committee
for questions now, and we have
Representative Lujan.
Don't think,
thank you, Madam Chair. Uh,
thank you for the presentation.
I think I'm gonna have a couple
of questions, um.
What, what have your revisions
been over the last 3 years,
Madam Chair.
Representative Len, do you mean
reversions? Reversion I'm sorry.
Is that what I said?
My throat.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Thank
you, Representative Lu Han. Um,
so this, uh, past fiscal year,
fiscal year 24, will have a zero
reversion, um, the year before
that, uh, we also had a zero
version, I believe, my CFO is
here, Michelle Varela.
OK, give me a thumbs up from
Miss Varella, uh, and as noted,
we also did request a um state
board of finance, um,
Help for that. And then in, uh,
the year before that, we had a,
a deficiency. Um, the historical
reason, of course, was that, um,
as soon as we started the fiscal
year, we wanted to get those
petitions going. We wanted to
get that wait list down. And so
we've been very aggressive with
our weightless reduction
activities, getting those, um,
petition getting folks off the
waitlist as quickly as possible
and uh we ran into some issues
where we were.
a little too efficient with how
quickly we were moving these
cases and because of that, um,
our projections for the year
were off because as you know,
the earlier you assign a
guardian, a professional
guardian to a case, the more
that's going to cost because
we're paying more month per
month throughout the fiscal
year. And so we really are
spending every dollar that the
state is giving us to provide
these very critical services.
Thank you for that, for that
answer, uh, manager.
It's hard to think that you're
being penalized in some way for
being so efficient, um.
I is there, is there anything
else you're doing to address the
high rate of applications other
than what you've mentioned,
Madam Chair, uh, Representative
Lu Han, thank you very much for
that question. Um, I think the
most critical thing we need to
look at as we see this huge rise
in applications, you know, we
know folks are aging. We're also
doing a lot more as far as
getting our services out there
to the disability community. And
I think one of the biggest
things we can do is prevention,
right? How do we keep people
Safe and protected and um and
supported without having to go
that guardianship route, and I
think our best chance of that is
going to be um supporting uh
this year's aging and long-term
services aging agency bill
supported decision making, um,
represented little, I think is
supporting and uh hopefully
sponsoring, um.
And this is, this is a bill
that's um
is not a new idea. It's been
around in the United States for
over 10 years. Texas was the
first to pass this bill, um,
and, um,
I'm on the record as saying I
did grow up in Texas, which I
don't usually like to say New
Mexico, but I did.
But he grew up in Texas and um,
you know, we don't like a lot of
government in our uh business,
personal business, and um this
is a way to keep the courts out
of family matters by being very
proactive on supporting folks
with disabilities because
ultimately we're all either
going to be a person living with
disabilities at some point, this
happens to everybody.
Or we're gonna be um aging, God
willing, and so, um, this is a
really important issue for us.
I wanted to bring this up also
because there is an a
preparation request in that
bill, uh, for, I believe, just
under 300. I think it's uh
289,000. This would establish
the support decision making
program within our Office of
guardianship so that we can
divert people out of
guardianship if it's appropriate
for them. Um, guardianship will
always be here to provide that
level of support that is sorely
needed. We've heard from courts.
Um, repeatedly over the years,
um, that they wish there were
something in our laws that
Is
Between guardianship and
nothing, cause that's what we
have. And so um we're supporting
that, we think it's gonna be a
big deal, um, right now that 289
is not in our budget. And so I
would request that
that's great. I think those are
great measures and, and in doing
that, we'd probably save, there
would be a savings because of
the diversion and chair. I just
like to point that out. Um,
also, uh, which you just
screaming to my last question
and and looking at as
we, we live long enough.
As mentioned before, we're, you
will have.
Probably have a a disability or
chances are you will. And
Which brings me to my question
with our um aging population.
Um, we are in the highest, I
guess, uh, percentage of, of
aging population by state or by
per capita, and so.
Have you taken that into
assessments and you're
increasing applications and if
we don't do something like a
diversion.
Um, build it's in place now.
Have you, has that come?
To mind, A.
Madam Chair, Representative Lu
Han, yes, absolutely, um, that
is why we are really grateful
to, um, aging long term services
department for taking the lead
on this bill this year, and we
believe it's critical. We have
predicted over the years to this
committee, um, that's the rise
in guardianship will continue
based on our population trends,
including this we
we have looked at that, Madam
Chair, as you know, during the
interim and.
really taking a look at that
that population, um, uh, cycle
on where the growths are and
what to expect, so I think the
investments into uh the small
agency and all the things that
they do and the efficiency that
they have is really a well worth
what what we do as
appropriators, but also it's our
it's due diligence, it's what
we're supposed to.
Thank you, Representative Luhan.
We'll now go to Representative
Little.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Thank
you for the presentation and the
information, um, yes, and I am
looking forward to carrying the
bill forward along with my
co-sponsors, but um I would I
have some Madam Chair, I've got
some um questions to try to
fully understand the snapshot
that you provided on
guardianship.
So I heard, I understand that
you can predict.
Fairly
Closely, the an aging
population, I can see that's
part of it. But one of the
things that I've found or that
I, as I understand is.
That is not the only group. Can
you describe other groups that
come into enter this area, uh,
uh, my question really was what
what?
My side note was what was
causing this major rise. I mean,
this is a
360% of the pre-pandemic
numbers, that's huge.
So, um, that and.
Yeah, that, that is my question
for the moment.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Thank
you, Representative Little for
the question. Uh, we anticipate
that one of the reasons for this
rise, um, was the pandemic. It,
it really brought to the fore,
um, the level of support that
folks needed, um, and
Additionally, um, it's
We did a lot of outreach during
the pandemic on our services and
what we provided and the answer
was, OK, yeah, we do, we do need
this work. And this uh rapid
allocation of the DD waiver in
2023, there was um an
elimination of the DD waiver
waitlist, of course, the
waitlist is back because
applications are always coming
in, um, but at one point we did
do a huge mass allocation of the
DD waiver, and through that
effort, we saw a lot more
requests for guardianship there
as well.
That's why it's so critical to
have something like support
decision making, which makes
sense within the context of the
DD waiver, um, but until we have
something like that, it gets
diverted into guardians or gets
shuttled into guardianship.
Another place that shuttles, um,
people into guardianship are,
um, schools. So often, you know,
students with disabilities in
their IEP teams, they're being
told by school staff, the
families are being told, you
need to get guardianship of the
student, or else you cannot
participate in, um, the IEP.
um, and you cannot support your
student, which isn't true, by
the way, legally, but, um, the
schools don't really know better
because that is the system
that's always been placed, been
in place. And so, you know, no
one's trying to do harm by doing
this, but it's a very antiquated
system and the IEP team is a
perfect place for support
decision making to happen. And
so having this kind of thing in
the law really shows how to do
this work in a best practice way
so that we are helping our
Young people with disabilities
learn the tools and skills
necessary to be able to protect
themselves out in the world
because that is really what
we're most concerned about.
We're concerned about, um,
people living with disabilities
being um targets of abuse,
neglect and exploitation, and
much, a lot of research has
already shown, and I'm happy to
provide the citations to this,
that, um, when you learn how to
make your own decisions. It
prevents, it helps you identify.
What abuse, neglect, and
exploitation looks like, and it
helps you push back and defend
yourself against it. And so, um,
so a couple of folks, you know,
uh, folks living with uh DD
developmental disabilities. We
also have a lot of people living
with mental illness that we
serve in the Office of
guardianship, and that is a
really tough, um, community to
serve because they have
fluctuating capacity, so in a
court of law.
You, uh, are determined to be,
um,
To be incapacitated and you're
determined that you cannot make
your own decisions, um, but when
you're a person with mental
illness, um, it can fluctuate
depending on, you know, your
medication, your treatment,
whatever you're going through at
the moment. And so we need a
more flexible tool that doesn't
require an expensive process to
get guardianship or terminate
guardianship, and it's not a
fluid, um, it's not a fluid, uh,
system. And so folks and
end up in guardianship for years
longer than they need. It costs
the state a lot of money and
it's a restriction of their own
rights to to have that control.
Thank you very much, uh, Madam
Chair,
just one last question, um,
The legal liability under the
special education ombuds
snapshot that you provided, you
indicated that it's the only
free service that's available,
uh, for them, and, and, uh, can
you?
Uh, would you please point me to
how much.
Is it adequately funded now, is
it, is this part of what is in
the request and in the LFC
perhaps recommendation, where
might I find it? Cause I, I.
Uh, I may have missed it, Madam
Chair. Thank you very much.
Thank you so much, Madam Ja and
represent little, um, currently,
I don't believe it is in the
legislative Finance Committee
recommendation, but if you'll
refer to the one pager fact
sheets, um, which hopefully is
in your um
Yes, ma'am. And I'll pull it up
as well. Um, we lay out in the
fact sheet on in the left-hand
column, um, what, uh, the Obed
request is, and it's the
$220,000 special, but we also
have put it into our um budget
increase. So, um, you know,
we're gonna need it next year.
We just didn't, you know, didn't
know where to put it. But we, I
think we put it in both places
and we don't see it in either um
the uh in for the LC
recommendation, we don't see it
in either the
The base budget or as a special
appropriation recommendation. We
do see it as a grow
recommendation from the
executive. And so specifically,
it's a $220,000 ask that will
cover the on by legal counsel of
behavior specialists because
that's where we're seeing a lot
of the requests come in is with
students that have high
behavioral needs, and the
parents in the schools are
struggling to figure out how to
serve the students, um, a data
specialist because we are
required under the law to do the
data work in a policy.
consultant because one of the
things that we have to do, um,
under this office is provide
recommendations. We did, we do,
uh, statutorily, um,
Submit an application or I'm
sorry, a report every year, and
I'm happy to send the annual
report to everybody on this
committee, if you're interested
in seeing it from the office of
the Ombud.
Thank you, Madam chair, that
ends my questions. I would just
like to make a note, uh, that,
um, the, uh, for consideration
of the 220,000 special.
Uh, uh
$220,000 for the uh umed
program.
Thank you.
Uh, Representative Duncan.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Um, you,
you mentioned uh grow money a
while ago. I was wondering if
you could uh
Explain a little bit how much we
have.
Oh
So, um, Madam Chair
Representative, um, the LFC
recommendation for DDC doesn't
include uh a grow appropriation
request, I believe, uh, the
executive um took some of what
was in the operating or
potentially recurring um
appropriation requests from the
agency and put them into the
grill right now LFC doesn't have
any, though that could be
something you all consider,
particularly when you're looking
at the non-recurring, um, budget
items. And all that.
you want to talk about I
I must have misunderstood, uh,
something there. Um, and then
one of the question you
mentioned advocates are doing
this for free, providing a
service.
Our family members and other uh
or parents and family members
providing less or more of this
services.
What you've seen this last year.
Madam Chair, um, Representative
Duncan, we've seen the request
for these services double this
fiscal year.
OK. That answers that then, so
families are stepping up to the
plate all they can.
Yes, sir, uh, they.
They appreciate the
The support, but also um the
best way to learn how to
advocate for your child is to
see effective efficacy
happening, and so one of the
things that we're seeing at the
office of the Umbed is that as
we're showing families how to do
it, it becomes an ever
increasing group of cure support
for each other, and we see a lot
more communication among
families as well and how to
support each other. So it's a
cumulative effort.
Thank you, Madam Chair. I think
that's a wonderful, wonderful
thing.
That's all.
Representative Brown.
Thank you, Madam Chair, and um,
Director, I'm looking at the 2nd
to the last page in the in the
handout, you're there, um.
Madam chair, it's the middle
bullet, basically on the page
it's Office of Guardian Special
Appropriations.
Uh, looks like DFA and this is
underlying language is
recommending $650,000 is a
special appropriation.
LSC on the other hand, is
recommending $500,000 as a
special and $300 as a
supplemental, and I'm just kind
of hoping that's a typo.
Uh, $300 or $300,000?
$300,000
Madam Chair, I've never seen a
special for $300 I apologize. I
might have been a little bleary
eyed when I was
doing this.
And uh let me see, I think I
have one more, um, yeah, um,
Madam Chair just pointing it
out, um, next bullet down, um.
455 with a missing 0 and make
sure we've got better numbers
then.
Many apologies for that, madam,
you know, it's, we all, we all
do things like that. Um, Matt
Cherry.
I just wanted to raise a point
about the special education on
board and that there's a legal
requirement that one be
On hand that we have a legal
counsel retained,
uh, director and
As a lawyer, I just I'm not
looking for jobs for lawyers,
but I'm sure I think if we have
a law that says we need to have
this covered, then we really do
need to do it. And I believe
Madam Chair director, you're
asking for 338,000 for that
particular.
physician or contract position.
I'm, I'm looking at the
left-hand column on your
handout, the one page. Uh, Madam
Chair, Representative Brown, um,
the Aba legal counsel is under
the $220,000 request. Um, it was
put in as both a special and a
base budget ask because we
wanted to get both those
requests in in case we could get
one or the other because it's
just so necessary, so we did put
that in in both places. Yeah,
sure, I hope we can, we can
certainly.
Thank you.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Thank
you, Representative Brown.
Uh, Madam Chair, I would move
that the committee subcommittee
adopt the LFC recommendation,
um, subject to any proposed
changes by LFC and DFA analysts.
we have a a motion from
Uh, representatives Dixon, uh,
25 little is there anybody who
objects to it.
OK,
so
Yeah
OK. And Alice.
We've, we flagged it, so we have
people taking notes of our
conversation. So they're
flagging some of these things
like the, the legal counsel and
stuff like that, just so you
know.
OK. Thank you, Madam Chair, and
I'm here to answer questions or
provide any kind of information.
And just to be clear,
representative little, and there
were no objections. Thank you
very much. A question, Madam
Chair, members of the committee,
I forgot to preface the
non-recurring stuff with a
little uh caveat that this was
only for informational purposes
today, there will be a separate
hearing for special
supplementals and deficiencies,
at which point then the motion
that you adopt at that point
would adopt the recommendation
for either side that it belongs
to.
too, but today that is not part
of the motion that you are
adopting the LFC wreck today.
That was all. Thank you. Thank
you for the clarification, so.
To be continued, in other words,
OK. Thank you so much.
And with that, we'll move on.
To, the Office of Family
Representation and advocacy.
This is agency 680.
And in your handy.
Book
It is on page.
3:40 uh
343.
And for our home audience, we
will have one more presentation
after this from the, uh
Commission on the Status of
Women.
So we're on our 2nd to the last
presentation and the time is
4:29.
Thank you, Madam Chair, and
thank you, Madam Chair for
getting us pointed in the right
direction before I even got
started, um, yes, this is Ofra
Agency code 680 page uh 342 uh
in your LFC volumes with me at
the table. It is Beth Gillia
executive director of Ofra, uh,
as well as Laurie and DFA
analyst for Ofra, um, Ora, I'll
give you a little bit of
background before I
talk about um the differences in
the two budget recommendations.
So the Office of Family
Representation and Advocacy
provides legal representation
for children and respondents in
children's uh cases,
particularly this is um the
agency that provides legal
representation for children and
respondents related to CYFD
cases. Um, this, uh, agency is
only 2 years, uh, in operation.
They used to be a contract. They
didn't they function used to be.
A contract within the AOC budget
to provide that legal
representation a few years ago,
you as a legislature carved them
out and created a standalone
agency with the intent and
purpose of improving outcomes
within the child welfare system,
particularly improving the
quality of legal representation
and doing things like reducing
time to permanency for children
um involved in the foster care
system, so I will note again
though they're only in their 2nd
year of operation, and so this
is the 3rd year.
that they will have an operating
budget, um, and so both, uh, the
LFC and the executive
recommendation, uh, take into
the account that this agency is
growing and scaling and doesn't
have a long history, for
example, of expenditures, um,
but also for that reason has it
one of the larger percent
increases that you will see, um,
because they are sort of getting
up to scale, um, so that's sort
of the background. Uh, I'll
point now to some of the overall
differences between the
recommendation, uh, and the
executive recommendation, they
are just one P code so you can
stay on that kind of front page,
uh, overall the LFC
recommendation would provide
12.5 million, an increase of
7.6% relative to FY 25, uh, the
executive recommendation would
provide 368,000 more in total
revenue. Um, there are a few
differences in the, on the
revenue side of the budget
recommendations between the two,
the
LFC recommendation budget
500,000 in fund balance. Um, I
will note that this
recommendation came from, uh, at
the time of budget development
looking in share, it appeared
that Ofra was going to carry
forward about 2 million in
unrestricted fund balance. Um,
it's our understanding that, um,
from, uh, during the audit
process, it appears that that
amount is actually less, um, but
there's some fun balances um
being carried forward.
Um, in that. The executive
recommendation provides 347,000
more in general fund, um, and
therefore also has a higher
amount for transfer revenue. The
transfer revenue, um, for, uh,
Ofra is federal title
4E-revenue, usually hear me
talking about that uh in
relation to CYFD. That's federal
revenue that is drawn down and
reimbursed for the
administration of foster care
and then transferred to Ofra,
and I will note and they are
doing a quite a good job of
reimbursing.
Um, for that federal revenue.
on the budget side, both
recommendations kind of work to
balance between contract and
personal, uh, and when it comes
to attorneys. So, uh, we knew
and expected when Oprah was
founded, they were moving from
entirely contract attorneys to
having some full time. I, I will
say, you know, they are still
working on kind of the balance
of what that is and so you'll
see some differences in how the
LFC recommendation and the DFA
uh recommendation kind of
balance that transition between
the two. so for
Specifically, LFC recommendation
provides more on the personnel
side, 582,000 more and would
fund about 41 FTE uh within the
agency, while the executive
recommendation would fund about
37 FTE, um, the agency requested
funding for about 44 and they uh
they currently had 21, although
that may, you may have an update
about how many you currently
have on staff. So shifting a
little bit further to fully
funding um attorney positions
and so.
Contrast the LFC recommendation
provided less in contractual
services, um, for contract
attorneys and the executive
recommendation did about 1.03
million less, um, which is
closer to actual contractual
services expenditures and FY 24,
um, so it, it's just sort of a
difference in the balancing
between those two.
Um, neither, uh, recommendation
I'll note included um specific
GAA language. There are some
differences in bar language for
Ofra, both recommendations would
allow Ofra to bar in additional
revenue for federal Title IVE,
should they be even more
efficient, uh, in, in drawing
down those federal funds. The
executive recommendation
provides some additional bar
authority, I believe,
anticipating that they would
have some fun balance um to
bring forward, though it sounds.
that that amount is less um
following the audit process, so
those are kind of the big
picture overview differences in
the two budget recommendations.
I'll point to Laurie to close
this out with any additional
comments, um, and performance
measure items.
I didn't say anything.
Madam Chair, Representatives,
uh, Rachel did another great job
summarizing the differences
between the executive and the
LFC recommendation. I would just
like to point out again that the
majority of the differences are
a matter of where each
recommendation is funding the
attorneys to handle the cases,
the executive is giving some
grace and allowing the agency to
have a higher contractual
services, uh, amount to have
those.
contracted attorneys again,
knowing that as the year
progresses, if they can, they
can do a budget adjustment
request to move the funding into
the personnel category to fund
staff attorneys as needed. Um,
With that performance measure
differences have been reconciled
and noted on the uh sheets
before you, and with that, I
will go to, I'll turn it over to
director Gila.
Thank you, Madam Chair and
members of the committee, um,
and thank you to Rachel and
Laurie. Before I start, I just
want to introduce my two deputy
directors who are sitting in the
front row here, Laura, uh, Lisa
Pitting, who's our operations
deputy and Farah Fong, who is
our program deputy director, and
I'm, I'm very happy to have both
of them on board. The first year
we didn't have deputies, and it
made a huge difference in our
second year to have, um, that
level of assistance. So they're
here to help fill in if I, if I
need it. So
Um, I won't go through as much
of the background as I had
initially planned because Rachel
did a good job talking about why
we were created by the
legislature. I'll just add that,
you know, we're really 18 months
in. We are a brand new baby
agency in our 2nd year, um, we
started on July 1 of 2023,
providing legal services to
every parent child respondent in
abuse and neglect cases and in
fostering Connections Act cases
for eligible adults. On July,
Uh, sorry, a few months after
that we began providing peer
navigator services in Bernalillo
County, and we're now providing
interdisciplinary services of a
social worker and a peer
navigator to one parent in each
case filed in Berlio County.
What makes Oprah different and
more effective than what
happened when this program or
the predecessor program was at
the AOC, is that we use a model
that's that has succeeded in
other states, and that's this
disciplinary legal services
model, and that has been shown
to increase safety for kids,
create greater placement,
stability, and fewer school
moves, and dramatically reduce
children's time and care, so
really moving toward permanency
for children much more quickly,
whether that's what their
families of origin or with
kinship caregivers or with other
adoptive families. Um, I think
you're all well aware of the
challenges that CYFD is facing
at the moment. We can't yet
show.
at 18 months in that we're
making uh enormous strides in
the permanent, the time to
permanency, that will come, but
most of the cases aren't even
getting through the system now
in large part because of the
condition of the child welfare
system here. Um, I just add that
by reducing time and care, this
model saves state funds and
based on the success in other
states, um, we're projected to
save up to $13.8 million
annually in the cost of foster
care alone.
New Mexico when we're fully
operational. But these, these
savings won't accrue to offer.
They will accrue to CYFD because
of the shortened stays in foster
care. I think courts and other
service providers will also have
savings, but we haven't
monetized those, so I can't give
you a dollar figure on what
those will be. I want to take a
few minutes of your time to talk
about kind of where we are and
what we've accomplished so far,
but I want to set the context,
and that's just to say that it's
really important that we
understand that
Although legal counsel has been
a right and has been provided to
children and families for uh
many, many years in New Mexico.
The shift to Ofra as an adjunct
agency in the executive branch
is really a large scale
institutional change, and that
this kind of change and
innovation is, uh, takes time to
implement fully and is
accomplished in stages, and
we're really, we're really
entrepreneurial. We're really at
the beginning. So I just want to
keep that in the back of your
minds.
Um, even more importantly,
overcame into existence at a
difficult time for the child
welfare agency in New Mexico,
and that has direct impacts on
us and our clients. So high
rates of staff turnover, chronic
high vacancy rates. Those mean
that CYFD doesn't have enough
staff, and its staff is
inexperienced, overburdened, and
inefficient. This leads to
substantial delays in services
to Ofra's families. Referrals to
services are not happening in a
timely way.
Family visitation, which we call
family time in New Mexico is not
taking place frequently enough
or sometimes at all for months
at a time. These are things that
delay permanency for children
and increased trauma.
To help understand the impact of
our work, especially in the
circumstances I just described,
I'd like to just briefly tell
you a story about one of our
clients, a mom that we'll call
Roberta.
Roberta's child was removed and
her case was filed more than 3
months ago. In those 3 months,
she has had no visits with her
child. This was so frustrating
and saddening to her that
Roberta relapsed. The CYFD
worker who was assigned to her
case was not following through
with meetings to discuss service
referrals or visitation plan.
And the the CYFD worker failed
to show for 4 scheduled meetings
that were intended to conduct
psychosocial assessments and
create a
treatment and visitation plan.
Roberta agreed to participate on
her own in substance abuse
treatment, but she needed a
referral letter from CYFT to get
admitted into the program. So
our peer navigator, a person who
has had lived experience of the
system, um, scheduled a meeting
with the worker at CYFD.
Based on the worker's schedule,
and when Roberta and the, and
our navigator went to get the
referral letter, the navigator,
uh, I'm sorry, the CYFD worker
was on leave, and she hadn't had
the courtesy to call and cancel
the appointment. That person's
supervisor was also not present.
But our navigator being
tenacious as our navigators are,
did not throw in the towel and
uh sat with Roberta and worked
with the receptionist at CYFD to
make sure that they worked this
problem up the chain, and by
mid-afternoon when the associate
deputy director and a deputy
director came back from lunch.
They were able to sit down and
visit and get the letter that
Roberta needed to go into
treatment. After that happened,
our work.
our navigator met with that mom,
Roberta, and made sure she had a
plan to get through the night
and into treatment the next day
by staying sober and uh not
relapsing and um
Just make sure, so she's been in
treatment.
And a and a and the associate
deputy and the other CYFD
leaders promised a visitation
plan.
It's been 2 weeks, no visits
have occurred.
So our navigator went back in
and and uh went after the
situation yet again, and as of
late yesterday afternoon, there
is a concrete plan for
visitation, but we will have to
see what happens. So I'm telling
you this story because this is
the kind of story we hear over
and over and over again about
how these cases are moving or
not moving, and it's really
important to know that
visitation is the number one
predictor of whether families
were unify.
And that uh visitation, family
time, also leads to the health,
better health and well-being of
children. So it's a really
critical piece of the puzzle and
the system. And when it fails,
it's, it fails families.
Um, the bottom line about this
story is that without our
superior or our peer support
navigator, this mom likely would
not have received the services
and support she needs, and this
child would not be able to see
her parent, um, and that often
leads to parental disengagement
and the failure of
reunification.
I just want to mention one other
thing about CYFD and, and it
does not give me any pleasure. I
have to say, to say that CYFD is
not functioning well. We all do
better. Our state does better,
our families do better when CYFD
is doing better. But the
challenges at CYFD also impact
court processes, and when CYFD
is unprepared for hearings,
hasn't filed written reports or
other required information, and
hearings are delayed and have to
be rescheduled often multiple
times. This is
some on our families, our staff
and our contract attorneys.
All of whom have increased
workloads as a result, without
any increased compensation.
These delays harm children, and
you can see it in the data. New
Mexico is not meeting state and
federal deadlines for hearings.
Children are moved more and more
often from foster home to foster
home, and they're not achieving
permanency in a reasonable
amount of time.
So with these challenges in
mind, I'm gonna mention just a
few of the highlights of what
we've done in 18 months that I
think are successes and then we
can talk uh about the budget as
well. So we've represented all
the parents, children and teens
in 1600 abuse and neglect cases
in children's court, we've
represented over um 2000
children in state custody. We
represented 255 adults in
fostering connections cases, and
we've provided consultations in
all referrals.
for voluntary placement
consultations, which is a total
of 3. It's a new process in the
states, so it's not getting
utilized very much yet, but
we've done all of those. Um,
we've begun providing social
work and peer navigator services
in Bernalillo County, that will
eventually be a statewide
service, but that is one of the
things that's gonna get scaled
up as we open offices across the
state, according to our enabling
statute. And just to date, I'll
mention that 82 families have
been offered interdisciplinary
service.
artists in Bernalillo County,
which is more than we're, we're
halfway through the year and
we're more than halfway to our
performance measure standard on
uh the provision of that
service, so I'm glad to see
that's, I'm well on its way.
Um, as Rachel mentioned, we've
done a really good job
collecting for refunds, so we
were budgeted for $1.5 million
we've collected over $2 million
or just about $2 million so we
did a nice job getting more than
we expected, and we're really
beefing up our recruitment and
retention strategies, um, we
have currently 22 staff. We
have, uh, we expect to have 37
by the end of this fiscal year
build, so that's in both
Albuquerque and in Los.
Las Cruces, where we plan to
open our 2nd office, and I'll
just mention to you, I say
office in quotation marks at the
moment, because we don't yet
have an actual physical
building, we expect a
renovations are beginning on our
leased building in Albuquerque,
our main office, and we should
be in there.
In July, maybe August, and we've
started an RFP process for an
office in Las Cruces, so, um,
we're starting to build staff
there as well. We expect, um,
despite the projections by both
LFC and DFA, we expect to fill
49, have 49 fully filled
positions by the end of FY 26.
Um, and those were authorized
previously, and they will be
primarily in Albuquerque and in
that southwest region.
Skip over some of that.
I think let's just get to the
budget, because I think a lot of
this, I, I could tell you lots
and lots about how we're
building the strength of the
agency, which I would be
delighted to tell you about at
any time you want to talk about
it, but since this is a budget
hearing, I think we could turn
now to the to the budget.
And, um, you know, as Rachel and
Laurie explained, their, their
budget recommendations are
within a few $100,000 of each
other. They're very, very close.
So I, I really can't take
exception to analysis in those
budget recommendations. What I
would call out though is that on
page 343 of your, um, I think
it's volume 2,
Yup.
There is a statement in the in
the last sentence of the third
paragraph that suggests that we
had an uncommitted fund balance
of $2.2 million Rachel alluded
to this earlier, and that their
their budget recommendations
were based on the idea that we
would have $2.2 million and
carry forward. That is not the
case. We actually have under
$500,000 in carried forward, and
the reason for that is um that
are
CFO at the time, Miss.
sort of misbooked that
particular um, money, and we
had, we had a $1.7 million
dollar reversion, which I am not
pleased about, but I can
explain, but in any event, we,
we don't have 2 $2.2 million in
the bank that we're gonna use in
addition to the money and the
recommendations that have been
provided by LFC and DFA, um, so
that's, that is one thing I just
want to clarify. Um, what I
would say is, um,
I, I'm happy to talk about the
reversion in a moment, but I'd
like to just highlight in this
handout that I provided for you
today. The
It's separate. It should be
separate on your table. Do you
see it?
I handed it to a staff member.
I'm sorry, I don't know her
name.
Um, before the hearing.
Well, I can tell you the
punchline and um that is the one
if you'll wait just a moment I
will happily.
Committee received the.
OK, Miss Gilly, please. Thank
you, Madam Chair.
What I tried to do in here is
just show how we intend to use
the funding that is appropriate
to us and, and the, you know,
federal 4E funding in each of
the categories and how we would
uh adjust to the recommendations
that were proposed by LFC and
DFA. And as you can see, I just
did it by category, so at the
first page is really about the
200s, and if we have the LFC
recommendation.
We will still be able to fill 49
FTEs even though the amount
appropriated is less than we
requested by just simply
adjusting some of the start
dates, and I think it's fully
realistic that we could get to
that number, um, and you can see
on the left hand side, that 38
of those positions will be in
Albuquerque and 11 will be in
Las Cruces, and then a list of
the positions that we
anticipate. And I'll just say
that we've done a really um
conscientious job and will
continue to do a conscientious
job trying to.
balance, operational staff,
administrative staff and program
staff, because as you grow
programs that, I mean, that's
what everybody wants, everybody
wants the frontline workers to
be with the families, but if you
don't support those folks with
admin support and the
operational folks who do the
budget and pay the bills, um,
you don't have good outcomes and
um so we are trying to be really
careful about how we do that,
and so you can see on the right
hand side what we expect to see
as a result of having full
staffing.
So we are um perfectly happy,
accepting that LFC
recommendation on the 200s. The
next page is um a comparison of
our first year in contractual
services are current year in our
what we project and the budget
requests for FY 26, and you'll
see in um FY 24 are actual
expenditures were $7.5 million
and the
That was a combination of state
general fund, Federal for
e-funding, and an emergency
grade from the state board of
Finance and um I'm pointing out
the state board of Finance grant
because it relates to the
reversion. So our reversion was
a 1.2 $1.7 million a
considerable portion of that was
in contractual services, 1.2,
almost we spent $1.2 million in
state board of finance funding.
And that's exact that is um a
significant portion of the 1.7
that we reverted, so we didn't
actually need the emergency
funding at the beginning of the
year, we saw case filings rise,
and we
Uh, projected out how many
attorneys we thought we would
need and how much money that
that would cost to cover the
rate of increased filings, and
we believed we would be short by
$1.5 million in our budget, so
we went to the board of finance,
they gave us a $1.45 million
dollar grant, of which we used
1.2.
And then we didn't need that
amount in our from our uh
general fund budget. So that
accounts for a significant
portion of our reversion, um, we
also had
Uh, as long as I'm on the
reversion, I'm just gonna finish
talking about it. We also had,
um, reversion in our 200s and
that was a more significant
number, part of that reversion
about just under $500,000 was
related to a cash flow problem
we had with our 4 e-money. So
because of the cash flow
problem, we knew we were gonna
get the money in, but it wasn't
flowing yet. Um, we were not
allowed to hire.
And so, uh, positions we
projected to hire worth about
$500,000 were not hired, so
another $500,000 got reverted as
a result of that.
So, um
I think that we're right on
track this year to spend our
entire budget, even if we draw
down more for you, we're being
very careful about how we're
monitoring our contracts, we're
disencumbering when things are
looking, um, like there's too
much money in a contract and
we're adding more where there's
need, but we're really paying
very close attention, and this
year we have a track record of
one year of service, and we've
seen the trajectory of case
filings, and we've seen the
slowness in case.
exits and so and we also know
how many cases with precision
our attorneys are carrying, so
we can project better what that
cost is going to be the first
year out, we just didn't have
that information to use, so I
think we're in better, we're in
a better place, um, and you'll
see in FY 25 that we budgeted
after bars uh $7.2 million and
we're projecting now that we're
gonna come in right around 6.9,
maybe just
Slightly higher depending on how
many case filings there are, so
we're quite close and keeping a
very close eye on that. And so
the next, um, so for FY 26, the
executive recommendation is uh
that is exactly the amount that
we spent in FY 24, so it's
pretty close to what we think
we're going to spend now. It's
closer than the LFC
recommendation if we, if you
adopt the LFC recommendation for
the 300s, we will almost
certainly
have to borrow money from one of
the other categories to cover
the cost of attorneys, and
I know it's
Uh, I know it can be confusing
to think we're beefing up staff
attorneys. Why aren't the, why
aren't the costs of contract
attorneys going down, and
there's
There's um at least 2 reasons
for that. One is the case
filings are continuing to rise,
and case exits are not keeping
pace. So last year, although
some young people left the
system, there was a net increase
of over 300 children in the
child welfare system last year
compared to the year before. So
that requires more attorneys, as
the case filings go up, we have
to, we have to supply attorneys
and we want to apply, you know,
supply that.
Interdisciplinary services as
well. So we can't, um, we will
always have contractors because
these cases have multiple
attorneys in them, each part,
you know, each parent gets an
attorney, each child or child
group gets an attorney, so there
can be many, many attorneys and
to avoid conflict, we have to be
able to have contractors um to
manage that, and we don't always
have full caseloads in every
region of the state to um to
fund a full-time attorney.
it's really matters by the
district, um, how many cases
exist there, so we need
contractors just to carry those
cases in small case areas. The
um
The other thing that's really
important to us goes to quality,
and that is that we came into
the system, there were already,
you know, 2000 children in the
system who had attorneys. There
were already parents in the
system who had attorneys, and we
can't or don't want to disrupt
those attorney-client
relationships. These are
families and children who have
very few permanent
Uh, professional people in their
lives, the caseworkers turnover
regularly at CYFD, um, and the
service providers turnover, they
need some constancy and the
attorneys have been mad for
years, so we don't want to
disrupt that relationship, so we
are not removing attorneys,
contract attorneys from cases
and assigning our staff
attorneys to those. So there's
gonna be a period where we're
ramping up.
Staff attorneys and were slowly
diminishing our contract
attorney caseloads, and that
will, that will be a sort of a
phaed uh process, I can't tell
you precisely how long it will
take because I don't know how
many cases will get filed.
If I knew that life would be a
lot easier, but it's just not
the case. So we expect it will
plateau.
And that we'll be able to manage
case loads better, our
contractors will have fewer
cases, they'll be able to do a
better job. The services will be
better and the numbers will stop
increasing. So that's, that is a
very long winded explanation of
the contractual services, um.
So we would suggest that the
executive recommendation is
actually uh closer to reality
for us and if we would like to
avoid a bar from another uh
category than the executive
recommendation makes more sense.
And then last but not least, um,
the LFC's recommendation on the
other costs and the 400s is
totally manageable for us. It's
less than what we requested, but
not by very much, and we can
make adjustments in the existing
budget to cover that, um.
To cover that difference. So
with that, I'm happy to take
questions, and I thank you for
your time.
Thank you very much.
We appreciate the, uh, all of
the information and let's go to
the committee, Representative
Doo.
Thank you, Madam Chair, and
thank you for the presentation.
Um, so this, this program is
after substantiative use that
levels to the rise that children
are involved in the courts, um,
Madam Chair, Representative Doo,
yes, it's right now we don't do
any pre-petition work, so
prefiling of the court case kind
of work except when a parent is
considering voluntarily placing
their child in CYFD custody.
There's a statute that requires
us to consult with them about.
rights. OK, thank you. Thank
you, Madam Chair.
So
But your peer support
navigators, master-level social
workers not doing direct
service, explain, can you
explain to me what they do?
Uh, Madam Chair, yes,
Representative Dao. So the, the
family peer support navigators,
you'll see, um,
That, well, I don't know where
it is. It's buried in the
material somewhere. We we really
anticipate that they are the
frontline main contact with the
clients, so we anticipate.
Close to 7880 family peer
support navigators statewide
when we're fully funded, so we
don't have that yet.
And um so they would carry a
caseload of nearly 30 cases per
person. The social workers will
carry a much smaller caseload
and work in, they will work in
what we call pods, so every
Social worker that we have and
every navigator that we have our
groups, and they share cases and
the social workers are there to
do higher level assessments of
family needs to make sure that
assessments are being
interpreted properly. They're
not direct service providers
like you would see in the
community. I.
OK, thank you. I think you
answered my question, Madam
Chair.
We're going to hear a report
from CYFD and I believe the
current, they have less than 7%
of their staff that are doing
prevention intervention before
they get to this level.
Only less than 7% have a
bachelor's degree in social
work, much less a master's.
Where are you hiring your people
from?
Uh, Madam Chair, Representative
Dao, we have, we have a very
extensive uh plan for
recruitment and require uh
retention that involves uh
having social work interns from
the social work schools, and
then we are, we're recruiting
from the same pools. I mean, I
will be honest, it's not an easy
feat, so we don't have that many
though that we
Projecting to higher. It's a
much smaller number. Thank you,
Madam Chair. I just think
If we're going to talk about
prevention, we're going to talk
about immediate intervention,
and we do not want to end up in
the courts. We cannot build
systems that supplant our direct
service providers, we need to
build capacity, and we need to
develop workforce, and it seems
to be another, I mean,
Well-intentioned bills that will
come up and say we want a social
worker at every school. We want
a social worker here, we want to
navigator here, and, and the
care reform, I don't know what
it's gonna look like, but they
want this care navigator for
children who are exposed to
substance, and we're not
graduating more social.
workers. So I'm definitely for
the behavioral health compound,
the compact Act, so that we can
have some more um reciprocity,
but it's very concerning to me.
That were that we would at this
point, unless you're recruiting
out of state, be supplanting
from someone who's doing direct
services, and I, I wouldn't
blame them if they did want to
leave direct service when you're
being forced to with their
abuser or it's always reunite,
but I'm just ranting now. So I
guess my next, um, the only
question I have is if you're an
independent agency. So I would
ask the same question of CYFD,
although I know the answer CYFD.
I don't know the answer here.
What is the grievance process
for somebody if they're not
happy with this agency.
And what's happening? How do
they how do they file a
grievance? Yeah, uh, Madam
Chair, Representative Dao, we
have a process whereby a person
can contact us virtually in any
way they say fit, so we have an
online portal where they can
enter a a complaint, they can
send us an email, there's a
phone number that they can call
all of that's on our website.
Um
We'll take the complaint anyway
they want to give it to us. And
then we have a process whereby
we document the complaint.
We share that with the person
that it is, you know, who's the
subject of the complaint, we
allow them to respond and then
we investigate, so our
leadership team, which is the
deputies, myself and the two
other division directors, the
Legal Services division director
and the interdisciplinary
Services Division Director, they
do an investigation of the
facts, so they interview people,
they check the court record,
they look at filings, if there
are documents that are supplied,
you know, we gather a full
picture of what is um.
being complained about, and then
we determine whether or not the
person being complained of did
what they're obligated to do in
the fashion in which they're
supposed to do it, so are they
fulfilling their contractual
requirements, and are they
following our practice model if
there are attorneys that are
being complained about, are they
following their ethical
obligations if they are social
workers, are they following
their code of conduct.
And then we make a decision. So,
uh, the decisions can be a wide
variety of things. They can be
no action if there was really no
issue. Oftentimes people don't
understand the system, it's a
little opaque and people don't
really know what to expect, and
so sometimes the response is
education.
Sometimes there's a serious
problem.
And some, uh, we have terminated
contracts this year. I'm sorry
to say, but also glad to say we
don't want people who aren't
doing the work right, so
sometimes it can result in
termination, sometimes it can
result in assignment of
co-counsels, sometimes it can
result in replacement of
co-counsel. Sometimes it results
in mediation, sometimes it
results in the assignment of a
family peer support navigator or
social worker to help the
attorney understand the client's
needs, so it's
a really wide range of
responses. Thank you, Madam
Chair, and I, my mind's going,
you, you, you started by saying
early on, this is a budget
hearing, so I'm sure you'll be
before us again, but my, my mind
is going 1000 different
directions and I, I'm very, uh,
I've been gone for 2 years and
so I'm in freshman mode. This is
a new, um, program, but I'm
hearing interagency. I'm hoping
the GLA and responding, you
know, they're not in the same I
have a lot of questions.
Thank you.
But I will say this, manager,
anybody working in this
Has a very difficult task. Thank
you for choosing to be in this
space. I want it to be
effective.
Thank you.
Thank you, Representative Dow.
We'll move to Representative
Lujan.
Thank you, Madam Chair. I'll be
brief.
Um
Thank you for all the work you
do and for this model of is we
are um working on a
A lot of these issues
continuously and thank you for
your
Your honesty, quite frankly.
Um
Madam chair, um, my question is,
As the Office of Family
Representation and advocate,
Madam Chair, um, Madam Chair,
Representative Lujan, no, we
don't. There's, um, our statute
limits us to working on cases
under the Children's code, so
our jus, our jurisdiction, so to
speak, is abuse and neglect
cases, fostering nections Act
cases and Finko's cases. So that
is, it's not in our.
I'll rephrase that, ma'am, so if
there is an account of abuse or
neglect during any kind of
family court hearings.
Which
We know a lot of those go
unaccounted or or do not get
reported during divorce and
other and other types of cases,
is that reported to you, or does
it, can it go through you and,
yeah, madam Chair Representative
Lu Han, it doesn't, so.
Uh, what should happen in that
circumstance, and I would
I would guess that it doesn't
uniformly happen is that anyone
in that courtroom who is hearing
things that make them believe
that abuse or neglect is
happening, is obligated to
report to CYFD.
So the judge, the court clerk, I
mean, if they're in the room,
they should be reporting.
Um, whether and how often I'll
dig deeper, madam chair. I'm, I,
I'm hearing all the things that
you're doing and you know, 18
months is, is I, I do agree with
not a long enough time for us to
give a lot of.
A lot of the information and I
assume that within the realm of
of your workforce that is a
challenge just as Representative
Dao has mentioned and so we'll
dive deeper with you. I think
this is a good start for us for
our state and what we're doing
here. Madam Chair, I'd like to,
you know, have a further that
discussion of.
The discrepancy in the budget
that we we see today, um.
Yeah, that's all I have to say.
Thank you.
Thank you, Representative Lujan.
I don't see in the other hands,
uh, I will accept.
I'm sorry. Representative
Duncan.
Thank you, Madam Chair.
Um, it breaks my heart that you
even have a job.
Me too.
I don't have a question about
your budget per se, but
The only way you're going to
get.
Down to working yourself out of
a job as a seaway CYFD does a
better job, is that correct?
For their other agencies that
can help out.
Uh, Madam Chair, Representative
Duncan, I don't think it's quite
that straightforward. I think
that CYFD is part of a larger
system that involves courts,
that involves behavioral health
system that involves us, that
involves schools. I think
there's a lot of partners, um,
who need to be at the table that
need to be coordinating, that
need to hospitals, I mean,
someone raised car earlier.
There are a lot of people who
have eyes on children who need
to be.
involved in helping families. I
also think I'm sorry that
Rebecca Doo stepped out of the
room for the moment because I
actually think that prevention
is the answer to, to uh
diminishing, if not eliminating
the need for Ofra, um.
And there are states and
jurisdictions that are doing
preventive legal work that help
keep families out of the system,
and I, um, you'll uh I'm sure
you saw that we asked for a tiny
expansion request, um, and that
was to pilot a preventive legal
services consultation program
that's based on one that was
started in the 2nd judicial
district here and also other
states. Those are the programs
that take vulnerable families.
Who have legal issues or social
issues that if they got services
or they had their legal case
resolved, whether it's, um, you
know, a housing issue or an
immigration issue or a um a
criminal issue. I mean, there's
just a benefits issue, um, all
of those things can really
strain families and push them
over the brink to neglect, which
is the majority of our cases,
you know, 75% or so of our
cases.
or neglect cases.
And uh push families into this
system that has its own uh
negative attributes, so I'll
say, and so.
In the
If we really want to help
families. We need to be doing
all that prevention work, and
it's not just behavioral health.
It is fixing these uh legal
issues that if parents had some
representation and support, they
could get more income through
income support they could get
more income through public
benefits. They could stabilize
their housing. They could get,
uh, whatever substance abuse
treatment they need. Those are
the things that keep children
safe. Those are the preventions
that keep kids safe. So I hope
that
will be a day that we will
entertain additional funding for
Offer to do that kind of
prefiling legal prevention work,
because it will make a serious
dent in the number of cases that
wind up in foster care.
Thank you, Madam Chair. I hope
we get to that point. I hope you
work yourself out of a job.
Thank you, Representative
Duncan. I don't see any other
hands, so I will accept a
motion.
OK.
Um, Madam Chair, I move that we
adopt the LFC recommendation.
It's been moved and by
Representative Garrett and
seconded by Representative Lujan
to accept the LSC budget, uh,
madam executive director, is
there uh any objection to upset,
uh, accepting that budget
recommendation. There's none.
Thank you.
Then
You have an adoption. We do look
very, this is our responsibility
to accept the lower budget. We
have noted the things that you
brought to our attention, and
we'll be looking at those
further and thank you for your
presentation. Thank you.
It's um
well it's like one page.
Thank you very much for your uh
Jennifer is there now. For your
patience, I would like to ask if
you have, would you please
Move your conversations outside
the door.
Thank you very much. So we now
have agency 601, Commission on
the Status of Women, would you
please, uh, move ahead, Ms.
Hernandez.
Good afternoon again. Um, my
name is Doc Madam Chair, members
of the committee, I apologize.
Good afternoon. Um, my name is
once again Doctor Allegra
Hernandez, um, I am here today
with my DFA counterpart Miss uh
Siaka and Jennifer Goetz, the
executive director of the uh
commission on the status of
Women.
So the LC recommendations
supports a flat budget
recommendation for the
commission on the Status of
Women.
Both the LC and executive
recommendation support fully
funding both positions within
the commission with the cost of
personnel is too $251.6,000
which comes from out of cycle
races, additionally, both the
LFC and executive staff
recommendation are within
$1.6,000 for the contractual
services category with the
recommendation with the LFC
recommendation.
Fully funding audit IT services.
Finally, the LFC recommendation
does not support an increase in
the other category due to
redistributing uses to reflect
increased spending in the
personnel and contractual
services category, and while the
executive recommendation
supports uh rental costs
associated with the commission
on the status of Women. I will
now turn it over to my DFA
counterpart Miss Saka.
Hello again, Madam Chair,
members of the committee, um,
the only thing I would like to
say about the differences in the
recommendation is that $88.6,000
difference in the other category
is for rent and uh historically
that rent has been.
Paid through non-recurring
appropriations and fund balances
that are no longer going to be
available to the agency for
those purposes, um, and so
without that $88.6,000 for rent,
the agency will be in a
problem in FY 26, trying to
maintain its facility. And with
that, I will pass it over to the
director for additional comment.
Madam Chair and members of the
committee.
I know it's been a long day. I
know you're all ready to wrap
things up and go home, but if
you will give me 5 minutes of
your time, I would really
appreciate it. It is 5 minutes.
I timed it.
I'm excited to share an update
on the expanding work of the New
Mexico Commission on the Status
of Women, who we are, what we do
and how we work to improve the
lives of women across our state.
The commission was was created
in the mid 1970s with the
mission of advocating for and
supporting women throughout New
Mexico. Our commission is made
up of up to 15 bipartisan
members representing 7 regions
of the state.
Currently we have 11
commissioners serving, all of
whom live and work in the
communities they represent,
ensuring that women have direct
access to resources and a voice
at the state level. The
commission's commission is
important in our state
government because we are
bipartisan, and we believe that
diversity of thought makes us
stronger.
We serve over 1 million women.
And we have built a tool, a
database capable of sharing
information with more than
750,000 legislators, nonprofits,
state funders, and individuals
about new laws, issues, and
opportunities.
However, due to budget
constraints, we are currently
unable to fully utilize this
resource, we would need an
additional 15,000 in our budget
to utilize this tool.
Our focus areas um follow from a
2022 listening tour and a 2023
strategic planning process, and
we have now concentrated our
efforts on 3 key areas. Health,
safety, and economic security
for women.
We advance our mission by
advocating for the needs of
women in the legislative session
and beyond, collaborating with
partner organizations to host
webinars, speaking engagements,
and events on issues like equal
pay, state sponsored child care.
Access to medical resources and
family friendly workplaces, to
name a few.
We also educate communities to
ensure women know about
available resources and programs
in their communities and
provided by the state.
One of our statutory goals is to
conduct conferences throughout
the state.
And our largest event of the
year is the Women's summit.
In November of 2024, we hosted a
two-day women's summit focused
on health, featuring expert
speakers and panel discussions
for women, health care
providers, legislators and
advocates, over 300 people
attended. We had more than 40
groups tabling, and we had over
50 speakers and panelists.
This year we also introduced an
awards dinner as part of our
statutory requirement to secure
recognition of women's
accomplishments.
At the ceremony we honored women
leaders in the field of health.
In fiscal year 2024, we hosted
six regional events focused on
economic security.
In Espanola, Silver City,
Clovis, Farmington, Roswell, and
Las Cruces.
In fiscal year 25, we shifted
our focus to health, and we will
hold events in Las Vegas,
Gallup, Tucum Carry, Demming,
Alamogordo, and Truth or
Consequences. These are small
communities that are never
visited and hardly ever provided
with information about state
resources. We feel it's really
important to include them.
Beyond our events we work to
support and inform women across
New Mexico through social media
and blogs. So far this year
we've focused on legislative 101
helping women to learn how to
advocate at the roundhouse.
Health issues affecting women,
resources for caregivers, food
insecurity, and so much more.
We hold monthly public meetings
featuring guest speakers on the
front lines of critical issues
to inform commissioners and
community members alike.
We have website resources and
strive to be a hub for statewide
programs, regional resources,
and updates.
We write an annual report
providing a comprehensive
overview of the status of women
each year.
We have completed our annual
audit for fiscal year 24, which
has not yet been released.
Stay tuned. But our audits
through 2020, fiscal 23 have had
clean opinions with no material
weaknesses or significant
deficiencies.
Well we uh, excuse me, the FY 26
executive budget recommendation
of 506,400 would allow us to
meet all our program goals.
Additionally, the executive
budget includes 200,000 in grow
fund money for a period of 2
years.
While we appreciate our current
LFC budget. We are requesting an
additional 85,000 to enhance our
capacity in 3 key areas.
50,000 for a part-time
accounting contractor, because
right now I spend 50% of my time
on finance-related
responsibilities such as budget,
audit, procurement, and
reporting.
Hiring a contractor would allow
me to focus more on outreach and
program, which is what I was
hired to do.
20,000 for office space.
Um, so with two full-time
employees and plans to add a 3
in fiscal 26. We need a
dedicated office where we can
collaborate effectively.
And 15,000 to utilize our
database of over 750,000 women
in New Mexico.
I wanted to address why we had a
90,000 fun reversion last year.
Um
Because of limited capacity as
we only have one full-time
employee in that year. I spent
half of my time on financial
management, reducing my ability
to complete planned outreach and
programming.
We had unspent allocations, we
were planning to fund surveys
and data acquisition, but due to
time and staffing constraints,
those projects were not
executed.
And we had postponed
partnerships. We intended to
launch a Southwest advisory
group of Commission on the
Status of Women's in
collaboration with other state
commissions, but lacked the
staff to move forward. Finally,
misinformation provided about
when special appropriations were
available to be spent was an
issue.
Despite these challenges, we
remain committed to empowering
women, expanding our reach, and
ensuring New Mexico women have
the resources and support that
they need, with additional
funding, we can streamline
operations, strengthen our
impact, and meet our statutory
obligations more effectively.
Thank you for your time. I
appreciate your support and I'm
happy to answer any questions.
Thank you, Doctor Hernandez. Is
there anything else? Uh, yes,
Madam Chair, members of the
committee, I did just want to
clarify that the LFC
recommendation does not contain
the special appropriation, which
you will find on page 6 of your
packet, uh, because it it.
Has reoccurring costs in it, and
so that is why the special
appropriation was not
recommended from the LFC.
Thank you.
We'll go to the committee. Are
there any questions from the
committee, Representative
Garrett?
Uh, yeah, Jennifer, I just want
to thank you for doing so much
with so little. We hear very
diverse presentations here, and
I know that as a one woman
person, you worked your butt
off, and you've made really good
use and I did go to the
conference this year, and it was
great. It was very diverse women
from all parts of the state.
A diverse presentation, so thank
you.
Thank you.
I don't see any of the
questions. Just one
clarification, Doctor Hernandez,
and looking at the uh costs that
was mentioned for rent and the
difference in the that was made
available.
And looking at the um
At the special is a special
supposed to cover that
difference or are you asking
them to find another rental
location. Madam, members of the
committee were asking them to
find a different rental location
and to work with the General
Services department to use
already allocated state spacing
and leasing offices.
I see. And Madam Chair, may I
make a, a comment to that. So we
did inquire with GSD to
determine if there was space
available, and we were told that
our two Albuquerque employees
were there was no space within
Albuquerque for, for us to work
within a state building at this
time.
Thank you. And Representative
Silva, you had a question. Thank
you, Madam Chair, thank you
presenters, um, and, um, volume
2,
yes, volume to, um, it says
that, uh, the commission
reverted 51.8,000 in FY 24, um,
can I, I just wanna ask about
that reversion.
Thank you, chair.
Uh, so I spoke to the reversion,
uh, issues in my statement. Do
you want, would you like me to,
to speak more deeply about that.
So, um, you know, one of really
the biggest challenge and one
thing I've been asking for since
we um began rebuilding the
commission in 2021 was for some
financial support. I currently
spend literally 50% of my time
working on financial issues, um,
and because of that, um, I
really have been unable to do um
some of the pieces of of work,
some of the
Programming that our
commissioners had allocated to
try to accomplish in fiscal 24,
um, I wish I
Add more time, more energy, more
ability to get everything done,
but I just really wasn't able
to.
Thank you. I appreciate the work
you do for the state. Thank you,
Madam Cha.
Thank you very much.
Say no oh
representative Brown, no doubt,
I'm sorry.
Rosinda Brown, please proceed.
Um, you have to, um, I would
just point out for the committee
that if you're relying on volume
2.
For the budget for commission on
the status of women, the numbers
are, are inaccurate.
And or if people don't have
access, we do, but to the golden
whatever buff colored sheet.
These appear to be the more
accurate numbers. So I just
pointed that out just so people
understand, we have an updated.
Uh, version. Thank you.
Thank you very much for pointing
that out. Representative Dow.
Thank you, Madam Chair. I, I
think I'm just, I think I'm
going to say my questions. Thank
you.
Have I missed anyone?
All right, seeing no other
hands, I will accept a motion.
Madam Chair, I moved the
adoption of the LFC budget at
this time.
It's been moved by
Representative Garrett that we
accept the LFC budget. It's been
seconded by Representative
Silva. Is there any opposition
to accepting that. Please note
that representative uh Brown has
objected to the adoption and
representative Vinson.
And Representative Doo.
In the
Uh
Miss uh Jennifer, I just want
you to know that one of the
things that we'll be doing is we
are required to accept the lower
budget, but we'll be looking
into the items that were raised
here, including the concept that
you raised about the rent and
what Representative Brown, uh,
brought to our attention
regarding the differences in the
documents that are available to
us.
And
You now have a budget adopted by
uh an LFC budget.
Thank you very much Thank you
for your time.
Right
We're not gonna go to public
comment. Do we have anyone
offering public comment in the
audience.
I don't, anyone making public
comment?
So I'd like you to uh make sure
that the button is pressed on
and green.
And introduce yourself, and you
have 2 minutes. OK. Hi, my name
is Jennifer. I've been working
in healthcare for detox and, you
know, just helping people with
mental behavioral health.
For years and also been studying
how to help the homeless.
And stuff, this is more related.
To what you guys were talking
about yesterday. I was in the
meeting yesterday and I just
have a few points I want to
make. I'm gonna probably write
this out better and bring it to
the chair. Alyssa said she would
help me with that, um, just to
put it out there. First I saw
yesterday you guys had the
crisis line, uh, you guys are
gonna be giving them funding.
There's some things I know for
sure about the crisis line, it's
not really very helpful. It
could be a lot more helpful, um,
so there's some point.
on that that I will write out.
Um
Healthcare professionals. I
remember yesterday just real
quick is the other thing I'll
mention is healthcare
professionals, you guys were
saying we need more funding, uh
programs to get more healthcare
professionals, there's so many,
there's plenty of people going
into the field. It's more
educating them on the difference
between behavioral health and
drug addiction, because in the
emergency rooms and urgent care
places, there's not a lot of
them that really have that
education on the difference
between someone who
addicted or someone who has a
serious mental illness, and
that's how a lot of people don't
get diagnosed properly or get
put in, you know, places that
help.
Um, and just finally, since I
know I only have 2 minutes. I
want to bring up short term and
long term programs, there isn't
any long-term programs and
statistically after 2 years, a
person who's just addicted to
drugs, you just take just the
drug addict person, um, after 2
years, if we put 100 people in a
program that's, you know, good
program, then 50% of them come
out, stay sober and stay sober
for, you know, the rest of their
lives and
become
Community members and people
that have jobs, but that's a 2
year program, and that's just
drug addicts. We have a serious
problem with both and mental
behavioral health, you know what
I mean? So we don't have any New
Mexico programs or Medicaid
insurance programs for the state
that cover over 2 years.
Everybody who has a.
Problem who wants help has to go
in for 6 months, 3 months, jump
around, and these aren't stable
recovery programs. I've noticed
there's several problems with
some of the immediate rep
recovery programs here in Santa
Fe. We offer 7 day detox and we
offer 30 day and then they try
to move them to 90 day and
there's not even.
A reliable program for 1 or 2
years, um.
Yeah, after just one more thing,
just as an example, my father
had serious problems in his 30s
and 20s, partied a lot, um, went
into jail, went into a program
after it was available. It was
one of the best programs I've
ever seen in Fort Statin
program, they don't have it
anymore, but he stayed sober his
whole life, never picked up a
drink.
Or, or drugs again, and it was
jail and then that. So gel can
also be a way to help people and
a lot of people are being put
back out on the streets instead
of locked up.
That that's another point here,
but I'm gonna write up some of
my ideas to help so that when
you guys actually start putting
the money in the financial, you
know, the and fundraising and
stuff is another idea I'd like
to help.
With homeless fundraising. I
have some ideas on that.
Yeah, I'll, I'll bring it by to
Alyssa.
You know, Friday or tomorrow or
Monday, I guess. Yes, thank you
guys so much. Thank you very
much. We're gonna go to the uh
webcast. Is there anyone on the
webcast who has a public
comment. There's no one there,
