Representative Little.
Representative Lujan.
Representative Pettigrew.
Representative Sanchez.
Representative Sariana.
Representative Silva, here.
Representative Vincent.
Vice Chair Dixon here chair
small. We have a quorum. Great.
OK, uh, we do have a quorum, uh,
we're gonna go ahead and start
is uh Senator Gonzalez here or
would you be? OK, perfect. uh,
Representative Garrett will be
taking, uh starting us off with
OK, great. Uh, so this up.
Thank you, Mr. Chair and
committee. Uh, I'm here with
Sonny Lou from LFC to talk about
uh Cenel 201 is amended, uh, the
provisions of this bill convert
the public education reform fund
into a fund for innovations, and
it establishes requirements for
the evaluations for the programs
in it.
Um, it amends the existing law
to repurpose it. We'll just say
purse for short to a targeted
3-year investment fund for
educational initiatives, it
would require that the plans be
developed by the public
education department with
consultation from DFA LFC, and
LASC and I think by uh
encouraging that cross-agency
collaboration, it will.
Improve the quality of data, for
one thing, resulting in a
stronger program of evaluations
and a better understanding of
the conditions which a program
can be developed, um, there is
a, um, changing amount of money
and uh Sonny Lou will explain
about the appropriation and how
it's now being used, and any
other details?
Great.
Luke.
Uh, thank you, Mr. Chair and
thank you, Representative, um,
for the opportunity to speak on
this. Oh.
The Senate amendment to Senate
Finance Committee amendment to
House Bill 2, as substituted by
HAFC does reduce the
appropriations for the public
education reform fund, uh, to
about 68 million. It was 82 when
it came out of the house. Um, it
does remove one item related to
school improvement, which is now
a one time appropriation in
section 5.
Um, but otherwise, um, as the
representative Garrett
mentioned, the fund and the
purpose of this bill is really
to increase the evaluation of
these 3-year programs to make
sure that we're all on the same
page and evaluating and
monitoring success.
And Mr. Chair and committee, I
will just add that it's a
3-year uh design plan that
supports the districts, so the
districts are much happier about
it because it can actually plan
over time, they can hire over
time instead of having a one
year.
Um, limit that time for
questions. Excellent. Thank you
very much Representative
Garrett, Mr. Liu. Anybody here
who would like to speak on
Centerville 201 as amended.
Please raise your hand.
OK, I don't see anybody. Is
there anyone online?
Uh, see anybody online, uh, so
we'll go to the committee. Any
questions from the committee.
OK, I don't see any questions
from the committee. I'll ask for
a motion to to pass for Cinel
201 is amended.
OK, it's been moved by uh
Representative Lujan, seconded
by um
Vice Chair Dixon, is there any
opposition to that motion?
Say no.
Oh, I apologize. Uh, please show
Representative Dao in
opposition. Thanks for catching
that.
Great.
Thank you
Thank you very much. OK. Uh, now
we're gonna go on to Senate Bill
45.
As amended, I don't see Senator
Steinborn in here yet
OK, uh, going one slowly for
Cenville 45, otherwise we'll
move on to um I don't, uh.
Otherwise, we may move all the
way down to Centerville 142 or
Centerville 37 if we don't have.
The sponsors in for 45 through
83.
Just
So Mr. Chair, yeah, we'll,
we'll, we're not gonna skip the
bills. We're, we're gonna make
sure and, and come back to
those. I just don't.
Great. Uh, Representative
Herndon, are you a co-sponsor of
Senate Bill 88?
That's
I, and we've got
He's on the floor.
Got it. OK.
OK. We'll, we'll, we'll work
past it. We'll text. Tell them
we'll text him.
Uh, Madam Leader, thank you for
being here.
Um, if you'd like to present
Cenel 48.
We can go to that.
Thank you, uh, Mr. Chairman,
and, uh, uh, the lead sponsor,
Senator Stewart is on her way,
um.
Thank you. So Senate Bill 48.
provides, creates the community
benefit fund, which provides an
overarching structure for funds
to flow to communities in New
Mexico to reduce pollution
through State departments or
existing grants within these
departments. Um, and basically
what the community benefit fund
does is it creates kind of an
overlay that involves the
community in the decision
making.
Uh, and here we have Senator
Stewart.
And I will pass it over to
Senator Stewart. I just gave the
overview.
Uh, great to see you. Thank you
for for being here. Thank you
very much, Madam Leader, for
getting us started, uh, we'll go
to you time too.
Uh, thank you, Mr. Chairman,
members of the committee.
No, this bill is created to help
communities all over uh in fact,
I have a handout if you'd like
one, would this be helpful.
To help communities all over the
state.
Uh,
we did kind of a search of what
kind of projects that
communities are looking for. We
found 1.5 billion worth of
projects that uh they would like
to do.
Um
So the idea behind this is to be
responsive to the community and
to have the community come to
the state for these funds.
So section one sets out the
community benefit fund and the
types of projects, um, that
would be allowed. The idea
behind this is that our
communities are struggling with
the results of climate change.
Just have to think of what
happened in Roswell, uh, they
got every bit of the rain they
would have gotten over a whole
year in a few hours. Uh, there
were people on top of their
community center waiting to be
rescued because.
of the flooding that happened
around them. And of course, the
fires in the north and in
Ridoso. These communities are
really struggling, um, this
climate impact for the Southwest
is is intense already, uh,
Potter, dryer, uh, more intense
weather. So starting on page 2
are the projects that uh we laid
out, uh, construction or
renovation of a public building,
reducing methane leaks and.
Lisa attributable to the
extractive industries, a
projects helping uh greenhouse
gas reduction strategies,
increasing electricity grid
capacity, uh, several of us are
working on that, very grateful
for the bill that you all have
produced, uh, reducing the use
of uh ancient uh combustion
engine vehicles through
transportation projects. I'll
give you an example of this in
dimming, they have.
Very high pollution around
Highway 10, going through the
town, and the suggestions that
the Department of Transportation
are talking about are moving the
exits in the entrances, so that
the pollution is not uh
In one area.
Uh
Assisting public entities in the
purchase of electric vehicles
and relating charging
infrastructure, our rural areas
want that for their school kids
in particular, you know, you
right now the diesel buses, they
sit there idling kids line up.
We have the highest incidence of
asthma among children in the
country.
Uh, establishing or expanding
economic development. So 6 years
ago when we, when we had this
new governor, she set forth
executive orders and laying out
what she wanted her department
secretaries to do. Uh, so
they've all been working for the
last 6 years, and the economic
development department in
particular, has led the
sustainable economy task force,
collecting 6 other agencies that
work towards thinking.
About the future, how can we
expand our economy with
renewable energy and other
industries. Uh, number 7 and 8
on page 3 are the establishing
or expanding worker training, uh
workforce in particular is
looking at recruiting and
retaining uh
Firefighters, any emergency
response.
Uh, so, on page 4 is when it
lays out how this works. Uh, we
want to ensure that we have,
we're looking at what's called
overburdened communities, that's
laid out by the federal
government, um, several states
around us have a screener, uh,
map where you can map out
overburdened communities we plan
on using that.
So, uh, Mr. Chairman, as you see
with your hand out, we started
with 340 million. I think we're
down to 210. That's still a
significant amount. I think it's
still what our community could,
could work towards. here's the
allocation and I'll stop talking
because I keep getting messages
that we're supposed to be quick.
That's great. Thank you very
much, Bo. Thank you, Madam
Leader, um, uh, we're gonna go
uh, to, uh, anybody who wants to
uh
publicly comment on Senate Bill
48, uh, as amended, uh, you go
ahead and line up here in the
middle if you can. Um,
Good afternoon, Chair and
members of the committee. My
name is Victoria Lacon Maia, and
then I'm, I'm an advocacy fellow
with the Sami project and Samia
action. Today I'm also speaking
for the 38 organizations around
the state supporting these bills
were representativeatives of
those groups, please raise your
hands.
We're here today in strong
support of Senate Bill 48, a
critical investment in both our
climate, future and New Mexico
economic resilience. This bill
is more than just a climate
initiative. It is a blueprint
for future proofing, our state's
economy by creating meaningful
job opportunities for our youth.
By prioritizing these
investments, we can build a
stronger, more sustainable
economy, while empowering the
next generation with the skills
and opportunities needed to
thrive in the clean energy
transition
additionally, Senate Bill 48
would provide the Department of
Workforce Solutions with the
necessary resources to continue
supporting and retaining
displaced workers. This ensures
that those affected by economic
shifts have the tools they need
to re-enter the workforce and
succeed in the evolving.
job market. I agreed to support
Senate Bill 48 and help secure
more just and prosperous future
for New Mexico. Thank you.
Thank you.
Hello, my name is Santiago
Hardy. I'm a 19 year old youth
intern with animated vote, and
as we know it's National Women's
History Month, and if you didn't
know, we all share the same
mother and that's Mother Earth.
SB 48 would benefit our
communities and Mother Earth by
helping us transition into
renewable energy and maintaining
our beautiful land and health.
The Community Benefit fund
invests in projects that create
new job opportunities for rural
communities, which would help
our people.
SP 48 provides a regulatory
certainty to prioritize,
prioritize sustainability,
innovation and growth. So
please, I urge you to vote uh
vote yes on this bill for Mother
Earth, future, our future
generations and communities.
Thank you.
Thank you.
When I started minhombres Marcos
Carranza.
So the pueblo Nido.
Me
Miss me.
Tees.
sitarella pollo but uh last.
Pastravacadores del petroglio.
Is Comosomos
Is Comosomos
composeritamosque
ella
is a tao
questina fondos but.
the capacitation
in, in Forzados and noestras
comunidades ruralles
para servir de apollo integrales
permitiendo quelos travacadores
comoyo
damos to era del travaco but uh.
Caitos and las industrias and
mergenes
proportion los pasos les
cesarios queuevo Mexico
nececita.
Para divers and
soconia
no estro estado en elcer mayors
and limpia and El Paiser no
queremos moss por favorboten
gray.
Uh, for the interpretation. Good
afternoon, chair and committee
members. My name is Marcos
Carranza, and I am here with
Somos. My topic here is to ask
for your support for oil workers
uh like me and all of those who
are with Somos uh SB 48 will
provide funds to create training
programs that are focused in
rural communities and which will
provide integral support for our
workers to be able to train in
the emerging emergent industries
outside of working.
hours as 48 will provide the
concrete steps in New Mexico
needs to diversify our economy.
New Mexico has the 3rd highest
clean energy job growth in the
country, and we do not want to
be left behind. Thank you. Oh,
vote yes for SB 48. Thank you.
Great. Thank you very much. OK,
uh, now we're gonna go online.
We're gonna try to limit this to
one minute a piece, um, starting
with, um, uh, uh, whoever is at
Olay staff, please identify
yourself and go ahead for one
minute, please.
Good evening. Hope that everyone
is hanging tight with this wild
wind. My name is Olga Grace with
empowered. I'm a single Latina
mother of 5.
With her first grandchild, do
May 5th. Senate Bill 48 and 49
is extremely important to me for
a better, more stable future for
my children and my
grandchildren.
Climate change and global
warming is real. Just look
outside. My dream and those of
many looking into the future is
to have a diversified New Mexico
economy.
Clean energy will not only
protect our planet, but will
create jobs in a wide variety of
fields.
Including construction and
maintenance, energy auditing,
bus operations, outdoor
recreation, engineering, and
many, many more.
Please go ahead and conclude
your thought will support
development of new and emerging
industries. I myself own a home
and conclude your thoughts on
our economy, when new jobs open
up for my own appearance.
Thank you very much.
Thank you. We're gonna go to
Maya, uh, Maya for one minute,
please.
Hello, uh, chair, members of the
committee, I will keep this very
brief. Um, I'm a high school
senior from Albuquerque Academy,
um, about a month ago, my
classmates and I visited the
Capitol to speak on behalf of SB
48 in Senate conservation. This
bill is essential to securing
the future of New Mexico, not
just for my generation, but all
the countless generations to
come in New Mexico. This bill is
deeply, deeply important, and I
urge you, I strongly urge you to
support SB 48. Thank you.
Great, thank you very much.
Uh, now go to Mayan Chavez
Baudin.
Good afternoon, Mr. Chair and
members of the committee. My
name is Mai Buddin, executive
director of Sovereign Energy and
a tribal member of Gua Pueblo,
sovereign energies and native
led nonprofit organization
supporting energy deployment and
tribal capacity building across
New Mexico under previous
federal administrations, we saw
significant bipartisan federal
investments in tribal energy
development infrastructure
advancement and sustainable
workforce development. However,
recent shifts in federal funding
priorities now threaten the
continued valuability of this.
support and put projects at
pause, putting both tribes and
important statewide climate and
infrastructure initiatives at
risk. We urge your support of
this important piece of
legislation. Thank you for your
time. Great. Thank you very
much.
We're gonna go now to Wendy.
OK. Can you hear me? We sure
can. Oh, thank you very much,
chairman small members of the
committee. My name is Doctor
Wendy Johnson with Healthy
Climate New Mexico. I'm a family
physician with 30 years'
experience working all over New
Mexico and I've seen the
devastation, how heavy reliance
on fossil fuels brings to
communities from the health
perspective, from fires and
floods caused by climate change
to higher rates of chronic
illness and cancers caused by
air and water contamination to
the
occupational illnesses that
others have spoken about minors
and oil and gas workers. This
legislation will have immediate
positive health effects for all
New Mexicans, just reducing air
pollution from fires and fossil
fuels will lower rates of lung
disease, heart attacks, strokes,
and even low birth weight and
dementia.
I know what will happen if we
don't pass Senate Bill 48, we
can look at Louisiana, at the
cancer alley, um, where cancer
rates are 95% higher than
national average, the Permian
Basin risks becoming the next
cancer alley.
Please go ahead and conclude
your thought
I just urge you to pass this
legislation so we might protect
all Mexicans from those fates
while also investing in energy
that doesn't carry such high
risk. Thank you very much. Thank
you. OK, and we're gonna
conclude with travel.
Kellerman.
Thank you, Chairman and members
of the committee. I'm Travis
Kellerman, senior climate
advisor at the governor's
office.
I stand and support and speak in
support of the community benefit
fund.
There's both adaptation and
mitigation.
Involved in the projects that
the pro tem listed. One of those
areas is energy efficiency.
Where in New Mexico is #2 for
job growth in the US.
Uh, governor last year issued an
executive order to create
thousands of apprenticeships
across the state in many of the
sectors and spaces and projects
that this bill supports.
The Community Benefit fund is
about climate change, but it's
more about diversification and
economic development.
I urge your support. Thank you.
Great. Thank you very much, uh,
Mr. Kellerman.
OK, uh, I think that concludes
the public comment. Um, yeah, if
there's, we'll go straight to
the committee for questions and
then we'll go from there. We're
gonna start with Representative
Doo, then go to Representative
Wuhan and uh go on for others,
uh, thank you, Madam Chair.
Thank you, Representative and
Senator. I'm looking at page 6
on the.
Bill, I think it's still the
same lines. I don't know. I'm
trying to look at the, the um
amendments and context. Um, this
is in regards to, well, first of
all, is this only for public
projects or could NGOs or
nonprofits supply.
Um, Mr. Chairman, this is for
anyone who follows the
requirements and in and reaches
out to the overburnt
communities. Thank, thank you,
Mr. Chair. Thank you, Senator.
So for-profit corporations could
apply as long as they're meeting
these standards.
Thank you. Anybody can apply as
long as they meet the standards
and they work with overburn
communities. Um, thank you, Mr.
Chair. Thank you, Senator. On
the last page, I'm trying to
figure out like what would be
eligible. So, um, this is
It is talking about renewable
energy source.
Is everything in that section
from the bottom of page 5
through 6 about renewable energy
sources.
So Mr. Chairman, this um this
definition comes from uh.
Uh,
just come from.
The renewable electric.
Oh yeah, rural electric
cooperative A. OK, that comes
from the real culture, OK.
And then, um,
Mr.
Chair and representative, there
is another, OK, on at the top of
page 5, I think you're familiar
with Senator Hamlin's initiative
for solar life.
If you, if you were to take
lights off.
Of a grid, solar, the, the
lights and communities and
replace them with those solar
solar lights.
Would that reduce
Would that, would that qualify
as energy efficiency?
Because it would conserve
energy.
Uh, Mr. Chairman, I'm not
familiar with that bill. Oh, OK.
You know,
you,
there's solar street lights.
They're street lights that you
install and they're they're not
on the grid because they're
charged by solar.
I was just curious. Mr. Chairman
sounds like a perfect uh project
to find money for. OK, um, and
then I was thinking about on the
worker training program and the
analysis, Mr. Chair and Senator,
it sounded like they were
focusing on energy type jobs,
electrical alignment and those
types of things. What about um
conservation efforts like the
folks who are doing thinning
projects and collecting seeds
and
This chairman, absolutely. OK.
All right. There's another
question. Um, Mr. Chair and
Representative on page 2. I
don't know why I'm going
backwards, but on page 2, line
17, 4, if it's the same,
reducing the use of combustion
engine vehicles through
transportation projects, um,
that's public transportation
projects.
Mr. Chairman, yes. OK. Could the
Department of Transportation
apply for this where they're in
there where they're installing
bicycle and pedestrian
infrastructure. Mr. Chairman,
yes. OK, thank you. Uh, thank
you, Mr. Chair and thank you.
Um, OK, all right. Thank you.
Great. Thank you very much, uh,
Representative Dale, uh,
Representative Wuhan had to step
out. We're gonna go uh next for
some Duncan and then some
Pettigrew. Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Thank you, Representative and
Senator. Um,
You know, my community is still
waiting for these good jobs to
materialize after we not ban a
power plant should run a coal
mine.
So I hope you'll forgive me, but
I don't put much stock in what
Al Gore preached many, many
years ago.
Um, I think, uh,
The Lord's in charge.
And I think we try and we spend
a whole lot of money.
And I'm not sure we we
accomplish a lot when it's over
with. So I would like to ask you
some questions, Senator, if I
could.
Um, on
On the back of this, uh, sheet
here, senator.
Can you, can you tell me, um,
just a little bit about the uh
residential and commercial low
interest loans.
Um,
Tell me what, tell me what
that's about if you wouldn't,
what's that for? Mr. Chairman,
if you
show me where your, where you're
looking at right here at the
community benefit fund right
here at the bottom, residential
and commercial low interest
loans.
Uh, so, Mr. Chairman, this is
part of our climate investment
center, um, we've spent about
$10 million already and that
center uh focuses on uh low
income, uh, commercial and
residential that we need to
upgrade. So whetherization,
new, uh, windows, new lighting,
etc. so uh that is focused on uh
low income, commercial and
residential loans.
OK, so this climate investment
center that's just uh another
pile of money. Is that right,
Senator, Mr. Chair, Mr.
Chairman, this is, this is an
important center that we
started, I think 2 years ago,
um, cause we didn't really have
the ability to uh loan out uh to
uh these folks that needed
funding for energy efficiency
upgrades, essentially. Uh, so we
put 10 million in, that's all
gone, and this is.
an additional 10 million for the
next few years. Thank you, Mr.
Chair and Senator on that. So,
um, how many, how many families,
how many businesses were you
able to help with the first
initial 10, I don't have that
information. Do you, um, Mr.
Chair and Senator, do you know
how much you think you'll be
able to help with the next 10
million by chance?
Um, Mr. Chairman, I don't have
that detail. OK. Um, Mr. Chair
and Senator, how are we gonna,
uh, I guess, I guess I'm trying
to figure out if you've had it
for 2 years, how do we find out
if
Who has helped what it's helped,
has it done what you think it's
done,
Mr. Chairman, I think you could
call the director of that, uh,
up to your committee and ask
her, or we could get a report
from her. I'm sure that's uh
probably available. I could look
for that report for you.
OK. um, Mr. Chair, thank you on
that, Senator. And the reason I
asked the question is, how are
we going to measure success in
in all of this, um, I'm, I'm
coming up from a person who
absolutely doesn't believe it at
all.
Um, and so from a skeptical
standpoint, how are we going to
measure that success?
So, Mr. Chairman,
All these projects are required
uh to come through a report on
every December of each year.
Um, it's just all listed down on
page 4.
So how much the project funding
was received, uh, the
administering agency also has to
produce a report, um, goes to
the appropriate interim
legislative committee, uh.
I think it's going to the LFC
funding for projects, um, and
final results of the project.
So, uh, starting on see the DFA
uh receives the funds and
distributes it to the all these
funds that we've identified and
then December 1 of each year, we
will have a report on every
project from every administering
agency.
Thank Mr. Chair and Senator, so
in that, in that report, uh,
we're gonna be getting, um, will
it show beyond just, you know,
I, I gave this person money and
I gave this person money, will
it show, is there any mark
difference?
We're did their electricity bill
go down? Did their heating bill
go down, um, is there any way
that this bill, particular bill
will indicate what was achieved
other than just the money was
spent and, and I guess the
reason I'm asking is we have
funds throughout the state that
are set up to do some of these
things as well.
And so I'm just trying to figure
out, are we overlapping in funds
in some of these categories, and
if we are, then I guess why? But
number 2, I'd like to know if
I mean, are there achievable
goals that you think will, that,
that this one will do. And what
are those goals? Other than just
replacing my windows that are 50
years old.
Uh, so Mr. Chairman, if you'll
continue to read where I was
reading on page 4 that the
interim committee can ask for
any details to evaluate the
project.
So I like what you're
suggesting. Um, I think that's
easy for people to do, and it
should be part of the report. So
LFC will be able to weigh in on
that. Um, so, um,
You know what, I, I don't have
lofty goals for each of these,
and I will tell you that these
funds, most of them are already
there.
Or adding to the funds. Uh, the
great modernization fund is
already there, public schools
facility Authority already
there, uh, the community energy
efficiency development block
grant which you house passed,
um, still there, um, climate
investment Center, uh, so I can
development, it's a little bit
different, um, they're uh
pretty, um, they have a lot of
ongoing and related initiatives,
so I don't think it's doubling.
Or, or overlapping. I think it's
adding to existing funds. A lot
of these came from the house.
Um, they were good projects,
they're good funds, and we're
just repurposing them to
continue the work.
Thank you, Mr. Chair and
Senator. Um, I, I think, you
know, increasing a bit grid
capacity, I think that's a great
idea. I mean, we need to work on
our grid and, and I think it's a
woefully behind.
Um, and so I'm all for that.
But I, I just wondered if there
was any way to measure whether
or not
This pot of money that we're
putting into
Um, how we're gonna, um, help us
in the climate.
If there is a definable way that
I can say and look at next year
or 2 years from now in a report
that says, all right.
Um
We're cooling down, we're
heating up, we're doing
something on the earth, but it
doesn't appear that that we have
those type of goals in mind, Mr.
Chairman, each of these funds
have their own internal writing.
So we originally were just going
to put every fund in there and
rewrite it, but we don't have to
do that cause these funds we
want to add to them, so the
funds have internal evaluation
and markers, the LFC will have
them, um, the DSA certainly has
them.
We'll learn a lot from the
reports, and I'm looking forward
to those.
Chan and the representative and
senator, I, I hope we do. I hope
a couple of years from now we
can look at it and say things
have moved, the needle moved a
little bit. I don't believe that
that'll be the case, but uh we
have the money, so.
Maybe it's a good time to do
some of these things. Thank you,
Mr. Chair. Thank you very much,
Representative Duncan. Uh, next,
we're gonna go to Rosin
Pettigrew and then
Representative Garret.
Thank you, Chairman. Thank you,
uh.
Representative senator for being
here tonight and.
So each of these funds that we
talked about throughout
this already exists.
So, is your vision that the
community benefit fund be the
sourcing.
To for
Refilling these funds.
German and senator. Mr. Sherman,
that's, that's one way to look
at it. I, I don't think we
started with that, but it's
certainly
One way to look at it.
Thank you for that.
Um, one of my other questions
have been, been answered, Mr.
Chairman and Representative, I,
I assume this girl should have
passed tonight, we'll be on the
house floor, right?
Yes, sir. Thank you very much
for that, Chairman. So with
respect to that, I think it
would be important
representative as you present
this bill or whoever presents
this bill.
On the house floor to be able to
answer with detail.
Uh, represented Duncan's
question, cause I guarantee
it'll get asked again.
Um
Mr. Speaker and Representative
and senator
one question because I wanna be
able to look this up.
On page 2 in the original bill.
Senator, um,
The reference on line 5, the
Internet most current
international.
Energy conservation code.
Mr. Speaker and presenters, can
you tell me where I can find.
Mr. Chairman, I can't.
Um
Uh, but, you know, those are the
uh energy codes. They're the
most up to-date standard that's
used by the industry. That's
what that description says. So,
um, we can certainly find that
for you, Mr. Speaker and
Senator, I appreciate that
answer, but
When we talk about the industry,
uh, this lays out probably 25
different industries, so.
Um, when we go from school buses
to electric bikes to all these
different things. Do I have to
go look at the most up to-date
current international energy
conservation code for everything
that's listed inside of this
bill.
Mr. Chairman, if you'll look
this only refers to the
construction or innovation of
public building.
Just with a under your wand.
Thank you, Chairman and thank
you, Senator for that
clarification. That helps me a
lot.
Um
If somebody
Uh, and support.
Of that are supporting this
bill, your professional witness
may be can get us the links to
where I find something that's
called an international energy
conservation code, I would.
I greatly appreciate it,
Chairman, Senator,
Representative, thank you.
Thank you, we'll definitely do
that. Great, thank you very
much. Thank you very much,
Representative Pettigrew. Next,
we're gonna go to Representative
Garrett, then Silva, then
Rosinda Henandez. Thanks, Mr.
Chair. Thanks, Senator and
Representative. I don't really
practical question of how it
would apply. So it says on page
one,
Uh, the money in the fund is
subject to appropriation to fund
projects that well, and then on
the bottom of two lines, 24 and
25, assist public entities in
the purchase of electric
vehicles and related charging
infrastructure. So for example,
if we passed the bill for uh
electric school buses, the
district would give them exactly
the same amount of money as the
traditional school bus.
Then could that entity after
they have their two meetings and
agrees to goal, could they apply
for this money to complete the
purchase of an electric school
bus and charging station. Is
that a use that this would
allow. Mr. Chairman, yes,
absolutely.
Thank you. That's it.
Thank you very much for
representing Garrett, uh,
Representative Silva, then
representative Hernandez and
then represent represent Silver,
please. Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Uh, thank you, Senator
Representative, um, I just had a
few questions. I also want to
thank the folks in the room for
being here on a late night and
um.
Sorry about that, Mr. Chair. I
want to thank the folks in the
room for being here in the
testimony we heard um earlier
today. Um, I just have a couple
of questions. Um, I'm wondering,
um, do you have an estimate of
the financial losses that New
Mexico has taken as a result of
fire, floods, um, high winds,
uh, and those sorts of climate
uh crisis emergencies in the
state, Mr. Chair. Mr. Chairman,
uh, Representative
Silver, um, we do have uh some
information, so in 2024, uh,
Emergency funding for fires and
floods provided over $141
million in emergency funding
that's just in 2024, uh, and of
course the catastrophic Hermit's
Peak Ca Canyon fires, um,
they'll claims that have been
paid out have totaled, uh, over
$900 million. Um, that's as of
last July.
Um, and in addition, 534 square
miles were burned in that
particular fire, 635 homes were
burned, um, and then, of course,
we're still dealing with flash
floods and mudslides, um, in the
aftermath of, of the damage that
was done there. Um, in addition,
uh, our agriculture and ranching
industries have been uh
experiencing impacts of severe
weather, so those cost
have been estimated to be at
least 73 million, so those are
things like.
We can crop resilience,
livestock impacts from extreme
heat, water shortages, um, and
then, of course, the healthcare
costs are difficult to estimate,
but those are. Thank you, Mr.
Chair. Thank you, Representative
and senators. So over a billion
dollars just in the last year,
um, of damages and financial
impact, not to mention lives
lost and other impacts, um, in
one year, and this bill is
asking
for how much Mr. Chair, uh,
Representative Senator.
So Mr. Chairman, we started with
340 million, um, there, I
believe there's 2, 210 million,
uh, in the budget.
Identified for these projects.
Thank you. Um,
Thank you, Protem and uh
representative and chairs, so
210 million to
Um,
to, to make an attempt to head
off the $1 billion of losses
that we've seen, um, and I think
that that one is a really good
investment, um, given the
impacts that you just laid out,
not to mention, as you've said,
like respiratory illnesses and
other illnesses that we see with
climate change. Um, that I think
are important to have new
windows in our houses so that
the dust doesn't get in.
As we've seen all over the state
today, um, not to mention
commerce that gets stalled or
lost when semi trucks tip over
and both I-25 and I-10 were shut
down today because of high
winds. Um, that affects our
commerce and our ability to be a
state that can transport um
All sorts of goods across the
country. Um, and so it's not
only dangerous for New Mexicans
that live here, but it's
dangerous for our economy. Um,
and so I just wanna lift those
up, not to mention insurance
premiums that spike because, um,
because of, you know, more
climate change that we see. And
so I'm glad to see folks, um,
that are often on the front
lines of those impacts, um,
showing up and advocating for
the spill today, um, and
And I'll be supporting this
bill. Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Thank you very much. Uh, we'll
go to Representative Hernandez
and Representative Vincent.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Um,
Madam Prota, uh,
Madam, uh, leader, I appreciate
this, uh, bill coming forward.
Uh, Mr. Speaker, um,
Uh, Mr. Cameron, sorry, sorry.
Uh, I was just, uh, um, uh, Mr.
Chairman, New Mexico has 56
Navajo chapter houses, um,
Um, Madam prote the, the, uh, my
leader, there's, there's
complexity when it comes to
giving state money to the Navajo
Nation on ensuring that the
money gets uh expended, and I'm
really glad that we're uh
utilizing uh Mr. Mr. Chairman
existing funds, um, I, I've had
uh some issues with the, the
existing funds, um, uh, Mr.
Chairman, more, more
specifically when it comes to
like the window.
When this the RFP goes out, uh,
Mr. Chairman, Mate, my leader,
uh, what they'll be technical
assistance to help rural
communities, uh, tribal
communities, apply for these
funds?
So Mr. Chairman, there will be,
uh, it's really part of the next
bill that goes along with this,
um, which is trying to help our
state agencies do technical
assistance and helped all these
communities. Um, it's very
needed. We know that, and it's
an important part of this.
Mr Chairman, um,
Um
my reader with uh back in March
of last year, the governor came
with her, uh, uh, had her
cabinet in, in, in your
community, in my community of
Shiprock. At that time, Mr.
Chairman, I, uh,
Asked if any cabinet member
wants to
wants to go with me to give a
donation of a solar microgrid
system to a family that's never
had electricity and Mr.
Chairman, Secretary Kenny went
with me, with his deputy
secretary, and they saw
firsthand the obstacles and
barriers that we face on Navajo,
just to get electricity and
running water, it costs $8000 a
pole. We need to go through
numerous uh clearances.
Which is why I co-sponsored with
Representative Dow on House Bill
315 to get more archaeologists,
but Mr. Chairman, um, uh, we'll,
will there be a funding
opportunities to help bring, uh,
you know, microgrids into these
rural communities.
Mr. Chairman, we've heard that
issue for a long time, and
absolutely yes, that really is
the purpose is to modernize the
grid to do microgrids,
microgrids are very helpful for
our rural communities, and, and
they're cutting edge technology.
So, you know, it was the house
that passed, the grid
modernization fund, we're just
trying to uh bump it up and have
it work better and have it work
for communities, so you're spot
on with that.
Thank you Mr. Chairman. I urge
the committee to support this
bill.
Great. Thank you. Uh, next we
have representative Vincent, and
then we'll go to the vice chair.
Thank you, Mr. Chair and thank
you, Senator Prote and Madam
Leader.
Who oversees this program?
So, Mr. Chairman, the DFA is
where the community benefit fund
will be housed, um, but then
they will distribute it to each
of these entities. So the
energy, minerals and natural
resources department, they
already have the grid
modernization fund, um, they
have the grant programs for
energy efficiency. That's where
the uh seed uh community energy
efficiency Development grant,
uh,
is housed the
The EV infrastructure, school
buses, that's in the public
schools facility authority, um,
workforce solutions obviously
has a lot of job and
apprenticeship work that they're
trying to do, um,
So
The agency that has the fund
that you're aiming for will be
the overseeing agency, and
they're the ones that have to
give a report every year,
December 1 to an interim
committee, I'm assuming would be
LFC.
Thank you, Mr. Chair and thank
you, Madam Pro Tem. That was my
second question on the
reporting, and what I try to get
into my mind is.
This is 210,000.
10 210 million, sorry, I get, I
forget the zeros. This is 210
million.
And sometimes I wonder.
We put all this money into this
program.
And then I look at a map.
And I see New Mexico right here.
And then I see the whole United
States. Let's just say the whole
world.
And we were such a small little
portion. I know everybody has to
do their job.
But what kind of, what impact
Are we really making.
On the whole world.
Well, Mr. Chairman, I, I think
it's an important question.
I mean, we're we're elected
officials. I don't know about
you, but everywhere I go, mostly
young people, yell at me, but
what am I doing about climate
change.
They're concerned.
You know, it's, it's a different
world than when I was a kid, we
didn't have this weather. We
didn't have droughts, you know,
you could ski every year. It was
raised mostly in Arizona and
Colorado, um, so things have
changed, and I believe it's
important that we step up. We've
already done that. We're really
good at regulation. We've
already reduced our greenhouse
gas emissions by 29%.
The major oil companies that we
met with over this and other
bills. They're all committed.
To net zero by 2050, they have
it in their documents, so it is
an all hands on board. The
methane rules that we passed.
The oil and gas industry says
it's been phenomenal, and they
have lowered methane emissions,
but that's important. We have a
big red cloud over southeastern
New Mexico and one up in the
four corner region. Um, I think
it's our job to try to lower
these greenhouse gas emissions.
Uh, for everybody's benefit,
especially the people who live
in those areas, these
overburdened communities. Uh,
it's really important that we
focus there and on them. So I
think we all have a role to
play. I certainly try to lower
my individual carbon footprint.
I have solar panels. I, etc. so
it's all our responsibilities,
and I think we can make a
difference. We already have made
a difference with the last 6
years.
Thank you, Mr. Chair and thank
you, Madam Pro Tem.
So I've, you know, I, I love
talking to older people that's
been there and done that.
And what I hear a lot of these
old ranchers telling me is that
they don't really, they can't
quite buy into climate change.
But they buy into the climate
shift.
And they tell me that we're just
in a shift that one of these
days we're gonna get rain again.
But, you know, I look at.
One thing that I'm very
passionate about, especially
this year, is our forest, and I,
I can't hardly
Stomach.
Watching people's houses burn
up.
But look how much we've
mismanaged the forest. They
burned so much more intense. Now
I'm not gonna dispute that we're
not getting the rain, we're,
we're drowty right now, but we
have a forest that's overgrown
completely overgrown.
And those fires burned so much
more intense.
And then we do blame it on
climate change.
And I blame it on mismanagement.
And one of my questions is on,
on the accountability side of
this.
You know, how do we, how do we
ensure that we're prioritizing
the right projects.
And that we're not mismanaging
funds.
Mr. Chair, and Madam Protein.
It, it's a good question, and I
share your concerns. Um,
Many of us are not real happy
with the federal government
right now, and what they're
doing, uh, certainly they were
implicated in the fires up
north, uh, so that's kind of on
them. We've done all kinds of
efforts to try to have the
state, the state forester, and
our efforts to manage our own
forests, the more important than
those that the federal
government. So, I mean, we've,
when I left the floor, we were
uh
Aiding a watershed and fire
suppressant bill. We're all
focusing on that. You're right.
Uh, we have to go above and
beyond that federal government
with their own state plans and
our things we're passing here,
uh, these last 60 days, so, um,
I just think it's important that
state governments start taking
over some of these things that
the feds aren't going to be
doing anymore.
Thank you, Mr. Chair, and I'd be
remiss if I didn't say we have a
dandy.
State Forester.
We do. She's great. And then on
the um my last question was on
the physical impact report on
the 2nd page.
There's a bullet, um, the 6th
bullet, and it says assess or
reduce the efforts of climate
change on the natural
environment.
Agriculture production. What is,
what does that mean? Agriculture
production, I hope it doesn't
mean electric tractors and stuff
like that, OK
I've had to tell Senator Ezel,
no, no, you keep those smelly
old diesel tractors.
Um,
you know, I I is already working
on reducing their greenhouse gas
emissions. They, they have a lot
of improvement. We, we've
focused on healthy soils the
last several years in the
legislature. That's really
important, you know, and one of
the committees in the Senate,
they said to me, well, let's
start at the Dust Bowl, which
got me interested in that and
dust bowl was in large part
because of bad agricultural
practices where we just wiped
off of the topsoil, and then
They had wins, of course, so um
there's they've done, they're
doing targeted application of
fertilizers, um, we're working
on soil cover in New Mexico
state is just really working on
these issues. So, um, I, I just
think the agriculture community
understands uh what they have to
do and they're doing it.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. And you
know, I just, I
I made a change today.
And Mr. Chair, if you'll just
allow me this.
I've voted for silocybin.
I never would have normally done
that and I'm trying to change.
I'm trying to get, I'm trying to
get, I just haven't quite bought
into climate change. I haven't
bought into a lot of this stuff,
so I'm not doing it to be
honorary. I'm just, I haven't
quite bought into it, so I
appreciate the questions. Thank
you, Mr. Chair. Thank you very
much. uh, thank you. No, I
appreciate very much question
Representative Vincent. We're
gonna go to the vice chair, uh,
thank you, Mr. Chair. um, thank
you. um, I had the opportunity
to hear this presentation in
house Energy and very much.
appreciate it, um, and the
opportunity to um ask you a
couple of additional questions.
Um, first off, uh, the $7.8
million for economic
development. Um, do you have, is
there a specific um activities
that are being envisioned with
that specific amount.
Yeah
I'm gonna, I'm gonna get my
expert to give you an answer.
I'm Julia Barnes, thank you, um,
Mr. Chairman, Vice Chair, um,
Economic development already has
many, many tools you all have
provided them with many
opportunities and ways to do
outreach to the community so
that for for both workforce
development and economic
development, there, uh, the
money is given to them to
utilize in all of the ways that
they're allowed to do it, so
it's very broad.
Thank you, uh, Mr. Chair, um,
thank you, Ms. Barnes, uh, for
the elaboration. I appreciate
that. Um, another question, um,
the definition of renewable
energy, uh, renewable energy
resource, um, and that is, um,
Number 5.
Uh, I forget which section. Um,
I'm not sure which section. It's
on page 5.
Um, is where it starts. But can
you point me to where um I see
um increased electricity from
renewable energy resources on
page 2 lines 14 and 15. And I'm
wondering if that's the only
place where it's referenced.
I, I think, I think that's
right. That's the only place and
this the definitions we took
from statutory, so the
definition that you referenced
is from that rural Electric
Cooperative Act that we passed.
Um, thank you, Mr. Chair, and
thank you, um, for, uh, for
that. I, you know, I am a little
concerned that um by specifying
renewable energy resources, we
are, um, not including things
that, you know, we know need to
be part of the solution. Um, I
did see, um, on the last page,
specifically, um does not allow
for nuclear energy, um, which I
think is a missed opportunity,
but I, you know, I can
appreciate that right now, uh,
there may be a preference for
focusing
on renewable resources, which,
you know, I.
Firmly believe are part of the
solution as well. Um,
Mr. Chair, um, and, uh,
presenters. Um, I do, um, I
think this is a great program. I
think that putting a large
amount of money toward this is
very much needed, um, and so, so
I support it. Um, I will say
that along the same lines of um
Nuclear and the, the strict
definition of renewable energy.
I am a little disappointed that
sometimes um our body does not
um, want to expand, um, for
instance, carbon capture, um,
you know, I think that those
That industry provides good
jobs, um, is part of the climate
solution, um, and it's
unfortunate that um we shut
ourselves off prematurely, um,
but I appreciate the bill and
look forward to supporting it.
Excellent. Uh, go ahead. Yes,
Representative Brown, please.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman and
Senator. So I, um, I have a
little sneak peek on what the
Senate has done with House Bill
2.
And it's my understanding, Mr.
Chairman, that um the original
asked for your bill was um for
cynical, um,
48 was for $340 million and that
has since been whittled away,
apparently by the Senate.
Uh, took out looks like about 43
million um.
For other purposes, um,
took 70 million from the
community benefit fund proposal,
putting into the grid
modernization grant fund, Mr.
Chair, but that's part of what's
on your list to begin with. So
maybe it doesn't mean much that,
that, but it looks like.
It's down to about um $210
million now, and what I'm
reading is all those dollars
have been transferred to other
programs or funds.
Um, Mr. Chair, you, we're in a
stage now where we're we're
looking forward to seeing what
the Senate has done with the
full House Bill 2. I'm just
wondering if any of the
monkeying that's been done by
Senate.
has, um, your, your opinion of
what it does to your bill, Mr.
Cha.
So Mr. Chairman, uh,
House Bill 2 coming over from
the house had already reduced it
down to about 243 million.
Um, and I think that was, we had
much more into economic
development, and, and I think
what's happened is that it just
got put into the department
instead of not being part of the
community benefit fund, which is
perfectly fine.
Uh, so, you know, I, I know how
this works and at the end it's
like, oh my gosh, we forgot
this. Oh no, we need more money
here and then you have the
governor saying what she wants,
so it's just the process and um
I'm happy with 210 million if,
if that's where we're at.
Thank you for that, uh, Mr.
Chair, and, and Senator and
Representative, I um
You know, at the end of the day,
when we added all that, I don't
believe this is gonna make a big
impact.
In reducing admission emissions,
I don't.
Um, I look at, we are just a
pinpoint on a globe.
And we have jet streams and wind
currents, and so what we
Saving emissions, it blows in
from perhaps somewhere else. Uh,
there will be some tangible
benefits, maybe someone will get
a really energy efficient
building out of some of this
funding, but I think the net
effect at the end of the day is
It's not gonna be all that uh
measurable and I believe that um
Mr. Chair, that um some of this
is just too diffuse in a way.
Uh, I would rather focus on one
or two things and do it really
well for the whole state, and I
just see this as kind of a
scattergun approach, so.
Probably not going to support
the bill, but I fully understand
uh the reasons you brought it.
Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Great. Thank you very much, uh,
Representative Brown. OK, I
don't see any other, um, uh, any
other folks on the list, uh,
we'll go to, for the, uh, the
vice chair for the motion and
Representative Saana for the
2nd.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Um, I move
that the committee
Um
I do pass, right? Like
I got my uh my freezing run, 48,
uh, as amended. Great. OK,
there's a motion from Vice Cha
Dixon for uh do pass on Senate
Bill 48 is amended, seconded by
Representative Saana. Can we go
ahead and call the roll briefly.
Representative Baca.
Representative Brown.
Um, my voters know, and I think
I've already explained. Thank
you.
Representative Chatfield.
Representative Doo.
Representative Duncan.
Representative Garrett.
Representative Hernandez.
Representative Herndon. Yes.
Representative Herrera.
Representative Little, yes.
Representative Lujan.
Representative Pettigrew.
Representative Sanchez.
Representative Sarona? Yes.
Representative Silva. Yes.
Representative Vincent.
Vice chair Dixon? Yes.
Chas small.
Yes.
Representative Brown. No, we've
already, I think we've some
Brown said no.
Oh no, that, that's, you're
totally OK. Great. So we'll, uh,
what was the vote?
negative. OK.
OK, great. 5 vote of 9 to 6, uh,
we have a DuP pass, uh, we'll go
ahead and uh go uh to Senate
Bill 83 as amended now.
um, going through there.
So Mr. Chairman, um.
Cynical 83 is designed to help
uh 7 agencies, uh, work with
communities uh on community
benefit fund or anything else
they need to do to improve their
communities. So it's uh started
off as a 10 million, I think it
remains at that, uh, the, uh,
more funding goes to environment
and uh
Energy, minerals and natural
resources, they're the two
agencies are on the lead, but
there also is funding to the
economic development department,
Department of Transportation, a
workforce solutions, general
services division at the state
land office. So they are tasked,
they have been since they got
the governor their tasked with
uh leading on uh changing and
adaptation mitigation of what's
happened.
happening in our climate. Uh, so
this just charges them uh with
continuing that work with
increasing that work and then
having the ability to help these
communities who want to uh do
their own work on climate
adaptation or mitigation. So,
It's kind of the similar, very
similar previous bill it just
focuses on state agencies and
Stanford questions. Great, thank
you very much. We'll go to a
brief public comment. Anybody
who would like to speak on
Senate Bill 83 as amended.
OK, great. Line up here in the
middle if you could.
Go ahead.
Thank you. Good evening, chair
and members of the committee.
I'm Michelle Miano, director of
the Environmental Protection
Division at the New Mexico
Environment Department, the
agency stands in support of SB
83 as it will provide regulatory
certainty to businesses,
including those seeking to
invest in new economic
opportunities from our emerging
clean transportation fuel
program, as well as certainty
for the agency's climate change
bureau as our team works hard
day in and day out.
out to help our state reach our
greenhouse gas emissions
reduction goals. During times of
uncertainty at the federal level
conclude.
Critical investment in the
innovation of state programs
like these underway at the
environment, Climate Change
Bureau is needed more than ever.
Thank you. Great. Thank you.
Good evening, Arta Chavez from
NM Native vote when the
inflation reduction Act became
law and we began working with
our communities to assess what
funding they might need to apply
for the barriers to access
stacked up in each conversation.
Many tribes have lost
experienced grant managers and
missed critical reporting
deadlines, making them
ineligible to apply for
additional federal grants. The
federal funding process is
complex and resource intensive,
demands that under
tribal governments simply cannot
meet without additional support
by investing $10 million to
build capacity at the local
level, SB 83 would support
tribal governments to navigate
and exist essential funding
streams. This isn't just an
investment and administrative
support. It's an investment in
the resilience and
sustainability of our
communities. I strongly urge the
committee to support Senate bill
83. Thank you. Thank you very
much.
Good evening, Mr. Chair, members
of the committee. I'm Anna
Lindon Weller, the senior policy
advisor for Clean Energy at
Western Resource Advocates until
about 6 months ago, I was policy
director at the Energy, Minerals
and Natural Resources
Department. And I say that in
this moment, because in addition
to my organization, many other
organizations here asking you to
support this bill. I had the
direct experience of trying to
couple together funds and staff
time to do a really important
job.
we did it with all of your help,
to giving us funding, but having
a steady dedicated stream of
funding makes all of that so
much simpler, and we can be
better at it when we have that
simplicity. So I urge your
support. Thank you very much.
Great, thank you.
OK, we're gonna go online, uh,
first we'll go to James Poviwa.
Good evening, Mr. Chair, members
of the committee. I'm James
Bobiwan. I am the vice chair of
the sustainable Economy Task
Force and share of its community
advisory council, the task force
and council were created by
legislation in 2021, with the
charge of creating a long-term
plan for our state to transition
to a sustainable economy. The
task force is administratively
attached to the economic
development department as a
state, we will not achieve this
important initiative unless our
state agencies have
the resources they need to
accomplish the task. SB 83, the
innovation and state government
fund will strengthen state
capacity, equipping agencies
with the resources and expertise
needed to support clean energy
initiatives, a key element to
laying the groundwork for a
sustainable economy, one in
which all New Mexicans thrive
and our air, land and water are
protected. This concludes my
comments. Thank you to sponsor
Senator Stewart, and I urge the
committee members to vote in
favor and do pass SB 83.
Thank you very much. We'll go
next to Ann Lynn.
Good evening Chair and committee
members. My name is Alyn Hall,
and I'm here today to ask for
your support of SB 83. I am the
CEO of Prosperity Works, and we
have been engaged with state
agencies over the last several
years on the implementation of
the community energy efficiency
block grants, which passes
legislature in 2022. We worked
with two different
municipalities to apply for
these funds to bring much needed
energy efficiency into a
disadvantaged households. The
first announcement on awards
from this fund were made last
March. It took almost a year.
From award announcements to get
contracts out, and the critical
work that the legislature
authorized in 2022 hasn't yet
started. Our state agencies need
support, like what is offered in
SP 583 to get critical workout
started and completed. They're
understaffed and under-resourced
and really need help. I urge
your support of this bill and
thank the sponsors for all their
work on this bill. Thank you.
Thank you. And we'll conclude
again with Travis Kellerman.
Thank you, Chairman, members of
the committee. I work directly
with our climate bureaus as the
senior climate advisor for the
governor. They're full of
talented people like Michelle
Meano, who spoke earlier.
They do significant creative
work, and now is the time to
innovate, as is in the title of
this bill. We need to attract
more investment to New Mexico as
federal support waivers. That's
what this does. It gives the
foundation and the resource to
do so. I urge your support.
Thank you.
Thank you very much. OK, uh,
we're now gonna go to the
committee. Are there any
questions from the committee?
I don't see any questions from
the committee. We'll go to
Representative Saraana for uh Du
pass motion on Senate Bill 83 as
amended.
Chairman. I do pass on Senate
Bill 83 as amended
it's been moved by
Representative Sanana, seconded
by uh representative Sylva and
Representative Little, um, can
we go ahead and, uh, please call
the roll briefly.
Representative Baca.
Representative Brown. No.
Representative Chatfield.
Representative Dell
Representative Duncan. No.
Representative Garrett.
Representative Hernandez.
Representative Herndon. Yes.
Representative Herrera.
Representative Little, yes.
Representative Lujan.
Representative Pettigrew.
Representative Sanchez.
Representatives Sariana.
Representative Silva. Yes.
Representative Vincent.
No.
Vice Chair Dixon, yes.
small.
Yes.
Yes, to the affirmative, 9 to
the affirmative and 6 to the
negative. OK, by a vote of 9 to
6, uh, we have a do past there.
Thank you so much, Mr. Chairman
and committee. Thank you. OK,
uh, Ferdinand, can we have you,
uh, and, uh, I think Mr. Avila,
OK, great. Let's go ahead and uh
do Senate bill uh 88 as amended.
Uh, thank you, Mr. Chair. We'll
briefly describe the bill and we
do have another amendment. So
Senate Bill 88 creates the as
amended, creates the Medicaid uh
trust fund and the
state-supported Medicaid fund
and requires certain balances of
reverting funds and accounts to
be transferred from the general
fund to the Medicaid Trust fund.
And um
Funds are generated for the
trust fund are contingent upon
reversions exceeding 110 million
at the end of each year due to
the varying reversions for each
fiscal year, uh
sometimes it may be difficult to
understand how quickly the fun
will grow, but we reversions in
the last 8 years, if we were to
look at this process would have
been approximately 1.8 billion.
Uh, so with that, Mr. Chair, we
will send for questions. We do
have, I do have a, a
Expert with me, and he will
introduce himself, and then we
will move for the amendment. OK,
great.
Yeah
Uh, Mr. Chair, members of the
committee, my name is Adrian
Avila I serve as the chief of
staff for Senate Finance. I am
the Amanda of the Senate.
OK. Very good. And Mr. Mr.
Chair, we do have an amendment.
The, the number is 0.231907.3.
It is in your binders.
And Mr. Mr. Chair, I've moved
the amendment for discussion.
OK. Uh, OK. Uh, can you explain
the amendment and uh go ahead.
Um, Mr. Chair, uh, members of
the committee, the amendment
more than anything, um, strips
the Senate or the Senate floor
amendment and basically changes
the funding mechanism. So even
though the bill looks thick,
only the first two sections
creating the trust and creating
the program fund stayed,
everything else was struck, and
then the amendment, um,
basically captures the
reversions and excess of $110
million each year moving
forward. That's what will fill
up this fund. Uh 10.
10 million was chosen as the
number because that's the number
the consensus revenue estimate
that Craig, that determines the
the revenues of the state.
That's the number they used to
estimate next year's revenue.
That's how much they believe
every year in perpetuity
reversions will be. So we're
capturing basically money that
isn't accounted for within our
revenue estimates. Great. OK.
Thank you for that. OK, are
there any questions on the
amendment. We've all got it in
front of us.
Nixon.
Uh, thank you, Mr. Chair, um,
thank you, um, Mr. Avila. So why
was the um so there was an
amendment placed on the bill on
the Senate floor.
Uh, and why was it, why are we
removing it? OK. If you could
just
Painting that up for me. Yeah,
Mr. Chair, members of the
committee. So the Senate floor
amendment basically chose one of
the many different revenue
streams that were in the initial
proposal, um, and they chose the
to keep this uh state treasures,
um.
Overnight investments which
fluctuate, they go up and down.
And basically what that means is
there's a possibility that they
could go into the negative. So
considering that the fund didn't
have any money in it, you can't
really start flowing money in if
it goes in the negative. So it
was just a, a technical fix, and
it was determined that the
easiest way to do this is to
capture.
funding that isn't accounted for
as part of the revenues. Any
money that flows in from the
state treasure in overnight
investments that is part of the
revenue estimate. It is the most
volatile source and we were
initially trying to remove that
volatility from the general
fund, but um at this moment, it,
it's better to just keep that
within the general fund where it
can kind of take the hit
compared to a fund that's just
starting that can't take
volatility.
Thank you, Mr. Cherry. Thank
you, Mr. Avila. So, um, but the
floor amendment, um, there was
also an amendment in Senate
Finance, and did the Senate
Finance amendment, and I
realized the reason I'm asking
the history is because I feel
like it affects the amendment
today. Um, so,
What was the funding source that
was put on in the finance
committee.
Uh, madam, or Mr. Chair, members
of the committee, um,
Represented Dixon, so that was
the amendment, but it was
written incorrectly, so it was a
technical fix that was on the
Senate floor.
Thank you. OK. Thank you, Mr.
Chair. Thank you very much, uh,
Vice Chair Dixon. OK, uh, I
don't see any other questions.
Can we have a motion to adopt
HAFC Amendment number 1 to
Senate Bill 83 as amended.
Hey, it's been moved by Vice
Chair Dixon or moved by
represent little signed by Vice
Chair Dixon, we're adopting this
to go back to the amendment.
We're not voting on the bill
yet. Uh, any objection to
adopting the amendment?
that
OK, now we're gonna go uh to
public comment. Is there public
comment on Senate bill 83 as
twice amended, uh, Ms. Fisher,
come on.
Come on down.
Thank you, Mr. Chair, members of
the committee, Christina Fisher,
Associate Director of Think New
Mexico, um, urge your support
for this bill. One of the main
reasons driving the doctor
shortage and the healthcare
worker shortage is that we have
a high population on Medicaid
and relatively low Medicaid
reimbursement rates relative to
commercial payers and Medicare.
This bill helps solve that both
in the short term and the long
term, in the short term, if
there is a reduction in federal
revenues, this is a source that
can be drawn on to make up that
shortfall in the long term as
this trust fund grows, it will
be a
occurring source of revenues
that can help us increase those
reimbursement rates and keep our
healthcare workers. Thank you.
Thank you. Um, chair small and
members of the committee. My
name is Lynn Christensen, and I
am an advocate volunteer for
AARP, as you know, Medicaid's a
critical lifeline for many older
New Mexicans. It means access to
care and helps provide a life of
dignity for them, whether
they're in the nursing home or
in their own home with community
support.
Um, based services.
So
We ask that you support this
bill as it will improve access
to care and increase the
healthcare workforce as was just
mentioned.
Thank you.
Thank you very much.
OK, uh, let's go online. We're
gonna go first to Kerry Robin
Bruder and then uh the infamous
JD Bullington, uh, and
implements, I just say in
without sort of known for this
evening, uh, gratitude for uh
helping supply the food for
members this evening. So first
to carry Robin Bruder.
Hello, Mr. Chairman Kerry Robin
Brunner with the New Mexico
Medical Society. You all know
Medicaid is a huge part of our
budget now, so we think this is
a really smart investment to
make sure we can stabilize the
Medicaid funding in the future.
We appreciate the bill, the
sponsor, and the work of
everyone on this piece of
legislation. Thanks.
Thank you.
OK, uh, now, Mr. Bullington.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman, members
of the committee, JD Bullington
speaking on behalf of the
Greater Albuquerque Chamber of
Commerce. I think the other
speakers before me have been
very eloquent in how they
described why this legislation
is necessary because we all know
the cost of Medicaid have grown
exponentially to the point where
now the 2nd largest demand on
the general fund below public
education and this bill, of
course, aims
And ensuring our state can
sustain the Medicaid program
regardless whether or not
there's federal reductions.
Or through any expanded usage.
Or expanded level of care. And
it does that by allowing a
variety and a wide diverse range
of revenues to flow into the
funds, so we think this bill
addresses what is likely to be a
critical need and the greater
Albuquerque Chamber of Commerce
asked for your support.
Great. Thank you very much. OK,
that concludes public comment.
Uh, any questions from the
committee?
We'll go first to represent
Duncan and then representative
Brown, Duncan, please. Thank
you, Mr. Chair. Um,
Representative, just one quick
question for you, and, and
Amanda, I don't think he comes
close. I just want you to know
that, um, no offense, young man,
um, representing, so what if
we're not able to fully fund
this trust. What, what, what do
we do then?
Mr. Chair, members of the
committee, uh, if we're not able
to fully fund the trust, we'll
have to find other means for
which we're going to make sure
that we're able to make up the
Medicaid shortfall.
Thank you, Mr. and that's what I
was wanting to know right there.
That's one question.
Great. Thank you very much, uh,
Representative Duncan. Next is
Representative Brown.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman, uh,
representative. I, I have some
high finance questions, and I
hope you have some answers. I'm
looking at the amendment we just
adopted here in the House
appropriations and Finance
Committee.
And um looking in particular at
um it's a section 6-5-10 subpart
A, and I just need a few um
explanations I guess. It says
that um except as provided in
subsection B of this section, so
we'll skip over that. All
unreserved, undesignated fund
balances in reverting funds.
That's one.
Uh, bucket of money, and then we
have accounts as reflected in
the Central Financial Reporting
and Accounting System.
So I just could use a little
tutorial.
Short tutorial, Mr. Chair, what
exactly we're talking about
there.
Representative Brown. So right
now, House Bill 2, right? Any
general fund that's appropriated
to any agency, be it in their
operational budget and specials
and IT, etc. It has its funding
source, right? And if that
source is general fund, it
reverts into the general fund.
If it's from a special type of
other state funds, it reverts
into that state fund. So with
this section of law, which is
existing.
Right, says is right now,
anything that reverts from
General Fund reverts into the
general fund. So we're basically
saying is that still happens up
to the $110 million mark,
anything in excess would flow in
here.
through the Medicaid Trust.
Mr. Chair, I think you and
Amanda could arm wrestle would
be interesting to see, that was
a good, good answer. I
appreciate that. Um, the, um,
Reference Mr. Chair to accounts
as reflected in the central
financial Reporting and
accounting systems. That's the
first I've heard of something
like that. Could you just give
me a, it, it's not the same
thing. I take it as what you
just said.
Uh, Mr. Chair Representative
Brown, that's basically the
share system. It's the
accounting system of the state.
Thank you.
OK, um,
Mr. Chairman, so in terms of
forecasting the revenue that you
would be able to capture this
way.
You don't really have much of a
clue, do you? Are, are, are you
waiting to see what happens, uh,
it, I don't see a
fiscal impact reported in my
notebook, maybe someone's looked
at the numbers. Could you tell
us, please? So, Mr. Chair
Representative Brown, uh, when
we ran the numbers, right, if we
look from fiscal year 17 through
fiscal year 24.
The total amount of reversions
during that time frame was $1.8
billion.
Right? If we apply this
mechanism.
To it. Um, this fund could have
been built up to 983.3 million.
During that time frame.
Uh, and out of those 8 years,
for the years, the fund wouldn't
have received anything but for
the years it would have. So it
very much will fluctuate, but
the idea is we're capturing
money that isn't taken into
account by the rag, so it
doesn't impact house build too.
Very good. um, Mr. Chairman,
and, um, representative and, and
your name Mr. uh
Eve Mr. Avila, yes, OK.
Um
I think the original bill tried
to capture capital outlay money
that was parked and not being
used, um, Mr. Chair, is that
accurate? Do I remember
correctly?
Uh, Mr. Chair Representative
Brown, yes, the original bill
had like 6 different options for
the Senate Finance Committee to
consider. They did not consider
that one as a viable option.
Oh, just close Mr. by saying I'm
really happy to hear that
because my proposed uh
transportation trust fund was
going to take
Unspent capital outlay and uh
try to factor that into the
trust fund for transportation,
so I'm glad to see that uh
didn't survive. Thank you, Mr.
Chair. Thanks for the answers.
Thank you very much
Brown. We're gonna go next to
Representative Doo and then Vice
Chair Dixon. Thank you, Mr.
Chair and thank you,
Representative. Um, so on page
5, once the balance, this is
line 21. Once the balance of the
Medicaid Trust fund at the end
of the fiscal year reaches $2
billion. The allocation pursuant
to subsection A of the section
shall be made to the general
fund.
So what's happening to the
balances before that.
Uh, Mr. Chair, Representative
Dao. So that's basically a
trigger, right? Where the goal
is to get this fund up to 2
billion, and then after that,
all of the reversions would just
flow into the general fund. So
it's meant to make sure that the
money gets back to the general
fund after this is built up.
Mr. Chair and Representative,
what happens to the reversions
now, they go back to the general
fund. So that's just saying
like.
We're not gonna put more than 2
million in it.
2 billion, I'm sorry.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Thank you.
How much do we have in
reversions annually.
Is is this accounting for all
reversions is what I'm asking.
Uh, Mr. Chair, Representative
Dao, it's all reversions that
would revert into the general
fund.
Mr. Chan representative, it is
at 100% of the reversions that
would be reverting to the
general fund.
Yes.
So
I think and Mr. Abbott, so this
is the our consensus revenue
estimating group right now, uh,
bakes in $110 million.
In reversions that will go back
to the general fund. This would
be in excess of $110 million.
Mr. Chair and Representative and
how much are we generally
reverting.
To the general fund annually.
Uh, Mr. Chair, Representative
Dao, so I'll give you an
example. FY 20, 345.8 million.
FR 21, 533.1 million.
FY 22, 353.1 million FY 23,
191.3 million and the numbers
just keep going.
Thank you, Mr. Chair and thank
you, Representatives. So we're
capturing about half of the
dollars that would revert back
to the general fundish.
It would vary by year, Mr.
Chair. Thank you, Mr. Chair and
thank you, Representative. Is
there another bill that's going
to capture the other half?
Uh, Mr. Chair, uh,
Representative, the other half
would be the general fund. It,
it is going to the general fund.
We don't have another bill
that's a climate bill or law
enforcement bill. OK. Thank you,
Mr. Chair.
Mr. Chair, Mr. Chair
Representative, OK, so what
about, I had heard a rumor.
That we have like billions in
funds that are capital outlay
that's unspent.
And um special appropriations
that are unspent.
And that this was gonna those
dollars were going to be used to
start this fund. Where, how, how
did you come to this conclusion?
Uh, Mr. Chair, Representative
doubt, that was presented as an
initial option for the committee
and they they rejected those
options.
So we came to this conclusion as
the most viable mechanism that
doesn't impact revenues or
disrupt any other um existing
flows of money.
Thank you, Mr. Chair and thank
you, Representative. And if we
had swept some of those.
Um
Those those special projects,
those I don't, some of them
were, you know, over a decade
old, that would impact.
What would, what impact would
that have had?
Uh, Mr. Chair, Representative
Do, it would have had an impact
directly on the community that
would have lost that money to be
able to implement that project.
OK. Thank you. Thank you, Mr.
Chair.
Uh, thank you very much,
Representative. We're gonna go
next to Vice Chair Dixon.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Um, just
two quick questions. Um, how
much, uh, money is in the
budget, uh, to start this fund.
Um, Mr. Chair, Representative
Dixon, at this moment, 0.
Thank you, um, Mr. Chair, uh,
OK, so at one point, I think I
saw 300 million, but that is
not.
OK.
Um, and then how does the
spending work, so
For a lot of trust funds, we do
sort of the 5%.
Um, you know, disbursement, um,
but I noticed
That the language in this bill
um says.
That it can be appropriated to
the program if reductions in
federal Medicaid funding, um,
would result in a reduction of
coverage. So it puts the formula
for how the funding is
dispersed.
So Mr. Chair, Representative
Dixon, this one is a little bit
more unique than any of the
other trust funds we've dealt
with because as certain
triggers. So since it is
Medicaid focused and our state
depends so much on Medicaid.
In the event there is a federal
reduction in the Medicaid
reimbursement rate.
This becomes accessible to you.
It's not locked up like the
other trust funds are. Um,
however, in the event that we
don't have that type of
reduction, then it would follow
the regular, you know,
Uh, average.
Um, I believe it's 3-year
average, um, and then you'd get
5%. However, there is also a
third trigger that.
It won't make a disbursement
like that, the 5% average, if it
doesn't have at least $500,000
in it. So the idea is let's
build it up before we start
depending on it. Um, so it's
kind of thinking.
Let's focus on the immediate now
the needs give you all as much
flexibility as possible, while
at the same time thinking into
the future and letting it grow
to a point where it'll actually
be beneficial for you all to get
the 5% every year. So you can,
um,
Have a sustainable path.
forward when it comes to
Medicaid.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Thank you.
Um, does that, um,
Sorry, will this fund count uh
as part of our reserves.
Um, Mr. Chair, Representative
Dixon, no.
It's as flexible as a reserve,
but it does not officially count
as part of the reserves, because
you do not want it to
destabilize the actual 30%
calculation.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Um.
Thank you.
Hey, uh, thank you very much,
Vice Chair Dickson. Uh, members,
great questions. I think from
San Ferdinand, thank you for
being on the bill. This is
undergone a number of
evolutions, uh, which I think
There are some, you know,
ultimately,
The reason I'm comfortable
supporting it. It's clearly a
very big um
A driving fiscal issue for us.
It's undergone a lot of
different generations. I wanna
thank Amanda and others for
working closely, uh, because
there were some ways that
funding this that would have not
been not worked. I think we've
found a way that does work, uh,
and so I think it, it shows that
there's been pretty good
collaboration and so anyway,
want to, to say that, uh, I
don't see any other questions.
Can we have a motion to for a
due pass on um.
Senate bill, uh, 808 as a twice
amended.
Uh, it's been moved by uh
Representative Duncan seconded
by Representative Brown, any
opposition to that motion, the
show represent Pettigrew in
opposition.
And
OK. Uh,
We're gonna go now.
OK, uh, go ahead, please down.
Thank you, Mr. Chair and thank
you, Representative, and thank
you to all the LFC team that
worked on this, I think it's
really, really important,
especially as this body
continues to choose to vote for
bills that will jeopardize our
federal funding. I hope that
this dollar, these dollars will
be used to sustain and protect
basic services, critical
services for our most vulnerable
low-income, our seniors are our
young families. I will be
absolutely um not happy if these
dollars are spent on
um notification that went out
October 8th of 24, that there is
no prior um approval needed and
that we would now be paying for
transgender surgeries for
Medicaid provider or patients,
and that would be um pretty
disappointing if we're going to
do that instead of shore up
essential services. Thank you.
Uh, OK. Thank you very much.
We'll go now to Senator
Steinborg, uh, sent of about 45,
chair, committee, thanks for
hearing this bill at this late
hour. Appreciate it. Um, Senate
bill, you ready for me, Mr.
Chair. Apologize. Senate Bill 45
expands the use of what's called
the county Healthcare Assistance
Fund, also known as Inigent
funds.
faded under law, state statute
that allows counties to charge
themselves a little gross
receipts tax, so that they can
raise a pot of money to help out
with healthcare for indigent
people, the law allows counties
to define themselves by
resolution, how they define
indigent. This is all in the
law. Um, what this bill does,
Mr. Chair and committee as it
expands the use by law we
authorize a set of permitted
uses for this fund that again,
counties can voluntarily, if
they choose to do so, help
people with what this bill does,
it expands the use to include
healthcare premiums for both
insurance products and public
programs. And, uh, there was an
amendment added earlier, it
started with just insurance
premiums and then we did an
amendment to add public programs
just because of what's happening
right now with Medicaid, the
high
Risk insurance pool, there's
some public programs that you
could leverage, um, that we
didn't wanna, we didn't wanna
leave it to just basically
private insurance products. So
that's what the bill does. Um,
I, I, you know, I want to uh add
to it that 32 of 33 counties
have an indigent fund.
Berlio County is the one
exception because they charge
themselves a mill levy, also
done under law.
And so all counties have this,
and so this is just another tool
for counties if they choose to
do so.
It's their choice. I'm, um, Mr.
Chair, I hopefully have on the
phone Jamie Michael, who's our
health and human services
director for Donana County. He's
very excited about the bill in
our county, it raises about $9
million a year, this fund, and
they have available funds to do
more with and help more people
and we know now with the working
poor, which really this would
help, that they're struggling
with a lot of bills and um this
can produce a healthier
population. So that Mr. Chair, I
will stand for questions. OK.
Thank you very much, Senator.
Anybody here who would like to
speak on Senate Bill 45.
As amended, I guess.
Um
OK. Is there anybody online?
I see, uh, OK, um.
We'll go, uh, first, let's go to
just Miss. Michael, uh, just to
speak in support of the bill.
And then um we'll go to uh
Arrica Sanchez.
Good evening, Mr. Chair. Good
evening, Mr. Chair, members of
the committee. My name is Jamie
Michael. I am the director of
the Health and Human Services
Department for Donana County. We
administer the healthcare
assistance program or the
indigent um program for our
county, um, and as the senator
said, this is not additional
taxes or additional money, and
it is not a mandate for
counties. It's just going to
give us more flexibility so we
can use the existing funds in a
different
way if the county chooses, um,
right now in our county, we have
a
program with the program.
I know it's this will expand
what people, this will expand
how we can cover people instead
of just limited healthcare
services. This will give them um
access to comprehensive care.
Great. Thank you very much. OK,
next we're gonna go to Arica
Sanchez.
Mr. Chair members of the
committee. My name is Erica
Sanchez with New Mexico Center
on Law and Poverty. We support
Senate Bill 45 counties provide
an important safety net for New
Mexicans who face the greatest
barriers in accessing
healthcare, and this bill gives
counties the option of some
additional flexibility in
administering their county
healthcare assistance funds, and
it's meeting a need identified
by patients in counties while
offering an option to.
leverage indigent funds to have
an even greater impact. We hope
that you will vote in favor of
this bill. Thank you. Great.
Thank you very much.
Finally, we're going to conclude
with Nat Dean.
Thank you, Mr. Chair, members of
the committee, apologies for the
quality of my voice. Thank you
for such hard work during the 60
day session, we're in the home
stretch now. I am a support of
this bill because indigent
health uh health fund resources
have been very helpful.
For individuals who I'm, I have
and family that I have had the
privilege to try to help
navigate some very difficult
times, mainly to have cremation
of their deceased loved one,
where they could not afford it,
where they could have the
cremation for $300 and then have
the ashes and then they can
conduct their own uh faith
practice ceremonies after that,
but that was so important at the
end of life, and also for
individuals who did not have any
way to get dental care expensive
dental care taken care of and
we're able to secure that at La
Familia Dental Clinic in Santa
Fe. So this really makes a
difference. Thank you so much.
And again, thank you for uh
productive long, difficult,
challenging, but ultimately
collaborative session this year.
Thank you.
OK, that concludes public
comments. Are there any
questions from the committee?
said Duncan, please.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Um,
Senator, can you tell me, um, as
a county, former county
commissioner, you know, we work
closely with the, the indigent
hospital in our county, and I'm
just, uh, I'm trying to figure
out in the bill, it talks about
um.
The
Indigent patient insured.
And I'm, I'm trying to figure
out, I don't, I don't know that
we had too many indigents that
had insurance of any time, so
could you help me out with that?
Yeah, uh, Mr. Chair, would you?
kind of refer to me to what
you're referring to, um, page 2.
Uh, Lane 5.
4 or 5.
So, sorry, so you're, you're
asking about the insurance that
we're, that we're proposing to
be able to allow the county to
buy them? Is that what you're
asking,
and senator, I just wondered is
and, and I don't understand it,
so my question might be totally
off, um, but, but I haven't seen
too many uh indigent folks walk
in the hospital that had any
type of insurance at all. And,
and so are we going to then say
that the county could purchase
insurance for indigents?
OK, so Mister, Mr. Chair, excuse
me, no, the insurance would be
purchased by the county for the
person. That's really what this
bill does. Right now, the
current law actually allows to
pay for ambulatory care or
emergency care, which is super
expensive, expensive, that's
about the most expensive thing
you can do. This would be a lot
more affordable rather than pay
thousands of dollars for
someone's bill, you could
actually get a policy for
literally a few $100 a month
through the exchange, so.
It's a smarter way to use the
money.
Thanks, Senator. Thank you.
Great. Thank you very much. Uh,
next we have Representative.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Thank you,
Senator Steinborn.
So will this bill lead to
increased financial strain on
rural counties with limited
resources.
So Mister, uh, chair
representative, the answer is
no, because this does not, this
is not a mandate, this doesn't,
um, direct anything, it just
creates an option, additional
option for what a county could
choose to do with their ingen
fund, totally at their
discretion.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. And then
all the counties, how do we make
sure that the money is spread
out equitably between all the
counties. Mr. Chair
Representative, it's the same
answer. It's, it's really these
are county programs at their
core. And um they're managed by
the county like our Health and
Human Services director, they
determine the eligibility. They
determine how they equitably
give it out and what kind of,
you know, um, validation people
have to submit in order to get
that assistance, so it's all
locally driven.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Last
question, as far as, as this
indigent fund, this fund we're
talking about.
Is the is counties gonna have
to, are they gonna have to hire
personnel to oversee this
program to do some of the, they
have to hire people.
Uh, Mr. Chair, Representative,
no, I mean, cuz they're already
doing it. Basically, every
county in New Mexico has this
program already, so they're
already doing it.
Thank you Mr. Chair. Thank you,
Senator.
OK, um, representative, uh, uh,
brown and then.
Mr. Chairman, Senator Steinborn,
um,
This is a, maybe a really
strange question, but why would
not an indigent be able to get a
really good question. Um, this
because Medicaid, Medicaid
people already covered for
Medicaid. So what this is really
helpful for is a population that
makes a little too much for
Medicaid, that is still
considered the working poor.
Makes poverty level wages, but
doesn't qualify for Medicaid.
Thank you, uh, I know we're
we're about to wrap up entrera,
did you want to make the motion?
OK, sorry, send it then.
Uh, thank you, thank you,
Senator, and I know that our
hospital, I, I know when they
come in for emergency care
without insurance, the first
thing they do is try to qualify
them for Medicaid, that's what
they've done, and I know our
county has given all of this fun
to the hospital, the, the one
hospital we have. So what we,
what we have lacked though, is
any access to dental care at
all, which is a huge problem,
uh, for, for many people, uh,
and very expensive, and
I think, I think this
legislation will go a long way,
so I just wanted to say I
appreciate you bringing that
party.
Great. Thank you very much for
We're, uh, we'll go to
Representative Silva for the
motion, Reverera for the 2nd.
Uh, I want to move that Senate
Bill 45 as amended to pass.
OK, there's a motion from Silva,
2 from Representative Herera. Is
there any opposition to that
motion?
OK, please show Brown, represent
Vincent and represent Pettigrew.
Thank you very much, Senator.
OK. Uh, we're gonna go to uh
Representative Dixon for um
Let's go, uh, we're gonna start
with Senate Bill 37 as amended.
OK.
Go ahead. Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Um, I am here today to uh
present Senate Bill 37, which
proposes amendments to the
existing strategic water
reserve, um, which is a program,
uh, administered by the
Interstate Stream Commission.
Um, there are this, uh,
This program has been in
operation for 20 years, and what
this bill does is it makes 3
amendments to the program
itself, and I'll be very brief.
The first is that it makes the
fund non-reverting. The reason
is, it is very difficult to
complete a water transaction in
one year.
So there's not enough time to
spend the money, which is why it
needs to be non-reverting.
There's a cap set of $15 million
which means that the fund cannot
just continue to grow.
Anything above 15 million goes
back to the general fund. That's
a, a good um accountability uh
measure for the legislature.
The second thing that it does is
it adds a third purpose, um, to
the strategic water reserve.
Currently there are 2 purposes,
um, and this adds the third
purpose to benefit aquifer
recharge.
Um
The 3rd item in this bill, the
3rd change that we are proposing
is to allow the interstate
stream commission to consider
supplementary benefits when
they're prioritizing funding.
So there are currently 2,
reasons that the money can that
you can um use the funds in the
strategic water reserve, um,
they are, sorry, I just wanna
make sure I say them correctly.
Um, if, um,
Actually, do you want to explain
that?
No problem, Mr. Chairman,
members of the committee, the
two existing purposes are for
compact compliance for existing
river compacts and to address
endangered species or the
prevention of future listings of
species.
And so, thank you, Mr. Chair. So
we've got those two existing
reasons, then if you add in
aquifer recharge, then what
we're doing is saying if there's
a supplementary benefit for
cultural reasons or recreational
reasons that can be an
additional sort of bonus point.
When the uh Interstate stream
commission is making funding
allocations. And so I think with
that, Mr. Chair, we'll stand for
questions.
Uh, great. Thank you very much,
uh, and can you introduce your
expert for us, please? Or the
yeah. Thank you, Mr. Chair,
members of the committee. My
name is Angeli Bean. I'm a
senior policy advisor for
Healthy Rivers at Western
Resource Advocates.
Great, thank you very much. OK,
uh, anybody who wants to speak
uh in support or I guess
opposition to Senate Bill 37 as
amended.
Great, come on down.
Thank you, Mr. Chair and
committee, Christina Fisher,
Associate Director of Think New
Mexico, uh, given the late hour
I'm speaking on behalf of a very
large coalition in support of
this bill that includes New
Mexico Wild Conservation voters,
Amigos Bravos, American Rivers,
Environmental Defense Fund and
the Sierra Club Rio Grande
chapter, um, 20 years ago, I
think New Mexico worked with a
very broad coalition to develop
and enact the original
legislation creating the
strategic water reserve. Since
then, it has proved to be a very
effective water management tool
that the ISC has effectively
used to keep more
water in our rivers for compact
and endangered species, this
bill would improve it in several
ways, and we encourage you to
support it.
Great. Thank you.
The chair members of this
committee, my name is Carlos
Matutes. I'm the state director
for Green Latinos. We urge you
to vote to pass on Senate Bill
37. Thank you very much.
Thank you. Uh, we're gonna go
online to Marla Schultz.
Mr. Chairman, members of the
committee, Marla Schulz
registered lobbyist for
Albuquerque, Bernao County Water
Utility Authority. We support
Senate Bill 37. We believe it
will provide additional
resources for interstate compact
compliance. It will assist with
environmental regulatory
compliance and will support
Aquifer recharge and reduced
groundwater depletions. Thank
you.
Great, thank you very much.
OK, that concludes public
comment, uh, go to the
committee. Are there any que uh
yes, please, ranking member
Chatfield, please.
Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Um, got a few questions.
If, uh, if you can't answer him,
it's OK. Uh,
First question, is there any
money in House Bill 2 for this?
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Thank you,
Representative. There is no
money in the House Bill 2
because there is no
appropriation, but we are
dealing with the fund.
OK.
Uh,
Mr. Chair.
Uh, on page 2, what are storage,
right?
And what are their value?
What is their value?
Mr. Chair, members of the
committee.
I can't say for certain, but my
understanding of storage rights
would be, um, for instance, San
Juan Chama Project water that is
stored in Abike Dam. I think
that would be counted as a
storage, right? That is contract
water stored.
So
Mr. Cherry doesn't say to
purchase stored water. It says
to purchase stor storage rights.
Mr. Chair, Representative
Chatfield, in that scenario, I
do think you would have to enter
into an agreement with whoever
is managing that.
dam in order to actually store
that water, so I believe it
would be that transaction. Thank
you, Mr. Chair. Thank you. Yeah,
Adam,
uh,
so the, it says the water would
be purchased at the appraised
market value. So water has a
different market value in
different areas, and I
understand quite clearly that
you would, it would be appraised
that where it comes from, but it
would be available for a variety
of uses. It would be available
now if you
use the ancillary uses, it might
be available for, for endangered
species.
Or
Uh, recreation.
Or possibly, I don't, if you
bought it from a city, it would
be, uh, at the price of, which
is probably not gonna happen,
but it could be drinking water
or?
Or
Agricultural water which use do
you value that?
Mr. Chair Representative
Chatfield, my understanding is
that the appraisal, which is
done by the Interstate Stream
Commission would be for the
purpose for which it is being
acquired within the.
Mr. Chair, Miss uh
Representative. Um, so if the
purpose is for endangered
species, then that would be the
determining factor for the fair
market value if it's for aquifer
recharge, um, and remember, it
has to be one of those 3 primary
purposes that uh comp uh compact
water compact, uh, endangered
species or aquifer recharge.
So
Um, let's talk about aquifer
recharge a little bit. The
bottom of the river is the
straw.
It draws all moisture out of the
banks and the uplets.
So you can never recharge from
the bottom of a river.
Because that is where the
In other words, the water level
on either side of the river is
never higher than the bottom of
a river.
So how would we see aquifer
recharge.
This surface water.
Mr. Chair Representative
Chatfield.
That new purpose. I do want to
be clear, does allow for ground
general groundwater acquisitions
as well. It is not just that
surface water, so we could see
aquifer recharge through aquifer
through groundwater acquisitions
in respect to acquiring surface
water for in-stream recharge.
There are sections of streams
that are losing reaches that do
in fact lose water into the
aquifer from the stream bed. And
we do think that in particularly
in small upland streams, this
could have a real measure.
benefit.
So this also allows for the
purchase of
Of groundwater.
Mr. Chara president of
Chatfield, yes.
OK. Um, it says that you may not
condemn water rights.
But you may condemn real
property.
We conveying our infrastructure.
Is this a new right or is this
an existing right?
Mr. Chair Representative
Chatfield, that is an existing
statute, so that does not
change.
Thank you.
Uh
It also says,
On page 5.
That uh it this water may not be
used to directly infiltrate
groundwater.
In other words, it has to come
directly through the bottom of
the stream, which we just
discussed is almost impossible.
It's not impossible. There,
there's probably some extreme
bread's dry, then it's gonna
build up to the height of the
bottom of the stream.
Uh
Why is it not OK to use it to
recharge groundwater.
Mr. Chair Representative in our
lengthy stakeholder outreach as
part of the drafting of this
bill, there was significant
concern about whether the
strategic water reserve was the
correct place to do more
traditional aquifer storage and
recovery projects such as taking
surface water and injecting it
directly into an aquifer. I
think that's an important thing
that the state should be
considering, how to explore, but
we didn't feel due to our
stakeholder outreach, there was
concern about how that might
impact stream flows.
Themselves and the original
purpose of the strategic water
reserve was to improve stream
flows. The reason for my
question is I don't think it's a
bad idea sometimes in certain
instances.
Um
So it can be used for
Habitat improvement.
In the auxiliary uses
recreational. Can you give me an
example?
Um, Mr. Chair Representative,
that could be anything from
boating to fishing to swimming,
anything that is an in-stream
use of water.
Um
Next, next question. So you may
not sell that water.
To the United States government.
And my question is this, can the
United States government own
Water.
Rights in New Mexico.
Mr. Chair Representative, I'll
make it easy on you. The answer
is no, OK? Uh, it's been tried
in court a couple of times. Um,
There's the ability to
to
These auxiliary uses, will this
increase the streams that are
available. Will this include
reaching out to other streams.
Right now, there's uh only a few
streams where we can use this
funding. So,
Uh, when you start talking about
An auxiliary use plus one, does
that mean we're gonna try to
Get water off of a lot more
streams in New Mexico.
Mr. Chair Representative, the
Interstate stream commission
itself goes through an annual
prioritization process for
dedicating those priority
basins so they can add and
remove basins.
as they see fit, they do have
fairly lengthy stakeholder
requirements to ensure that
those basins are, are correct,
but this bill doesn't change
that.
Right now there are only uh
can do it for environmental
issues or for in-stream flow.
That only exists on the Rio
Grande and on the Canadian below
you dam.
So these auxiliary uses would
that possibly increase the
number of streams available.
Um, Mr. Chair, um, and
Representative, but um, the
auxiliary only comes into effect
after the primary. So the, so
you have to first meet.
Uh, one of the three primary
objectives would remain on the
same. It would still be the same
streams that we're talking
about.
Mr. Chair representative.
I think they're in current
statute, there is a future
scenario where those basins
increase, so I wouldn't want to
say that, um, this, and
currently the strategic water
reserve is also used on the San
Juan and the Pecos, and those
are currently priorities and I
intendipate will remain strong
priorities, but the, the
interstate stream commission
does have the ability to expand
those and. Oh, I think it only
applies to um a uh
It's Interstate delivery of
water.
Or an endangered species. Is
that true?
Mr. Chair Representative or the,
the prevention of fuser listing
of species, yes.
And so which rivers currently
have that.
Mr. Chair, I don't know that I
have a comprehensive list of
that in front of me. I
apologize. Uh, I thank you, Mr.
Chair. Good answers. I was
expecting the state engineer and
uh you've done a very good job
of filling in. I thank you.
Thank you very much for uh
ranking member Chatfield. We're
gonna go next for Duncan, then
Petre.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Uh, just
one question for you, uh,
Representative.
Um
H 6 line 10.
You explain to me what sporting
traditional or and cultural
practices is.
Mr. Chair Representative, I
think that could be a broad
supplementary benefit. It could
include tribal uses, religious
uses of water. It could be for
Asia is another small water
users, um, any, any sort of
water use that has cultural
impact and benefit.
Thank you, Mr. Chair, I
I
I guess I wanted a little bit.
I wanted to drill down a little
bit further because putting it
in another ditch, I don't care
if you call it in the here or
whatever you wanna call it.
My ditch is a ditch and and uh I
feel the same way about my diss
that in the year, a farm runner
and does.
So I was wondering it.
Can you drill down a little bit
farther and tell me what those
might be.
Do you want to make, Mr. Chair
Representative.
Any of these supplementary
benefits do still have to be in
stream benefits, so this is not
pulling water out of the stream,
it would be anything that as the
water went downstream for
endangered species or compact
compliance if it had an
additional benefit such as
keeping the stream wet longer so
that our agricultural community
can continue to divert their own
water, if that is tribal use for
their religious purposes in
stream at the right time, if
that's fishing or any sort of
other um
Supplementary benefit, but it
would have to remain in stream.
It would not be diverted out.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. I'll ask
my fellow representative from
San Juan County if there's a
cultural practice on the river
that I'm not aware of. Thank
you.
Thank you very much
Representative Duncan. We're
gonna go, uh, next to uh
Representative Pettigrew.
Thank you, Chairman, thank you,
uh, representing or co-chair.
Do this. I had the opportunity
to hear this bill in House Ag
and
The same issues continued to
exist. I, I have.
Concerns with
Even having a thought process
that asks the infiltration is
really gonna help us strategic
water reserve, adding those.
Comments in there, um, the on
page 5, section 3 chair and, and
representative have no concerns
with that. I have concerns with
other parts of the bill.
That we spend more time on
probably on the floor.
Um, the
For the, for the very same
reasons that.
Someone in depth on and how I I
still can't support this
legislation.
Thank you.
Uh, thank you very much for
representing Peig group. Uh,
next, we'll go to represent.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Thank you,
Representative. Just a couple of
questions. Could this have an
impact on private water rights.
Mr. Chair Representative.
In that private water rights
holders voluntarily can choose
to participate in this program.
Yes, but there is no mandatory.
Thank you, Mr. Chair, and
So just increasing state
involvement.
To that
Drive up
Prices so that, you know,
indigenous or
Farmers or ranchers, maybe get
priced out of water rights.
Mr. Chair Representative.
The Interstate stream commission
is required to go through a very
rigorous, um, appraisal process
to ensure they are in fact not
allowed to purchase water beyond
the fair market value.
So that is, that is a limitation
to this program.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Thank you,
Representative.
Thank you very much for
representing Vincent.
Uh, Representative Brown, no,
that's great. I appreciate
everybody keeping
that's why more than 2 pairs of
eyesentative Brown, please.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman and
Representative Dixon. Well, um,
So what I'm seeing here is that
um this is an expansion of the
Scope of work of the Interstate
streams commission, would that
be accurate?
Mr. Chair Representative, this
is of course an existing
program, but it does allow
additional flexibility for how
those funds are used.
So Mr. Chair and and panel, what
I'm reading is it allows the
interstate stream commission to
prioritize water transactions.
So to me that's
That's a, that's a big change, I
think, to actually prioritize or
is it not, Mr. Chair.
Mr. Chair Representative, the
Interstate stream Commission
prioritizes their current
transactions based off of their
priority basins. What this bill
does is it just allows
Acquisitions that serve multiple
benefits beyond the, the, the
purposes, the primary purposes,
excuse me, to have priority when
it makes sense, but it does give
the Interstate stream permission
broad authority to make that
decision.
Mr. Chair and representative and
your expert. So,
Interstate stream Commission, I
I've gone to some meetings where
um
Commissioners have spoken and
what is their internal process.
Or deciding these kinds of
things, and you don't have to go
into great detail, but I imagine
there is a defined process.
Would that be correct, Mr.
Chair, Mr. Chair Representative,
yes, there is a defined process
both in the prioritization
process, and then each
individual transaction is
required to go through approval
through the commission itself.
And then we heard Mr. Chair
earlier this evening that there
is no money in the budget bill
for this, but we're creating a
fund.
Is, is that, did I hear that
right?
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Thank you,
Representatives. So the fund
already exists, and there is
money in the fund already, um,
but the, the key is allowing um
the interstate stream commission
did
Frequently it takes multiple
years to complete the water, the
transaction. And so they need
the non-reverting language.
Mr. Chair, I think my concern
about the bill is it we're
ceding something from the state
of New Mexico to the Interstate
Stream Commission.
And I guess I don't like that.
I'd rather we hold on to that.
Uh, power that we have right
now.
In our existing structure. So,
uh, if you'd like to comment.
Mr. Chair.
Thank you, uh, Mr. Chair and
Representative, I think, you
know, as, as appropriators, that
is something that you we're
always looking at, um,
realistically, um, you know, I
think what we found over the
last 20 years is that it is
frequently not feasible to spend
the money, um.
To to do that transaction in
within a year, and so the state
frequently misses out on
opportunities that could be
really beneficial for the state.
By putting a cap of $15 million
on the fund, that's one way to
ensure that this isn't just um
amassing money uh for the sake
of amassing money, um, and it is
a bit of a check.
Um, on that.
And that process. Mr. Chair,
it's almost a blank check, not
quite, but.
It's a big check.
OK, I don't see any other
questions, um, I wanna, uh,
well, I guess a quick question.
I know we're going late tonight.
My understanding is that the
interstate stream commission
supports the bill and although I
haven't been in a committee with
them before. Is that accurate?
Mr. Chair, absolutely, uh, a
representative from the
Interstate stream Commission has
been at this table for every
other committee. They do
apologize for their inability to
be here this late tonight, but
they are in strong support of
the bill. OK, just wanna ask
that. Uh, OK, uh, in any time
you can impress the ranking
member with knowledge of about
water or is
is
exactly. OK, uh, thank you.
We'll go uh to Representative
Garrett for uh Du pass motion on
Senate bill.
37 is amended. Uh, thank you,
Mr. Chair. I move a do pass for
Senate bill, 37 as amended. OK.
Uh, is there a second
by representana 3 any opposition
to that motion.
OK, uh, please show represent
Pettigrew and represent Vincent
in opposition.
Um
And Representative Chatfield to
explain his.
I'm gonna vote yes on this bill,
you tell her I had a little bit
of tentative uh thoughts about
the various ways it might affect
the state, but the one
overriding factor to anybody
that travels our state, if you
go down the Pecos, you see a lot
of the barras and the old most
senior water rights.
Uh, from the land grants.
They are laying fallow.
Uh, non-use is a curse on these
senior rights because the, the
children grow up, they move away
from home to the city, they're
not there working in the farm or
the ranch, and it, it is
statewide. If we, this gives
them the right to lease that
water right.
To the state.
Or sell it, preferably miss it
and not lose it for non-use, so
all my other
Uh, fears and worries, I'm just
gonna have to set aside.
And know that, that uh families,
historic New Mexico families can
lease their water rights, keep
them in the family, and maybe
the next generation will want to
be able to come back and form.
We, we hope that there's a time
comes when it's, is
Fiscally
Beneficial to really form our
Our smaller acreages.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Great.
Thank you very much, uh, ranking
member Chatfield. OK, uh, uh, we
have that, um, were members, uh,
we, we're meeting again
tomorrow. Tonight was obviously
a long night. Uh, we're gonna go
ahead and roll, uh, Senate Bill
142, um,
But, uh, very much appreciate
everybody's time tonight, uh,
and please take some food for
members in the audience, Mr.
Avila, uh, please feel free to
grab some food if you guys want
any, uh, and of course for our
sergeants and the excellent
staff. Thank you guys. OK, HAFC
