Representative Chatfield,
Representative Dow here.
Representative Duncan.
Representative Garrett.
Yeah.
Representative Hernandez.
Representative Herndon,
Representative Herndon,
Representative Hereta.
Representative He a
Representative Little,
Representative Little,
Representative Lujan, present.
Representative Pettigrew.
Representative Sanchez.
Representative Sareana.
Representative Saraana.
Representative Silva.
Representative Silva,
Representative Vincent.
Vice Chair Dickson.
They're small.
Here.
We have a quorum. Excellent.
Thank you, members. Uh, thank
you all. We're apologies, we had
a joint floor session, uh, some
caucus and other activities.
Appreciate everybody taking
time. First, where I'm pleased
to see Chair McQueen and ranking
member Montoya here. Um, this
is, members, this will be, I
think the 3rd or the 4th that
we've done. This is a
legislative preview, um, Mr.
Chair, Mr. Ranking member,
please come on up. This is the
first time we're doing this.
We want to, um,
Or or the first budget, I guess
that we're doing this, the, the
committee is very committed to
trying to get a different
perspectives, especially from
the committees of expertise,
which is why obviously on a day
you all are here today. Uh, your
choice, Mr. Chair, Mr. ranking
member, how to approach it. This
is pretty wide open. We're
especially interested if you
want to flag legislation that
has a budget nexus.
Uh, also very interested and
want to open it to uh sort of
broader budgetary thoughts about
that connect with the committee,
um expertise that the both of
you bring.
So, uh, members, just a
reminder, we don't, this won't
have any questions here. It's
just an opportunity for equal
time between uh the chair and
the ranking member to share
their perspective. With that, we
would turn it over, uh, Mr.
Chair, Mr. Ranking member to
you, and again, whichever order
that you want to go in. We
budget typically about 3
minutes, uh, if you want to do
less, that's fine. Thank you
very much.
Thank you, Mr. Chair, members of
the committee, um,
Uh, this, this is new for us
too, um, so I appreciate the
opportunity. Um,
You know, we, uh, in policy
committees, if we see a bill
that has an appropriation on it,
the first question we ask is, is
in the budget?
Um, and, you know, in my
experience and I'm in my 11th
year, bills with appropriations
usually die.
Because if it's not in the
budget, it typically doesn't get
in there.
Um, I certainly
We'd like to have more
flexibility there.
Um
Uh, I would also note that
You know, the house is a little
different when it comes to
natural resources, the house,
uh, our committee is House
Energy Environment and Natural
Resources. We also have a house
agriculture.
And water. There we go.
Um, so in the Senate, you know,
Senate conservation deals with
water issues. We deal with water
issues sometimes, um, but not
always. Uh, so one water bill
which is coming our way is the
strategic water supply, um,
which currently has a $75
million price tag.
Um, my
Belief and I've shared this with
uh the interim um uh legisinance
committee once before is
the $75 million price tag. My
first concern is sort of the
opportunity cost.
of that bill.
And I, I look at the other sort
of
isn't really specifically for
any particular bill or any
particular fiscal impact, but
just the general philosophy of
let's make sure our agencies
have what they need, um,
Uh, especially in these times of
plenty.
So.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Thank you
very much, Mr. Chair.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Um, I kind
of figured, uh, that we were
asked to sit on the side of the
table together, so you guys
could take a picture of it and
then all the memes that would go
out and uh
Um,
I, I was thinking that somebody
with AI could get grab this off
of the internet and then the
discussion that we could
potentially have, uh, with that
would be interesting to see.
Um
Mr. Chair, um, and members of
the committee, um, there was the
picture. I knew it was coming.
Um,
Mr. Chair, um, members of the
committee, um, more than
anything, um,
I sat on this committee for the
last 2 years. I sat on
appropriation the last 2 years,
and I, I too do have some
concerns about how uh how the
budget is baked. Um, and
unfortunately, I think uh the
the vast majority of, of
legislators.
Uh, in on both sides.
Uh, have very, very little
direct
Um
Ability to see things
appropriated. Um, I think I've
only sat on this side of the,
this table once in
In 11 years, this is, this is
the 2nd time. Um, one other
time, uh, the last, the previous
time that I was on this side of
the table, I was uh presenting
the budget for Lieutenant
Governor's office, uh, in 2011.
So,
If, if I were to, to, to just
bring up a point.
I, I would love to see the
process.
Become a little bit more.
User friendly for the rest of
the legislators who don't sit on
this committee or don't sit on
LFC.
Um, I, I think that's a big
point. And in part, um, that,
that's one half of what I'm
wanting to say. The second half
is, um, I, I did present a
memorial, uh, on oil and gas
day, and I, and I just want to
remind everybody in here again,
the appropriators.
That, uh, about 2/3, I mean, we,
we talked about 49% of the of
the general fund is uh comes
from oil and gas.
But the reality is we're talking
about 2/3 of all taxes paid in
New Mexico, when you're talking
about the sizes of what goes to
the general fund.
What goes to the uh severance
tax permanent fund.
What goes to early childhood
trust fund. We have several
other funds that we've created
as well, but what goes to local
communities and taxes, uh, then
we're talking GRT payroll taxes,
we're talking.
Oil and gas in New Mexico is
Responsible for over 2/3 of all
the taxable dollars in New
Mexico.
I think that we need to let that
sink in.
We need to be careful.
That we don't
Kill the golden goose. Doesn't
mean the golden goose doesn't
need to be regulated.
But we need to be sure that we
don't kill the golden goose,
because for as much as we've
talked about,
Uh, diversifying the economy.
Diversifying is one thing.
But
Eliminating and replacing
2/3 of all taxes in New Mexico
is just not doable.
So, um, I, I would just, once
again, just suggest that we
Uh, be very careful in that, and
I, I appreciate the time. Maybe
in the future I'll be on this
side of the table advocating for
a bill, but we'll see.
Thank you Mr. Chair. Excellent.
Thank you very much, Mr. Chair.
Thank you, Mr. Ranking member.
Um, these are part of uh our
extension into welcoming other
voices here. I think we're all
very proud of doing. um, so
thank you both for being taking
time today.
Great, OK, members, uh, next,
we're gonna go to our budget and
accountability hearing. This is
uh an update on emergency
appropriations, as well as major
investments in energy and
natural resources. Um, thank you
very much, Mr. Austin. We'll go
ahead and get started, uh,
whenever you're ready.
Uh, thank you, Mr. Chair,
members of the committee, good
afternoon. I'd like the chair
said, my name is Austin
Davidson, I'm the natural
resource analyst for the
Legislative Finance Committee,
the packet we're going to be
going over today, looks like
this, I believe that support
staff has passed it out.
I'll give you a moment to look
for it.
OK, let's, let's hold on for a
sec. I've got it here on mine.
Do we, does everybody, it's
gonna be a
3 page
If you don't have it
it should be in your books, uh,
right behind agency codes
behind tab number 5.
I
There we go. Yeah, behind 5:21.
Perfect.
Thank you staff for bearing with
us. I'm always amazed at how
staff
can get all of these papers in
here ordered perfectly which we
deeply appreciate.
Does everybody have it? OK,
great.
There we go, Mr. Davidson, take
us away. Mr. Chair, members of
the committee, apologies for the
commotion, uh, if you look at
the first page of the handout
that's before you, you'll see a
graph that charts the last 10
years of budget growth for the
cumulative natural resource
agencies, specifically the
energy, minerals and natural
resources department, the Office
of the State Engineer, and then
the New Mexico Environment
Department. The legislature has
grown, these natural resource
agencies cumulatively.
By 123.8% over 10 years, putting
a number to that, that's gonna
be $59.8 million. Now for each
of those different agencies,
starting with the energy,
minerals and natural resources
department, the
budget for them has grown by
19.6 million, or 93% over 10
years for the Office of the
State Engineer, it's grown by
18.5 million or 118% and then
for the energy and then for the
New Mexico Environment
Department, it's grown by 21.7
million or 188%. So I think
those numbers, I think, give a
good picture of what the
legislature has invested into
each of these agencies and how
those budgets have grown over
the past 10 years. And if you
look at that graph,
You'll also see that the
majority of that growth has
happened in the past 5 years
from F420 to FY 25.
Now moving on to the next part
of the presentation, Mr. Chair,
members of the committee, I'll
be going over some of the
highlights for the recurring
increases that the LFC
recommendation includes for
these agencies, for the energy,
minerals and natural resources
department, there's a 2.3
million or 5.6% increase with
the prioritization of 1.2
million for the state's hotshot
crews, uh, for the New Mexico
Environment Department, the New
Mexico Environment Department
requested a flat
fund budget for FY 26, but also
requested the movement of funds
from each of its divisions to
create a new compliance and
enforcement division. Uh, the
Secretary of the Environment,
James Kenney and I gave a
presentation to the legislature
in the early winter that went
over what the compliance and
enforcement division intends to
do. And a good example of that
would be the air quality bureau,
where currently the Air Quality
Bureau does the permitting and
the enforcement of those
permits, and then with the
creation of the compliance and.
Enforcement division, those two
operations will be separated to
where the air quality bureau
will process the permits or the
compliance and enforcement
division will be regulating and
enforcing.
Those permits, and also when we
get into the budget discussion
for the environment department.
I'm sure that the secretary can
also fill in more details
regarding the new compliance and
enforcement division.
Moving lastly to the office of
the state engineer, the LLC
recommendation increases their
general fund by 1.2 million or
3.4%.
Journey to the 2nd page, Mr.
Chair, members of the committee.
You'll also see on that
left-hand side, two graphs that
give a good breakdown of how
much the different revenue
sources fund the agency
operations for our natural
resource agencies. You'll see
for Enerd in the blue, it's
going to be the general fund,
that's how much is comprised
there in the gray, it's going to
be federal funds in the yellow
is the other state funds, and I
think those graphs give a good
example of how those different
pockets of revenue have grown.
and how much the state funds for
those different agencies.
Now moving on to the
non-recurring side, Mr. Chair,
members of the committee, uh,
the LFC recommendation just to
give some key uh highlights
gives the New Mexico Environment
Department, 3 million for bridge
funds for the compliance and
enforcement division.
Uh, it gives 2.75 million for
the water regionalization
support and 2 million to address
PAS contamination in Curry
County, moving to the energy,
minerals and natural resources
on recurring appropriation
recommendations, the highlights
would be 8 million for the land
and water conservation fund, 10
million for expanding outdoor
recreation and trails, and then
12 million related to the new
wildfire preparedness fund,
which is contingent on passage.
House Bill 191. And then finally
for the office of the State
Engineer, the LLC recommendation
gives 20 million for Indian
water rights litigation, and
then 3 million for Pico's uh
settlement compliance. Mr. Chair
and members of the committee,
the next portion of the packet
goes over some highlights of
previous non-recurring
appropriations that the
legislature is given to these
natural resource agencies.
Specifically for the office of
the state engineer for the 3 FY
25 non-recurring appropriations,
those balances are still
complete, meaning that those
projects haven't begun
implementation yet, regarding
the 27.5 million appropriated in
FY 24, the 10 million related to
critical dam maintenance has
been fully expended, 76% of the
7.5 million for the strategic
water reserve has been expended
and then
53% of the 10 million for river
channel maintenance has been
expended, going on to the
energy, minerals and natural
resources, non-recurring
appropriations. The 7 FY 25
non-recurring, also have not
been fully implemented yet,
leaving full balances for the 3
FY 24 non-recurring
appropriations. One of them has
been fully expended and then 81%
of the 7.5 million to state
forestry or replacing fire
engines and vehicles.
Has been expended. Moving to the
3rd page, uh, Mr. Chair, members
of the committee, uh, the, uh,
ending this kind of overview of
the different recurrent
appropriations, non-recurring
appropriations. The majority of
NMEDs for FY 25 non-recurring
appropriations are unexpended,
of note 11% of the 7 million for
development of the state surface
water and groundwater permitting
program has been expended. Mr.
Chair, members of the committee,
the final portion of this goes
over the special session funds
that the legislature gave for
different projects related to
recovery for the uh Riodoso
fires, specifically of the 70
million that was appropriated to
DFA for projects. There were 2
that were highlighted, 26 who
Lincoln County for a road and
river damage, and then 44
million to the village of
Riidoso to repair road and
bridge damage, and Mr. Chair,
members of the committee,
important with these projects is
that the state.
Is giving, giving the funds to
these projects, and then they
will be federally reimbursed.
do those projects and then the
state will receive those federal
reimbursements. And with that,
Mr. Chair, I'll stand for
questions. Excellent. Thank you
very much, members. This is just
an overview. It gives us a good
snapshot, uh, and it's great for
the agencies. We're gonna go
right into our agencies now. Um,
uh, otherwise, if we, this can
take up all of our time just
sort of on this piece, and many
of the questions as we found out
the first time, we're gonna
involve our agencies in this way
they're there to answer them.
So, uh, Madam Secretary
Kenderine.
Thank you for being here. We'll
invite you up.
Um
Um, great to see, uh, Mr.
Shelton.
And
Uh, Mr. Jessup, do we have
Maybe we, uh, can we ask the
committee to bring in another
chair?
OK.
Maybe not.
We'll see. Great, uh, Mr. David,
so, uh, which uh are we on here?
521 Mr. Chair, members of the
committee, it'll be behind tab
5, the agency code is 521.
Uh, joining up here for our
discussion of the energy
minerals and Natural Resources
department secretary, uh,
Melanie Kenderine and also
joining me is Matthew Lovato of
Energy, Minerals and Natural
Resources and my DFA counterpart
SJ.
Uh, Mr. Chair, members of the
committee, the LFC and the
executive recommendations
increased the federal and fund
balance of the agency, the LFC
recommendation placed the land
of enchantment Legacy Fund
revenue in the agency's other
revenue category, while the
executive placed it in the
agency's other transfers
category. The executive
recommendation increases the
agency's general fund revenue by
approximately 3.9 million, or
9.8%, while the LFC
recommendation increases the
general fund revenue by 2.3 or
5.6%. Both the LFC and the
executive recommendations on the
agency's requested 9 FTE
increase, excuse me, the
executive recommendation is
30,000 higher in the agency's
total personnel budget,
367.2,000 higher in its
contracts budget.
The largest difference stems
from the executive's
recommendation increased uh
state parks other budget for
park maintenance and let's just
pause right there. We're on page
4.
So we have a few different pages
here.
Energy and minerals turn to page
4.
We
Yeah. Apologies, Mr. Chair, I
can go over it again if you
would like to. No, I think we're
good. We're just wanting to
make.
The
Great
OK. 1 and 4.
Mr. Chair, going back to page 4,
I apologize committee. I'll make
sure to keep the page numbers in
mind as well, um, both the uh
LOC recommendation and the
executive recommendation funded
those 9 FTE and like I was
saying, the largest increase is
that the executive
recommendation increased the
agency's state parks other
budget, while the LFC
recommendation takes into
account the new uh park fee
increases that were instituted
January 2025. The LFC and the
executive reached.
consensus on all of the
performance measures for the
agency, and I turn it over to my
DFA counterpart to go over the
energy conservation and
management division.
Um, the executive recommendation
for the energy conservation and
management division is a
$366,000 general fund increase,
um, sorry, $167,000 general fund
increase or 6% and the LFC
recommendation is 366,000 or 13%
onto the base, the LFC
recommendation increases
personnel costs or state match
federal funding, and the
executive recommend
ation is $200,000 lower than the
LFC in personnel recommendation.
Both recommendations support the
agency's requested increase in
contracts and other and other
budgets, and both
recommendations support the
agency's requested 7 FTE
increase in this division.
SJ, uh, Mr. Chair, members of
the committee, you're gonna now
be turning to, I believe, page
6. It's going to be the healthy
forests, uh, division of Mnerrd,
their P code is 741.
Uh, the LFC in the executive
recommendations increased the
federal revenue and decrease the
agency's fund balance, the LFC
recommendation budgeted the Land
of enchantment Legacy Fund
revenues in the agencies's other
revenue category, while the
executive recommendation
budgeted them in the other
transfers category. So the same
amount of funding going to the
agency just in different areas.
Uh, the LFC recommendation
increased general fund revenue
by 1.2 million or 14.5%.
While the executive increased it
by 858.3,000 or 10%. Both the
LFC and the executive
recommendations, uh, recommended
flat personnel budgets for uh
state forestry, the LLC
recommended recommendation
increased the contracts by 1.2
million for equipment and
software updates, rent, and fire
engine maintenance related to
the state's two hotshot crews,
uh, the executive recommendation
almost mirrored the LLC's
request with just a difference
in the amount.
I'll turn it over to SJ to go
over state parks.
Thank you, Austin. Um, in State
Parks, the LFC recommendation
was flat, due again to as Austin
mentioned, the fee increases and
the executive recommendation is
$1.8 million or a 14% increase,
uh, we're equal in all of the
other revenue recommendations.
For the base, the difference
between the two recommendations
is due to the executive
recommendations increased others
and contract budget for park
maintenance and internet fees,
which the LLC did not include in
its recommendation again because
he's
Increased part fees were
instituted January of this year.
Which are projected to increase
park revenue by up to $5 million
and both the LSC and the
executive recommendation support
the requested increase of 6 FTE.
Mr. Chair and members of the
committee now turning to the
mind reclamation program that's
gonna be P code 743, um, for the
mine reclamation program, both
recommendations kept other
transfers flat, increased
federal revenues and decreased
other revenues and fund balance.
The executive recommended
65.2,000 more in the general
fund, uh, than the LFC's
recommendation.
Both recommendations increased
uh the requested increases in
contractual and other budgets
for fuel, travel, and IT
expenses, the executive
recommended increased personnel
budget for the coal and hard
rock mining programs, the LFC
recommendation increased the
personal budget for the hard
rock mining program due to that
program not receiving federal
funding. I'll not turn it over
to SJ to go over the oil and gas
conservation division.
Thank you, Mr. Chair, members of
the committee for the Oil
Conservation division, both
recommendations increased
federal revenue and fund
balances and decreased other
revenues, the executive
recommendation increased
revenue, general fund revenues
by 399.9,000 or 3.8%, which was
not included in the LFC
recommendation, which keeps the
division's general fund revenue
flat.
Both recommendations increase
contracts.
Budget for equipment costs, uh,
and the executive recommendation
increases personnel costs to
address recruitment and
retention issues at the
division, which was not included
in the LSC recommendation. Thank
you.
Mr. Chair, members of the
committee, the final division of
the Energy, Minerals and Natural
Resources Department, their
program leadership and support
division that's going to be P
code 745. It's gonna be your
last different sheet. Uh, the
executive recommendation
increased the program's general
fund revenue by 281.9,000 or
6.3%, while the LFC
recommendation increased it by
221,000 or 4.9. Both
recommendations increased the
contracts.
other budgets for rate IT
expenses, the LFC's
recommendation increased
personnel spending by 141.1,000
or 2.2% recruitment and
retention while the executive
recommendation increased it by
202,000 or 3.1%, both
recommendations support the
requested increase of one FTE
for the program. I'll turn it
over to SG to go over any
performance measures of note for
the agency.
Uh, thank you, Austin. We were
able to reach consensus on all
performance measures, I believe
so.
That's OK. Yeah. Thank you.
Great members of the committee,
if you'd like me to go over any
of the differences between
specials or we can go to
questions as well.
Yes, please do address the
specialists and then Madam
Secretary will go to you.
Uh, Mr. Chair, members of the
committee, it's going to be on
pages 1415, and 16 of your
packets.
LLC versus the executive, um,
non-recurring differences. I
think Mr. Chair, members
Committee of note is that the
LFC and the executive reached,
uh, they both recommended the uh
support for the community energy
block grants, the LFC
recommended 5 million executive
recommended 6 million, the
executive also recommended 10
million for uh delivering
flexible and innovative
financial products, while the
LFC recommendation does not. Mr.
Chair and others.
key difference is the LFC
recommendation does not fund the
requested 20 million or uh
geothermal projects related to
geothermal development, uh, both
recommendations, uh, recommended
8 million for the state
supplemental land conservation
Fund, and, uh, in addition,
other differences would be the
exact the executive
recommendation recommended 2
million for public education
campaigns for wildfires, and
they recommended 5 million for
the Smokey Bear uh upgrade.
and remodeling the LFC
recommendation has 940,000 for
match funds for federal
programs.
And then that last page, page
16, you'll also see the LFC
recommendation has the 12
million for the wildfire
preparedness fund.
Mr. Chair, members of the
committee will now stand for any
questions after turning over to
the secretary, of course, Madam
Secretary, thank you very much
for being here. Please feel free
to introduce members of your
team and take us through your
presentation.
Thank you, and this is Ben
Shelton, uh, he's our acting
deputy secretary in Matthew
Lovato, he knows everything
about the budget. OK, so when,
when you have tough questions,
I'll turn to them, but anyway,
thank you. Good afternoon, Mr.
Chairman and members of the
committee. Thank you for the
opportunity to testify before
you today on Mner's FY 26 budget
request. I would first note that
there is a significant amount of
agreement between the DFA and
LFC funding recommendations.
We appreciate both the LFCs and
DFA's support for critical
programs at em.
These investments include the
ability to manage a robust
portfolio of grants and tax
credits to accelerate the
deployment of clean energy
technologies.
To regulate oil and gas
production as well as coal and
hard rock mining and reclamation
to prepare New Mexico's forests
and communities for the
increasingly frequent and
intense threats of wildfires, as
well as fight fires when they
occur, and to enable New
Mexicans and visitors to
experience all the natural
wonders of our state, our state
has to offer through its 35
beautiful state parks.
The executive budget request and
the LFC recommendation also
align on funding Amner to
execute the state's first of a
kind quadrennial energy review
or the QER, uh, that's modeled
after the QER uh we did at the
federal level when I was in
Washington. The QER will be a
multi-agency effort that will
deliver rigorous data and
technology-driven analysis to
make recommendations for
pragmatic policy strategies to
guide the state's energy future.
These strategies will provide
the legislative and executive
branches with the tools needed
to navigate the energy
transition while strengthening
New Mexico's economy.
New Mexico has significant
conventional and clean energy
resources, and such a review
would serve as a model could
serve as a model for the country
because we have both
conventional and clean energy
resources, and I quite frankly
think regions of the world, uh,
there are many regions around
the world that have a similar
energy mix and um and could
serve as a model for identifying
policies, programs, and the
investments needed to
successfully, cleanly and
affordably manage our energy
resources over the next.
25 years.
As I noted, I appreciate the
work that went into the LFC
recommendations and the many
impactful investments these
would make. However, there are
two critical differences between
the LFC and DFA recommendations
in Emert's operating budget that
I wish to bring to the
committee's attention.
First is funding for the state
forestry division, Smokey Bear
Seedling and inmate work camp
programs, that's very hard to
say. Um, uh, the state forestry
division needs to restore
operational funding for the
Smokey Bear Historical Museum,
Conservation seedling and inmate
work programs. These programs
are entirely funded through
self-generated revenue and do
not impact the general fund.
These programs put funds into
the general fund then receive
funds back.
for operations. This was not the
case in the FY 26 LFC budget and
transferring $381,700 back from
the general fund these programs
is essential for ensuring their
continued operation and
long-term success.
Another area uh in the general
fund, um, I'm operating budget,
sorry, uh, state parks
collection fee service, and
that's for a million dollars for
the last 8 years state parks has
contracted with a vendor to
provide an online reservation
system to collect fees from
state park patrons.
Under the original contract on a
monthly basis, the vendor held
back the revenue collected to
pay for their services and sent
the remaining balance to state
parks with a new RFP and
contract completed this past
year, it was determined by DFA
that the revenues collected by
the vendor over the past 8 years
was not done correctly.
Um, moving forward, state parks
must collect all revenues and
the vendor must submit an
invoice for their services, so
that parts can pay for the
services rendered.
This change in the process where
state parks collects the money
first, then reimburses the
vendor will increase the
division's overall expenditures
by a million dollars to manage
the gross funds received by the
reservation system, the vendor
services, and to pay the
contractor for services
incurred.
This expense of a contracted fee
collection service is critical
for the efficient operation of
state parks.
This reservation system, I think
you all know, collects a total
of over $6.2 million in annual
revenues. It's ongoing
operations is important for
ensuring that these revenues are
collected and used to enhance
park visitors' experience and
their value to the state.
In addition to these deficits in
the operating budget, I wanted
to flag uh some critical areas
of difference in our special
appropriations request and
propose some add-backs that I
believe can make meaningful
contributions to the
department's mission.
First is investing an additional
$20 million in geothermal energy
development.
Last year, the legislature
provided $5 million to our
energy conservation and
management division to jumpstart
the geothermal industry in New
Mexico. The funding supports
subsurface hot rock mapping, it
supports feasibility studies and
early stage project grants and
loans, the industry has
responded over the past year,
Emner has seen significant
interest from geothermal
companies looking to invest in
New Mexico, I spoke to one just
yesterday, so there.
There's a huge interest in
geothermal in the state of New
Mexico.
Importantly, and this is the
reason why, New Mexico currently
ranks ranks 6th in the nation in
geothermal capacity.
The United States DOE's National
Renewable Energy Laboratory has
identified 15 counties in New
Mexico with the most favorable
geothermal potential, and 5
counties already have mapped
hydrothermal sites. Uh, we have
a fact sheet on these counties
and sites. I have it with me and
copies if you want, um, if
you're interested in seeing if
your county uh has high
potential for a geothermal, um,
and as a complete, um,
Uh
Aside from, from my uh
testimony, uh, we were sitting
here waiting. There's another
fact sheet, um, that you all
might be interested in on the
state's 50-year water action
plan, and I just, I was asked to
uh mention that. So there are
fact sheets in the audience, we
would love to share with you.
Now, back to geothermal, a $20
million appropriation could
expand Emert's toolkit to move
more quickly to affordable 24/7
clean geothermal.
to help ensure grid reliability,
promote energy security, enhance
energy independence and
increased private investment in
our state.
In addition to add-backs for
this important program, Iner has
prioritized the following
special appropriations. It's $20
million for the wildfire
prepared fun.
Wildfires and the lack of fire
insurance continue to threaten
the livelihoods in neighborhoods
of many New Mexicans, inner is
seeking a $20 million special
appropriation for the wildfire
Prepared fund this $20 million
would provide two types of home
hardening grants to help
eligible property owners make
necessarily necessary uh
wildfire resistant upgrades. The
funding would enable the
hardening of homes on a
neighborhood scale would support
the reduction of wildfire.
spreading and incentivize
insurers to offer coverage.
This request is contingent on
the passage of SB 33, the
wildfire Prepared Act that was
marked up last week by the
conservation, uh, committee, uh,
9 to 0 vote. Uh, there's a lot
of support for this, um, and
that's uh currently moving
through uh the Senate.
This dollar amount is scaled for
a pilot project primarily
centered in Lincoln County for
obvious reasons, the dollar
amount to scale this program
statewide would need to be
significantly higher.
There's also 250,000 for the
Atteno litigation defense, Inert
is, is seeking this 250,000
appropriation for the oil
conservation division to con to
continue the Atteno litigation
legal defense is appropriation
covers the defense for the
entire executive branch covering
not only our defense at Ener but
also the New Mexico Environment
Department and the Office of the
Governor.
In addition to the two operating
budget add-backs and specials
Inert is seeking to
reauthorizations.
The energy conservation and
management division needs two
reauthorizations in the amounts
of 1.8.
$13,400,000 and $1.705,000 both
extensions are to support
federal matching requirements
for the solar for all grant
through 50 fiscal year 2026, um,
the feds have been slow, slower
than we anticipated in, in
rolling out these dollars so we
would greatly appreciate an
extension of the state matching
funds, in addition, during the
2024 special session, 10 million
was appropriated to the.
Forestry division to support
post-fire mitigation, watershed
restoration, slope
stabilization, erosion control,
and post-fire management in
Ruidoso from damages incurred by
the salt and South Fork fires in
the following floods. The RFP
process to undertake this
extensive work has taken longer
than anticipated. It's
incredibly important for the
village of Ruidoso, and I urge
the committee to authorize these
funds through FY 26. Finally,
Emer is seeking changes to the
budget.
Adjustment request language, um,
in this regard, a recent LFC
rule change that could have
major implications for Emer,
eliminating category transfer
authority and the 5% bar
increase would severely limit
our agency's ability to manage
its budget. I think that we are
not alone, uh, as agencies
having problems with this, uh
this bar provision, um, without
transfer authority, critical
positions may be.
May go unfilled and essential
work could be delayed as Amner
could be forced to simply revert
funds that are badly needed,
albeit in a different budget
category.
For example, the 5% bar increase
authority is especially crucial
for state parks, which is relied
on this authority for the past 2
years to cover rising
operational costs due to
inflation. In FY 26, this
flexibility will be even more
essential as a new state park
reservation system contract will
increase operating expenses by
the estimated million dollars
that I mentioned and the
legislature may add a new state
park to the network as well.
Um, so, so restricting these
budget tools, uh, with this LS
LSC provision would hinder
efficiency and increase
reversions, and we urge the
committee to reject these uh new
LFC rules. Mr. Chair, members of
the committee, again, thank you
for your time and I look forward
to your questions. Thank you.
Thank you very much, Madam
Secretary. We're gonna go
straight to questions, starting
with Representative Pettigrew,
then Representative down.
Thank you, Chairman and thank
you presenters for the
information.
Um
Chairman, I think my first
question is,
For Austin, and it may take some
Some responses from
Cabinet Secretary designee as
well.
We went through increases over
the last 10 years, and the key
hearing issues, Chairman, my
first question.
As others increases.
What percentage of those
occurred in the last 5 years.
Uh, Mr. Chair, members of the
committee, that's a great
question regarding specifically
the energy, minerals and natural
resources department over the
last 5 years. I can do some
quick math to get you that
specific percentage, the
presentation I gave mainly had
that 10 year curve, but I can
get you that 5-year curve as
soon as possible.
Thank you, Chairman and thank
you, Austin for that.
The, the graph looks like we
started increasing at a pretty
decent rate, and
FY 18, but um,
Um
the next main.
point of curvature in there was
around fiscal year 22, so.
Chairman, uh Austin, the next
question.
If you were to
Give me
1000 ft level of this.
How much of those increases.
To each of the departments was
based off of legislative action
versus executive branch.
Mr. Chair Representative, that's
a very good question. Um, I
don't have the information for
that granular breakdown right
now, but I can certainly follow
up with you with a more detailed
breakdown of how over the last 5
years, each of those increases
has gone to each of the
divisions.
Chairman, uh Austin, that's,
that's
Perfect.
I'm, I'm glad, I'd be glad to
have that information in my, my,
my key under my key point in
those questions really.
get to
Is there 112 people that are
making decisions that are
growing, each of these
departments.
Or is there an executive branch.
Either from the department
standpoint from um
Um, rulemaking, public health
orders, executive orders that
are creating the crux of this,
or is it a 50-50 percentage,
what is it? And, and so just
trying to get an understanding
of, you know, as the
appropriating body are we truly
the ones that are creating this
growth.
Yeah, and so we write a bill.
Well, it's
Chairman,
If IR says, well, if you're
gonna do that, it's gonna take 6
new people.
You're gonna create this
department, you're gonna need
this many vehicles. This is the
operation side, this da da da da
da da da.
I just trying to understand the
differences between
So, yeah, any information that
you could give me on that would
be, would be great.
Chairman within that also.
Over that 10 year and that 5
year period, I'd like to see a
breakdown of the employee growth
at the same time.
So understanding, you know, we,
we all know that we've increased
our budget in the last 5 years,
substantially, almost.
Getting very close to double.
Right? So,
2019 south of 6 billion in in
recurring this year, we're
probably most likely be north of
11 billion.
So, um,
With that,
By, by my, my math.
We've grown state employees by
about
37 to 39%.
At the end of the day,
Chairman, I'm curious what the
state's getting out of it.
In other words,
So we've grown government like
this, we've done this. This is a
great example grew one agency
over 10 years by 123.8%.
What's the return on investment
for 2.1 to 2.2 million people.
throwing all that together, just
trying to, trying to get an
individualized picture.
Mr. Chair members Committee,
that's a great question, uh,
representative, uh, I apologize
for maybe my confusing uh
presentation, specifically
Mner's budget increased by 93%
over 10 years. So 19.6 million,
so not that kind of cumulative
123 that all of the budgets
collectively. Thank you. So I
apologize, you know, regards to
the 5 year increase that you
were asking specifically Ener's
budget grew from FY20, which was
22.7 million, and they now sit
in FY 25 at
0.7 million, so close to almost
a doubling of that agency's
budget in the general fund, so
to speak. Thank you.
And, and chairman and, in
Austin, we all know that just in
the last 3 years, we've like
300% increased non-reoccurring
side of our spending as well.
So, I'm just trying to get a big
picture and be able to explain
why we should continue to do
that. And so Chairman.
secretary designee, probably a
question you've never been
asked.
Um
Let's say we're in a budget
crunch.
And
Our state investment council,
uh, we're getting closer and
closer to the end of phase one
of the ETA. We're in a budget
crunch this, this year, OK? I'm
not saying that that's when the
end of the ETA is, but I'm
putting it all down in the year
2025.
And
We're looking from a house
appropriation standpoint of
taking it where we were at a 10+
billion dollars dollar budget
and have to go down to an $8.5
billion dollar budget.
Chairman and Secretary designee.
What would be your self pitch to
me to justify continuing your,
your, your budget increase.
Chairman, I asked this question.
There was a time in my career
when I, um,
Who's vice president over about
110 $115 million a year.
Oh
Revenue budget.
And on the corporate side of
things. And I was required to
walk in with no paperwork and
defend my budget every month.
And
We went through just like
everybody else in 2008, and then
Um,
Other times in our past where
markets just went.
So
We had to change our budget, we
had to be able to defend.
The budget that we asked for.
Knowing that everybody else was
gonna get cut by, by 25%.
Chairman, Secretary designee,
what would be your sales pitch
to, to this body, this that
justifies the increase.
And not a 25% decrease.
Um, Mr. Chairman and
Representative Pettigrew, uh, I
would not make a sales pitch,
OK, I would make a uh a provide
you with a careful analysis of
why we needed uh funds for the
range of activities that we do,
I would note.
That, uh, one of our divisions,
uh, in the last
5 to 4 years has brought in a
billion dollars into the state
of New Mexico, alone in the last
year since I, I've been here for
8 months. We brought in about
$400 million.
Into the state of New Mexico
across a uh a number of our
divisions.
And so we are attracting
significant, significant federal
investment in the state of New
Mexico, and that in turn is
attracting private investment
into the state of New Mexico and
incentivizing a company to come
here and locate and, and just
state parks alone, I just
mentioned uh earlier in my
testimony had brought in $6.2
million in fees alone, uh, last
year or so, so, uh,
We are uh have a budget, um, uh,
it is, it is uh uh based on uh
uh analysis, it's not a sales
pitch, it's what we need to do
to continue to administer the
enormous amount of federal
dollars and an investment uh
investments in New Mexico that
we are bringing into the state.
And so, so, um, uh, that's,
that's what I would say, uh, is,
is justification. Another thing
that I would say, and I
mentioned the QER that we would
be doing, uh, uh, that's the LS
both LFC and DFA recommended
funding for that. Um, we'll do
deep dive analysis.
Of energy systems, policies,
investments, etc. etc. and make
recommendations for the future.
So for the next 25 years or so,
so.
Thank you, Chairman and thank
you for playing along with the
scenario with me. Chairman, I
back.
Uh, thank you very much. Uh
represent Pettigrew, just a
quick announcement. I think
we're gonna, we're falling
behind a little bit here. We
still have 8 or 9 folks on the
list, so I think we're gonna
have to move veteran services,
uh, away from today's hearing.
Unfortunately, but we'll
reschedule as quickly as we can.
We're gonna keep going down the
list going next to
Representative Doll, please.
Thank you, Mr. Chair and thank
you for the presentation. My
questions are mostly regarding
state parks on you open by
saying that energy, minerals and
natural resources has had a 92%
increase in their budget.
What percentage of that increase
was for state parks.
Uh
Mr. Chair and members of the
committee, that's a great
question. I can certainly get
you a breakdown of where
specifically those increases
have gone in the state parks
this director superintendent,
no?
Uh, Mr. Velasquez, I think, is
here if you wanna add to rep if
you wanna answer representative
Dall's question to the
committee. That's great. Um,
Please.
Um, Mr. Chair, uh, Toby
Velasquez, director of the New
Mexico State Parks Division.
Thank you for having me here and
uh Representative Doll, as far
as our general funding over the
last 15 years, we've pretty much
stayed flat. Um, any additional
revenue that we go after is
self-generated revenue,
primarily made up of federal
money as well as user fees.
Um, so I, without giving, I
don't know what the exact
percentage is that Austin would
come up with at a later time,
but I would say that would be um
a very humble percentage of
increase uh through general
funding. Thank you, thank you,
Mr. Chair and thank you for that
director Vasquez, um, and on
the, the, the special.
In this $20 million for the
special, could you break that
down for what I heard, what,
what is the $20 million for?
Where will it be spent?
State parks.
20 million for state parks. Did
I hear that? I see it in the
special, it's not we have 20
million for um
For uh geothermal, and we have
$20 million for uh wildfire uh
prepare. What's, what's the
one-time special for state
parks. I heard.
Mr. Chair, uh, representative,
it's going to be 10 million for
the state parks and it's going
to be for it's for state park
improvements, so it's going to
be given to the department
Mr. Chair and Representative,
are you talking about the 8
million for the state, the land
and water conservation
supplemental fund, the matching
fund. No, I don't think so, Mr.
Chair. I think I'm asking about
$10 million for state parks for
specials state parks was gonna
get special funding. Let me go
look.
Uh, Mr. Chair representative,
that's, that's actually going to
be in the capital outlay
framework. That's why I broke it
out with that. So I apologize
for that confusion, but it's
going to be in the capital
outlet. Thank you. Thank you.
I'm assuming it's either to um
provide upgrades to parks or to
bring a new park online. How,
Mr. Chair, um, director,
whoever, how many state parks
are in line to be added.
Or are designated or have
studies for new state parks.
Mr. Chairman Representative, I
believe we have a study
completed and a bill for this
body for one new state park at
Broad Broad Canyon. Thank you,
Mr. Chair. Are there any others
under consideration for future.
Mr. Chair, madam, I don't
believe so. All right, thank
you, thank you. um, thank you
for that, Mr. Chan. Thank you,
um, for the presentation. Um, in
the fee increases, the park fee
increases. When was the last
time that state parks did a fee
increase. Uh, Mr. Chair and and
representative Doo, I think it
was 1994, 1994.
Was it?
Uh, uh, Mr. Chair and and
Representative Dow, members of
the committee. So it depends
which fee you're asking for. So
that one of the fees that we
increased were for both
registration fees. Those were
last changed in 1984, 40 years
ago, um, our core, uh, state
park camping and they use fees
were 25 and 20 years ago,
respectively, um, and they were
only $5 for day use fee per
vehicle, not per person. So if
you had a Tahoe that fit 8
people, it was still 5 bucks.
It's still that today, um, and
for our
fees are, are, are developed
camping fee was $10 back then
and it just got raised to 15, so
very humble increases in fees
and fees that had not changed in
decades. Thank you, Mr. Chair,
and thank you, Director Vasquez,
and on the um on the percentage
of, of visitors, what percentage
of the visitors are at rivers
and lakes. You might as well
just stay up here.
I wish everybody knew because
quite frankly, Mr. Chair and
director, I feel like sometimes
like why are you at energy and
natural resources instead of
tourism or so I feel like you're
kind of like a stepchild. I'll
say that for you. I don't know
if you feel that way, but I
certainly feel that way. But um
what what percentage of the
visitors are at Rivers Lake.
All right, rivers and lakes. I
mean. What, what percentage of
the visitations to the state
parks are at what I call a
flagship park, either a, a lake.
Or a river.
Um, Mr. Chair and, and
Representative, we serve on
average 5.3 million visitors a
year, and the majority of that
visitation comes from a large
lake water featured uh type
parks like Elephant Butte,
Cavallo, Ute Lake, Navajo, um,
those lake parks are really
popular. They have the majority
of the, of the visitation and
revenue generation across the
system. However, I just want to
say that every state park, uh,
found in 25 of 33 counties
across the state are important
to those communities and the not
only the local and regional, but
statewide.
economic stimulus. Yes, thank
you, Mr. Chair and I definitely
agree. However, you just raised
state park fees, therefore, your
budget request is flat again,
and we have record low, no
snowpack, uh, I don't know what
our monsoon season is gonna look
like. And it's kind of like an
inopportune time to have
implemented New State Park fees.
Do you project having $5 million
in revenue from your new state
park fees.
Um, Mr. Chair and Representative
Doo unfortunately, state parks
is an agency, uh, it's
resiliency is challenged by
environmental factors that are
outside of our control and
Representative, you're correct
that visitation revenue will be
adversely impacted by drought,
by water levels, by fire
restrictions, by closures, etc.
and at this point in the season,
looking at our 2025 peak season.
Um, we're worried that our
visitation revenue are going to
be adversely impacted by all of
the above. Thank you, Mr. Chair
and thank you for that director,
and I, I have to say.
I really very much appreciate
state parks. You are beyond um
agriculture and mining, you are
the revenue driver, you tourism
is our community and, and it is
also frustrating to see such
primitive conditions of our
state parks, and you know, I
know we filled up the room and
you listened. I appreciate you
going back to the, to the
drawing board, um, but some of
these park fees, you know, I'm,
I'm concerned about the 80 out
of state visitors because when
we are raising our fees because
we're looking at other state
park fees.
Um, as the, the guide without
looking at the amenities, I'm
very concerned about our, our
visitorship and what we're going
to be able to do. So I, I really
hope and catch up and clean up
that will put some money into
your budget for operating, and I
really hope that the Secretary
of Energy and Natural Resources
will start like, I don't know
what we got to do like have some
formal ceremony so you can move
into the family, go out, I don't
know, but like we need to get
more money in the state parks.
We brag about it all the time.
We talk about our natural
resources, but the budget sure
doesn't reflect it, so.
I just want to give it a shout
out for you and your team and
all that you're doing. Thank
you.
Great. Thank you very much,
Representative Dao. Uh, next,
we're gonna go to Representative
Garrett.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Thank you
for that presentation. Uh,
madam.
Almost confirmed secretary.
Uh, thank you so much for
bringing up geothermal projects.
Is there money in other
departments or sources for
working with geothermal, which
is vital.
Is there are many someplace else
in the budget other than the
fact
That it's only a recommendation
in this budget, Mr. Chair,
members of the committee that is
currently not within the LFC's
recommended budget.
Any place, Mister Chair, and Mr.
Chair and Representative
Garrett, I, I, as I mentioned,
we did get $5 million in the FY
25 budget for geothermal and uh
uh some of the things that we
are doing with that, we're doing
kind of high level mapping uh of
the geothermal resources, we
want to do a much more detailed
mapping, uh, of the geothermal
resources in the state, I think
that it is hugely, hugely.
important, uh, as I mentioned,
for economic development, and
again, the uh the uh 15 counties
and then another 6 that so 21
out of 33 counties with a
significant geothermal resources
and um and uh so important for
economic development, but also
geothermal, as I said, 24/7,
geothermal is base load power.
It's base load renewable energy
with zero emissions. And so what
that means is you don't need
batteries, OK, you don't need
battery storage for this
renewable uh uh uh zero
emissions resource. So I think
it's hugely important for many,
many aspects, and, and I think
investment is, is a critical and
important for the state and uh
and we have huge opportunity
here.
Thank you, uh, Mr. Chair, my
second question is on the
high-level budget on page 2.
Line 11, uh field equipment for
hotshot crews and budget
realignment.
Uh, the LFC is uh much higher
than the executive. Is that
problematic? I mean, our hotshot
crews are vital.
Mr. Chair Representative, uh,
the LFC recommendation certainly
um prioritizes making sure there
are hotshot crews are fully
funded. I'll turn it over to DFA
to maybe explain some of their
recommendation.
Um, thank you, Mr. Chair,
Representative Garrett, the
executive recommendation does
fully fund the states to hotshot
cruise through the next fiscal
year, so.
As far as that, I'm not
Exactly sure what the extra
money on the LFC side is for,
but specifically for state
parks, um, I'm sorry for healthy
forests, um, we, we ensured that
the hotshot cruise would be
fully to crews of 11 people
would be fully funded um by a
recommendation. Thank you.
Mr. Chair Representative, just
to add to that, I think that may
be DFA and I can maybe meet on
maybe some of the differences. I
do think there are others that
400,000, 300,000 different. So I
do think there is some
discrepancies between the two
budgets. So maybe we can meet
offline and give you a more
comprehensive breakdown between
those two.
Thank you. And then my final
question is just, I'm trying to
look for the seedling project
that is under your department,
isn't it? The, the ceiling
project was gonna go to, was
that located finally in Mora?
Yes, it is, it is.
is located in more and it's very
important as well so
I'm sorry, Mr. Chair and you're
fine. Let's invite up, um, the
director.
I'm sure.
She knows everything and just,
yeah, no, we, we've had a great
visit to in Mora. I know there's
been a great deal of work in uh
Forrester, McCarthy, please in
answer to Sam Garrett's
question, Mr. Chair and
Representative Garrett, the
conservation seedling program is
the program that uh has been
around for about 2 decades, that
is revenue generating and is
separate from the tree seedling
program.
That is aimed at reforestation
of burned areas. The
conservation seedling program if
you've ever been to the state
fair and received a $1 tree.
That's how it generates the
revenue and it is separate.
Thank you very much.
Great. Uh thank you very much,
uh, Representative Garret. We're
gonna go to Representative
Vincent and then vice chair
Dixon.
Thank you, Mr. Chair, and uh
thank you guys for being here.
Secretary Kinardine.
I appreciate your aggressive
leadership, and I really
appreciate your state forester.
Laura McCarthy's.
Leadership as well. Me too.
Especially in our fire our fire
wildfire stuff that we've been
having going on. And, um,
Mr. Chair, I was wondering when
are we gonna be able to push,
I'm gonna get right to it, but I
just got to ask this question.
Are we gonna push against the
Forest Service and get our
forest right.
Mr. Chair.
Me and you.
I'm sorry.
Mr. Chair or Madam Secretary. Oh
sorry, I thought you were asking
him a question. I'm sorry. I'd
love for him to do, I, could
you, uh, Mr. Chair and
Representative Vincent, could
you repeat the question? Sorry,
cause I was confused. I was, I
was looking at him for an
answer. Can you and I and your
state forester team up and push
against the Forest Service.
To take better care of their
forest, so our houses quit
burning down.
Um, uh, Mr. Chair and, and
Representative Vincent, uh, we
have been working closely and
pushing hard, uh, the US Forest
Service and uh and will continue
to do so. Happy to uh talk with
you separately and, and see
what, how more, how much more
aggressive we can actually be,
um, but I do agree that it's
important and uh working with
them, uh, uh, is very important
for our state forests and state
lands in general, so thank you,
Mr. Chair.
Thank you, Secretary.
I don't know if this question is
directed at you or at Austin,
but uh, what's the difference
between LFC, the 12 million for
wildfire preparedness contingent
on the passage of 191 versus the
12 million in wildfire prepared
contingent on the passage of SB
33, Mr. Chair, Mr. Chairs
representative, that's a great
question. I think I'll give an
initial answer, and I would hope
that the state forester could
maybe also add some color to
maybe the two differences.
12 million that's within the
wildfire preparedness fund would
go towards the preparation work
relating to wildfires when it
comes to the 20 million that's
discussed in the executive
recommendation, that's for what
they uh they highlighted as home
hardening preparedness. So I
think those are kind of the two
differences that are between,
and now the hope is that with HP
191, there is flexibility for
the use of those funds, for
those certain projects, but
The 20 million is specifically
from home hardening projects.
OK, thank you. And Mr. Chair,
last question.
If you're appropriated, if
you're given a special on the
the Smokey Bear Park in Capitan.
How would you utilize those
funds?
Then
Uh, Mr. Chair Representative
Vincent, that the park is in
need of a general upgrade just
to.
Across the board, I think that
you see some of that in our
capital. So Mr. Chair, is that a
complete overhaul? What is, what
is the, what is the museum gonna
look like?
Mr. Chair and representative,
the Smokey Bear Historical Park
in Capitan that serves about
20,000 visitors a year, just
completed a master plan. It has
a bigger price tag than we've
asked for, but the 5 million
would systematically work down
the list of upgrades to the
facility itself as well as to
the exhibits and programming.
Thank you, Mr. Chair, and, you
know, I hope we get something
like that going cause I, I've
been over there and I know it
needs an upgrade and I'm hoping
that we might be able to work
with New Mexico through and turn
the 20,000 into 40,000. Thank
you, Mr. Chair. Thank you very
much Representative Vincent. I
want to go next to Vice Chair
Dixon.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Um, thank
you, Austin, um,
And uh to our DFA counterpart,
um, and secretary. I have a
couple of questions, um.
Mr. Chair and Austin, uh,
In the earlier presentation, uh,
the budget growth chart.
Um,
I like that over the last 10
year period, you're able to show
us um the increase in general
fund dollars and the percentage
growth, but I was wondering if
um you could perhaps overlay
that with the production in oil,
uh, the production growth
because I'm wondering, do you
happen to know off the top of
your head what um how many
million barrels of oil were
produced a day in 2015 from New
Mexico.
Uh, Mr. Chair.
OK. Uh, Mr. Chair
Representative, I think I was a
kicking a soccer ball at the
time, but I think when it comes
to um in 2015, the specific uh
barrel, I do not have that off
the top of my head. I'm sure
that I can get those productions
and map that for you as well,
but I think maybe Ben might be
able to. We have uh uh Mr. Chair
and and Representative Dixon,
um, it was about in 2015, uh,
less than 200 million.
Barrels a day, a year, sorry,
I'm, I'm looking at the graph,
uh, right now, and we are now at
700 million barrels in 2023, 700
million barrels a day, I mean a
year, sorry, and uh so huge,
huge, I was gonna I was gonna
come back in and mention that
earlier. Uh, how much we have
increased our oil production and
we are #2 in the country in oil
production soon. Thank you.
Mr. Cha, thank you, um, Madam
Secretary, and, um, I would love
that in the future, Austin, if,
if you're up for it, um, you
know, it has been a tremendous
growth in production and, you
know, one of the things to go
along with the increase in
staff, uh, means that New Mexico
has some of the lowest
emissions, you know, and
cleanest produced oil and gas in
the world, right?
Is that correct?
Our, our, uh, methane emissions
from gas systems and oil systems
is dramatically lower than
Texas, for example, and, and
that's because of our successful
regulatory structure too.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Thank you,
Madam Secretary. And so, you
know, I just want to uh sort of
add my voice to supporting um
ensuring that our agencies are
fully funded to do the
compliance work that's necessary
and also the permitting um and
support for the industry, uh,
that ensures that we have um a
strong responsible, um, oil and
gas industry in New Mexico.
Um, Mr. Chair, um, secretary,
you mentioned uh geothermal, and
I was wondering, um, not
everyone has the the math, uh,
and so I was actually wondering
if you wouldn't mind just
quickly telling us which are the
21 counties in New Mexico that
um our prime for geothermal. Mr.
Chairman and Representative
Dixon.
OK, I'm gonna, there's two
different lists, OK, and I'm
going to read first counties
with identified hydrothermal
sites, and those are Sandoval,
San Miguel, Donana, Karon, and
Hidalgo. OK, so that's one
category. Um, Sandoval and
Catron County are also in the
next list. They're both, OK? And
so these are counties, and this
is according to Enrail high
level mapping, but but uh
mapping with
most favorable to least
favorable, uh, geothermal
resources, and the counties in
New Mexico with the most
favorable resources, uh, in
addition to, um, uh, Catherine
and Sandoval, Rio Riba, San
Juan, Taos, Colfax, Bernaleo,
Valencia, Socorro, Sierra.
Luna Otero.
Grant, Shibala, and McKinley.
And so, so it is a huge number
of counties I did, I think in
most of your districts, um, uh,
in, uh, of the members of the
committee, uh, you have, uh,
geothermal very high geothermal
potential, and I just think
it's, we, I think we just uh got
somebody who agreed to be our
geothermal person working in our
office.
today, so we're excited about
that, and I just think that it
is hugely important and very
excited about it, so, Mr. Chair,
uh, Representative Dixon, I hope
you all will consider that
request, so thank you, Mr.
Chair. Thank you Secretary. I
think it's great that just about
every representative, um, in
this committee could benefit
from geothermal um energy
production and one of the other
great things, Mr. Chair
secretary, is that with the sort
of explosion of AI.
for instance, and the growing
demand for energy, geothermal is
a wonderful asset for the state
for economic development, um,
and so, you know, I really
appreciate that you flagged that
special request if I could say
one thing, Mr. Chair, and, and
Representative Dixon that um as
I mentioned, uh geothermal is
24/7. That's hugely important
for a data center, uh, having
24/7.
Electricity and for those of you
who aren't buried in something
like capacity factors, OK, so
for 100 megawatts of geothermal,
it has a capacity factor of 90%,
so it is generating uh
electricity 90% of the time, um,
and, uh, solar is 29%. So
that's, that's why you need
battery storage, etc. etc. and
the wind's not or the sun's not
shining and uh
So it's it's hugely important
from that perspective as well,
that it's a renewable resource,
90% capacity factor doesn't
require storage, and, and we
have great potential in New
Mexico, so.
Thank you, Mr. Chair, Madam
Secretary, um, and you know, a
number of us took a tour of
Sandia National Labs, a couple
months ago and we're able to see
some of the innovative research
um that our national labs here
in the state are doing in
geothermal, so it's a wonderful
compliment. I'm meeting with
them this week. OK. Lovely. Uh,
Mr. Chair, um, Madam Secretary,
I'm gonna wrap up my questions,
I promise. Um, wildfire, you
know, I know that this is a a
subject near and dear to um.
Many of the representatives, um,
on this committee. I'm
wondering um if the department
is looking at.
Technologies that can help
identify, um, mitigate, uh,
wildfires at the, you know,
right at the first moment and if
there are, if that's something
that we're looking
Uh, to fund expand, uh, in the
budget this year, moving
forward, how, how your
department is, is working with,
with some of that technology and
developments.
Mr. Chair and um Madam Vice
Chair, there are a number of
companies that offer the exact
services that you were
describing with uh rapid
detection using cameras
primarily, and at least
Companies are in discussion with
us about pilot programs, uh, one
that would be potentially funded
by an industry, um, another that
we just don't have budget for
currently, uh, but
There is in the executive
request, $800,000 for wildfire
housing hazard mapping and um
Uh, we, that would be uh one
avenue for us to pursue the
acquisition of new technology.
Absolutely our neighboring
states, uh, that are somewhat
more sophisticated in terms of
their use of technology have.
been able to do the testing of
which of the services.
That are offered are truly
useful, and we would learn from
that if funding were provided to
us.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. um, thank
you, Madam Forrester, and I
think that's great because you
know it.
Something like that can really
go along with the other tools
that we've been discussing, the
home hardening, you know, the
management of the forests and so
it's just another um tool in the
toolbox, so to speak, uh, so
thank you, Mr. Chair.
Thank you very much, Madam Vice
Chair. Next, we're gonna go to
Representative Duncan and then
representative Saana.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Uh, Madam
Secretary, just a couple of
quick questions. Are the hot
shops, are they full time or are
they contract?
I'm sorry, I, uh, uh, Mr. Chair,
uh, represented, I didn't, I
didn't hear the question. Thank
you, Madam Chair, um, Madam
Secretary, are the hotshots, are
they full time or are they
contract
they're.
OK. Thank you for that.
Under air quality is pecan dust.
Heard of that.
Mr. Chair and Representative
Duncan, I think so wrong, but
they'll be up later. That's the
air quality and environment.
And then one last question for
you on mine reclamation or any
of the mines, um.
that we have on the reservation
as far as reclamation concerned.
Uh, representative minds on
tribal land are not part of our
jurisdiction. There are mines on
tribal land in New Mexico, but
they're not part of our
jurisdiction. OK, thank you,
man.
Thank you very much,
Representative Duncan, uh,
representative, uh, Sanana, then
Representative Hernandez. Thank
you, Mr. Chairman. Um, thank you
for your presents. I missed your
presentation. I'm sorry, I was
presenting a bill, but I think
I've heard it several times over
the interim, um, so, um, I just
have some questions. So looking
at the graph, it, it includes
Mner OSE and enemyD and isn't it
true? I know when I first came
in, um, we weren't giving much
and it's been 9 years, um, to ED
or
A nerd or any of these
organizations as far as money.
So now that we're finally giving
it, we're trying to catch up and
get you what you need to do your
job and as far as um so I've
been looking at gas and oil, um.
How many abandoned wells do we
have? Can you give me a basic
idea, Bandon Wells, and maybe
the cost to the state to deal
with those last year. Can you
give me something like that, Mr.
Chairman Representative, we
don't have an exact, uh, we
don't define orphan wells the
way a lot of neighboring states
do. The numbers of potential
orphans as we think of them are
inactive wells or abandoned
wells numbers in the thousands.
So, Mr. Chairman, the state
isn't really having to pay for
plugging these wells.
and the liability for the state
runs into the hundreds of
millions of dollars, 100s of
millions of dollars. OK. Um, as
far as we today in the bill, um,
we had a bill this morning in
energy. We talked about bonding
issues for wells, you can only
pay $250,000 right for bonding?
Is that the limit right now, Mr.
Chairman Representative? Yes,
the blanket bond is capped in
statute, dollars.
And um I believe you said, I, I
believe it was said that
sometimes it costs between
400,000 and close to a million
in some, some, I don't know if
that's true, but 400,000 for
sure. How much is the state
paying for as far as bonding,
um, when whales do go, when we,
little small companies go
bankrupt and we have to pay for
them. Mr. Chairman
Representative, the average cost
for us to plug a well downhole
work only before environmental
remediation and things like that
coming into the equation is
about $125,000 although we did
just recently.
We have to bring up, snubbing
unit in from Louisiana, which is
going to push that single well,
um.
Much, much higher, uh, so those,
those costs can, can run away,
generally speaking, as, as we
covered this morning and I'm
sure this committee has heard
before the runaway cost
potential is in the can you give
me a number on the highest
you've ever had to to do or pay
we signed, we just saw one go
past the $10 million mark. OK,
so, so it's costing the state
quite a bit for oil and gas
right now. Um, as far as
produced well produced water,
um, so we have a, how much, how
much produced water are we, are
we talking about every year from
this industry.
barrels in 2023, the industry
produced about 2.1 billion
barrels of produced water in
2024. That number I believe went
up to about 2.4 billion. And,
um, how much is uh I know we're
injecting
sorry just a quick reminder to
go through the chair. I'm sorry.
No worries at all. Yeah,
so, um.
my train of thought, um.
So I know injections is causing
seismic activity. Do we have
costs for any of this, or is it
causing any problems with wells
or anything as far as the
injection of it.
Mr. Chairman and Representative,
when we notice seismicity
associated with um different
what we call SRAs, seismic
reactivity areas, uh, we are
pretty aggressive, uh, at OCD
about being proactive around
around shutting that in, we had
to do that last year, we shut in
the county wine SRA, um, in
response to what we perceived as
some as some seismic activity,
something we keep a very close
eye on.
Um, so,
Um,
So, as far as produced water, is
our biggest problem, what do we
do with it and, and where is it
stored when we don't, we can't
put it somewhere.
Uh,
Mr. Chairman, Representative,
what do we do with it is
actually a great encapsulation
of that problem, where it's
stored, it is put in the
pipelines, it is driven in
trucks all over Eddie and Lee
County and representatives and
Me and Lee County a huge amount
of truck traf truck traffic on
the roads down there. A great
deal of that is moving produced
water around, some of it is
stored on site. Some of it is
reused, uh, some of it is
injected on site or taken other
places and injected there either
New Mexico or Texas.
OK, um, and leaks and spills,
what's the cost to the state as
far as cleaning up leaks and
spills or that are kind of left
or
to administer, find them, get
people to get the industry to
clean them up, how much is that
costing the state, Mr. Chair, I
clarify, are you talking about
spills produced water releases
produce water. Yeah, yeah. Sure.
Uh, it's a growing cause of
concern, uh, candidly, Mr.
Chair, Representative, uh, that
produced water takeaway issue
found in different parts and it
it can present a a groundwater
contamination problem. We do
share some authority under for
groundwater contamination with
our friends in the environment
department and when it's on the
oil field, it becomes our
problem and, you know, it's
something we track very
carefully. We have
chloride plume, certainly that
we, that, uh,
We're watching right now, that's
almost half as wide again as the
city of Santa Fe, so there's
this is a
Certainly an issue that we, that
we work with.
And costly, right? So, so this
budget we have, it has to grow
because we have so many wells
and with all the issues of
orphan wells and plugging and
bonding and and produced water
and leaks and spills, we have
to, we have to continue to add
to this budget so you can do
your job and ED can do their job
and, and the Office of State
Engineer can do their job with
water. So this budget, I, I
would like to see it even go
higher because we need
especially water in all these
pollution, 70% polluting.
of this industry, so I um I
think what we're doing, we're
moving in the right direction
for these for these departments,
um, and, uh, I appreciate
everything you do. I have, Mr.
Chairman.
Thank you very much for Saenana.
Uh, next we're gonna go to
representative Hernandez.
Thank you, Mr. Chair, and Madam
Secretary designee and um your,
your, your staff, that's all
here, always good to, to see
them, uh, Mr. Chairman, um, I'm
really passionate about
renewable energy, uh, especially
on the Navajo Nation, as we
know, access to, uh,
electricity, uh, is far behind
because of the cost of uh of
power lines, um, the solar for
all.
Uh, Mr. Chairman, the, the, uh,
uh, so frog all grant, which I,
I understand is federal grant.
Um, with the, uh, current, you
know, uh, situation where, where
under this, under, under the new
administration, uh,
Is, is, where does that money
stand? Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Um,
Mr. Chair, Representative
Hernandez, um, where we stand
right now with our federal
grants is we have currently been
able to draw our federal funds,
um, in the energy conservation
grants that we have, um, we have
had some issues with our mining
grants and one with our oil
conservation federal grant, um,
but as far as uh the energy
conservation grants we currently
have, we've been able to work
with them and been able to draw.
Yeah, yeah, I can, I'm sorry,
Mr. Charon and Representative
Fernandez Ecam has uh received
its money, OK? And it's, it's,
we do have problems as, as
Matthew said, uh, uh, MMD is an
issue.
Uh, uh, forest, I think is an
issue in in uh we are uh in
touch with our
Federal delegation,
congressional delegation on
those issues, and they have
offered to do everything they
can to help, so.
OK
Mr. Chairman, um, I had, uh,
visit the Navonation Minerals
department and um
And uh the uh the division
director there had also
mentioned to me under the
previous, uh, the, uh, my
secretary designee
Mr Chairman, I, I believe it
was, uh, under the OCC, um,
Those are relationship there,
when, when it comes to our
orphan abandoned oil wells on
the Navajo Nation as far as like
Mr. Chairman, uh, opportunities
to regrant money to help Navajo
Nation orphan abandoned wells,
um.
Is this, is this a, uh, is this
something that is viable uh or
possible going forward to um
continue that relationship with
these, uh, websites on the Navo
Nation.
Mr. Chairman, Representative
Hernandez, we, we do have a
relationship, uh, with tribes to
the rec fund, we are restricted
in the use of some of our
federal funds. We, there is some
precedent for this. We do hold,
for instance, funding from BLM,
uh, to enter and, and plug wells
on, on BLM land after the BLM is
completed their process.
Mr. Triton, that concludes my
questions.
Thank you very much for
Hernandez. I don't see any other
questions, uh, really quick,
Madam Secretary, Mr. Shelton,
for the oil conservation
division positions, do you have
a breakdown of what those are
that the executive provided, uh,
but is not in the LFC
recommendation.
Or is, is that uh recruitment
and retention bonuses for
existing positions.
This, oh, go ahead. Yeah, it's,
uh, Mr. Chair, members of the.
retention bonuses, uh,
specifically the LFC
recommendation also took into
account the oil conservation
divisions existing uh vacancy
savings, so they have about 1.4
million in vacancy savings they
can also use to address these
concerns. OK, thank you for
that. Uh, so there we're not
different on the number of
positions were different on sort
of that, that support.
OK, um, uh, great, uh, great
hearing, uh, members, I think a
few different issues have been
flagged, um, we're gonna go,
we'll go ahead and ask for the
LFC recommendation, uh, and
there's, there seemed to be a
few potential special
differences that can be that can
be looked at.
Mr. Chair, I would move the
committee adopt the LFC
recommendation.
It's been moved by Vice Chair
Dixon, seconded by
Representative Garrett. Is there
any opposition to adopting that
motion? Yes.
Well, please show Representative
Pettigrew in opposition.
Thank you very much, Madam
Secretary.
OK, uh, I, our state engineer
and her team are here state
engineer Anderson, you could
come over.
Uh, Mr. Chair, members of the
committee, while everyone gets
settled, I can maybe give you
the page number and then the
agency codes. It's gonna be
behind tab 5 as well and the
agency code is 550, similar to
the last packet that first page
is gonna be those bullets, that
second page will be an agency
high level and then that third
Great. Uh, Mr. Chair, members of
the committee, joining me today
for a conversation about the
Office of the State Engineers'
budget is the state engineer,
engineer Anderson, and then my
DFA counterpart, Monica Tapia.
Uh
Mr. Chair, members of the
committee, beginning on page 3,
the differences between the two
recommendations, uh, both
recommendations supported the
agencies's flat fund balance
request while the executive
recommendation reduced the
agency's other transfers by 2
million. The executive
recommendation increased other
revenues by 320,000, the
executive recommendation
increased the agency's general
fund revenue by 7.4 million or
21.6%, while the LFC
recommendation increased it by
1.
2 million or 3.4%.
Uh, the executive recommendation
significantly increased uh
personnel by 4.4 million or
11.5% for the agency salary
increases, the LFC's
recommendation increased the
agency's personnel by 300,000 or
roughly 1% for two water
planning FTE. Both
recommendations included 500,000
aura, 6.9% increase for the
50-year water plan
implementation and the executive
recommendation increased the
other category by 1 million or
17.
7 % while the LFC budget
increased it by 650,000 or 8.3,
I'll now turn it over to Monica
to go over the water resource
allocation program.
Thank you, Austin. Mr. Chair,
members of the committee, the
executive recommendation
includes 1.7 million in general
fund to increase salaries within
the water resource allocation
program for competitive salaries
to retain technical experts in
the classifications increased by
salary studies.
Part of an agency-wide
corrective salary adjustment.
The executive recommendation
provides a 500,000 increase to
fill 4 Indian water rights
settlement mandated water master
positions and 375,000 to fill
three metal Rio Grande water
management positions.
The LSC recommendation does not
recommend any increases in the
personnel services and employee
benefits category within this P
code.
Both the executive and LFC
recommendations include
increases of 150,000 in
contractual services for
increased lease rates and
200,000 to the other category
for increased drought field work
and increased fuel costs to
enable the program to expand
enforcement activities in the
field.
I will now pass it back to
Austin for 552 Interstate stream
commission.
Thank you so much, uh, Mr.
Chair, members of the committee,
uh, just like she said the P
code is 552. Uh, the LFC
recommendation increased the
general fund revenue by 800,000
or 16%, the executive
recommendation increased general
fund revenue by 1.26 million or
25.3%, the gap between the
recommendations is due to the
executive recommending these
salary increases. Both
recommendations fund two water
planning FTE and 500,000 for
contract.
work related to 50 year water
plan implementation. The
executive recommendation funds a
personnel increase of roughly
366.3,000 or 4.8%, which is not
included in the LFC's
recommendation. I'll turn it
back over.
Thank you, Austin.
P 553 litigation and education.
The executive recommendation
supports the agency's request to
eliminate LAP's reliance on the
Esseia community's irrigation
works construction fund, with a
1.5 million general fund revenue
swamp and to decrease its
reliance on the improvement of
the Rio Grande Trust Fund, a
498.2,000 general fund swap.
The current trend towards
insolvency of the trust funds
will be reversed by this
success, this substantial and
ongoing reduction of what was
intended to be a short-term
legislative dependence on trust
funds.
It will also further the effort
to enable the designated
beneficiaries of the trust funds
to use trust revenues for the
purposes specified by statute.
The executive recommendation
includes an increase of 16.8,000
in general fund for corrective
salary adjustments within
litigation and education.
The executive recommendation
also includes 250,000 for new
leased office space to increase
uh litigation education
footprint in both Albuquerque
and Las Cruces.
LSC recommendation keeps the
personnel in contractual
categories flat to the FY 25
operating budget.
The other category, both the
executive and LFC
recommendations include 120,000
for a new water education
education document management
system to improve the education
process.
I will now pass it up.
Uh, Mr. Chair members the
committee, the final program for
the Office of the State Engineer
is going to be its program
support division, the LFC
recommendation kept general fund
revenue flat while the executive
recommendation increased general
fund revenue by 390,000 or 6.4%,
the gap between the two is due
to the executive
recommendations, salary
increases, while the LLC
recommendation does not include
those. Mr. Chair and members of
the committee also note both the
uh EFA and LFC found consensus
on all performance measures.
For the agency, I not turned
over to Monica to go over any
differences in the special
recommendations
of the committee.
Both the executive and LFC
recommendations provide 3
million for eco settlement
activities, the executive
recommends 35 million for Indian
water rights settlements, while
the LFC recommends 20 million.
The executive recommends 5
million for interstate
litigation and 5 million for
water planning, education and
outreach, while the LFC does not
recommend either appropriation.
Ma'am, thank you both, Madam
state engineer. Uh, thank you
for being here. Please feel free
to introduce any staff and uh go
ahead with your presentation.
Thank you, Mr. Chair, members of
the committee, um, thank you for
having us here today. Um, I'm
joined by, um, our interstate
stream commission director
Hannah Riley White, and um
I am the state engineer
designate, um, for the Office of
the State Engineer, our staff
that are present here right now
are Tanya Trujillo, um, Michelle
Hunter, John Romero, Jeff Prim,
and Jennifer Baca.
So we have a brief presentation
for you to follow with key
highlights from our budget
request and time for questions.
Um, we're gonna have Hannah come
up here and join us, thank you.
All right, we also have copies
of a one pager comparing the
executive recommendation with
the LFC recommendation. If
anyone would like a copy, we
didn't get those in time to get
them and do you have that? We
do, uh, madam engineer, and as a
note, it's now looks like a
mixture of snow and rain out. So
that's, that is a state engineer
for you right there
We brought that just for you, so
thank you. it worked out.
All right, so, um, we do have a
presentation, I don't know, are
you able to see those slides
right now?
I can't see them.
right here.
OK. Well,
You able to see that, OK?
OK.
Um, that's fine. So, um,
technical difficulties.
Um, so we wanted to bring up
this map, this is um the.
The current climate conditions,
um, demonstrated here are dire
for New Mexico, as you can see
on the slide.
Um, we expect this pattern to
continue with climate change.
Um, it's time to address urgent
needs and prepare for long-term
implications of a hotter, drier
future, and this map emphasizes
the urgent need for that action.
So wanted to start with that
note. I also wanted to highlight
the governor's 50-year water
action plan, um, I think you,
you also.
Um, received copies of this one
pager. Um, so the governor's
50-year water action plan really
lays out a roadmap for us to
follow as a state, um, in, in
Preparing for what what you see
ahead on this map, the dry, the
dry conditions that we're seeing
now and anticipate seeing in the
future as well as the intense
storm events that we, that will
come along with climate change.
um, but
I wanted to point out that one
pager, this summarizes the um
the budget request from the
executive recommendation that
fall under and within the the
bounds of the 5th Year Water
action plan. It's a nice concise
summary.
So, um, we've formatted our
presentation here focusing on 3
key areas, um, water touches all
aspects of our livelihoods and
economy here in New Mexico and
recognizing that so the focus of
our budget requests this year
are focusing on um modernizing
water management, investing in
the 21st century management
tools and ensuring sufficient
staff salaries to pay for itself
in successful outcomes.
Um, this is key. It's urgent
need to invest in these tools,
we'll get more into this on
future slides, um, but this is
looking at modernizing both in
terms of technical resources and
administrative tools.
Um, for invest in the Rio
Grande. This one is um
We want to highlight here that
we're not ignoring the rest of
the state, just highlighting the
work needed on the Rio Grande as
reflected in the budget request.
And with that, I'm gonna pass it
over to Director Risley White.
Thank you, Mr. Chair and members
of the committee, it's a
pleasure to be with you again,
Hannah Risley, White, director
of the Interstate Stream
Commission. I want to just take
a moment first to acknowledge
the real leadership that we have
with this legislature and in
this governor's office and
tackling water challenges. Um,
it's also really exciting to see
the level of coordination occur
across the executive agencies
that are presenting to you
today, um, clearly these natural
resource agencies intersect, um,
without healthy forests. We
don't have solid water supply as
we
increasing water scarcity,
water, uh, quality becomes
increasingly important and so
the coordination occurring
across the executive agencies
and reflected in this, this, uh,
request related to implementing
the governor's 5th year water
action plan is really great to
see, um, I realized that we're
short on on time this evening,
so we'll go, go through our
presentation, but I, I was just
gonna highlight and we'll bounce
back and forth a little bit
between state engineer Anderson
and myself, um, investing in the
Rio Grande, and as she said, you
know, we're advancing.
critical priorities across the
state. However, we see a real
need given the challenges that
we're facing to invest in the
Rio Grande specifically, um,
with a holistic view and looking
at the system as a whole, um,
and also managing each each drop
as it becomes increasingly
precious in the middle Rio
Grande, we're looking at
ensuring New Mexico's continued
compliance with the Rio Grande
Compact, which will be
increasingly challenging, as
well as settlement of this, the
water rights of the six Middle.
ro pueblos and ongoing ESA
issues and so the state's
ability to focus in on the
middle Rio Grande is going to be
increasingly important. We are
continuing to carry forward
critical initiatives in the
lower Rio Grande as well, and
we'll, we'll speak to that more
later, later in the
presentation, um, and then the
last category of sort of key
priorities is planning for our
water future, um, that includes
both implementing the 50 year
water action plan, but as you
all know, the legislature passed
unanimously in the 2023.
Legislative session, the water
security Planning Act, uh, New
Mexico Interstate Stream
Commission is hard at work and
implementing that act and we
have a number of budget requests
moving in front of you that will
further support that effort. Um,
And I'll hand it back to State
Engineer Anderson on the next
slide.
Thank you. So, underwater
modernizing water management,
um, we really wanted to first,
um, highlight the need for staff
funding, um, to ensure
sufficient funding to recruit
and retain technical staff
leaving asked for 2.6 million
recurring in the executive
recommendation. Um, this is
critical because um our staff
are highly technical. We were um
we were funded 80% of the staff
within the agency or over 80%.
Within the um we're affected by
this salary studies. So and we
haven't received any funding to
fill that gap to be able to
bring them up to where they need
to be within the salary ranges
that um
that were prescribed in that
study. So that's, that's part of
this request here, the
additional funding for staff is
critical. Um, we know there's a
job architecture study underway
and we'll look forward to
working with the committee and
DFA on the necessary next steps
for that, but recognizing that
our staff need this funding now
is really important, um, it
really can't wait.
We have 350 of OSC and ISC's 373
positions require a 4 plus year
college degree, including
licensure and specializations.
We've also been experiencing
challenging staffing conditions,
including significant
retirements and turnover, um, in
the last 16 months. We've gone
through 168 recruitments and for
an agency with 292 people.
That's a lot. Um, that's 45% of
our current workforce, meaning
we have
45% of the people in our agency
in in new roles to them within
the last 16 months. Um, we're
working to complete in bands and
reclassifications wherever
possible, and we effectively
used all of the FY 24 budget um
for salaries and still have a
23% vacancy rate. So we're
making the most of what we can
with what we can, but we really
need that additional funding for
staff.
For the water date app
implementation. I wanted to
thank the legislature for um for
passing that act, it's really
meaningful in terms of
modernization of our agency, it
gives people a better
understanding of why we need to
modernize. um.
So here we have a $200,000
recurring funding ask um for
staffing and then another
additional IT ITC2 requests um
for the real-time water
measurement system. This one
supports the metering that the
legislature has funded um
through ICIP requests over the
years. We have a lot of meters
out there in the field that
could be providing more data and
um and so when we upgrade the
system, we will be able to
provide more data.
to the public and have that data
available to ourselves
internally. The water's database
placement, though I have to say
is probably the most critical
need of that list. Um, we'd
asked for $1 million in C2
funding and that, that, um, it's
a 30 year old database that
presents security risks. It's
something that our staff
throughout the agency use on a
daily basis.
And the public uses it as well
to access their water rights
information, so the water's
database replacement, what you
see with the 1 million is just a
phase one of that. I also want
to highlight in this um that we
did receive the rats funding for
the past couple years to update
the rats database, and that is,
is complete or near completion
within the next month. So that's
a huge accomplishment that
really helps our litigation side
of the house. We're gonna be in
um integrating that with
The Waters database and um and
so it's just gonna be a seamless
process, but thank you for the
funding for rats. That's a huge
improvement over what we had
previously.
Um, in addition to what's on the
slide, I also wanted to
highlight that we have an
enforcement bill that we're
putting through right now under
Senate Bill 210. This is gonna
be really important in terms of
being able to administer water
in the state and enforce enforce
water theft against water theft.
Um, and we have another 1.5
million in capital requests for
additional metering and
measurement.
For investment in the Rio
Grande. Um, we've asked for
500,000 recurring to um enhanced
middle Rio Grande management to
support water users and increase
deliveries to elephant Butte
Reservoir. This is gonna help us
with increased administration in
the middle Rio Grande. It's
another 4 FTEs to be um to be
supporting actual administration
and increasing metering and um
those types of activities also
will be increasing staff
accessibility and enforcement
capabilities in Albuquerque and
Las Cruces with the 70.
0000 $0 recurring request there
as well, recognizing that we
need support throughout the
entire reach of the of the Rio
Grande.
And with that, I'll pass it over
to um Hannah Riley White,
director. Thank you, Mr. Chair
and and state engineer
designate, um.
Yeah, and I would just say echo
the comments from the state
engineer terms of the corrective
salary adjustment and the
additional funding for office
space, that office space as, as
we've highlighted is in
Albuquerque and Las Cruces as we
really wanna be as accessible as
possible to those communities
and see increasing need given
this, uh, need to invest in the
Rio Grande and in those areas.
Um, I wanted to highlight for
you a critical component that
we're concerned about and the
difference between the executive
recommendation and the LFC
recommendation, and that's the
litigation special for.
to see New Mexico, um, as you
just heard, the executive
recommended a $5 million special
LFC has a $0 amount on that
special. We are working
incredibly closely with the New
Mexico Department of Justice on
that case, we are headed later
this month to a next round of
settlement discussions with the
special master appointed by the
US Supreme Court, um, and we're
optimistic and leaning in
towards settlement. However, we
expect that if we don't make
real progress in that
that effort, we will receive a
trial date for later this year.
The last time that we went to
trial in this case or burn rate
was over $3 million a year, um,
and so it is gonna be critical
for New Mexico to have some
funding available to support
that conflict. Do I want to
spend that money on litigation?
No, um, but I think there's,
there's two reasons why it's
important that House Bill 2 end
up including that funding. One
is it says it sends a critical
message to the other parties in
the case about New Mexico's
commitment. And number 2, if we
go to trial, we
literally just won't have enough
money to to get through that
process given a $0 amount in
that line, so I wanted to, to
highlight that, um.
You know, in addition, when it
comes to investing in the, the
Rio Grande in addition to to the
items on the slide, we have
important capital requests
related to River channel
maintenance habitat and
restoration, most of of that
funding, and I realized that
this hearing is not on Capitol,
but will be important in, in, in
that process of investing in, in
the, in the Rio Grande, and last
I just in terms of the lower Rio
Grande and I was mentioning it,
I want to highlight in the 2023
legislative session, the
legislature appropriated
significant funding to
support the state's effort, not
only the litigation, but
actually implementing solutions
on the ground in the in the
lower Rio Grande. We're making
significant progress with that
funding, um, in parallel to the
litigation we're very much
committed to working with
stakeholders and implementing
solutions and that effort is, is
very much underway, um, in the
lower Rio Grande. Next slide.
And all I'll take this last of
our key priorities here planning
for for our water future, um, as
you heard from the analyst,
there is that $800,000 increase
in recurring funding in both
recommendations were very
pleased to see that. We're
optimistic that the planning
process that's being teed up
through the new water security
Planning Act that again you will
passed in 2023, um, we'll set
the stage for communities across
the state to really confront and
get out and
front of the challenges that
we're facing. I realized that
that's an investment. I think
that investment is well made on
the front end instead of running
into costly litigation and
conflict on the back end, you
all should have received, uh, in
your offices copies of our most
recent updates from our planning
work. We're very pleased with
extensive public engagement that
occurred last year all across
the state. The results of that
engagement are reflected in in
this report and then also a
discussion draft.
Of the rules and guidelines
called for by the Act that we're
looking for comment on by later
this month. We'll then
incorporate that comment and
revised rule and guidelines that
will go to official promulgation
later this spring and welcome
any uh comments or engagement
that any of you or your
constituents have related,
related to that effort, um, so
very pleased to see that
increase in recurring funding in
both recommendations. However,
we would also very much like to
see in the executive
recommendation.
there's a $5 million special
appropriation that would help us
kickstart the effort of the next
step of implementing the act,
including convening the future
regions, um, providing the, the
scientific foundation to to
really inform, um, that planning
process as it as it kicks off.
Also, it will play a role in
implementing key initiatives in
the governor's 50 year water
action plan, including
recommendation A1, which relates
to water education. That plan
calls on us to
develop a water education
template and engage in
developing curriculum for all
ages, uh, elementary school all
the way up to adults to help New
Mexicans understand the critical
nature of water in our state and
engage with them effectively. In
addition, that special
appropriation is intended to
help us build better online
engagement tools so that data
information is easily accessible
to you all and others and
support further implementation
of the, the Water Data Act.
Also, I'd like to highlight
we're really proud of the work
under that act, uh, called on us
for the first time to convene a
water security tribal advisory
council, um, that council has
been convened as of October last
year. They've been weighing in
very productively and what this
new planning process needs to
look like, so I appreciate the
effort of the participation
there, and you'll see the other
item, uh, on the slide here is
funding special appropriation
for Indian water rights.
moments, the executive
recommendation includes 35
million to advance those
settlements, the LFC
recommendation includes the 20
million, um, we think resolving
those outstanding Indian water
rights claims is critical, uh,
both in terms of its challenging
to plan for your water future
without those in place. There's
been tremendous progress over
the last two years in furthering
those settlements, they have the
potential to leverage
significant federal funding in
total, the, the settlements that
are moving.
right now, uh, account for 3
billion potential of $3 billion
in federal funding appropriating
funding towards those efforts
shows the state's commitment to
those settlements, which helps
us secure that federal funding,
and I also just wanna highlight,
um, those settlements are
intended to resolve sort of the
global issues in those basins,
so it resolves both issues with
tribal and non-tribal entities
typically the state funding goes
to the non-tribal parties, so
we're that that involves.
Many other stakeholders um
throughout those regions, so we
encourage you to support that
that request, um, and then last,
uh, wanted to highlight the
trust fund swap that's proposed.
It was presented to you earlier,
the executive recommendation,
uh, proposes a, a swap for the
agency dependency on our trust
funds, um, Interstate stream
commission is tasked with
managing what's called the
irrigation works construction
fund and the income to the Rio
Grande.
Uh, improvement fund, uh, those
funds have been used for agency
operations for over a decade.
That agency dependency on those
trust funds creates solvency
issues for the funds themselves.
It also makes that fund, those
funds not available for their
originally intended purpose, um,
and so by supporting that that
swap in the executive
recommendation that helps uh
ensure the solvency of the trust
funds, but also allows for those
funds to be more available.
they're needed most, and we're
seeing that need increasing over
time, including for things like
a infrastructure, which is also
funded out of those those
funding sources. Uh, in addition
to what's on the slide, we have
important requests for, for
funding associated with se
specifically in the strategic
water reserve, uh, reserve in
our uh capital request. And I
also would like to just take a
moment to highlight, uh, our
agency has gone above and beyond
in the last couple of years and
identified.
buying other funding sources,
so, um, similar to the other
natural resources agencies
presenting today who get big
chunks of their funding from
federal and other sources we've
been really working to not just
come to you all, but to look to
those other sources, including
almost 90 million and either
federal funding or or other
grant funding that we're
currently advancing, and I would
echo the comments from Secretary
Katterine related to the
importance of bar authority, the
way that we bring in that
federal funding currently is
through bars.
authority. So, um, both in terms
of agency operations and
flexibility in responding to
changing conditions and the
ability for us to continue to
leverage federal funding through
federal grants that bar
authority is is really important
and I think with that all hand
it back to state engineer
Anderson for any final comments
and really look forward to
engaging with you all. 01 last
thing, um, on many of the
critical items on this, uh,
comparison sheet that we've
handed out. We
uh
issues specific one pagers as
well, um, so if any of those are
of particular interest to you.
We won't inundate you with a ton
of paper, but we have more in
depth information on any of
those if you'd like to hear
more. Thanks so much.
OK, thank you, director, and
just to wrap it up, I wanted to
say that our agency is full of
talented, dedicated employers,
employees who are ready to take
on the challenges ahead, but
lack resources. We appreciate
the opportunity to present our
budget to this committee and
welcome any questions.
Thank you very much, now state
engineer, Madam ISC Director,
um, we'll go uh to questions
starting with Representative
Sanchez.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Uh, Madam
Secretary, you brought up, uh,
the 2.6 million to bring people
up, uh, can you tell me, uh,
what are the repercussions or
impact of not getting that
funding.
Ma, uh Mr. Chair, um,
Representative Sanchez, the
repercussions are that we're
losing staff. We, we've already,
we already are losing staff and
it's becoming really hard to
fill positions, so we, we really
do need that funding to be able
to pay people what they what
they deserve to be paid and be
competitive on the industry.
Mr. Chair, I think uh LFC is
asking for 17 million to do some
study, uh, study adjustments.
Uh, OFC, uh,
Are you gonna take a deep dive
into uh how this affects the
state engineers or like what's
going to be the focus of that
study, uh, Mr. Chair,
Representative, great question.
I think what you're referencing
is the 17 million compensation
package that's going to be in
the back of the bill, to my
understanding, correct me if I'm
wrong with what you're,
and so that study and the
compensation package will target
certain FTE that were found to
be below industry minimum.
And so that competition package
will address those specific FTE.
Thank you, Mr. Chair, uh, I
think we really got to look at
uh
We help these guys retain their,
their people also on the Indian
water rights settlement, uh, I
think that's something we, I
know, uh, we really need to
focus on um.
We need to uh get that closed
out for our traditional Hispanic
communities that are impacted by
the state portion, I know a lot
of my area.
And uh rep Fernandez Cesarias
are also impacted by that and
also the litigation.
I know, uh
A lot of water rights in our
fights with Texas. I think uh
we're, we've got the short end
of the stick on that, and I
don't know if it's because we
haven't put.
They have a better attorneys or
uh we don't have the money to
get good attorneys. I think we
definitely need to uh invest in
that so uh we don't get the
short of the short end of the
stick again. Thank you, Mr.
Chair.
Thank you very much
Representative Sanchez. We're
gonna go next to Representative
Luhan and represent Pettigrew.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. I really
appreciate, um, the time to
speak on this. This is.
This has been one agency that
I've really taken a big dive
into since I started as a as a
legislator and making sure that
we're trying to fully fund as as
much as possible, so I can, I, I
see that we're still working,
you know, in your um initiative.
Uh, corrective salary
adjustments to retain technical
experts, um.
I feel like
This is extremely, extremely
important to get us to the next
place where we've been building
up to um really address the um
the database and analysis and
the work that we need to, we
need to be doing, um, and in
other aspects, I mean.
This is an agency that needs to
have
Um, that type of funding, um,
because without this agency, I
mean, as it.
Stated over and over again,
this, this agency, um,
It affects all of our
communities, all of our
economies and in our
environments, and I just can't,
I mean, I, I just.
When I think about as I first
started to really uh jumped into
what the the budget was in my
first lesson into the budget
before I was on this committee
was was for this agency and
understanding, um, the process,
uh, particularly for what was
going on here and I and.
Um, from there, we've had the
water task force, which I'm so
grateful for and I and
participated in, and I just want
to say that um those that are
that are there and working and
doing the work I have.
A lot of um.
I regard for everything you're
doing and respect and know that
you're doing everything that we
need you to be doing, so thank
you for that. I have a couple of
questions. I'm, I'm looking at
the, and if you can expand on
the executive side of uh of the
recommendations here. The
executive recommendation
including the $2 million revenue
swap from the irrigation works
construction fund to the Rio
Grande Trust Fund. Can you, can
I get some more information on,
on, on the need to do that, Mr.
Chair. Uh, thank you, Mr. Chair
and thank you.
Representative Lujan, and thanks
for your, your support, um, and
interest over the years, super
important, um, so yeah, those
trust funds were intended to
support, you know, irrigation
works, so, uh, funding for for
various irrigation, uh,
infrastructure, including in say
say is but not limited to that,
um, and improvement to the Rio
Grande, which, which involves
all sorts of projects related to
Rio Grande management and and
channel maintenance, etc. um.
Over a decade ago, the agency
started depending on those funds
or agency operations maybe
around 2008, that is persisted,
um, that agency dependency on
the trust funds for basic agency
operations has the potential to
jeopardize the long term
solvency of those funds we've
had a serious concerns about
that over the years. What's
presented, I think in 2019 we
were requested by the
legislature to put together a
plan for over 5 years to
eliminate agency.
dependency on the trust funds,
um, what's requested in the
executive recommendation, which
is the $2 million swap, so
instead of relying for agency
operations on the trust funds
that would be moved to general
fund, that gets us a long way
there towards the plan that was
crafted in 2019. We see that
again is important for a long
term solvency of the trust
funds, but also by allowing
those funds to then become more
available for their originally
intended purposes, including.
For example, ourakia and
community ditch infrastructure
Fund tops $2.5 million a year
out of the trust funds. There is
effort underway to increase what
that fund could receive from the
trust funds. We have serious
concerns about that in the
absence of the the trust fund
swap that's presented in the
executive recommendation.
Hopefully that helps answer some
of your questions. It does, and
I, I, I just, I just think we
needed to hear a little bit more
about that and why that's
happening. Did Dallas did?
We need to
Add anything to that or Mr.
Chair, members of the committee,
great question. I think the
LFC's recommendation takes into
account not only the LFC's
budget guidelines of trying to
craft a budget of like a
sustained recurring growth, but
also the balances of the two
funds currently the irrigation
construction Works fund has a
6.2 million balance while the
income Rio Grande trust fund has
about a 2 million balance and so
how the requested breakdown of
offsetting would be, would be
1.5 million from the irrigation
construction works fund.
500 from the Rio Grande, and so
the LFC recommendation took into
account what it believed to be
healthy balances and then
keeping that within the agency's
budget. OK.
Thank you, thank you for that
expansion and that information.
Um, I do wanna, you know, I have
a.
Bit of concern on um the
interstate litigation, um,
request, uh, we're, we're asking
for $5 million from the
executive, and we don't have
anything in the uh LFC
recommendation, and please
remind me, did we not put, how
much did we put in last year,
Mr. Chair.
Um
For this
Um, Mr. Chair and Representative
Lujan, I'm not sure what year
the previous appropriation was
made. I know we have some funds
remaining in that, um, uh, I
think it's around 2.9 million
remaining. We expect to expend a
significant portion of that
before the end of this fiscal
year, given what we see on the
horizon, and then, as I said
earlier, in anticipation of the
likelihood of going to trial
heading into next fiscal year,
um.
Having funding available for for
that litigation is going to be
critical for New Mexico.
Thank you. Uh, I, I agree. I
think that we need to look at
that, um.
I mean, I'm remembering
something as a request, maybe
last year like a words of $30
million or $25 million
I think maybe you're discussing
the Indian water rights
litigation, and I think so those
are the two different things
we're discussing. There's the
litigation for the Rio Grande
and then there's Indian water
rights litigation.
So for
settlements, the LSU
recommendation as an additional
20 million this year, but does
not include further litigation
money for the 5 million being
discussed, I think I would just
want to flag that. I think that
that is really important. I
think as we've been, we're
keeping up with it, um, and
having an executive sessions and
being briefed on where we are,
which we can't have much
discussion on that, um, but I, I
would say we really need to flag
that there and also, as I said,
the flag and the corrective
salary adjustment.
to retain technical experts, and
I would, I mean, and we can
talk, uh, we will talk about
that, uh, that 17 million that
we're looking to do the study
and.
I have some questions about
that, that that's for another.
Matter just some more um I think
information regarding the LFC's
recommendation
of the
reauth last year, a 2.9 million
being discussed related to the
litigation. So that there is
still existing balances for
litigation work related to this,
Mr. Chair, I, I'm just concerned
that maybe that's not enough. I
mean, having known uh and been
part of the um we're an
executive session and being
debriefed on what's going
on where the litigation we
thought we were going to have
this settled and it was not, so
we're moving on with that and I,
I just feel like this is
incredibly important, yes.
Uh, Mr. Chair and um
Representative Luhan, you know,
I'm, I'm really proud of the
work that our team did in
reaching a settlement across the
states, so I just wanna
highlight for everyone we are
still in lockstep with Texas,
um, and I think that's also why
funding this litigation is
important in terms of showing
our commitment to the settlement
that we reached with the other
states. So, I, I agree, and I'm
just, I can't. I'm not expanding
because I don't know what I can
and cannot say so, but I do know
what I, I know, and so.
That's why there's what my
concern is, um, Mister Chair,
again, um, when we're talking
about the database analysis is
like I, I mentioned I'm seeing
that we have some funding there,
um.
But again, I'm just gonna always
go back to the need of what this
means for our entire state and
we're looking at economic
development, infrastructure, and
everything is dependent upon
what we do with our water. We
need to know how much water we
have, we need to know where it
is and um that's, that goes to
the planning and if we don't
have this information and we
don't have this expertise here,
then we're not going to be able
to have like the best plans that
we can. Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Thank you very much,
Representative Lujan. Uh, next
we have representative
Pettigrew, then represent
Vincent.
Thank you, chair, and thank you
all for the presentation.
Sure, I, I just have one
question, I believe.
Can we go back to the
presentation where we talked
about the funding that allows
for federal funding. Can you
tell me
Presenters
Where
And any of the different
worksheets.
We show a revenue from a federal
revenue.
Uh, Mr. Chair Representative,
that's a good question. So are
you referencing specifically
these graphs in that initial or
in the different sheets.
I see nothing in the 3 different
sheets that we get.
The
Outline any federal revenue for
Uh, the LSC water resource
allocations, Interstate stream
compliance.
Uh, thank you, Mr. Chair and
thank you, Representative
Pettigrew for that question. I
think what I was trying to
highlight earlier is just even
in the last few years, the
agency was not leveraging
federal funding, um, given the
challenges that we're facing
around water in New Mexico and
given the recently available and
particular federal funding, but
other funding sources we've
really, uh, hustled to try to
secure those fundings, so we're
going from near 0 or maybe 0 is
what you're looking at on your
sheet to, uh,
Let's see, about 80 million
that's currently moving in
various uh federal funding
sources now without sidetracking
us, obviously there's some
uncertainty and those are in
different places in the process
in terms of what's happening in
the federal transition, um, in
Washington, however, um, I think
it's important to highlight that
we've really tried to secure
other funding sources to to deal
with the challenges that we're
facing. It also includes around
6 million in grant funding.
So that, that you're not seeing
that because it's new and we're
trying to be as aggressive as
possible and looking at all
possible funding sources.
Thank you, Chair, and thank you
for that answer. So,
You
Chairman, I, I believe they're
working from a presentation we
don't have on our desk.
You're referencing documents
that we don't have right now.
OK.
Uh, Mr. Chair and Representative
Pettigrew, I probably is not
reflected cause it hasn't all
come in yet, um, we did, you
know, submit a bar request
recently which um for the 65
million in IRA funding, um,
that's for the lower Rio Grande.
Those are all uh federal funding
pots that are currently in
process. I'd be happy to provide
a breakdown to you of those are
coordinate offline in any way
that you'd like.
Chairman I would appreciate
that. I'd love to have an idea
of what.
Funding your, you're pursuing
with respect to that, and is the
application is complete, or, you
know,
It's just, oh, look here, we've
got this opportunity to start
working on this, or we're 50%
through where we stand on all of
that. Thank you, Chairman. Thank
you very much for representing
group, uh, and next we have
representative Vincent and then
representative Duncan.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. And uh
Madam Director, I was wanting to
ask you about the uh restore our
watershed.
And protect our and remediate,
you know, our groundwater, 87.7
million, or is that, does that
work on federal lands or?
State lands, what watersheds.
Um, Mr. Chair and Representative
Vincent, uh, you'll notice on
that handout those funding
sources are going to our sister
sister agencies, so I really
defer to them to answer that
that question, and I don't know
if stateerry Anderson wants to
comment. I think it's a
combination.
And Mr. Chair, I heard you say
something about, you know, our
You didn't use these particular
words, but our mismanaged for
us, what that would do to help
us with water.
Do you agree that our forests
are mismanaged and that we could
get more water off of our
watersheds, if we would manage
them more correctly.
Mr. Chair.
Uh, Mr. Chair and Representative
Vincent, I would say, um, I have
been incredibly impressed with
the work of our state forester
as clearly as as are you, um, I
think those investments in
properly managing our our
forests and the work that's
occurring at Ener is
outstanding, and I think it has
a ripple effect in terms of
implications for water supplies
for New Mexicans downstream. It
is a critical effort for sure.
Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Thank you very much
representative Vincent. Next we
have representative Duncan.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Um, just a
quick question for you on, um,
Miss Charon litigation, um, have
you had any discussions with the
Ute Mountain Utes on their
claims to water in the state of
New Mexico.
Mr. Chair, Representative
Duncan, um, I am not probably
the best person to respond to
that. Tanya Trujillo, deputy
respond to that?
Thank you, Mr. Chair and uh
representative, short answer,
yes, we are in active
discussions with them, and
several other tribes throughout
the state.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. That's the
only question I had.
Thank you very much,
Representative Duncan. Uh, next
we have Representative
Hernandez.
Sorry.
Uh, thank you, Mr. Chair, uh,
first off, uh, Madam Secretary,
really glad that your team's
here, uh.
I also, I also wanna, uh, um,
you know, uh, uh, Mr. Chairman,
um, it was, it was really
fascinating in August of 2024,
to see, uh, uh, your, your whole
team in Farmington at the at the
civics, uh, yeah, I think it was
at the civic center, and just to
see the display and the, the,
uh, just that community
engagement that you guys do, and
I know that probably cost your
department, um, some money.
To do that water planning open
house. I, I, I don't know if
that was a title of that event,
but it definitely was a unique
experience and, uh, Mr.
Chairman, when, when I, um, I
know that there was a low
turnout of like people uh of,
of, of a community stakeholders
from my district that didn't get
get to participate in that, and
one thing I noticed is that um
The tribal water report was
dated in 2022, um, would, would
there be any efforts to maybe
get an update on the tribal
water report. I know that might
also cost more money for your
department, but I think under,
you know, this, you know, having
all these, uh, new, new, um,
outcomes. I, I, I think it would
be really beneficial. Thank you,
Mr. Chairman.
Thank you, Mr. Chair and
Representative Hernandez and
thank you for participating in
the Open house, um, so the
tribal water report that you're
referring to was part of a
tribal water work group that was
convened as part of the
governor's 50-year water action
plan, um, and it was intended to
work just towards completing
that report and then be done.
However, we found that work
group to be incredibly helpful
and productive, um, and I think
that that experience fed into um
the additional language in the
water security plan.
Act that, as I mentioned
earlier, called on us to convene
this new water security tribal
advisory Council, and, and yes,
I think that uh council can play
an ongoing role in helping to
inform water management
decisions at the state. We'd
love to work with them to update
that report periodically. Um, I
can provide you. We have a
little summary report from the
council coming out of last year.
It's pretty simple, but I'm
happy to provide that to you,
uh, I would love to continue.
to engage on how that counsel's
role evolves as we're, uh,
charting this new path in
regional water.
Thank you very much,
Representative Hernandez
represent Little, please.
Thank you. I have a couple of um
clarifying questions. So, um,
correct me if I'm wrong, it's my
understanding that generally
speaking, LFC uh doesn't like to
provide funds uh for settlements
unless there's a specific
settlement on the table.
And so is that, is that, am I
correct in that, in that, and
Uh, Mr. Chair members Committee,
um, um, uh, I'm sorry if I'm not
interpreting your question
correction correctly, are you
asking is the LFC recommendation
not recommending further
litigation funding due to not
having a settlement.
Uh, Mr. Chair, uh, members of
the committee, uh, correct me if
I'm wrong, uh, presenters, but I
do think when it comes to
specifically the litigation
regarding the Rio Grande
settlement, those conversations
are ongoing and the state has
given considerable funds to
that, uh, without there being
any specific settlement in mind
regarding maybe the Indian water
rights settlements, those are
also funds that are being put
towards continued support to
these efforts.
OK, uh, so let me ask another
question, Mr. Chair. Then are
there any other um settlements
in the queue in Congress.
Thank you, Mr. Chair and uh
Representative Little, I'm Tanya
Trujillo from the State Engineer
office. I think you're referring
to our Indian water rights
settlements funding and I just
want to clarify for the
committee that every year we
make a presentation to the
interim Indian Affairs Committee
regarding the progress on all of
the negotiations and the
existing settlements, and last
year we did have 6 different
bills pending in Congress.
Unfortunately, those.
did not pass, but we're working
closely with our delegation to
get them teed up again and move
them through as quickly as
possible. I would note we are
also working with uh other
states who have Indian water
rights settlements and other
delegations to try to make
progress in this important
effort regarding the state cost
share for those settlements, we
are trying to build a fund so
that we can meet the state's
obligations when they come due
and
In many cases we have
responsibilities to begin
implementation efforts as soon
as we have the funding for them,
and again, those go to the
non-Indian parties in the
various um settlements to try to
help expand the water resources
and meet the challenges across
the board. So it's a very
important area of work for us,
and we appreciate the support
from the legislature.
Thank you very much, Mr. Chair,
that helped to clarify some
pieces for me. Thank you and as
complex as it is too, it also
kind of opens up others. Thank
you.
Thank you very much,
Representative Little. Uh, I
think that concludes our
questions, um, briefly actually
to go off
for the water right Indian water
rights settlements. It's my
understanding that uh as was
pointed out, money dedicated by
the state goes to offset sort of
the non-tribal share, so the
non-federally funded.
We can spend, we, the state can
utilize those dollars prior to
settlements being executed at
the federal level to uh help
communities and that, that will
be credited towards the eventual
federal uh settlement. Is that
accurate?
Thank you, Mr. Chair. That's
absolutely correct, and it
leverages additional significant
federal funding coming into the
state. That's great. Thank you
for that great questions from
the committee, great question,
uh, and this has been a focus
for Representative Sanchez. I
think that helps us sort of see.
So, second question, can um you
all help provide us a bit of a
road map for how uh some of the
additional funding the Delta,
we're already recommending
another 20 new. Can you give us
a bit
of a road map, uh, as we go
forward for how some of those um
state dollars could be used in a
time frame that doesn't wait on
the federal government, but
we'll, as we've established,
we'll get credit from the
federal government. Thank you,
Mr. Chairman. Would you like me
to do some examples now or
provide something if you could,
thank you very much, Mr. Hill.
Uh, if you could provide them to
the uh sort of offline to the
committee, uh, and I think
that'll help we've heard
interest from the committee on
that area. So offline is great.
Absolutely, and I would know uh
the report that we did submit to
the Indian Affairs Committee and
the Natural Resources Committee
interims uh contained a
breakdown of those of that
information, so it's easy for us
to pull it up again.
That's outstanding. Thank you.
Um, I know it's a little bit
late, so I, I'll cut my
questions short, but one say a
big thank you. We've seen a
great deal of investment, a
great deal of progress and
appreciate the committee's
interest in continuing to
support in a vital area.
Thank you all very much. We'll
go ahead and thank God for the
snow. That's right. It's truly,
uh, we'll ask the vice chair for
the LLC recommendation for right
now. Thank you, Mr. Chair. I'd
move the committee adopt the LFC
recommendation at this time?
OK, it's been moved by Vice
Chair Dixon, seconded by
Representative Garrett. Any
opposition to that motion?
Please show represent Pettigrew
in opposition.
Thank you very much.
OK.
One of the originals will invite
up Secretary Kenny.
Mr. Chair, members of the
committee, while we get
situated, the agency code is
667, so it's going to be behind
tab 6 in your binders.
Similar to the previous
different sheets, that first
page is going to be some
bullets, a second page will be a
high level and then that third
page will be the beginning of
our different sheets. I'll give
us all a couple of minutes to
get situated.
Uh, Mr. Chair, we're just
looking for the uh presentation
for the agency really quick, so
hopefully we can.
Uh, Mr. Chair, members of the
committee, just like the vice
chair is showing you, there's a
handout and so hopefully you can
follow along while the agency
maybe gives their presentation.
Uh, Mr. Chair, members of the
committee, uh, once again, I'm
Austin Davidson, the LLC's
Natural Resource analyst and
joining me today for our
conversation is the secretary of
the Environment, James Kenny and
the Deputy, the secretary John
Roderick and my DFA counterpart,
Laurie.
Mr. Chair, members of the
committee, the LFC
recommendation, uh, reduced the
agency's general fund revenue by
670.8,000 or 2% resulting in a
general fund revenue difference,
but beyond that, the two
recommendations are identical in
recommending the movement of
funds from the agency's
different divisions for the
creation of the compliance and
enforcement division, if you'll
remember from presentations
before and from discussions
initially today, the compliance
and enforcement division.
Chair representative where we're
getting a nice overview of the
NMED website right now, if you
guys have any interest in the
current.
Departments and funds.
Mr. Chair Representatives, while
he goes, uh, there's a
presentation.
Um, going out to the base
differences between the two
recommendations. Both
recommendations keep the
agencies' other and contracts
budget consistent with FY 25,
the LLC recommendation did not
fund the agency's requested
movement of personnel funding to
the resource management
division, which would have
increased their personnel and
kept all other division personal
budgets consistent with the FY
25 operating budget. The
executive funded this personnel
budget movement resulting in
that 670,000 or that 2%
difference.
Uh, the LFC and the executive
reached consensus on all of the
agencies performance measures,
I'll now turn it over to Laurie.
Good evening, Mr. Chair, members
of the committee, my name is
Laurie Saka. I am the uh
Standing analyst at DFA for
environment, uh, but it should
be temporary, so don't get
attached.
Um, we're gonna go to.
I'm sorry. Uh, we're gonna go to
P 566, which is the a new
program within the environment
department. It's the compliance
and enforcement division. Both
the LFC and executive support
the creation of the new program
and the requested total budget
just shy of about $14.1 million.
Which includes 3.2 million in
general fund revenue, 1.3
million in other transfers, 3.5
million in federal revenues and
6.1 million in.
Uh, for the base, both the LFC
and the executive support the
agency's requested personnel
other in contract budgets, and
with that, I will pass it back
to Austin.
Uh, Mr. Chair and members of the
committee, now turning to the
resource management division of
the agency that's going to be P
code 567.
The LFC recommendation increased
the program's general fund
revenue by 58.2% or 0.7%, the
executive recommendation
decreased the program's general
fund budget by 729,000 or 9.3%
resulting in this 670,000
difference. The LC
recommendation, uh, funded
building leases and 158.3,000 in
contractual services, uh, the
executive increased personnel by
670,000 in the executive
recommendation also increased.
by 21.7, while the LC
recommended transferring the one
FTE from the program to the new
compliance and enforcement
division and once again, all the
performance measures we met with
consensus. I'll turn it back
over to Laurie. Chair, members
of the committee, um, real quick
on resource management, I would
just like to note again that the
general fund is still flat to FY
25, it's just the movement that
if you compared between the FI.
25 operating budget and the
recommendations, it's, it's
flat, it's just moving it to
better help the agency where
they need the help the most,
which is for finance positions
as well as other positions.
And with that, I will move on to
the water protection division,
which is P 568.
Uh, the ellipsian executive
recommendations support the
transfer of funding from the
program's personnel budget to
the newly created compliance and
enforcement division.
The LFC recommendation places
the agency's land of enchantment
Legacy Fund revenue in the
program's other revenues
category, while the executive
budgeted the land or the land of
enchantment Legacy Fund revenues
in the programs of transfers
category.
In the base, the LFC and
executive recommendations
support the agency's requested
movement of 4.6 million or 16.5%
from the agency's personnel
budget to the compliance and
enforcement division. The
reduction of 13.2 million or
29.4% due to an expiring.
Grant
And a 1.3 million or 6.4%
increasing the
Increasing in the program's
other category for increased
travel costs, risk rate
increases, and expanded funding
for grants to local governments.
And with that, I'll pass it back
to Boston.
Uh, Mr. Chair, members of the
committee, a nice quick
different sheet, uh the LFC and
the executive had no differences
in their recommendation, and we
had no differences in the
performance measures, so we'll
turn this right back over to
Laurie to go to the next
division. Uh for
the environmental protection
division, um, again, you'll
notice that there are no
differences in revenues or
expenditures, um, or performance
measures, we've reached
consensus on that.
Um, and I will turn it back to
Austin for
The next one
Mr. Chair, members of the
committee are signed like a
broken record. Once again, there
is no differences between the
LFC and the executive regarding
the movement of funds from the
Environmental Health Division to
the new compliance and
enforcement division and
possibly a helpful handout to
maybe map this is going to be
your high level, that will kind
of show the movement of the
funds from each of the divisions
and the compliance and
enforcement division. I'll now
turn it back over to Laurie to
kind of discuss maybe the
dismantling of the special
revenue. Thank you, Austin, Mr.
Chair.
members of the committee, um, P
802, the Special revenue funds,
this program has historically
been the repository for the
various, I think it's 28 special
revenue funds the agency has,
um, is in receipt of, and they
would bring the money into this
fund and then disperse it where
needed. Both the LFC and the
executive support the agency's
request this year to
Uh, do away with P802 and just
put those funds in the programs,
um, applicable to them instead
of having to do extraneous work
with transferring from bars to
bring in those revenues. And
with that, I believe Austin is
going to do differences on the
specials.
Thank you, Laurie. That was a
good breakdown, uh, Mr. Chair,
members of the committee, uh,
Madam Chair, members of the
committee, if you want to turn
your packets to page 17, that's
where the beginning of the
discussion between the LFC and
the executive specials are.
So you'll see on that first
page, the executive recommended
a $3 million non-recurrent
appropriation for the
development and implementation
of climate change, the LFC and
the executive both recommended
the creation of a for the
development and implementation
of compliance and enforcement
strategies, which the LFC did 3
million, while the executive did
6.
The executive recommendation
also gave 2.5 million or
sampling and analysis of
drinking water contaminants.
turning out a page 18 of note,
uh, Madam Chair, members of the
committee.
There's going to be that 50
million that the executive
recommended for a uh cleanup
fund, and I think there's also
companion legislation that also
discusses that fund as well,
that's not included currently in
the LFC's recommendation and any
other major special differences
of note would be the executive,
including a 75 million for the
strategic water supply, while
the LFC recommendation does not
include a recommendation for the
strategic water supply, both
recommendations included funding
of 5.7.
million for Toreroin Superfund
cleanup.
And lastly, Mr. Chair, members
of the committee, turning to
page 19, that final gives you
those breakdowns, the two
differences. There's a 2.75
million in both recommendations
for regionalization of water
systems and for the development
of utility operator workforce,
and with that I'll turn it over
to the secretary. Thank you.
Thank you.
Uh, thank you, Madam Chair.
Thank you, members of the
committee, uh, I appreciate
being here and, and being able
to talk about our uh our budget
request. Um, I, I will keep this
brief. I believe you all have a
handout from the department.
Yes, thank you. And in that
handout is an insert, so, um,
I'm just gonna go very high
level to get to your questions,
uh, as I know it is late, um,
but I don't want to do a
disservice to the the
Uh, financial staff that we have
both here tonight and that have
been working on this budget as
well as the programmatic staff.
Um, Madam Chair and members of
the committee,
I think the people left in the
room aside from Camilla, are,
uh, our environment department
employees over here, so I'll
introduce them if you have
questions, but sitting here with
me is our, our deputy John
Roderick. Um,
Me of members of the committee,
you are right that you heard
from, um.
LFC and DFA earlier that the
Natural Resource agencies,
including my agency, have been
a, uh, have, have been made
whole in many ways or have
gotten additional general fund.
Um, when I started this
position, we were digging out of
a hole. Uh, we have now gotten
to the point with your help that
we have appropriately placed our
employees, and let me just
mention to you what that means.
So when I started, we had
employees who were, you know,
newer employees.
were making more than senior
employees. We had all sorts of
topsy-turvy kind of pay
structures going on, um, which
is reflective of where we have
been. I'm, I don't want to
assess blame in any prior
administration or secretary,
etc. but we were where we were,
um, last year you appropriated
$6.2 million in general fund, we
added another 3+ million to that
in permit fees and got everyone
in the department appropriately
placed so nobody is out of step
with their
their pay bands, etc. um, that
resulted in our vacancy rate
going from 23% to 5%. So when
you heard um the the uh state
engineer here a moment ago
saying that, you know, increased
pay helps with recruitment
retention. I, I can, I, I am
shocked to tell you that how
much it helped, cause I didn't
think our vacancy rate would be
as low as it is right now. And
with that 5% vacancy rate
whenever we do advertise a
position, we still get 12.
applicants who want to work for
the department. So we have no
shortage of people who want to
work for us. We have no shortage
of, of need and um again, that
was your help that got us there.
So I wanna thank you for that.
Um, Madam Chair, members of the
committee are, uh, the, the
Environment department, we don't
talk about this a lot, uh, when
I come before you and I wanna
make sure I do mention it, you
know, for an agency that's grown
in its budget, we, we're also
giving out more to communities
than we ever have as well. So,
We, we passed out about $165
million in the last fiscal year,
um, that money is both in
grants, loans, all sorts of
programs from water to uh air,
etc. but we think $165 million
for an agency that is um
Uh, about a $200 million agency,
uh, it, it, it's a lot of
investment in communities that
we're giving out. Um, Madam
Chair, Mr. Chair, uh, members of
the commit com com oh.
It's getting late, uh, of the
committee, um,
We also, you know, with respect
to our compliance and
enforcement activities, um,
which, you know, that we can
differ on whether we're being
too aggressive, non aggressive
enough, etc. but nonetheless,
we've collected penalties that
uh now offset our total general
fund taking. So we're putting
more money into the general fund
by um holding those polluters
accountable. I will be the first
to tell you that the vast
majority of New Mexico
businesses are trying to comply
and do comply.
But there are a number of
facilities that when they get it
wrong, they may get it really
wrong, and that's where you see
some of those, those bigger
penalties coming into play.
Um, and finally, Mr. Chair and
uh members of the committee, um,
With respect to the LFC
proposal, and I, I know how, how
this works, but with respect to
the LFC proposal. I just want to
highlight that in the last
fiscal year, we took a cut to
what we call resource management
division, um, we're, we're now
proposed to take another cut to
the resource management
division, which would total
about 1.4 million in recurring
funding, uh, if that were to go
through this year, that's about
10 positions. These are
positions in finance, HR, our
attorneys, um, these are the
critical infrastructure.
positions that actually keep our
vacancy rate low, they keep the
money flowing to communities
high, um, that hold polluters
accountable that provide uh
adjudication of contentious
permits. So I just want to put a
plug in there that, that while
we requested a flat budget, I
was disappointed to see that we
got a cut uh from LFC of that 2%
as well.
Um
Going to page 2 of, and that was
really all of page one, I'll be
somewhat quick on page 3 of the
handout, um, that you have
there, which is really our
special appropriations, and as
you heard a number of our
special appropriations were
proposed by LFC to uh at lower
than the executive rates, um,
for example, the $8 million to
fund the PAS legislation that we
have going through House Bill
212, uh, 3 million of that would
go for implementation of that
legislation.
and then the remainder of it
would go for the uh litigation
that we are both the recipient
of an initiators of with respect
to the Department of Defense.
Um, there's a number of other
special appropriations that are
listed here, um, in the table
that I would just say, uh,
perform critical functions in
terms of one time money, uh,
and, and I hope that the, the
body considers those special
appropriations. As you turn to
page 4 of the handout, uh, Mr.
Chair, members of the committee.
Again, I just wanted to, you
know, a little bit urge you that
when you have time, uh, on the
bottom left-hand corner of that.
page 4 is a budget video that we
put together. It's only about 2
or 3 minutes long. Um, it's
something that I would just
encourage you as a new
legislator or existing
legislator to to to watch. We
really tried to really break
down how our budget works, uh,
for you and for the public, as
well as our own employees. It's
now part of, uh, our new
employee orientation, um, but as
an agency that has over 125
funding sources where only one
is general fund. It can be true.
That, uh, our air program can be
without money and our water
program can be flush and never
the two shall meet, um, which is
why we've had to slow some
permitting, which I think we're
getting that fixed now, but we
can still move our other
programs because you don't
budget us at the at the agency
level, you budget us at the pe
code or division level, and then
those special revenue funds,
which we have 24 permit fee
funds are further compartment
analyzing each dollar that we
get. So I can't use my hazardous
waste fund or air permitting
because of state law. And I
think that budget video is
really helpful to see how that
works. Um, lots of great
accomplishments to talk about
both internally in the
department as I highlighted some
of those, uh, with our vacancy
rate, with giving out money to
communities, um,
And lots of great things, um,
you know, I'm really proud
about, uh, our, our team, our
staff, uh, we, we started a
501c4 called the New Mexico
Environment Department Employee
Association, it's boosted
morale. We have lunch and
learns, we have, we go to, um,
you know, socially, no one's
getting paid for it, uh, but
socially we go out and do things
together. I think that's boosted
the morale of the department,
uh, on top of everything else
that you've helped, helped us
do.
Um, and this is truly finally,
if I've said finally already, I
put an insert in your handouts
that we just uh printed up this
morning.
I watched the AJFC discussion on
budget adjustment requests,
bars, um, tried to meet you
halfway with where maybe you're
thinking. Uh, I, I do echo what
my colleagues have said. Bars
are really important for years,
we've been told don't revert
money. It'll be a penalty
against your department, even if
those are permit fees or federal
funds, it still becomes a
contentious moment. So we've
conservative, uh, we budgeted
conservatively from those funds.
Um.
Now, if the tendency is going to
be to get rid of bars from
agencies, we would want the
opportunity to budget a little
bit more aggressively and then
maybe revert the money we don't
use, but we are not uh an agency
that's borrowing money in
traditionally into the 200s,
unless we're, we have a new task
or assignment from from
somebody, uh, but one of the
things maybe that I could point
out to you is like our hazardous
waste emergency fund. If we
don't have bar authority for
that, and there is a spill a
release.
And I am limited by how much
money I asked for, then I would
have money sitting in an account
but couldn't respond to an
emergency in the state of New
Mexico. I don't think you want
that. I don't think I want that.
Um, so there are reasons why
budget adjustment is, is, uh, in
my opinion, necessary to the
operation of the department, but
we tried to think about the way
you were talking about it the
other day, and what we did was,
we broke down our budget
adjustment language into what we
would maybe need right at the
beginning of the.
School year and what we could
come back to in a 30 day session
and ask you for. So that's the
difference on that handout for
the first, uh, page one, page
two of that handout, where page
two is everything after the,
the, um, or during the 30 day
session. Again, just trying to
anticipate the way you're
thinking and show that we're
trying to meet you where you
are. Um,
Mr. Cha, members of the
committee, I think we're good.
That's great. Thank you very
much, Mr. Secretary. Thank you,
Deputy Secretary Roderick and to
your team, uh, we'll start with
questions first to
representative Silva, then to.
Uh, thank you, Mr. Chair. Thank
you, secretary, um, and folks,
um, can I ask what events or
data led you led your department
to decide to create the
compliance and enforcement
division.
Thank you, chair. Yeah, Mr.
Chair and Representative, thank
you for that question. Um, a
number of converging events took
us down this path, um, maybe two
of the most important ones are,
um, that the way we implement
federal programs in the
department, uh, the permitting
and compliance and enforcement
should not be routed through the
same decision maker. So in other
words, if somebody wanted their
permit changed to get
out of a violation that should
be a very different decision
tree, so we don't have conflict
of interest, um.
That was one of the reasons and
we're implementing federal
programs under federal grants
that also speak to that
construct, and the department
hasn't.
Has we've put institutional
controls and, but this would be
uh a, a truly separation, if you
will. Um,
That is probably the, the
primary reason we focused in on
that, um, the other piece of it
is that
You know, the, it's, it's the
permit writers and technical
folks that work on permitting,
um, should not be the ones who
are going out in the field doing
the compliance and enforcement
work. That's not to say that a
permit writer shouldn't go in
the field and understand what
they're permitting, but they,
they should not be put in the
position where they're, uh,
could feel in a compromised way
that they can't fulfill all of
their job either through
permitting or enforcement
because they're the same one.
Um, and, and that we, we have
that construct right now.
Excellent. I appreciate that
separation just for
accountability and good
governance as an agency, so
that's great, um, what, so,
Uh, so part of the district I
represent is
Um, pretty isolated. Lots of
huge illegal dumping sites, um,
that don't quite necessarily fit
into like they're not a super
fun site. They're not, um, they,
they're not related to, um, like
groundwater quality necessarily.
It's just like.
Hundreds if not thousands of
tires and or construction
equipment that's just dumped,
and I'm wondering what um what
compliance measures does the
Department of Environment do
when when the county, the the
local public entity can't
leverage the power they have to
enforce something like that.
Thank you, Chair. Mr. Chair and
Representative, uh, thank you
for that question. Um, if we're
talking about illegal dump
sites, um, solely and not like
dry clean.
ers cause with different answers
for different things, um, but
for illegal dumb sites, we
actually have a really
interesting bill. I'm hoping
that some of you consider uh
joining it, uh, but we have a
House Bill 291, which is
modifying the recycling and
illegal dumping Act to be more
responsive, uh, and also create
things like the a a producer
responsibility organization, so
we can, um,
Incentivize those tire
distributors or mattress
distributors to put programs in
place where they collect that,
so we never let it become a, an
illegal dump site. That said,
for those that are illegal dump
sites now that revision to the
House Bill 291 will give us a
little bit more, uh, teeth to
address things like scrap tires,
and it, and when I say teeth,
it's not always a hammer, it
sometimes is, we'll be able to
put more money.
to grants that would, that would
then go out to communities like
yours where we could work
cooperatively to, to remedy
those.
Excellent. I will look up that
bill, um, I also want to say
that I, um, I appreciate your
concern for staffing and just
wanna flag that um for uh the
chair in this committee and uh
what was the other thing, sorry,
it's a long day, um, and the
strategic water, uh, planning,
so thank you, thank you, chair.
Thank you very much for
represent Dow and representsana.
Thank you, Mr. Chair and thank
you for the presentation. I'm
looking at page 18 on the
special.
Supplemental and deficiencies.
Um, I, I believe I understand
that Curry County, that area to
deal with the PFO issue. They
need 15 million and here I see
44 million is the balance
somewhere else or the LFC
recommendation is only 2
million. Is a balance somewhere
else in the budget? How are we
getting to the 15 million that's
needed.
Yeah, um, Mr. Chair and
Representative, thanks for your
question. Uh, the, the, the 12
million, well, so.
There's about 12 million that I
understand to connect the rural
Curry County residents to the um
public water supply there. And
so 1215 million either or, but
um that request came in after
our budget submission was put in
in September. Um, the 4 million
that you see there is uh money
that we wanted to go out and
test people's houses and then
buy them.
Whole house filters.
So, as we evolved, this is the
challenge. I don't want to call
it a problem, but this is a
challenge of putting a budget
together and, you know, getting
it in in September cause you
learn things after. So, we added
the 4 million to get people's
houses safe on their own well
water.
And then we learned about this
$12 to $15 million that's needed
on top of that to get public
water to these residents. So all
in all, I believe a House bill
and Senate bill in the amount of
$12 million has now dropped, and
we would add the $4 million
either to filter people's homes
or maybe even provide them a
connection to the public water
supply once it reaches them.
Does that make sense?
Chair and secretary. Yes, it
does. And so the bill has
dropped.
But it's not in the, it's not in
HBT right now.
So is the governor looking at
funding that?
Um, Mr. Jarrett and
Representative, I right now
we're talking about where that
money would come from either
from the executive or from the,
the legislature or combination
thereof, so I
I, I'm not sure how to answer
your question. We're still
talking. OK, thank you, Mr.
Chair, and thank you Secretary.
At the very next one, rural
infrastructure Fund.
15 million. What is the, what
does low interest mean?
And how long are the terms
and uh.
Madam Representative, so the
rural infrastructure fund, um,
first, let me say is our most
agile funding source.
It has maximum
Pay out amounts of $2 million
per year, which means a
community can come back year
after year and reapply up to
$500,000 of that $2 million can
be grant, OK?
Uh, in some circumstances we can
do grant only up to 500,000
session or so ago, you funded us
with 10 million to that rural
infrastructure program, we
obligated that funding
immediately.
Um, the reality is that it is
because it's so agile, it's the
fun that we can move quickly on,
for example, um.
The Clean Water State revolving
fund or drink water state
revolving fund may take 6 months
to a year to implement.
We just did one in 30 days out
of the rip fund.
And so it's crucial, you know,
that, that we continue to fund
that because we can do water
wastewater, solid waste, it's a
real responsive. Thank you, Mr.
Chair and thank you. Thank you
for that. Why then why such a
conservative, knowing the need,
why such a conservative request?
Mr. Chair and uh
Madam Representative.
We don't always have the liberty
to ask for everything that we
would want, um, realistically,
we can utilize much more funding
than that, I believe, uh, one
request was 15, in this case,
LFC recommended 20 million.
Um, and, uh,
As many in this committee have
heard me say before, we'll never
turn money down, and this is a
good place to fund.
The state, um, Mr. Chair and,
and Representative, I just want
to add one piece to that. I, I
think, uh, Deputy Roderick is
correct. We, we, we could make,
we could get as much money as
any legislative body wants to
put into that out the door.
There's need. The, the, I, I
will also point out that the
clean water State Revolving
Fund, and the drinking water
state revolving fund as
administered by NMFA are two
other funds that have a that are
that are more cumbersome to
administer, but they're not.
They're not as nimble, um, we're
about 9 to 13 years behind other
states for those getting those
monies out the door. So
sometimes when we're we create a
nimble opportunity like RIP or
Capital Olay, we lose our, we
potentially risk federal funds
because we're not getting those
out the door as quickly, so we,
it, it's a balance.
OK. Thank you, Mr. Chair, and on
this sheet, on the very last um
secretary in this very last one,
it, it says using the rural
infrastructure program, the 10.2
million available to help
communities with essential water
wastewater and solid waste
products, um, critical funding
can be used to provide loans or
grants. Is that just a summary
of this? Or so that is the funds
depleted. It's, it's encumbered.
It's.
OK. All right. Um, and then,
The air was my last question on
the air quality bureau, um, do,
what, what is, just cause I'm
just on a learning curve, Mr.
Chair secretary, where does
pecan dust fall in here?
Uh, Mr. Chair and
Representative, thank you. It,
it sounds delicious right now.
Um, but, but honestly, it is not
a, it's not regulated under our
air. So we have fugitive dust
programs that that particular
dust is not subject to, so like
a construction site would be
subject to managing their
fugitive dust. But, uh, pecan
dust would not be.
And if the, if the Green
amendment passed, where would
pecan dust fall in that?
Um,
mister, Mr. Chair, and, and, and
representative. I, I honestly
don't know at this at the
moment. It, we, we have a
Mr. Chair and Representative, we
have a state.
Uh, rule that exempts pecan dust
from our agricultural dust, uh,
from
The dust standards. I don't know
how the Green amendment, if it
passed, would interface with our
state roles, it may cause us to
have to change state rules, or
it may cause us to have to
change state laws, but I don't
know off the top of my head.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Thank you.
Thank you very much
Representative. Next, we have
Representative Sareana, then.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman, um,
it's always good to have you
here. I learned so much from
you. You, you're the easiest
person to listen to for me,
cause some, but you are, so
thank you, um, so on the 2%
decrease.
Um
It says in in human resources,
IT and legal staff, that's what
concerns me, the legal steps,
so.
Maybe Austin, can you tell us
why?
Mr. Chair, uh, members of the
committee, that's a great
question. Uh, the LLC's
recommendation takes into
account while the agency was
requesting movement of the
different funds to create the
compliance and enforcement. They
wanted to move 670,000 into the
resource management and we took
into account the agencies'
existing vacancy funds. If you
turn to the agency's PSA, you'll
see that they have $15 million
in funded vacancy dollars, and
so they have um considerable
funds that they could use for
certain programs. So that was
one of the aspects that.
OK, I'm not sure I understand,
but
Does that make sense, Mr. Chair,
and, and, um,
Representative, uh, thank you
for your kind words first, um,
and, and secondly, uh, maybe for
Austin, is that
15 million in 200s.
General fund or all funds?
Uh, secretary that will be in
all funds the PS takes into
account.
and representative, this is,
this is where we, if we, if we
talk about all our money is
being
Um, interchangeable, then that
makes sense to me, but our money
is not interchangeable. So I
can't use an air quality fund to
pay for an IT professional
unless that IT professional only
works on air quality issues. So
I, I think with no disrespect to
my friend here, um, I think that
15 million in PSEMB is not
necessarily the right number
relevant to what those
attorneys, IT professionals, HR
professionals,
etc. would, would normally work
on. If we, if we talk lump sums
versus the reality that of the
agency life there, it's very
different.
Uh, I, I think that is fair,
secretary. I'd also add just
further context, Mr. Chair
Representative, if you look at
the agencies' different sheet
for resource management, their
actuals versus their general
fund versus their APA. There's
about a 3 million gap there as
well. So that's also additional
funds, uh, basically the outside
of the scope that we're
discussing that could also be
used for these.
OK. Thank you. Thank you, Mr.
Chairman. Um, the other thing
was, um, agency totals, well,
no, no, we'll forget about that
one. PAS coloman,
do we need any extra money for
that? Would you, or is it just
too early, um, Madam Chair, um,
chairman and representative, um,
That $8 million special
appropriation, 3 million of it
would be to implement HB 212,
the balance of that would be for
our litigation, uh, whether
that's technical discovery, etc.
that would be for all of our all
of our sites, Hollman included.
And Mr. Chair and
Representative, we've been using
our hazardous waste permit, uh,
fund and hazardous waste
emergency fund to self, to not
come to this body to ask for
every time we need something on
PAs. We've been using those
funds to, um, you know, do
studies, that's how we know that
Uh, Lake Hollman has the highest
concentration of FIFAs in any
animal or plant in the world
right now.
Thank you, Mr.
Thank you very much,
Representative Saana.
Representative Lujan. Thank you,
Mr. Chair, uh,
representative Saana like the
same, um, the last, the last
thing she talked about with the
$8 million special she flagged
it, so she took my question, you
answered it. Thank you.
Uh, excellent. Thank you very
much, Representative uh Luhan,
um.
Uh, Mr. Secretary, Deputy
Secretary, um.
I guess the big things first of
all, #2, uh, regarding the
cleanup of uh uranium, uh, sites
contaminated uranium sites and
non-contaminated uranium sites.
Uh, how much money can we expend
over the next year and a half in
sort of on the ground cleanup.
Yeah, Mr. Chair, um,
You know, we put in a $50
million appropriation, uh, we,
we are aware of the $50 million
bill that dropped. We think we
can get $47 million out the
door, um, and we've already
pre-selected and somewhat
identified sites, uh, both, you
know, wet uranium mining.
Uh, dry uranium mining sites as
well as um
Uh, former dry cleaners and
things like that, so there's
there's probably about
8 to 10 sites we can really make
it done on.
OK. Uh, thank you, Mr.
Secretary. That's great to hear.
And as part of that is, are we
look this would be bringing land
back into sort of productive
space from a place now where
it's like not even you can't use
it, you also wanna stay away
from it in many cases. Yeah, Mr.
Cha, I fully agree that you, you
not only gain the economic
development of what's happened,
you know, the economic
development activity of the
remediation crews that are
working on it, um, but then you
turn the, the land back.
To a viable uh options for
additional economic development,
cause some of these are, you
know, downtown Albuquerque or
there, you know, out in areas,
uh, Nahoneian areas that that
could really benefit from this.
And, and that's all about
economic.
There's also the public health
and environmental benefits,
which, you know, are the focus
of us. Absolutely, absolutely.
Uh, thank you very much, Mr.
Secretary. Thanks to our members
and Representative Duncan,
Representative Hernandez for uh
leadership there. Um, the, the
funded vacancy and sort of the
how we address some of that, Mr.
Secretary. I think that, you
know, it remains a challenge is
going back to one of the first
slides that uh that Mr. Davidson
showed
there's a great deal of federal
money, obviously that comes in
and that you utilize
effectively, um, it's clear that
we still have a ways to go
because our Mr. Secretary, um.
Sort of our overall funded
vacancy rate that were shown as
of last September is 17.5%.
Um
And
with, with really over a million
dollar funded vacancies in uh
most departments with the
exception of resource
management, which, uh, so I, I
think there's
It's late tonight. I think
there's just, there is continued
work here and there's a lot of
interest from the committee in
both the programs that you uh
offer as well as getting some of
this piece right, and I don't
know that we're there yet.
Anything that, Mr. Armstrong.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Jonas
Armstrong, director of the Water
Protection Division, but
formerly the director of
strategic initiatives, and if
you look at page 4 of your
handout, I think there's a
little bit of context to, to
give you here. Back in August
when Austin ran his PSA, uh, on
our budget request, which made
sense at the time. We had
5005767 field positions. We've
added almost 40 filled FTEs
since then, uh, well, actually
through the end of December.
So, you know, I, I think that
that has something to do with
the discrepancies, uh, uh, thank
you. So that's sort of between,
that's helpful and always sort
of that's, this is a snapshot.
It's not sort of a
A be all end all.
OK, um, there's a lot of, uh,
continued sort of discussion
around the specials, um, and
need to sort of understand clear
as as best we can on on this uh
PS and EB side. We'll go ahead
and ask. I don't see any other
questions. We'll ask for the,
uh, the LFC for right now, um,
and look forward to staying in
conversation.
Mr. Chair, I would move that the
committee adopt the LFC
recommendation. Second, OK, it's
been moved by Vice Chair Dixon,
a very quick second and lucky
for that from representative
Muhan. Is there any opposition
to that motion.
Please show Pettigrew in
opposition.
OK, uh, committee, thank you
very much. Great work, um, what
we're gonna go to public
comment, um.
No,
uh, briefly.
OK, uh, public comment in uh.
In person, come on up for a
minute, please.
Thank you, Mr. Chair, members of
the committee. I'm Camila
Feibelman. I'm the director of
the Rio Grande chapter of the
Sierra Club, and I just, first
of all wanted to thank all of
our environmental agency public
servants.
Um, if you look at the emergency
funding that's been spent in the
state this year.
You know, something like 80% of
it is attending to climate
related crises.
And we see time and again a
worry about forest management
when it comes to the climate
crisis, but our forests are bone
dry. And we need to be able to
manage the climate-driven part
of our forest fires as well as
the forest management side of
things, and so I'm here just to
make sure that our agencies come
away from this session with the
resources that they need, um, to
really truly regulate our
greenhouse.
ho use gasses, we are gonna see
a move away from federal
regulation of greenhouse gasses
and being the 2nd largest
emitter of oil in the country,
it means we have a special
ability to step up and make sure
that we're creating the
conditions to manage for extreme
fires followed by floods,
extreme heat, and drought. So I,
that's a, a real importance to
us, our kids are 35,000 members.
supporters. I also wanted to
just name the need for agency
capacity to regulate PIFA,
something that the federal
agents are, are not doing that
$8 million. I mean, these are
forever chemicals they've
affected our dairies, um, it's
been found in mother's milk,
it's in products up and down our
daily lives, and there's a lot
we can do locally.
The last thing I just wanted to
name is the $50 million for
neglected groundwater.
sites. Thank you so much for
representative Hernandez for
bringing that and attending to
uranium, uh, clean up. I'd like
to say I live in a neighborhood
that has a dry cleaner fluid
spill, and we've been added to
the Superfund list, but um there
are dry cleaner spills
throughout the state and every
single one of your districts,
and we need to be able to pay
for those cleanups. Thank you so
much.
OK, uh, I don't see anybody else
in person. Is there anybody
online?
Uh, seeing no one. OK, we're
gonna conclude that. members
really quick, just wanna
announce our IT working group.
It's gonna be a representative
Pettigrew, Representative
Duncan, Representative Garrett,
representative Soignana and Vice
Chair Dixon, um, they'll be
meeting on Thursday. We have a
few more uh full committee
meetings, we'll be doing a lot
of work groups coming up here
pretty soon. Thanks everybody
and have a great evening. We're
concluded.
