Here.
Representative Armstrong.
President.
Representative brown here.
Representative Castellano.
Thank.
Ice Representative Chatfield.
There.
Representative Crowder here.
Representative Dixon.
Air.
Representative Garcia.
Representative had at this.
Representative Hochman Vigil.
Representative Lane.
Here.
Representative Lotta.
Here.
Representative Sarinana here.
Representative Swetser.
Representative Trujillo.
I share small.
I am here.
Madam chair Lundstrom.
Okay we do provided you have a
for
Madam chair is and is there have
been I guess some some internet
difficulties.
I think
Let's go ahead we do we do have
a quorum we appreciate everybody
taking time to hop on today
let's go ahead and if if we
could start with our LFC
analysts please for
the early childhood care and
education department secretary
Groginsky great to see you we
look forward very much to
hearing from you so we'll start
with the LFC analysts and go to
DFA analyst and work from there.
Mexico.
So hot hold on briefly Kelly.
I at least seven having trouble
hearing you.
Now the mute button is off but
it's still difficult we we can't
hear at this time.
If you see Hochman Vigil let me
know looking to.
Thank you.
Mr chairman.
If this difficult technical
difficulty continues maybe we
can hear the data DFA first it's
your call Sir.
Representative Anderson thank
you that's an excellent
suggestion.
I see that Kelly may be moving
offices.
Let yes that's an excellent
suggestion.
although let's wait to make
sure.
That states that Kelly is seated
but we will start with miss
Densmore.
For the excellent suggestion
from Representative Anderson.
Joe is a work in.
Yet thank you all committee
members just to make sure
everybody and for those
attendees we see we have
thirteen of them
Miss client has asked just to
give her a minute to make sure
while she switches computers
taking me.
We we have got you there Kelly
we're gonna go to agency downs
will offer to begin the
presentation but can you give us
a thumbs up Kelly if you can
hear us.
The.
Okay.
Okay we can see you thank you
very much will you get situated
miss Densmore.
Go go ahead Sandra please.
There we go.
Thank you all for bearing with
us as we can.
Can you hear me now Mr vice
chair we we absolutely can Kelly
okay I'm so sorry I read this to
use a different computer no
that's that is all right or do
you want to kick us off yes I
can't Graham I'm so sorry my
apologies to the committee in
this them interesting is in time
so we are on HSD code six eleven
the early care and education
department which is that quite a
mouthful of your FIR into them
and.
The rest of the presentation.
With me today is MaryBeth dense
more my counterpart at
department of finance and
ministration and secretary
Elizabeth Groginsky.
I'm gonna go over the general
fund high level summary first
and then we'll go over an
overview of the agency so I can
actually ask the committee to
turn to page eight of the year
handout that's page eight the
general fund summary high level.
So
Let's make sure yeah give us
another fifteen seconds and and
we do see I see madam chair is
is on there
So I will turn over to madam
chair at Kelly can you just
remind us of the pager beginning
from and we'll kick it off yes
Mr vice chair that is page eight
of your packet age eight.
Already thank you let's go ahead
and continue.
Thank you madam chair so on page
eight of your packet you'll see
the general fund high level for
the early care and education
departments.
There's also other revenues on
this sheet that I'm gonna walk
us through the for the general
fund there's not much of a
difference between the LFC and
exec if you look at line twenty
three on that general fund high
level you'll notice thing one
basic difference between the two
recommendations the LFC
recommendation reduce general
fund two million dollars however
in the recommendation we swap
that two million dollars with
pre K. fund balance so the
overall operating cost or budget
would be flat we just used
another revenue sources the
general fund we use pre K. fund
balance so that's the real only
difference between the executive
and the LESC when it comes to
general fund and the
recommendations.
The real difference between the
two recommendations can be found
at the bottom of the sheet if
you look at lines fifty three
through sixty two this is a rack
up of how the two
recommendations appropriated the
new early care and education
trust fund many of you will
remember that last year the
legislature put an endowment of
over three hundred and twenty
million dollars to start the
early care and education trust
funds during special session the
legislature took twenty million
dollars of that corpus however
the LFC recommendation going
forward also recommends twenty
million of that be put back into
the Corpus so the first year of
distributions of the trust fund
come in this FY twenty two.
And so you'll notice between the
LFC and Executive
recommendations we've done
slightly different
recommendations on how to spend
the trust fund balances coming
into the department for the
first time so you'll notice on
line fifty six both
recommendations increase
prekindergarten but the LFC is
higher by three point two
million dollars also on line
fifty seven the LFC is higher
for early prekindergarten which
is pre kindergarten for three
year olds by two point eight
million dollars however the
executive recommendation what's
more funding into work for
supports and so you'll notice
that they are higher than the
LFC by five point one million so
overall big picture the main
differences between the LFC and
executive recommendation is the
LFC uses some pre K. fund
balance for spot general fund
and the LFC puts more
prekindergarten slots well the
executive invest more trust fund
money into the work force.
With that I'll have is turn to
the very beginning of our pack.
So we're back on page one this
is the first page summary of
your different sheets.
The LFC general fund
recommendation was that two
million dollar difference
obviously do that revenue spot
by just discuss of the
prekindergarten fund balances
yes the LFC other transfer
revenue recommendations was five
million above the executive due
to a technical error in
temporary assistance of needy
family transfers from Human
Services Department so if the
committee chooses the LFC
recommendation we do have two
six eight technical transfer
here which is not a big deal the
LFC can do that.
In the base excluding the
technical air a majority of the
difference between the executive
and the LESC recommendations are
proposed allocations for early
care and education trust fund
which I just presented.
Overall the LFC recommendation
increased funding for
prekindergarten however the LFC
recommendation use more trust
fund money them the executive
did well the executive use more
for work for supports and the
family and and Tom they're pro.
With that I'll turn it over to
miss Densmore to go over the
first program.
Thank you as client good
afternoon Mr chair members of
the committee I'm I am going to
take you through the first P.
code in your packet it's P. six
two two the support and
intervention program for the
agency so for this program in
looking at the revenue the
executive recommendation for
other transfers included one
point one million above the LFC
and that other transfers from
the early childhood education
and care trust fund distribution
in the base the executive
recommendation included this one
point one million above the LFC
and and this is an example of
where the
Trust Fund use just differs a
little bit for are you
recommendations but in the
executive this one point one
million is for the family and
spent Tyler program.
And includes five hundred
thousand for anticipated program
growth and six hundred thousand
for the provider rates and the
LESC recommendation supported
the original Department request
I wanted to know quickly for the
committee that this six hundred
thousand that's included in the
executive for the provider rate
increases when it's combined
with eight hundred thousand of
general fund it's in the base of
that one point four million
total for provider rate
increases it's honest I
recommendations that were made
in twenty seventeen for in a
provider rate study so that's
what that is for
for language the executive
recommendation included language
for the tenant transfers from
HSD which supports the home
visiting program in in this P.
code I lastly the performance
measures target differences were
reconciled their noted on the
performance measures sheet so
with that I will turn it over to
me it's going to get in for the
next program.
You very much for we are on P.
six to three the early childhood
education care program.
That's page three of your
packet.
The LFC general fund
recommendation was nearly two
million below the executive due
to that revenues fall off of
prekindergarten fund balance
which we discussed earlier the
LFC other transfer
recommendation was nine point
two million above the executive
recommendation however there was
that five million dollar
technical issues so once you
take that out the real
difference is actually only four
point two million dollars and of
that four point two million
dollars in other transfers
resulted in the LC recommending
higher early care and education
trust fund revenues than the
executive in the base
recommendations expand
prekindergarten the difference
in contractual services category
as a result of the LFC
recommendation including four
point two million above the L.
above the executive for those
prekindergarten slots.
For comparison of the
recommended appropriations of
the trust fund please I refer
you again to that general fund
summary high level those bottoms
columns fifty three that will
give you a more detailed
pictures.
With that I will go over to miss
done for.
Thanks Kelly Mr chair members of
the committee the next program
is P. six to four it's the
public prekindergarten program
before I read the revenue I just
will note for the committee that
are there are no S. T. E. in
this program so if you see
blanks the personal services
line S. T. E. that work directly
for this program are still at
PED so I'm just to prevent any
potential confusion there so for
the revenue the LFC
recommendation for this program
in other transfers what is one
point eight million about the
executive from the early
childhood education and care
trust fund distribution and the
LESC general fund recommendation
was one hundred dollars higher
than the executive in the base
again the LFC recommendation was
one point eight million higher
the executive this is for our
public school pre kindergarten
slots within their interest rate
and it would out an estimated
two hundred and sixty two slots
about the executive but I did
just want to
point out that the executive has
one million of the early
childhood education trust fund
money in here and it is intended
to convert two hundred and
eighty five slot so they're
currently party to be full days
so there is funding in the
executive to support expansion
of that public prekindergarten
Again with the performance
measures the targets and that
differences were all reconciled
so I will give it back to you
Miss Clint what we're trying to
finish with programs for.
So much so program support the
executive recommendation for
other transfers included four
point nine million above the LFC
from the trust fund.
This money was basically for
higher education well both
recommendations increase wage
supplements and work for
supports the executive
recommendation include one point
three million above the LFC in
the contractual services for
this purpose the executive
recommendation also included
three point six million in other
financing uses transferring
trust fund revenue to the higher
education department for higher
education endowments and other
workforce supports and early
care and education training.
Of the LFC recommendation
includes language line apartment
to transfer of million dollars
between programs that Lincoln
was not included in the
executive recommendation that
sums just additional flexibility
given if you note on a high
level there's a lot of money
coming in and out and that's a
basic financial reorg and so we
put a little extra flexibility
in case the department needed it
given this is a new department
and they're still trying to
figure out what's the most
efficient way for them to budget
their operating budget and makes
programs that makes sense for
them to maximize what federal
revenues and their capacity
internally.
before I turn it over to
MaryBeth for any closing
comments I do want to point the
committee to the volume pages
they're quite extensive for this
department in particular there's
a broad policy discussion in
volumes one which is on page
twenty three through thirty
three in volume to the
departments operating budget
recommendations from LFC is on
page two twelve year to
nineteen.
And in particular in volume
three which has a lot of our
working documents and financial
spreadsheets there is a very
large section for early care and
education it starts on page
ninety seven and it ends on page
one eighteen and I really
encourage the membership to look
through these pages it will
break down where your home
visiting programs are across the
state for pre K. prekindergarten
slots are early prekindergarten
slots Public prekindergarten
slots how we're spending
childcare assistance that's a
rather large budget over a
hundred and fifty million
dollars both by quality the
average cost and how much early
child hood funding has gone up
since FY twelve so there is a
broad spectrum of information
given how much growth
financially this program has
seen over the last fiscal year's
oversight and and really allow
the membership to dive in to
policy discussions a little bit
more in depth with that I will
turn it over to MaryBeth for any
closing comments you may have
and then to the secretary.
Thanks again Kelly madam chair
members of the committee I don't
have anything else to add I I'm
sure that you will be looking
forward to hearing from the
secretary so I'm just going to
turn it over to her US secretary
Groginsky.
Thank you madam secretary would
you go ahead and start yes thank
you madam chair Mr vice chair
members of the committee I will
share my screen now show or a
few slides thank you this quote
to M. is dense more for your
analysis of the LFC and the
executive recommendation.
And everybody see the screen.
Yes.
Yes we can fantastic really
grateful to be here with all of
you today and I'd really and
pressed with how well you all
have been able to move to remote
in and zoom I know it's not easy
and it's something that we've
all experienced but I'm as you
all know ECECD opened its doors
in the midst of this pandemic
and we have been working
diligently building not from
scratch but from bringing
program from different agencies
during an incredibly difficult
time and really want to just
acknowledge and appreciate the
support that I've had that our
team has had from the governor's
office from the cabinet
secretaries and from the
legislators I'm in the state it
is truly been
and all in efforts to bring the
department into its full
formation we are doing a great
job despite these struggles we
have had a lot of successes and
one success that has been really
part of the work we've helped
lead but it's been part of the
larger cabinet children's
cabinet work is last week we
were able to launch the first
ever New Mexico early childhood
state strategic plan and we're
excited about the opportunities
truly a once in A. generation
opportunity to improve the lives
of children and families so lots
of good details in there and
look forward to any questions
you may have about that as we
work as we discussed today by
one of the brave because I want
to leave lots of room for
questions so
I'll just give a quick overview
of the agency for those of you
who may be new to this committee
are and of course we are brand
new and then go through just a
little more detail on the
programmatic budget and the
children and families impacted
by the budget.
So are with me today I have are
Assistant Secretary for native
American early childhood
education and care Mr von
Archuleta at R. W. secretary Dr
Jennifer drawn solely we also
have our administrative services
director Renata period gallon
our chief information officer
Sandeep Patel our chief general
counsel Kate Gerard our family
support and early intervention
division director might Acevedo
our early care education
nutrition division director I'll
hop over the at already and our
policy research and quality
initiatives division director
Claire Dudley Chavez these
people have truly been an
incredible team that helped us
hit the ground running at to be
able to bring about for this new
department our own vision our
own mission done with the staff
who work within the early
childhood education and care
department our vision is pretty
simple I think we all can agree
we want all New Mexico families
and young children to be
thriving we know that our
mission in order to accomplish
this vision is about optimizing
the health development education
and well being of all babies
toddlers preschoolers and doing
this with families from an
equity standpoint and knowing
that the systems are delivered
at the local level so being
community based and focused on
quality is our mission.
I don't know if you were able to
receive we did a handout on our
FY twenty two budget the
executive budget recommendations
that reflect the strategic
priorities how are budget
actually helps us drive towards
the strategic priorities the
strategic priorities came out of
the transition committee that
was made up of legislators from
the house and the Senate here in
New Mexico from the governor's
office cabinet secretaries
national and statewide experts
in business early childhood
we're really excited about
having the strategic priorities
the R. over eight over arching
died as we think about budget
policy financing practice and we
can talk more about that as we
have discussions today.
The next three slides are the
next few slides we'll just talk
about is you heard from of the
that from this client and is
dense more the different
programmatic divisions we have
the family support and early
intervention division which
includes family infant toddler
home visiting and our families
first program.
First we'll talk about home
visiting this is something that
our state cares deeply about and
has made really important and
significant investments you can
see here that as they've already
discussed the increase that we
have requests from the
distribution from the trust fund
to continue to expand our
Medicaid centennial home
visiting and other evidence
based programs that connect
families with critical resources
and supports we have that serve
you'll see here the funded slots
we we look at how many we can
find but as you can see in FY
twenty we actually served over
fifty seven hundred families and
of these programs are located
throughout the state and they
are they're about thirty four
programs now across the state
that are providing home visiting
services.
Family and program we know that
that again home visiting and fit
during this pandemic have both
gone to telehealth really
grateful for our partnership
with the HSD in their support in
allowing these telehealth visits
to also be reimbursed at the
level of in person visits and we
have been able to continue to
bring families into the family
is the top of program we see
that more families are coming in
early which is good and we're
looking forward to the
opportunity to get back in
person with families and be able
to support them we are
anticipating more growth in this
program because of COVID because
of the pandemic the impact that
it's had on families and
children so that is where the
budget is both supporting
getting us to the full provider
rates we want to make sure we're
competitive we're getting the
best speech language P. T. O.
T.'s here in the state of New
Mexico and that they're able to
effectively serve our children
and families across the state
and we know that we need some
funding to expand services.
Families first at this is a
really my landmark moment
because we want to put part of
our trust fund towards actually
supporting this peri natal case
management program developed
here in New Mexico in the
nineteen late nineteen nineties
the mid nineties they connect
families prenatal to age three
with evidence based outcome
based interventions.
Currently they have been sharing
their time between COVID
response testing and vaccination
as well as continuing to serve
families and we are exploring
how we can merge the real
promise of this department is
about how we strengthen the
services and supports for
families and so we are in
conversation with nurse family
partnership about how some of
our nurses can become nurse
family partnership home visitors
as part of their role as
delivering that case management
and support will be home
visiting that case management of
but we also are seeing of the
other opportunities to better
align our services across the.
Across the prenatal deprive
system.
Okay but now I'm gonna turn to
the division of early care
education and nutrition and this
budget is reflecting childcare
services.
As you know since the beginning
of our pandemic our child care
providers have stood on the
front lines to support families
to support educators to be there
to support our first responders
we have done a couple of really
I think impactful and important
efforts in this the first six
months seven months of our
department and that was issuing
emergency regulations for child
care they're a lot inequities in
our child care regulations that
were actually blocking access
for families to get active to
the care that we all know they
need and that they want and so
things like graduate school that
was something that was not
allowed so we were able to make
that change the families who did
not have the child care
assistance and found themselves
unemployed they also would not
we're not allowed to have access
to childcare now they are under
our emergency regulations other
things around grandparents
raising grandchildren families
who have someone in the home who
May be incapacitated and unable
to care for the child we made
some very important changes that
will deal with some other
inequities that have been
present in our childcare access
system but also really promote
and support families in I'm
having their child in high
quality nurturing environments.
We have also had to provide a
lot of support and have done a
great job supporting the
childcare industry as a whole we
have provided very good guidance
around COVID safe practices we
provided wage supplements to
first respond to child care
staff who were working childcare
stabilization grants
infrastructure technical
assistance health and safety
materials personal protective
equipment and we also were able
to provide childcare to first
responders and health care
professionals so a lot has
happened in this program we have
a long way to go because we have
to get families to feel
comfortable coming back into
childcare we have to make sure
our childcare provider programs
have the funding they need to
keep their doors open even when
their enrollment is low so we
are we're focused on that and
we're in constant communication
weekly communication with the
early childhood community as so
we hear what every community
needs and we're able to adapt
and address those challenges.
New Mexico pre K. as both miss
Densmore miscon shared.
We have a difference in terms of
the funding but absolute
commitment to a mixed delivery
system parent choice is what we
want to support what every
community to have pre K.
available in family child care
homes public schools community
based settings head start
programs this is what will make
our state strong families have
different needs they have
different needs in a rural
community versus urban and so
this continued investment in
full day pre K. expanding to
early pre K. and making sure
that we have head start your of
Indian education all of our
child care providers and our
public schools at the table
together ECECD is now looking at
this comprehensively we're
looking community by community
to see where is their saturation
where do we need to build
partnerships where can we expand
access for families from across
the state so this is a big
priority and have really great
work happening here in
collaboration with PED.
Workforce development we know
one of our key priorities you'll
see if you get that budget fact
sheet is advancing a diverse
well compensated and
credentialed workforce.
Our budget this year really
reflects that commitment we're
putting money towards pay parity
for our pre K. eight teachers in
community based settings that
have bachelor's degrees or
higher they are not getting the
kind of Hey at their public
school counterparts are getting.
This investment in the higher
education program development
fund is very exciting and it
comes out of conversations with
higher education institutions
childcare programs pre K.
programs head start programs and
our early childhood higher
education task force to say that
if we want our work force to
have degrees and credentials
we're gonna have to push in
we're gonna have to have our
higher education institutions
really at the table innovating
with us around recruiting and
supporting bilingual indigenous
educators in completing their
certificates going forward with
an a a getting a bachelor's
degree they're going to be in
our program so while we know
that this doesn't necessarily
expand services long term we're
building the infrastructure in
the capacity of our higher ed
institutions to innovate be
creative elevate early childhood
professional development within
our institutions and we're
really excited about what will
come out of this creative you
know the creative response to an
RFP that will be issued by the
higher education department
partnership with DFA and the
ECECD department and so we're
really I'm hopeful that we
continue our investments in wage
supplement for all educators
infant toddler teachers pre K.
teachers and scholarships we
have I have a new partner our
agency is really focused on
making sure the programs and
services that we have are very
easily accessible transparency
plain language of these are some
of our values that we want to
make sure that any educator in
the state knows how to access
all of these programs and can do
it without.
With with some effort but not a
lot of challenges and barriers
so removing barriers creating
greater access.
With that I think and finally I
will talk about our technology
really grateful for the LFC also
recognizing that this new
department we are building our
infrastructure currently we're
so grateful to CYFD and PED and
the efforts that they have done
to support us in keeping our IT
infrastructure but we need to
bring that in house were also
very involved in the HHS twenty
twenty work and our future state
will be that are early childhood
programs will ideally be well
integrated within the HHS twenty
twenty so that a family coming
to access Tanith Medicaid staff
will also learn about here about
and apply for childcare services
so it'll be more seamless on
that and so these two
investments in addition to what
in the executive these
appropriations are also really
critical to our.
Our long term success and
establishing ourselves as a
fully functioning of patient
affected department that's
delivering
outcomes for children.
The questions.
All righty thank you
Thank you madam secretary we do
have some questions we're gonna
start with representative
Armstrong go ahead.
Thank you madam chair and the
thank you Terry secretary for
your presentation are we know
that developing developing
literacy and early childhood is
critical
I to a child's growth and
development and how are you how
is your department supporting
early literacy and learning in
this effort.
Madam chair representative
Armstrong thank you so much for
that question you are absolutely
correct and our department has
continued of really important
investment and are looking at
had expanded and that is through
the imagination library so you
may be familiar with getting
books into children's homes so
that by every month they get a
new book they get excited the
families that can get read them
and build a library we know that
in many homes there there's
desert's there's terrible
desert's so we don't see
children having access so we is
looking at that and excited
about the opportunities through
our department to expand our
support for imagination library.
The other work that we have been
leading is there's I don't know
if you've all seen the moments
together campaign it's been on
TV as well as on the billboards
but part of that is program
called bright by text and so
families can get in the moments
together they can sign up for
these tax and they get helpful
information about ways to
support their child's overall
development but definitely it's
focused on play and singing and
talking with your child so that
is a great campaign and I will
make sure you all have access to
that because it's been a
tremendous and has received some
some national awards as well for
the work that we've done and
then we also have a program
called UP start through the
Waterford and Senator Mimi
Stewart introduced us to it it's
a comprehensive technology based
early reading and math science
program families get a computer
in their home at the student of
the four year old there most of
for four year olds and they
really focus on their reading
and math and getting them ready
for kindergarten and then
finally just and both of the lot
of this work was supported
through a preschool development
grants that the state one and
awarded we have invested in a
research based curriculum call
connect for learning all this
out in we're we're rolling it
out for the fall we're working
with programs in public schools
and private sector it was
developed through the National
Science Foundation and it
integrates research validated
teaching methodologies from
early childhood experts in math
science literacy and social
emotional brings them all
together in this incredibly
fabulous curriculum we have a
look at how many would be I
think we have
A hundred and sixteen pre K.
educators from across the sector
that are going to be implemented
that in the fall we're doing
training so we're very excited
about these literacy efforts and
then continuing to just monitor
and share with families he
strategies that they can use
with their children in the home.
Thank you so much thank you
madam chair I I know I I am a
little bit concerned about the
imagination library part not
that I don't support it totally
supported but I don't know that
it reaches across the whole
state of New Mexico I've had
some constituency they it was
unavailable in their area so the
more we can expand that the
better thank you for that and
then the department of.
Request has prioritized
investment to build capacity at
state institutes can you deliver
can you tell me how your you
plan on spending those funds for
how you imagine yes madam chair.
Representative Armstrong thank
you this was really so we will
do it for a transfer to AGD so
that higher education department
has in statute the higher
education program development
fund and this will through an
RFP process that we will develop
a really focused on some of
those key areas that I know this
legislature and others are
interested in is that
recruitment and supports for
bilingual and indigenous
educators I'm generally for our
perfect for the professionals
who work in early childhood as
you all know have families of
their own work very long days
and so we also want to see
creative pathways for credit for
prior learning credit for prior
experience many of our
institutions have these programs
in place but they may not be as
robust as they need to be and
some of it is elevated our early
childhood faculty within our
higher education institutions
I've heard from many of them we
are fortunate in New Mexico we
have one of the best aligned two
to four year early childhood
systems in the state but many of
these programs are maybe one
faculty mostly adjunct so we
want we know that we're going
to.
Take our current workforce and
make and have them advance their
credentials and we need to
recruit a whole bunch of
pipeline of new educators really
making sure that the capacity is
there in all of our institutions
including our tribal colleges
and universities so we've we've
done some innovative things
around cohorts early childhood
educators coming together
faculty coming in a meeting with
them as a cohort with building
on our scholarship are mentoring
programs but this this will be
operationalized really by the
institutions telling us their
ideas around these criteria
indigenous bilingual educators
yeah sorry okay thank you for
that and then and so that that
works in conjunction with your
scholarships that you offer as
well and is the scholarship that
you offer madam chair and
secretary one of the guidelines
for that scholarship or where
can I find those.
Yes we will follow up with you
we have just we're releasing a
one pager we may already have it
available and we have a new
partner who is doing a lot of
webinars information so we will
get you all the information on
the scholarship program thank
you so much thank you for your
answers thank you madam chair
already thank you I have next
Representative brown and then
Sweetser.
Your thank you so very much and
secretary Groginsky very nice to
see you again.
Madam chair and and secretary
I'm going to ride the coattails
of representative and give
Anderson R. L. Armstrong for
just a minute and go back to pre
K. literacy programs.
I have in front of the
legislative education study
committee report that was
released in January of this year
and there's a section here are
research based members programs.
But we know from this that the
public education department so
this is PED not your department
I received a five year forty
million dollar grant to try to
improve the pre literacy of
children under age five.
And I
I have really high hopes that
this is going to help.
the you know the way I see it
The.
Math is job one and reading his
job a.
And we've got to have really
great emphasis in both math and
in reading so anything we can do
to focus on that it is a good
thing representative Armstrong
asked madam chair about the
imagination library and and I'm
pleased to report that because
of the efforts of a barber in
their Nelson over in Grant
County they are have have gotten
the program almost into all
thirty three counties now some
of the larger counties may not
have full coverage but there is
at least a presence there
but getting back to this federal
grant of forty million dollars
that.
grant award was applied in a
number of school districts and
recorded Albuquerque for Leo
Kolber a Honda valley Los crucis
Los winners for telecentre face
Santa Rosa von inTaos so that's
of a selection of counties but
not all thirty three and so for
just effectiveness in terms of
reaching more children I think
the imagination library program
is really has built a statewide
platform and it just needs a
little bit more funding I I've
spoken with the the folks to I
I.
On the mother ship for the
program in the state The
Nelson's
they said that and we know this
from previous meetings that CYFD
and your department now have
each devoted a hundred thousand
dollars a year to be
administered through a council
of governments on the west side
of the state and the demand
however has been a hundred and
seventy two thousand recently so
they really do need some
additional funding and madam
chair so the request is to
increase the amount for the
hundred thousand to three
hundred thousand which would
help defray the cost of each
book by fifty percent the rest
of the money is raised locally
by volunteers and
this would serve nearly twenty
two thousand preschoolers so I'm
just giving you an update madam
chair madam secretary to let you
know that of this program is in
place it's extremely popular
I've heard from some parents we
have this program in a county
where where I served and I've
heard some for from some parents
that the book arriving in the
mail box every month was one
thing that really help them with
the pandemic and the kids that's
something to look forward to and
it gave the family something to
to enjoy together so I just want
to make that comment and
I'm I continue madam chair madam
secretary when it comes to
literacy for preschoolers
I'm looking at state data on
reading proficiency and I'm just
continuing to be very
disappointed as typically under
thirty percent and that's just
not acceptable and I really
have.
Right expectation that the early
childhood education and care
department will be a factor in
boosting the scores right.
We we just can't keep are
treading water it at less than
thirty percent so madam chair
madam secretary and
am very supportive of your
department and at eight I hope
for great things thank you madam
chair.
Thank you representative will
start Representative Sweetser.
Thank you madam chair and thank
you madam secretary good to see
sorry I was unable to get back
with you before we got here
today it's a little crazy here
a couple of things first of all
I I was surprised to see that
you are projecting an increase
in enrollment through the
pandemic I don't know if you
know but I run a radio station
from my real job and all of the
the preschool providers are
constantly trying to public
service announcements on begging
for people because they have
openings so kind of share with
the if you will what you're
looking at their with the
numbers you gave us.
Thank you madam chair
Representative Sweetser yes N.
as in my remarks particularly
where I said we expected growth
was I was speaking to the family
infant toddler but to your point
we are looking at increasing so
for public pre K. we're looking
at expanding from half day to
full day so it wouldn't be
increased lots of new children
but it would be enhancing the
day and in our pre K. programs
in the community based it is
focused more on three yearolds
and four year olds and we we
anticipate that we are going to
get our vaccinations we're going
to get people back in person and
that we know that come the fall
more families are going to want
access to all day quality pre K.
and that will be happening in
different types of settings that
meet the families needs so that
is a in particular and then with
the budget because of COVID we
anticipate more children may
have developmental delays and
need to have will benefit from
being able to access our fit
program.
And thank you for that thank you
madam chair specifically about
childcare the where are year
enrollment.
Madam chair Representative
Sweetser yes that we are I'm
very under enrolled and actively
I was very fast so weird about
fourteen thousand and we'd
rather be at about twenty to
twenty four thousand of children
enrolled in childcare so we're
climbing like the rest of the
country and bringing our a
childcare programs back online
to where they can be stable and
that families can access those
resources so some is it through
the emergency regulations that
we've issued in child care will
allow more families to have
access but we also know that we
have to do really strong
messaging with families that
these are safe places to bring
your child.
With everybody working at home
or older children at home we
believe that families are making
you know just other choices
because they they may not feel
safe so what we are working on
it we will with moments together
we have a campaign through
moments together specifically
focused on talking to families
about the importance of
childcare and that it's there
and then expanding access for
our child care regulations we
anticipate that we are our goal
is to have us increasing by at
least a thousand a month
families coming back into
childcare.
And so that's where you're
getting your childcare figures
madam chair.
Your projections I guess.
Yes chair representative there
where we are projections are
based on what pre pandemic I'm
so we're looking at once we get
back to.
The pandemic conditions endemic
three.
Or and we know that that we have
many families expressly needing
access to infant toddler.
And other care.
And school age right now a lot
of our childcare programs are
serving at the students who are
in remote or hybrid learning and
so they're they're really and
it's been an incredible
challenge I've been really
impressed with the way they've
stood up and now we need to
help.
With that marketing and
messaging and of course getting
the vaccination which secretary
designate Collins and I work
very closely together we know
childcare workers are you know
the next you know as they come
along with our child our
educators and public schools
getting them vaccinated that is
going to give a lot of
confidence to families I think
to bring their children back
into care so and it's another
part of the strategy thank you
for that madam secretary madam
chair I wanted to to ask you
about your workforce I in new
development ideas I mean I guess
I'm kind of where Representative
Armstrong was it looks like
you're you're transferring five
million of your twenty million
to hire add or is that part of
the workforce development my
misinterpreting how that how
you're moving that.
Madam chair representative C.
two as three point six million
is under the the workforce
development the higher education
program development fund and
that is to build the capacity of
our higher ed institutions to
prepare our early childhood
workforce.
An ex celebrated pathways so
thank you for that and and madam
chair I thought I heard you say
that you're trying to get that
workforce with a a or or
bachelor's degrees and so you're
looking at scholarship programs
for them in addition to
scholarship opportunities are
available through all the higher
ed institutions and even to some
public school districts and
athletes as well right.
Madam chair yes that's it we
have it I call it my three
pronged approach we have to have
compensation so we have the wage
supplement program which M. any
early childhood professional can
apply for if they have their
child development certificate
then they get their ay ay then
they get their BA they're
eligible for a supplement that
we have our scholarship program
which is in place they need help
with a hundred percent tuition a
hundred percent books work with
them we have a mentoring support
network and then now it's this
third prong of building the
capacity of our institutions to.
Xcelerated pathways recruiting
and supporting bilingual and
indigenous educators so that our
children have professionals in
the classroom who really
understand their language their
culture and can help advance
their development.
Madam chair secretary that
workforce development across
both public and private
institutions is that how you're
viewing it yes.
And the only reason I'm I'm
concerned about that are
questioning that is I was struck
when the panelists representing
on the FTE position for public
pre K. that they're all still
under PED and I guess I was
under the impression that some
of that was going to be shifting
to do the ECB Department.
Madam chair representative
Switzer settlement of this does
more of it's quite want to
comment but no it was the
funding for the funding comes to
our department we look at all
applications that we look at
where programs are available not
only in public but private but
head start compared Indian
Education and then we make
decisions about where the
funding should go and then we
send the money back to PED and
they administer it to the public
schools of that's why they're
staff say that gets one maybe
one and a half I don't know how
many antique PED right.
Not okay so well that makes
sense is it's a growing
department in it and so we're
we're all learning exactly how
it's going to be funded and how
your looking at growing your
work force and and all of that
stuff madam chair thank you
madam secretary appreciate your
answers thank.
All right let's go to
Representative Trujillo and that
Representative Dixon.
Yes thank you madam chair and
thank you our.
Cabinet secretary could get ski
I got my tongue tied.
I really like what you've been
saying especially in the context
of preparing new educators.
And the you know I'm a proponent
of bilingual multicultural
education and it's nice to see
that what you're doing is
building capacity at the on
start so that
we don't have to go back and fix
things I think it's important to
be inclusive and it seems to me
that that's what you've done.
I I I also saw that the LFC C.
as high in some areas and
lowered in then the executive
and others.
Know about you and you may
disagree but I really support
the executive.
A budget because of the work
force component I think that
You know I've I have a grand son
and I've helped my daughter with
them throughout.
The the COVID of process and
the.
You know.
The turnover is great.
In these childcare facility
because people can't support
their families and the I've seen
you and spoken to some that have
said that they want to go back
to school they can't afford it.
But the overall is
that the care givers that we're
having our kids be with can't
afford to buy a gallon of gas or
or milk and they're the ones
that were we.
That we are relying on god take
care for our kids so I'm really
concerned that
and maybe Kelly can tell us why
LFC is doing three million I
think it was three million and
the the governor's request was
eight is am I correct Kelly
madam chair.
Madam chair representative
excuse me just a second.
If you look at the high level
Representative Trujillo eyes out
of course is child care and
education fund.
When you look at line fifty nine
that's exactly what it is.
You look at what the executive
rectus and the LESC rack it's
five point one million dollars
difference so.
you can get into some detail on
that as to why it's lower but it
helps me to have all of you ask
the questions of the cabinet
secretary and what this
workforce support is I didn't
know what was going to go to
hire at and this is exactly what
these conversations are about so
if you would Kelly you want to
add some more for Representative
Senator hill thank you.
Aaron representative of this
request to send money to the
higher education department
wasn't included in the agency
request of how they requested
the early care and education
trust fund this came in just as
a part of the executive
recommendation so we were able
to that it traditionally and
talk about this policy was in
discussion with the LFC in the
fall to that's why it's not
included in the LFC
recommendation our
recommendation is the three
million to go to work for
support such as wage supplements
and the scholarship money.
Madam chair may the cabinet
level secretary respond.
Of course go ahead.
Thank you madam chair
Representative Trujillo yes it
was and the early projections
you know we had and June things
did not look good economically
and we were looking at the trust
fund is really ten million to
support existing programs to not
have to lose services and then
to have ten million to expand so
when things look better we said
no we really have to think of a
holistic approach to the
workforce strategy so we have a
good wage supplement program in
place in the state it hasn't
been over utilize there's no
wait list for it we have a great
scholarship program that is
available in addition to the
other scholarship programs you
have mentioned here today but
what we need to be mindful of
this also comes out of the
national academies transforming
the early childhood workforce is
that states need to be investing
in the higher education
institutions as part of our
workforce strategy for early
childhood we know The New Mexico
since nineteen ninety five has
had an early childhood higher
education task force meeting and
working diligently and we see
this as an opportunity to seed
and incentivize some true
innovation things like teacher
preparation programs that enable
students to be part of the
teaching workforce while
finishing their degrees
apprenticeship programs
residency programs a cohort
strategies all types of things
and we know that are higher
education institutions want to
do this so this three pronged
approach is build capacity at
our institutions that we
absolutely have to rely on to
build this workforce keep the
scholarships going keep the wage
incentive program there pre K.
parity so we feel that the
executive budget really reflects
what we're hearing both from the
national academies in terms of
strategy states need to be
taking to take us from where we
are to staff who are not well
compensated and that well
credentialed and they are
holding the future of our
children in their hands every
day so.
So we we really feel strongly
that this is is a good
innovation and something that
gives us an opportunity to
really thank our higher ed
institutions especially the
early childhood who have been
doing some of these things
without the resources to take it
to more scale.
Madam chair.
Representative drill thank you
very much you know I am an
educator and
You know when I saw this and I
heard about it I was so happy
because you know this this is a
brand new program for the state
we did although we have some
qualified care givers there
aren't enough with degrees and
I'm not sure what the process is
for getting that to
appropriation to higher ed but I
hope we do it because we really
need to build the foundation so
that we're not struggling in the
future so along with the wages.
But also the ancillary support
for training and educator
development I would love to see
this supported thank you madam
chair and thank you secretary
you can ski.
Thank you very much now let's go
to Representative Dixon.
Thank you madam chair thank you
Secretary Groginsky I'm I was
wondering if you could talk a
little bit more about how are
our child care providers are
doing
and you know we we talked about
how at the beginning at early in
the pandemic a lot of them were
closing temporarily but have how
are we in terms of level
providers thank you.
Madam chair representative Dixon
thank you for that question we
we did as you as you mentioned
early on we had about four
hundred facilities you know say
temporarily closed because they
were were challenged by a
variety of factors we now have
about seven hundred and fifty I
can get my most recent about
seven hundred fifty of our
licensed providers open and most
of our registered homes are are
still open so nearly two
thousand a different facilities
across the state again at seven
fifty in licensed facilities we
do have two hundred her are
still on our list is temporarily
closed and they're Bennett
between twenty five and thirty
who have permanently closed so
we have lost capacity definitely
across the state across the age
span infants all the way to
school age they have been
incredible though as a as a
field they do testing every
other week they we get the
results from the department of
health I really want to give a
shout out to our department of
health and the partnership we've
had with them they join our our
weekly calls with providers we
we talk we've innovated as we
hear from the community but they
have had challenges of bird
round staffing finding the
staffing and then of course the
quarantine and isolation
requirements when there is a
positive case every facility
across the state has had at
least one if not more positive
comment basis so we do rapid
response they they do there
action plan but we are we are
pretty close communication
around that so I I hope that
answers your question.
Yes thank you madam chair and
secretary another question is is
there was there a a surplus in
your operating budget from last
year for child care.
Madam chair representative Dixon
I FY twenty year FY twenty one.
The.
Sorry twenty.
I have I will ask we're not
Kerry gallon had if we had or I
guess Representative so Kelly
yes Kelly can we did have so yes
I'm gonna turn it over to Kelly.
It's okay I can talk about some
of the current operating
expenses so for you to speak up
please we can hear you and my
apologies I meant at twenty one
okay the current year.
Madam chair members of the
committee so I was looking at
the most recent childcare
romance numbers and the budget
the current budget is actually
based on average enrollment of
nineteen to twenty thousand kids
enrolled any given month however
enrollment is only about
thirteen thousand kids the
department is spending slightly
more per child about five
percent of the of the previous
fiscal year due to an
differential payment that
they're paying child care
providers but if we keep on this
track that we're currently act
pessimistic Lee the department
could understand the childcare
budget by twenty five million
dollars optimistically if they
were to be able to bring up
enrollment to their highest
point in the year they might
understand if I only sixteen
million dollars but that's
current projections of that of
the total budget for the current
fiscal year is a hundred and
fifty eight million dollars and
I would note that this does not
include the eighty million
dollars at the department is
going to get from the newest
federal package looking and
child care so that's a very big
chunk of money.
Share Representative if I could
just add that we are talk about
twenty one I'm more familiar
with twenty one but I I would
say that the couple things that
we've done that I think have
been very well received and
import to the childcare
committee are the two hundred
dollar differentials for every
child care contract every child
there serving in the facility
again because of the lower
enrollment because of the
increased COVID safe practices
expenses are we have and we
anticipate extending that to the
end of the fiscal year as well
as waving parent co payments you
know so many of our families are
struggling to make ends meet and
to juggle all the different
challenges so we also anticipate
at this point I'm looking at
that Kelly's point we did
receive the notice yesterday
that it is a little over eighty
two million New Mexico will
receive for the child care and
development block grant those
funds will be available to us
through September twenty three.
Thank you Secretary thank you
madam chair.
All right let's go to
Representative Sariñana.
Hi you're on mute.
Thank you madam chair and
secretary it can ski I'm only
questions been asked I just want
to make a couple comments
first you have a huge job to do
every study we've read through
LFC or in in my education and
map say eight you know home
visits and pre K. and all these
things are going to help our
kids do better and as a math
teacher
I've had kids come in with such
low skills and once they are
behind they just never catch up
and then they drop out so you
your department is what we're
looking forward to getting
started early in teacher early
and get in my head so that they
can continue to succeed because
it really does take our kids
coming in at at proficiency
levels at grade level for them
to be successful so I just wish
you the best I'll be here to
reach you on and help you in
anyway but thank you for this
because as a math teacher I know
this is what's going to help our
kids do better so thank you.
Ready let's go to Representative
Herrera.
I you madam chair.
Thank you Secretary against gay
it's great to see you I'm I I
must tell the whole committee
and the LESC everybody involved
it is amazing to see these
numbers for early childhood
really I I hope everybody
understands of the work that has
been built over the years I
remember about fifteen years ago
going for a million dollars and
raised to million for the thing
called home visiting and I went
to the state for it to match
that and they did it but I mean
I just kind of get astounded by
how fast the state has grown in
this field I I are we the lead
secretary again scary as far as
taking a budget from very low to
where we are now are are we one
of the leading states.
Madam chair representative
higher up I would like to say
yes we are I will I will I will
make sure we get the facts on
that but we absolutely I mean
the the commitment here in the
state of New Mexico at every
level community state
legislative executive right now
is tremendous of the nation is
definitely I get a lot of tweets
and different things from my
national colleague saying what's
going on you guys are doing
amazing things in New Mexico so
people are watching us and
they're pretty excited I think
our town we got to bring it
together and make sure these
programs really work in service
of each other and strengthen the
root system so I I I believe we
are one of the absolutely
leading states in the nation and
and have been for quite sometime
so I I share your excitement.
Secretary I the kids do we have
now in non in line.
It.
Sixteen thousand something like
that.
All all all of our techs coming.
That that I know I get into the
weeds here let me tell you why
and what we're looking for let
me tell you I'm worried about
that I just
Can you give it to me at
sixteen.
Yes so add them what we we
projected for twenty one is
fifteen thousand five hundred
forty two what we are currently
serving in this is just quarter
one which is a quarter one for
FY twenty one is seven thousand
nine hundred seventy two
but I'm gonna look for my staff
to get because those are the
ones currently serves but some
have left and some have come so
far.
Ages zero to three the stated
and and and it is always been
support national has a great
program but I it just see those
numbers seemed a little high to
me and I I know nationally that
development eight kids are
developmentally delayed it's
about one in six and I'm trying
to figure out if we have you
know about twenty five thousand
it's a year give me
Representative can you speak
right into the Mike when you're
moving around you're cracking up
on on our end so you might just
be can right into the computer
thank you thank you madam chair
I will I will try to be steady
here.
I'm thinking that it's it's a
little high I've got like are
developmentally delayed
population seems a little high
nationally as one and six it's
fifteen thousand out of twenty
in a out of twenty five
thousand.
No would be that because it be
it five thousand have twenty
five if it be closer to wet at a
twenty percent numbers that
true.
Madam chair representative
product so you're asking of the
children that we sixteen
thousand of our birth to three
which would be about seventy.
Seventy five thousand children
total in the state with the fall
into that category of age.
So do some quick math on that
but I do want to point out the
New Mexico is I don't think many
states but we also have the at
risk category for qualifying for
early intervention so it's not
just developmentally delayed or
disability but at risk of
becoming delayed both these if
these kids are and are really
very low poverty group they
moved up into this into that
that program is that how it
works biological or
environmental risk factors that
contribute to their delay they
they are also eligible.
That explains a lot if it's
environment risk factors plastic
then right then I our our
numbers are probably one and six
I I was just a little what that
that when I heard that not
because that was frightening and
and the whole purpose of home
visiting is to lower those
developmentally delayed
Number it's and and to get those
sent people enrolled prenatally
that's the most important part
of home visiting so
that helps with that can you
tell me what the average salary
of them madam chair and
as secretary Groginsky can you
tell me what the average salary
for child care workers these
days that I've been away from it
for awhile so I don't know
anymore.
Thank you madam chair
representative Carrera of the
well we are in the process of
finalizing our cost estimation
study childcare so we've been
interviewing are surveying and
interviewing not us but an
external evaluator it's around
twenty seven thousand the
average salary of a lead teacher
in a child care program.
The bureau of labor statistics
for New Mexico.
Originally teacher salary of
thirty three thousand for a
childcare workers so we know
that in the state there may be
variation but that's where it is
according to those two data
points that is considerably to
send congratulations for
whatever you have to do with
that I mean I remember what it
was all just minimum wage really
it was it was pretty pretty set
at and can you tell me how many
students we have enrolled in the
public school pre K. program
versus private.
Yes was on one of
its thank you madam chair phone.
We have.
In our pre K. in the public
schools seven thousand two
hundred and forty seven.
And in our.
Private pre case six thousand
one hundred and seventy one.
Funded that's those are funded
slots for FY twenty one.
Is that.
I guess I'd like to know when
you might not have the answer
right now but I'd like to tell
is that is that figure in public
schools because they take their
rate public school teacher
salary.
What has driven the cost of
childcare workers making
and that thirty three thousand
dollars a year you don't have to
answer that now but I really
like to know that's what has
brought that number up still
soon significantly I and I can
get with you later on and the
last question then I'll stop
madam chair is really to talk
about your strategic plan and I
I guess I'm curious if this
budget reflects the goals of the
strategic plan that you put in
place and I hello how is that
all can work together.
Thank you madam chair thank you
Representative Herrera and we
were really excited to release
last week the early childhood
statewide strategic plan with
governor Lujan Grisham money end
of the of the children's cabinet
and four other cabinet
secretaries besides myself we
feel that our but this budget it
definitely aligns around a
couple of areas one is around
families having access to more
multicultural multi lingual
responsive trauma responsive
programs so that investment in
our pre K. parity but also in
the higher education workforce
development program we see as a
key part of that strategy also
just improving access through
expansion of pre K. expansion of
home visiting which we know
really it's as to your point
home visiting connects families
with all these other important
resources and supports that can
help them and their child grow
and develop and then around data
is it a goal around data
integration better use of data
data to drive decision making so
the investments you see in our
I. T. and our technology and
that coordination with HHS
twenty twenty are all critical
aspects in our budget for this
year that really relate to the
statewide strategic plan that
cuts across all the cabinet
agencies I'm as well as our
private sector partners who are
hugely supportive and key
partners in implementation of
the plan.
Thank you madam chair thank you
Secretary congratulations on
getting such a well qualified
staff on your team it that that.
That's like the who's who in
early childhood eight amazing
amazing staff that you've been
able to get on your team so I
chair that you and I only look
for things getting better and
better thank you very much madam
chair.
Representative Lane place.
Thank you madam chair I would
like to first focus on page five
of our different sheets Agency
six to one.
And I have a just a specific
question I noticed for the FY
two one operating the.
General fund transfers were four
point eight million and then for
the base recommendation for LFC
and exec they're both at
seventeen point four million so
that's the increase of almost
thirteen million and I do notice
that there are.
Eleven new F. T. E.'s additional
FTE use that might explain some
of that increase but madam chair
if I could maybe just help is to
help in understanding the the
increase in the general fund
transfers there.
Madam secretary madam chair I'd
like if Kelly and
Beth can.
Madam chair please answer with
the permission of.
If I could potentially have
of the representative turn to
page eight in your packet I
think this will be the easiest
way to explain it.
Which is your general fund high
level and so you're gonna see a
lot of in and out all over the
program and that's a financial
reorganization when the
department was initially set up
basically the they put all of
the programs I went from CYFD
into one program all the
programs that were coming from
the original one program and the
public pre K. into one program
so the secretary when she came
and she realized that we really
need to do a a more strategic
thinking about how these
programs interact preventively
into other organizations so she
wrecked requested a
reorganization of putting those
into the appropriate places this
fiscal year and so it looks like
it's a general fund increase but
actually it's mostly a
reorganization so that the
agency can put the money in the
right place for appropriations.
Thank you madam chair and then
my last question actually what
was still on page eight that's
were of my question is and so at
the bottom page eight line sixty
one it's F. I. T.
and I assume F. I. T. means
family infants toddlers so I
noticed that the executive has a
recommendation of one point one
million and the LESC doesn't
have anything there so my
question madam chair is what is
the the agencies intended use
those one point one million
dollars.
Madam chair Representative lane
thank you for that question it
has two purposes one is to
complete the rates and the
increase in the rate from the
two thousand seventeen provider
rate survey that showed a gap in
what we would providing our.
Physical therapists occupational
therapists speech language
therapists provide that would be
competitive and so each year and
twenty and then in twenty one
there were investments in that
right but we want to close that
gap fully and fully fund the
provider rate survey from
seventeen and then the other
portion of it is to M. and for
the anticipated growth Marshall
access intervention did too the
pandemic and the impact of not
having the impact on families
generally so I think I can get
to the exact breakdown is six
hundred thousand of that is the
provider rate and five hundred
thousand is for it You
dissipated growth.
In children's.
Thank you madam chair I have no
further questions all righty
thank you representative Garcia.
Thank you madam chair most of
questions were you asked if you
had a few questions
Senator Gonzales keep ahead of
the right of.
On your staff will receives them
you know there's issues that
have come up and we discussed in
prior on people say well the
does the investigator was
offered to me.
And the visitors and that the
person taking care of the child
one fair or how do you'll see
that now.
Madam chair representative
Garcia thank you for that
question that is managed and
monitored administered through
our early care and education and
nutrition division led by all a
hundred over the at a rate who
was the leader at CYFD and came
over and under her is her bureau
chief Ken brown who's fantastic
and the Pat also works with her
so we have an excellent
regulatory team who monitors and
provides technical assistance
and support to childcare
programs across the state and so
they they regulates they go in
they provide guidance of they
provide sometimes when things
are going well our ultimate goal
an obligation and responsibility
is the health and safety of
children and staff in licensed
facilities so that is their
their prime directive so to
speak as they go and monitor and
make sure that's happening then
we connect them with our
resource and referral are other
quality supports that are
administered by our policy
research and quality initiatives
division.
Thank you madam chair thank for
the the secretary what you're
doing right now.
Vacancy rate budgeted vacancy
rate is seven point one percent
rise vacancy is about fifteen
percent.
Can you explain that for me of
the vacancy rate wanted they
constrict.
That funded the budget vacancy
rate is seven point one percent.
Okay and what is happening with
the money that you're not using
for these employees don't have.
We are working very diligently
to fill those positions and many
of those are in in recruitment
right now and being higher but
those we're I mean that's that's
our goal right now is to get
those positions filled and then
to look at where funds they need
to be supported in other areas
for the funds will be reverted
back to the general fund if they
are used thank you madam chair
madam secretary of of how much
you're audits hello you're on to
have it have you had when you.
Madam chair representative
Garcia we did have an audit of
the one point two five million
that was given to the ACC
Department for FY twenty and it
was perfect.
Think that's very weird to hear
that but that would one more
thing your child care workers
providers at home because of
providing services for kids.
How are they doing for generally
speaking what our state.
Madam chair representative
Garcia thank you for asking
about them you know I I mean I
think they're they're doing well
considering but I'm the social
emotional impact of COVID on
their work is is extreme an
enormous and we are really
looking at the strategies that
we need to deploy the help them
they we we we meet with them
every month on Tuesday morning
from eight to nine it's an open
call usually have between four
and four hundred and four fifty
eight AM join us for that call
so we're able to hear from them
directly and address their
concerns but I think more
support is needed and that's
that's what we're looking at
with this eighty two million as
well as the monies that we have
currently in FY twenty one
budget to make sure that we you
don't wake up from the pandemic
and not have a strong childcare
industry in the state of New
Mexico so madam chair and
senator because he's you know if
you're doing a fabulous job I
appreciate what you're doing for
kids for working with you thank
you madam chair thank you
Secretary.
All right Representative.
Thank you very much madam chair
thank Senator Groginsky
madam chair secretary Groginsky
and analysts going back to the
page a and the differences and
the distribution of the twenty
million
Is for for LFC the additional
six million basically over the
it for prekindergarten and the
yet for the prekindergarten is
that an early prekindergarten
at.
Madam chair and an agency client
is that because to there there
will be a need for additional
slots can you explain why the
LFC recommendation is
significant.
areas please.
Madam chair members of the
committee Representative small
so the LFC guidelines were to
look in particular and investing
in programs that are evidence
based on our pre in our biggest
return on investment to the
state LFC is done several recent
projects on prekindergarten the
last few years showing that not
only does it increase literacy
and math but also reduces
special education designation
and when stacked with the K.
five plus program it can it's
almost totally close the
achievement gap between lower
income and higher income
students so when the LESC was
looking at investments
prekindergarten and early
childhood is been shown dish to
do some of the biggest bang for
the Buck and return on dollars
for the state improving child
outcomes and so that in
particular was why the LFC
invested more into
prekindergarten expansion.
Understood thank you very much
thank you madam chair I guess
similarly then moving to the
work force pay and supplements
where the executive is that five
point one million higher are
their performance measures that
have or or and
performance analysis that has
been applied to that the
proposed increase and miss dance
more press secretary again ski
since that's the the the much
larger executive fees.
What's your sense there.
But Madam chair of the base
chair small thank you for that
question in terms of the pay
parity for pre K. some of the
performance analysis we would
want to do is looking at
turnover does that help reduce
turnover in our community based
settings when we know that
educators have access to similar
rate to the public school
colleagues so they won't that's
really does drive the public
school but also we will want to
see more educators in our
community based pre K. program
seeking higher credentials
because they'll see that there
is a budget I'm at the end of
them going towards moving from
there eight eight to there being
a so we we want to see that and
on the higher ed the program
development we will look at the
recruitment of bilingual
indigenous educators possibly
anyway see the national
association education children
as an accreditation for our two
colleges.
Thank.
No one getting now the general
questions over the phone over
here this may Representative
Garcia there you go okay
Yeah I'm sorry
That so those are the types of
performance measures that we
would be looking at within the
higher education program
development and are you
graduating more early childhood
professionals are you doing it
are you building quality
programming within your teacher
prep programs as of those as the
things that we would be putting
in place as our performance
measures I understood that thank
you have in the second time I'll
make a quick comment in this
area where there are significant
differences madam chair
secretary against the need to
increase pay and that higher ed
pipeline certainly resonates the
need to
Make sure that the performance
measures are agreed upon with
the LFC who is put this
significant work in to the
outcome piece and that the the
educator improvements workforce
and other what or or pay and
otherwise are connected to the
the outcome improvements for
early childhood that for the
kids of New Mexico I look
forward to that I don't know
that that's I've seen that yet
this year but I think obviously
you're also moving you're in a
very new place with a an
unprecedented pandemic
madam chair finally I would just
ask.
the incoming infusion of that
eighty two million dollars and I
think secretary you said that
that currently would need to be
expended by September of twenty
three or say follow twenty
three.
Do you have an initial sense of
how that will fit in.
Perhaps not this fiscal year but
it's but perhaps this fiscal
year is that is will.
Yeah well that where is that
within the budget development
for the CCD.
Madam chair space chair thank
you for that question I do want
to also say that some of the
outcome performance measures
that we already do have as part
of the LFC report card around a
quality programs number programs
looking to four and five star
would also be fed by increase
credentials better quality
workforce so I did want to make
that point and and better
outcomes for children and higher
quality settings better outcomes
for children.
In terms of the eighty two
million that we have we're very
grateful to have received input
from the early learning Advisory
Council in terms of their
recommendations I just today or
yesterday from the early care
and education association of New
Mexico they have we've asked for
the Senator recommendations we
are the meeting with the
governor's office and kind of
putting together a plan
continuing to build on what we
did with the first twenty nine
million looking at ways to
support our work force getting
dollars into the hands of the
early childhood professionals
who've been on the front lines
the federal government is
definitely focused on making
sure we're supporting the
businesses as a whole so
partnering with our economic
development are small business
what kind of supports are they
getting and building childcare
stabilization grants some of the
things that we've seen have
worked very well also looking at
possibly opening up child care
to people outside of the two
hundred and two hundred fifty
percent of eligibility that's
another allowable use of the
funds so if we see that more
people in New Mexico really need
help paying for child care
because it is expensive of those
are so we're we're presenting
different scenarios and
recommendations but the hopes
that the you know we put we have
to refer report back to the
federal government by February
twenty third at generally what
our plan is for that those
dollars so.
Understood thank you Secretary
certainly encourage and
appreciate your point about some
of the outcome measures the
previous question being
connected there I think
expanding that scene the
significant and potentially even
far more significant infusions
of investment that could come to
ECECD and the overwhelming
importance of coordination with
the LFC given the deep work on
pre K. and early pre K. E.
outcomes that they have already
demonstrated both here in New
Mexico in New Mexico so we know
what works for us
but really honor the difficulty
of your work and encourage being
aggressive with the investment
of that federal money thank you
very much madam chair.
Representative Anderson.
Thank you madam chair madam
chair I be really quick I have a
question to the LFC analyst of
and it goes to I think you want
to Representative small was
talking about want to be
redundant but.
The difference between.
The significant difference
between DFA and LFC is over of
these trust fund monies of one
question is do we consider trust
fund monies general fund or are
they your market is trust fund
income.
I see madam chair Ms committee
Representative Anderson they're
not booked as general fund
because they come from an
endowment fund so they come in
is a different revenue source
you can see on your
On your difference for instance
on page the I in program support
they come in in other transfers
coming from a trust fund and the
twenty million dollars is the
base no matter what growth the
trust fund does or doesn't see
twenty million dollars the base
recommendation of what comes out
of that fund to the Department
thank you and and I don't have
that information in front of a
calendar so you know we don't
need to refer to that for me
what it is the fact is that it
down what was created by general
fund surplus money the year we
had a billion dollars over a
billion dollars two years ago in
and I'm just only making the
point that we may not call it
general fund but it originated
in my mind at least from the
general fund but I I wanted to
talk about of the three point
four million dollar pre K.
number LFC over DFA and the two
point eight million dollar
the funding level LFC over DFA
and I I think about that and I
think now that's where.
That's where the rubber meets
the road in addressing this
issue in New Mexico I listen to
the need for a workforce support
Harrity.
it's hard to argue against that
but I think in the year when.
New Mexicans are suffering.
Unemployment is is way too high
businesses are either closed or
or failing that very hard to see
that is the year we must try to
achieve workforce parity
workforce parity being among
other things another way of
saying salary increase so up I'm
I salute the LFC for their
courage in bringing their
recommendation for this I do
think it it sort of keeps the
eye on the ball what we're
really trying to do here and I
hope we will keep that in mind
going forward thank you madam
chair.
Thank you Representative
Anderson I don't see any other
hands up so I've got a couple
questions myself.
I'm looking also on page eight
the high level.
Similar concerns about the
difference between they pre.
Prekindergarten additional slots
in early prekindergarten
additional slots and we say
we're going to see an increase.
So it doesn't make sense to me
that there be that kind of
differential.
Also interested to know if we're
gonna start subsidizing higher
ed is that something that is
going to continue under this
trust fund or is this something
that we would hope of eventually
hire would would pick up on
their own and start recognizing
part of the the way they could
resolve their loss and
enrollment is this kind of thing
you know and and they'd be using
their own dollars for this kind
of programming.
Madam secretary I want to ask
you you know I'm interested in
overall performance with this
agency.
And based on the inputs that I'm
familiar with over the last few
years generally how would you
describe your outcomes.
Madam chair thank you for that
question
well what I think right now it's
been an interesting time to to
measure are outcomes I think so
if we were to measure how we're
doing from the one of the of the
pandemic I think our outcomes
are very strong families are
getting services they're getting
them for telehealth our little
our children are getting
referred to early intervention
our average age of enrollment in
early intervention right now
eleven months which is a good
sign and it just was recently
reviewing the annual performance
report for our family in a
toddler program and you know
children are advancing their
developing the skills so on that
front it's very positive I would
say in our childcare in our pre
K. this year and has been very
disruptive between the remote
starting in March and some back
in person so I will we will be
releasing an annual outcomes
report which is mandated through
our our legislation that created
our department will be doing
that here in the year we feel
like we need a year for us to be
able to get our feet under us
understand how the outcomes that
we are achieving
so the positive outcomes are
that we've we've got an engaged
workforce we the moments
together campaign that we
released we are actively
reaching families all over the
the state and I do want to also
speak to our Assistant Secretary
for native American early
education more because she has
done a tremendous job we have
eight tribal liaison to the
department will meet twice a
month with all of our tribal
education partners and we are
sharing information about our
programs were learning about the
programs that they are running
their childcare programs their
head start and early head start
programs we are meeting monthly
with the New Mexico head start
association and.
What evidence based professional
development around the classroom
assessment scoring system bring
our tribal in our head start
programs together so I think in
the in the outcomes we are
building a strong community we
are being more transparent in
our interactions and we are
tracking and really working on
building our data systems so am
I eligible used to be an app
that you could just go on and
find out am I eligible and then
you have to go into a bunch of
work we turn that app into a
place where you can register and
apply for childcare so I think
in those areas we are creating
more access were removing
barriers and we are focused.
How to present on outcomes for
both families and children so
we have a lot of growth to do we
have to strengthen the way these
systems and programs work
together the supports that come
around them and and that that is
my number one priority is making
sure that this isn't just
another department with a bunch
of programs and services but
that there integrated their
online and they're working in
service of one another because
that's that is what is essential
for us to all realize the
promise of this new department
so I hope that answers your
question I know but I think we
have made a lot of strides in
some significant outcomes for
families and educators and the
provider community.
Yeah will be looking for more
quantitative on that versus
qualitative I mean it gets high
level qualitative right now in
light of the pandemic and I
certainly recognize that but at
the end of the day because this
is such a major investment by
the state of New Mexico we
really need to understand where
we're going and and are we
making that that
Outcome that we've asked to to
see Kelly I wanted to ask you if
you know right off hand because
I don't have my volume here in
Gallup what the pre K. cash
balances are you have a sense of
what that looks like.
Madam chair members the
committee when the agency
submitted the budget it was a
little over six million the LFC
took two million of that fund
balance and put it into the
operating budget and that's the
general fund swap you see
they're leaving a little bit
about four million left in the
public provider prekindergarten
fund on the private provide the
school per fund does not exist
anymore okay all righty.
The other question that I had
was the
Looking at the Trust Fund column
on page eight.
Why didn't LFC have anything in
there for for the.
There it wasn't actually
requests to us when we were
doing the budget development
that was an executive at that
came out after our process.
Okay so how much of this changed
or is it just that one item
after the.
Budgets are due.
madam chair the higher
endowments that we've talked
about were not included in the
recommendation to hire a
transfer and the that dollars
everything else was included I
will say though that the
agency's original request was
more in line with given the
financial times when they
submitted it the reduction and
so the HSD mostly requests to
decrease prekindergarten general
fund and use the trust fund to
back fill that and so both
recommendations coming out of
the executive an else you're
very different regarding that
situation.
Yeah that's what I remember and
this higher ed and element well
it sounds like a good way to get
qualified people it I mean is
that something that we want to
make we're understanding that
we're taking the trust fund.
Earnings and putting that into
the higher at department.
In a time when hiring discuss
such declining enrollment and is
being paid based on the student
count that they had the previous
year all righty is there any
other questions about for this
for this department.
Senator so I'm gonna turn to
Representative small.
I can't somebody is talking or.
Thank you.
The.
I'm sorry we're we're getting
feedback on chair can you hear
me I can hear you sorry.
Okay thank you madam chair sorry
about that madam chair I would
move the LFC recommendation for
the early childhood education
and care department okay.
A motion do we have a second for
that in a chair okay
Representative Garcia we have a
motion and a second and we're
going to.
ask is there any opposition to
that motion and recognizing that
we can certainly on this trust
fund if we need to.
Evaluate that during catch up
cleanup we can but
We need to be a super clear
super clear on these additional
slots.
Being possibly under funded by
the executive so that being said
we have any opposition to that
motion.
Saying that we have a two passed
motion and I'd like to thank the
cabinet secretary and her staff
and all the folks involved with
with this department thank you
very much.
Let's move on to the next
departments and that is the
children youth and families
department and we'll start with
the analyst.
I'm good afternoon madam chair
members of the committee.
Happy to be here with you this
afternoon my name is Carla khaki
and the analyst for the children
youth and families department
and Michael Reagan's Berg who is
to analyst for DFA is here with
us and Secretary Blalock and I
see a number of members from his
team.
So I will go ahead and start
with a general summary of the
budget you can find the children
youth and families on page
of two eighty four of volume two
that's where it begins.
So the overall difference
between the executive and the
LESC budget is only about a
million dollars.
it's less than one percent.
That and both recommendations
include a reduction in general
fund.
The LFC recommendation includesd
at three point three million or
one point six percent decrease
in general fund and then
consecutive includes a seven
hundred fifty eight point five
thousand are point four percent
decrease in general fund.
The one of the central
differences if not the biggest
difference in the budget is the
use of the our juvenile justice
services fund balance so the LFC
recommendation is swapping four
point two million in J. J. S.
funds to keep the juvenile
justice graduated relatively
flat and the executive is using
about half of that so the
executive recommendation swaps
two point four million and in
our fund balance for general
fund to keep the budget lacked
so those that's a really that's
the major difference in the use
of the general fund.
the executive recommendation
also includes an increase in
person of four hundred and forty
one point five thousand which is
to provide of that reach New
Mexico initiative.
both of both recommendations
include increase of just over
two million in the use of
federal funding and that's
really reflection on the
Department capacity to bring
more federal funds into the
program support program.
both the executive and the LFC
include overall increase in the
personal services employee
benefits category but there are
significant differences about
how we distribute that increase.
The executive or the LFC
recommendation is four point one
million or more in the
contractual services category
and four point seven less in the
other category and this is
largely explained in the
protective services program
where the LFC has taken a
projected savings in the foster
care and support line item and
moved that into contracts that
can be used for preventive
services and to support the
differential response initiative
the alternative response and
relief programs to prevent abuse
and keep families out of the
system so that is a major
difference in the in that
recommendations is the
executive is leaving that foster
care and support are pretty
pretty much flat with the FY
twenty one budget and the LFC is
moving quite a bit of money and
to contracts to fund preventive
services.
I'm then I would say that the
last major difference in between
the the recommendations is in
the behavior health program and
the LFC is actually recommending
an increase and the behavior
health services program it's a
four point five percent overall
increase and is one point six
million more than the executive
recommendation.
The LFC recommendation supports
the legislators priorities to
rebuild community based behavior
health services and largely
reverses the solvency measures
that were taken in the first
twenty twenty special
legislative session and this
restores funding to many of the
initiatives that were approved
during the twenty twenty
legislative session.
And then the executive
recommendation includesd
several language provisions
including nonvoting General Fund
and a two million program
transfer authority I'm and
that's kind of the overview of
the differences and then we'll
go through it program by program
but I'm first gonna let Michael
I had given any comments you may
have.
Thank you Mr kirke
good afternoon madam chair
members of the committee my name
is Michael Reagan's Bergen on
the executive budget and policy
analyst for the children youth
and families department from the
different department of finance
and administration and Mr techie
gave a a great summary of the
major differences between the
executive and LESC
recommendations overall we are
pretty close in the overall
funding for children youth and
families department the one
thing that I would reiterate is
the executive recommendation
does include the non
reversionary language I just for
the behavioral health and
protective service programs and
we believe that this language
will allow the agency to be more
trauma responsive which is part
of the cabinet settlement
agreement that was agreed upon
early in twenty twenty so if you
recall back in twenty nineteen
during the twenty nineteen
session the legislature actually
gave this non reversionary
language to CYFD and it's helped
the HSD re alligned in and our
work on a lot of different
services build out a lot of a
lot of different services that
are benefiting our kids and
families all over New Mexico so
we would like to request that
language again it'll just
accelerate the reorganization
the Secretary Blalock is kind of
undertaking during his his
tenure here at CYFD
other than that I don't have
anything else at the high level
we can move on to programs
support which is P. five seven
six on your different she.
That's fine just go through each
one of the programs thank you
yes ma'am madam chair so with
the program support the
executive recommendation is two
hundred seventy four thousand
higher in general fund and then
the the LFC recommendation and
this is restoring the program
support operating budget to the
Opry FY twenty one levels if you
recall the early childhood
services our programs left CYFD
and went to the early childhood
care and education department
and so this left a big hole in
the program support budget we've
had some challenges in the
current fiscal year we actually
had to freeze up hiring earlier
in the fiscal year because there
was not sufficient budget in
program support to fill some of
these positions and we've since
I'm identified new federal
funding streams that we've
allowed we've we've Barton we've
we've done budget adjustments to
bar in to allow programs support
to start filling some of these
positions but the executive
recommendation does restore some
of this funding in you'll see
that it's mostly on the
expenditure side in the
controversial Services category
so the executive recommendation
fully funds of the maintenance
and operations of the fax system
and supports the agency's
transition to the new child on
child welfare information system
the LFC recommendation is two
hundred seventy four thousand
under the executive
recommendation for these
contracts I will turn it back
over to Mr khaki for additional
comments.
I don't have any additional
comments on programs support the
difference between the two
recommendations is two hundred
and seventy four thousand and
contracts.
I'm and so with that I can go
ahead and move on to that
juvenile justice program which
is a P. five seven seven.
and as I pointed out earlier the
big difference in the two
recommendations is the our use
of the fund balance available to
the Justin all juvenile justices
Services program back when the
HSD made its recommendation of
the fiscal situation was much
more uncertain and they actually
are requested to use a large
chunk of fund balance to keep
the program a flat instead of
taking the reduction from the
actual operating budget so what
the executive does is give it is
used about half of that fund
balance where as the LFC is
using the same at the fund
balance that was originally
requested.
There is also a decrease in
person services
That executive recommendation
includes a six hundred forty
nine thousand increase in person
services and at the LFC
recommendation includesd a just
a small decrease so there that
there's just a difference in the
personal services category.
I'm both recommendations include
a six hundred sixty thousand
decreasing contractual services
which is a result of the non
renewal of a contract with the
San Juan detention facility and
that's the same in both
recommendation.
I'm and then all of the
performance targets and
differences were reconciled so
that's that's J. J. S. then I
can turn it over to Michael for
comment and he can carry on with
protective services.
Thank you Mr khaki I have no
additional comments on juvenile
justice I I would just add that
the reason that the executive
recommendation is six hundred
sixty thousand higher in
personal services employee
benefits is the agency has made
good progress on hiring the
current of vacancy rate for
juvenile justice is eighteen
percent and the executive
recommendation includes a
sixteen point three percent
vacancy rate which is more in
line with the actual vacancy
rate.
I'm moving on to protective
services which is P. five seven
eight on your different sheet
the executive recommendation
overall is one point four
million higher in general fund
and two hundred thirty seven
point eight thousand higher in
federal funds for a total of one
point six million higher one
point seven million higher
overall and our this really just
restores the funding to the FY
twenty one operating budget
level as you practice the
committee is has heard of
agencies were instructed to
request a five percent decrease
and we are just restoring the
the operating budget to the FY
twenty one levels and we're also
building in funding for on the
reach New Mexico initiative
which Secretary Blalock will
we'll talk more about during his
presentation but this is
allowing kids to communicate
with CYFD to taxed and this our
our recommendation the executive
recommendation supports twelve
new at full time FTE that will
work in the central intake with
the region Ms initiative and
there's also a federal component
that's why you see the two
hundred thirty seven thousand
eight hundred dollar federal
revenue difference there as well
the the the general fund would
we be matched for these are
twelve positions
so those are the major
differences between the
executive and LFC
recommendations for protective
services and with that I will
turn it over back to miss the
techie additional comments.
I'm in protective services I
would just bring your attention
to the transfer of the money
from the projected foster care
savings
the money that we moved out of
the other category which is the
projected foster care savings is
actually more in line with the
actual cost that we're the FY
twenty actuals so we feel
comfortable moving in that
funds from the foster care and
support line item into the
contractual services where they
can find new preventive
services.
And then I would also just
emphasized that the LFC
recommendation are doesn't
change the person services and
employee benefits funding gets
flat with the FY twenty one
operating budget it just didn't
included the additional money
that the executive put in for
that reach New Mexico
initiative.
I'm and then shall I continue on
with behavior health anything
else Michael.
You can
then you.
The LFC recommendation to put a
lot of resources into the
behavior health services program
in recognition of the
legislators priority to rebuild
out community based behavior
health services and the
importance of those services to
improving outcomes for for
children in New Mexico.
So the LFC recommendation is
including a one point five six
million increase in general fund
to support the expansion of the
services.
And the executive recommendation
is keeping the general fund
revenue flat with FY twenty one.
The LFC recommendation includesd
increase of six hundred thousand
R. six hundred and one point one
thousand in the personal
services employee benefits
category.
And this largely reverses the
solvency measures taken during
the twenty twenty special
legislative session to restore
funding for positions that were
approved for the behavior health
services program back in the
twenty twenty legislature.
The executive recommendation and
personal services employee
benefits category is three
hundred ninety four thousand or
four point five percent below
the FY twenty one operating
budget.
And it applies a fourteen
percent vacancy rate.
The LFC recommendation includes
an increase of nine hundred
twelve thousand in the
contractual services category
and this is to restore funding
for several of the behavior
health initiatives that were
again approved back in twenty
twenty including transitional
living residential treatment and
maternity home facility.
The executive recommendation
includes a two hundred and three
thousand increasing contractual
services so there's really about
seven hundred thousand more in
the LFC recommendation for those
for that these these contractual
services these new programs.
Both the executive and the LESC
recommendation included decrease
in spending in the other
category the LFC recommendation
is about eighteen point six
lower than FY twenty one
operating budget and recognizes
operational cost savings from
telework.
I'm and then there's the
differences in the language and
all that Michael talk about that
I'm.
Both.
Of the recommendations include
and language that extends the
time for the one million
appropriated and in twenty
twenty for the M. S. T. program
so that we are allowing the
behavioral services program to
extend the time to spend about
one million and I think that
projection is that they have
about
from between two hundred and
three hundred thousand that they
would spend in the next fiscal
year.
And then I'm over to Michael.
You Carl so madam chair members
of the committee the only other
thing I would add for behavioral
health services is the executive
recommendation is is flat with
the FY twenty one per year
operating budget we didn't build
in the level of funding that
LESC did because as you recall
there was some realignment
that's been done within CYFD we
move the domestic violence
program over from protective
services to behavioral health
services are in the nineteen
session and so that was our all
the domestic violence program an
eleven million dollars of
funding that was moved over and
do actuals if you look at the
actual expenditures behavioral
health is actually spending a
lot lower than their current
operating budget and the current
vacancy rate for the program is
forty three percent the
executive recommendation being
flat with the current year
operating budget built in a
fifteen percent vacancy rate so
we believe that this is more
realistic for funding of the
behavior health services program
right now is it is it expands
and grows and as this Pataki
indicated on both the executive
and the LESC are recommending
the extension of the one million
dollar appropriation the most
multi systemic therapy language
so those funds could be utilized
in FY twenty two and the print
the current projection is about
three hundred thousand of
available funding for for those
expansion behavioral health
projects in FY twenty two so
with that I don't have anything
else on the different sheets
madam chair I will turn it over
to Secretary Blalock for his
presentation.
Thank you Mr Reagan's Berg at
I'm at of the takeover just
briefly Secretary Blalock and
thank you course was the khaki
Secretary Blalock thank you for
being here today and please go
take away.
Let's try that again thank you
Mr members of the committee can
you hear me OK.
Okay great progress
you all of you if it's only by
zoom and I hope you I really
hope to be able to visit with
you at some point I realized we
would likely have had a chance
to visit talk a little bit about
budget at this point.
And so I regret that we haven't
really been able to do so with
the slide up.
Mr chair members of the
committee can you see the slides
should be orange.
Okay great.
So you know in twenty nineteen a
you Mr this committee and
explain some of the frame of
what we were hoping to do as we
rebuild a Department that from a
policy perspective the
structural perspective we
seriously lacking.
In twenty twenty we came back we
went to the strategic plan and
talk about some of the progress
we were continuing to build that
really focused on how we were
going to do the things we
described in twenty nineteen
this year Mr chair members of
the committee we get to focus on
the progress we've made looking
at some of the data so that you
can help us hold hold us
accountable for things that we
told you we would do and then
look at how are projected budget
would help to continue to do
that I just wanted to the only
looking at our budget you can
see there that big drop from
three twelve to twenty seven
would not actually drop in the
state of New Mexico from
investing in children that with
the launching the program and I
do that this is an honor to go
after thank you again to hear
about all of the fantastic thing
she is building there and I look
forward to watching that program
just continue to grow and be
successful going forward as the
as you heard from that my the
the budget experts that usually
I'm sitting in the middle of
this the khaki and throwing
breaking for the budget between
the LFC recommendation in the in
the executive recommendation is
not that different I will go
through how the differences are
meeting for for what we are
building at CYFD has that comes
up to this presentation so flag
some of those differences you
see the juvenile justice
difference there but as it was
mentioned a big component of
that different is a fund
transfer that LFC is
recommending that we do for this
year I do want to point out if
that becomes part of the budget
going forward that fund will be
depleted by the second year and
so I may be a one year gap of
three age but the second you'll
need a different financial
mechanism to ensure that
division's appropriately funded
and then of course CYFD so we
have we are doing adjusted we
are the children's behavior
health care of forty for the
state of New Mexico and the
state and how many of you here
with the leadership of this
budget.
In the governor's office and the
governor's fantastic leadership
on community based health
services has resulted in that
division finally catching up to
the legal entitlement for what
we need and should be doing for
children in order to respond to
the high level of trauma the
children have experienced your
New Mexico of protective
services as well and we also
have an office of the home
homelessness which is our
programs support budget and just
launched a series of programs
this month the next month at the
started to get established to
really help you and families who
are struggling with housing
instability and homelessness.
into a big component of what
we've been doing to live twenty
nineteen and you are you might
remember the four columns they
usually show you of our
strategic plan we have shrunken
down to these six important
things that we are really
focused on driving forward in
the next year the fact that no
services for children or family
should be predicated on court
involvement it whether or not a
child of the child welfare or
juvenile justice system or not
we want to be able to respond in
the appropriate way to help
strengthen and improve overall
child well being in the state of
New Mexico trauma responsive
services and I'll explain with
that need in just a little bit
but being sure this is the a
partnership we're doing that
multiple agencies of the
specially with HSD and Dr bone
in his team over there is
behavioural health care so that
we're building out trauma
responsive services for our
children and families across the
state of New Mexico increasingly
moving to upstream prevention in
more and more and when I say
prevention I'm talking about
preventing criminal justice
involvement preventing hello for
involvement preventing trauma
in preventing homelessness
preventing institutionalization
preventing all of the adverse
outcomes that has some New
Mexico at the bottom of still
many ranking systems when we
look at where we are with child
well being really driving a lot
of what we're doing with project
predictive analytics and data
and having a public health model
at its core and focusing on the
restricted settings and that's
the core pieces of our strategic
plan that we really had to
twenty nineteen but those are
the real focus is for the next
year when we work on our budget
this year close to the
governor's office in DFA we had
for think that that we're that
you that I'm hoping you see in
every line of the budget the
first is really aligning the
dollars our strategic plan so in
other words focusing on putting
money where we most think we're
gonna get in.
The impact on our strategic plan
going forward a reforming the
agency so that we're meeting a
legal requirement that we need
to meet and that includes
federal law the Medicaid child
welfare juvenile justice Baker
how of supporting that child
well being over all over all of
our systems and really do silo
in our system as much as we can
part of how we do budget in New
Mexico kind of hampers our
ability to really focus on the
whole child in the whole family
because our budget in New Mexico
it's really silos by division
and so we are increasingly
restructuring increasingly
looking at our programs across
those division so we can make a
real impact on families and then
doing just much smarter finance
leveraging more federal dollars
whether it's a title for the
social security act foster care
whether it's Medicaid dollars
whether cancer grants
increasingly bringing down those
federal dollars going forward.
The other consideration that I
want to be sure Mr chair members
of the committee that that we're
all mindful of that there is
also budget impact of a legal
settlement of the Kevin
application that was brought in
September right before this
administration took office right
before I came New Mexico and we
settled that in record time and
it ended up being a contractual
agreement that it's being
moderated and overseen by co
neutral three commercials in the
in there's a remedy if we're not
showing that progress through
good faith effort to achieve and
sustain progress and the reason
that I mention it is when we set
we were able to settle Kevin us
so quickly because if you see
here the legal entitlement
there's really for legal claims
in that lawsuit they fit
perfectly with our strategic
plan and that was intentional
when we met with plaintiffs
attorneys when we first came and
we very quickly agreed on the
main large pieces that needed to
move forward for children and
families in New Mexico and so
we're able to settle it very
quickly.
And that includes that children
need to be in least restrictive
settings in foster care
in that means like the most
family like setting possible we
need to be working better with
tribes how would have the.
Allowing them and setting up
procedures and practices and
policies they are taking the
lead of for Indian children are
native American children that
are in our care or in their care
so we can support them in that
in that in it go Indian child
welfare act we actually have the
bill this session of the
building and your bill in
addition those sponsoring and
and and Representative Lewis and
house that would codify and
strengthen those protections to
be sure to hold us accountable
going forward under the Indian
child welfare act you and say in
New Mexico of building trauma
responsive services for youth in
foster care and then building up
a community based health
services which we have talked
about a lot here we do not have
enough in the state of New
Mexico but I am happy to say I'm
gonna show you the data in a
minute that we have many more a
community based health services
now than we ever have before.
And so when we look at the least
restrictive settings just to be
sure on the same page about what
that means for our children in
New Mexico the least restrictive
settings being home with parents
and if that's not possible being
home with relatives you can and
if that's not possible being the
fictive kin or people who have a
relationship with the child or
foster care a non related costs
to care placement and then going
all the way up to the most
restrictive which country care
setting in the most restrictive
setting for our children with
Bacardi care setting and a lot
of placing a lock setting out of
state that's it for this within
the community the most
restrictive setting and where we
get our worse outcomes
unfortunately with our children
so that's where we want them to
leave this is outcome measures
this is important because this
is our kids succeed the most
it's also legal requirements in
all kinds of variety ways one
data point I I am happy to share
with you is progress we've made
here at this lower level this
can a placement so in January of
twenty nineteen when this
administration first came in
about four percent of all of our
the first time placements for
kids coming faster with with
where with relatives of four
percent that's incredibly low we
now we're around forty percent
as of today and to increase that
in two years and then the our
overall placements with
relatives was around twenty five
percent of when this
ministration happened twenty
nineteen and now we're at around
thirty nine percent and to
increase those and our goal is
forty at the end of four years
and so we are ahead of schedule
and helping support our
relatives in keeping our our
children there.
if you look at our budget the
governor's budget that we worked
on includes funding for a couple
of other things that would help
us with prevention and kinship
including funding for increased
community contracts for care
coordination differential
response that is something that
I think we all agree on it's
been a big the point of this for
legislative finance committee
for years and we are happy that
the launch that it launched our
initial pilot launched in
January of this year and then we
have money in the budget for
next year to continue to expand
it us so that we're getting
upstream helping families and
helping families to that we're
preventing trauma and preventing
children from needing to come
into any of our systems formally
at all
earlier behavioural health
support and suicide prevention
this includes money for training
for all of our staff into PR
which is like CPR around suicide
prevention so that we're
recognizing and responding to
possible signs of suicidality
going forward exceptionally
important right now based on
data from twenty eighteen New
Mexico at the highest youth
suicide rate in the country.
and so this is urgent and
necessary and that we have
because that's who I had to be
part of what we're gonna be
going doing going forward and a
big part of our budget and then
also contracts for predictive
analytics which allows us to
better identify are at risk
families so that we can provide
proactive support and not wait
until a tragedy happens and then
we're responding to the tragedy
but instead providing support to
biting food connection school
connection the of the support
services connection in the
health services so that we can
help our families upstream the
possible.
More data to in twenty nineteen
of the first things that I did
tell the committee was that we
were going to be bringing our
children back from out of state
placement and bring it back here
here to support they can succeed
in the community I'm happy to
say that we have had a good
progress and that the yellow
graphic yellow bar on the left
is protective services the
orange on the right is juvenile
justice those of the kids that
we can most control where they
are because they're in our
custody and you'll see there we
had over a hundred of those kids
in placement outside of the
state will meet us in twenty
nineteen and you can see here we
have less than fifty now assume
that but more than half and
we're continuing to work on that
of I have.
Being the kids back that's an
important component the kinship
care is a lot of the kids come
back and they will come up and
we're also building up those
therapeutic community based
mental health services as well
another big focus for us around
older you you're Mister Reagan
for madam nested in the
governor's budget not in the LFC
budget social highlight that is
one of the differences between
the budget is we launched a
first of its kind Tax base
reporting platform so that older
you think specially can reach
out for us for help and support
by tax.
If any of you have teenagers you
know that if they they have a
smartphone and if they think
about this phone is being able
to access the web due at listen
to music and text people and
actually making phone calls like
a distant distant use of that
device we know children from
looking at research and talking
to kids the tax is more
comfortable way for them to
contact for help and to interact
with our into this it lacked and
interacting with their most
contract of we just launched
this in December and we've
already had about a hundred and
fifty kids reach out to us for
help and support for all kinds
of things connecting the food
how did they get connected to
COVID testing to actually
reporting abuse if they have
concerns in their family or
another family they can report
abuse to us and we can respond
and help them to help support
them.
And then a community based
mental health services is like
the glue and the structure that
exists that supports everything
that we're doing of you know and
we look at the degree of trauma
of families and children in New
Mexico a New Mexico has the
highest number of individuals
who experience adverse childhood
experience experience four or
more aces
than any other state in the
country and so our children have
experienced serious trauma and
so those community based mental
health services is what allows
our kids to stay in the
community stay home at the
state.
and we all know that that that
that just shake up there that
pictures from the documentary is
made by a guy who grew up in
Albuquerque of doubt the a
community based health services
providers in New Mexico that are
no longer here that were run out
of business and so we knew
coming in twenty nineteen that
we had to start rebuilding those
and I also for the lawyers on
the committee Mr chair I gave
the legal side because it's also
important because the legal
entitlement for every child in
Medicaid on Medicaid to receive
community based mental health
services if they need it to help
with the impact of their
disability in ninety three
percent of all the kids that we
work with the CYFD are on
Medicaid this is a legal
entitlement almost all of our
kids that we are on is that that
community based mental health
services.
in just looking again at the
data and so we said we would
start rebuilding and twenty
nineteen and this is what we've
done and so I have the into the
office and I will say if the
grass a little small from what
you're looking at in front of
you we also gave an appendix
that blows it up and has it on
each individual slides you can
just go there to the end of the
presentation of our intent in a
health program which usually
important for our families and
keep start our babies home and
say you can see here the
expansion that will be enabled
by this budget that we have a
proposed with the governor's
office expanding and many of
them expanding in collaboration
with our tribal partners to the
northern and simply pay us
simply pay such a great example
we we there so maybe there
behavioural health care program
you so strong we're learning
from them about how to do peer
to peer and how to bill Medicaid
for the pure Care Services and
then we are helping them launch
into the health program.
our wraparound site you'll see
before twenty nineteen the a
high fidelity wraparound site
there Bernalillo rose out of the
and then I wraparound site that
we're growing in that we have
grown since then increase those
but more than a three fold.
A big part of doing these build
also includes rebuilding the
infrastructure of many of our
providers don't have the
infrastructure for some of the
services any longer because of
the shake up and so having that
infrastructure money has been
very key for us and we've been
able to do that because we do
get that non reversion clause
all go back to that in a minute
the key to us celebrating of the
growth of the community based
health services going forward
are mobile response which is
Google response you might ask
that's and that's a crisis
response so that a family can
call the child is experiencing a
mental health destabilization of
family can call and have a
mobile crisis team go out to
their home he can be an ultra
positive alternative to calling
the police so instead of you
call a mobile response
therapeutic trauma responses a
trauma response chair former
spot to can be escalate the
situation we currently do not
have that for you the state of
New Mexico and so this will be
building it from scratch into
our budget for next year include
being able to build twelve teams
to get that off and running our
functional family therapy than
evidence based program that
allows us to work with family
keep children there in the home
is very intensive in home
services to that our families
can stay together again this
would be a new service that
we're growing integrate evidence
based program that to be able to
bring to New Mexico.
I rested a respite services also
of vital in order to stabilize
the placement specially to could
be able to be there we care
givers need a break or
caregivers need a a way to take
some space and be able to come
back refreshed and work with
kids and help us the potentially
problematic but he the academics
and their motives to make
therapies really good example of
a program that existed in New
Mexico was successful it's very
good at working with older you
and keeping those older youth at
home and the and stopping
problematic behaviors and
increasing overall child well
being this is a a service that
was largely driven extinct by
the shake up and so we're
rebuilding that with providers
could be happy about that and so
the money in the budget you'll
see there will allow that the
growth there of industry program
of from this fiscal going to
next fiscal.
all expansion of those services
with experience will grow at the
continue to invest in that
infrastructure part of the
infrastructure building is also
ensuring that providers can bill
Medicaid so that we have long
term sustainability in the state
of New Mexico so we're
connecting it to those federal
funding streams of it again a
lot of that is rebuilding from
the ashes of the shake up the
from of the four twenty
nineteen.
and also a or expanding services
here and then there's some
definitions of multi systemic
therapy and functional family
therapy not happy take more
questions I'll listen to much
time there's also more
information in the appendix.
Another key component of the
budget going forward has been
investing in supported housing
for our young people and for our
families one of the budget
differences you heard Mr tacky
mention that LFC recommends
moving
funds from Karen support
contracts for prevention and
while I totally agree that that
focus on prevention is a huge
priority for CYFD I just want to
point out some things to
consider some contact there that
might make that might lead to a
few little short in the care and
support one is our
implementation of fostering
connections act that allows kids
to stay in foster care from
eighteen twenty one I think you
trust specially during pandemic
allowed us to keep children and
keep them house instead of
having them exit faster care
with the frequently act
homelessness during this time
that just super dangerous the
housing and they were our
housing and secure we have
ninety nine children and already
the launch the program July
first and the program will
continue to grow because of the
sheer implementation to eighteen
will be in this year eighteen
and nineteen next year you can
nineteen twenty and that will
call their care and support
dollars expenses to go up quite
a bit as more more of those use
come and that's how we had
budgeted at the we had we knew
we had to transport dollars that
were unspent this would then
those dollars and so moving it
to contracts with leave us a
potentially short in that area
we also right sized our foster
care right to our care and
support dollars we're giving
more money to families in order
to incentivize maintainers
restricted settings so that our
care givers can hold on to those
children who have higher need.
and then of course some of the
care and support dollars that
we're not spending now it's
because of our out of state
travel without because of the
pandemic so we're not going to
physically see most of our kids
because we can't because of the
pandemic course that will stop
and then we also have increased
in our subsidized guardianships
overall and that's actually
exciting win up for us because
it allows children exit foster
care into permanent settings
with relatives and allows us to
continue to financially support
and that they need that.
moving on to our supported
housing what we have lunch I
mentioned fostering connection
it into New Mexico opted into
that in twenty nineteen we
launched it July first twenty
twenty right now as of today we
have ninety nine use that are in
that program that's in ninety
five percent entry right so when
we actually we first have to
launch talking about we a lot of
people say there's no way that
kids will understand foster
eighteen they want to get out as
soon as they can what we found
that ninety five percent of
those you eligible wanted to
stay in and it allows us to give
them free housing connection
therapeutic services and just
continue to work with that in
continue to support them our
kids are great to we've worked
with and you to help us build
these programs and they've been
fantastic supports they're a lot
smarter than we are about what
we needed to build were so
appreciative of them helping us
build successful program in
right now to will be a hundred
percent that's at ninety eight
point nine percent when we need
to fly this is true a week ago
it's not a hundred percent of
those you they're in stable
housing and a hundred percent of
an attached to us there appear
offered therapeutic community
based mental health services as
well.
our housing support well as well
for transitional living programs
you'll see there of twenty
twenty and before the you'll see
the budget and then twenty
twenty one the increase in
budget as we increase our
transitional living programs and
work more more with older youth
so that they have the support
and we can really help get to
some of those bad outcome
measures in New Mexico for those
eighteen to twenty five year old
this allows us to take more
responsibility for those you'd
work collaboratively with them
he can stabilize connecting the
support services and help them
stay in housing and so we're
expanding the in the number of
communities.
and then also are supportive
housing vouchers as well we're
expanding those that's a program
that were specifically expanding
in Bernalillo county of from
Albuquerque then you see also
our new partnerships and housing
really all over the state in
really focusing on some of the
areas that have been the series
we had by the pandemic including
San Juan and we can we County in
working we actually help build a
permissive for housing project
out there McKinley County that
we think can make a real impact
for our families out there are
thrilled to the part of that
project with you Gallup and you
can the counties while also
building our pregnant and
parenting group homes we talked
about those last year we said
we'd love to do it we got some
funding now we're in the process
of doing that in Lee County and
also a second site in that state
home for survivors of child sex
trafficking as well to really
building a lot of programs that
New Mexico really needed for a
long time for some of our most
vulnerable children who are
suffering experiencing the worst
types of job.
and then our budget in the
juvenile justice side as you
heard from my esteemed
colleagues a big big part of the
difference there is between the
funds transfer balance but I
want to talk to you about how
we're strengthening that the
fiscal health of our juvenile
justice department because if
you look at one of the things
that should jump out to you is
that we leverage zero federal
dollars on our juvenile justice
side and so we are working to
change that so that we have
federal dollars coming in help
support these you that includes
looking at our facility and
looking at the viability of
changing some of our lax
securities into non lot there
appreciate Medicaid funded
placement so that are you can
get better services and we can
also use federal dollars in
order to fund those services
help our help our kids do better
it also helps our our kids moved
to restrict the settings of so
that we can follow that and then
also working with our kids
you'll see how many of our youth
and appropriations are actually
living with relatives that that
warning sign and so last year we
implemented a program so that we
can do a ten subsidized
guardianships which means as a
lead appropriations we can we
can help them get guardianship
and continue to provide the
fiscal support if they need it
with ground that helps and not
come back to us so they don't
need to come back into our
system at all they get to go
live their lives in the in the
independent independent happy
way and I have to deal with us
at all the other thing around
court is we're also.
Turn on money and college for a
lot of these kids who are living
that would not with their
parents additional support I
will say that.
I will say that this requires
that a fix because it's not
something we can do on our own
this requires a court six and so
we have a bill right now it's
the two fifty seven that would
provide that jurisdiction for
the court so that they could do
those out of home placement
orders so that these the
children can have access to
those additional support and and
also pull down federal dollars
to that we're providing those
supports to federal dollars.
There's also money in the budget
for training in the governor's
budget which is vital for us I
have committed committee talked
many times about the
professionalization of our
workforce our staff I believe
are some of the best that in all
of state government they is
responded to the call around the
pandemic they've been providing
food doing transportation
providing working on a shelter
in collaboration with the agency
and the O. H. throughout the
pandemic and so big part of that
is around our to be sure that
they have access to health care
training a drop in training
increased professionalization
training and we've heard a lot
from our staff about how
successful these are the very
well attended everything from
mindfulness training the
escalation all of that to our
new training institute that was
created by any with field is now
currently the director of office
of African American affairs I
should say there's a direct
connection in total return the
money in the budget is so
important for our training is
also because part of our
settlement agreement and so we
need to do it for staff we also
need to do it to our compliance
with our settlement agreement on
and us any more money.
The more lawsuits that includes
trauma response to training
spots you recruitment equity
earnings up all of our staff in
many of these are also for
agencies that as well.
And then I'll tell you impact of
training when I when I say
training here I'm really talking
about that coaching model and
for this particular effort we
actually brought in T. he family
foundation is really helpful
coming in bringing a lot of
coaches and then through the
hard sweat blood and tears of
our staff but when we started in
twenty nineteen.
We had almost thirty five
hundred overview investigation
of what that means is that we
were responding to reports of
child abuse and neglect and we
had not compiled through and
look into the a look into the
case and done what we needed to
do in order for that to be up to
date investigation in Bernalillo
county alone we had over twenty
five hundred over to
investigation this is something
our staff focused on to be sure
that our children are safe and
that we were doing what we need
to do with his investigation and
still noted as of today a
statewide less than less than
sixty five overview
investigation and then
Bernalillo county you can't even
see it because it's so short as
of today there six over to
investigation and so I think
real reason just looking at the
data we have it on more work to
do of the will reason looking at
the data that we're headed in
the right direction and our
staff are really responding to
the call.
and then the last thing I'll
talk about is just why not
reversion you Mr Reagan for
talked about this it's really
important for CYFD because of
all the restructuring we're
doing all the additional federal
dollars we're doing it allows
you to your budgeting much of
the growth that I just showed
you the community based mental
health services grow the growth
in supported housing the
elimination of overdue
investigations much of that was
because we had flexibility to be
able to do to your budget that
allowed us to realize
inefficiencies take that money
and reinvest it pulled out more
federal dollars take that money
and reinvest it into that to
your budgeting is super
important it also allows us to
pull out more federal dollars so
that we can be more efficient
and and a stronger agency going
forward fiscally
and I also want to be sure
everyone know there is a process
a check and balance for that it
doesn't mean we just get carte
Blanche two years a budget we do
we go through we have an
oversight committee and to all
of our re investment dollars we
required that any proposal we
also leverage federal dollars
in would be sustainable and we
build infrastructure so that was
attached to our strategic plan
NMPSIA also want to approve one
we actually had a meeting with
LESC as well so we could talk it
through in the shore that
everyone's comfortable with how
we were using the dollars four.
And like I mentioned before
there's we do have an appendix
to go through some other things
but in that would be mindful of
time and so happy to to
questions Mr chair members of
the committee thank you so much
for your time.
Thank you very much Mr secretary
thank you to the analysts we
have a number of questions we're
going to get started with
Representative Crowder and go
down the list Representative
Crowder.
Thank you Mr chairman and thank
you for the presentation of the
analyst and the secretary.
The majority of my questions are
gonna come up the high level
general fund comparison sheet.
Of the truck like to start.
In online for that comparison
sheet.
It talks about decreases in
contracts to NMSU.
There's a positive four hundred
fifty two dollars which kind of
implies it's an increase can
someone tell me what.
What exactly does that mean on
that line what what's happening
there.
I can I can jump in there.
Madam chair members of the
committee so the original budget
request included
Reductions based on the
executives of mandate for that
agencies to include a five
percent reduction so when the
The HSA put in its original
request it showed that it was
taking a decrease and contracts
to NMSU this was one of the ways
that it was trying to
you bring the budget down the
five percent that was required
by the executive and so what we
did is show where we put back in
money that was in in their
original request.
I'm sorry that I don't have the
original request on the high
level that might have been
helpful but you can see what
their original request was in
volume two okay thank you for
that explanation and and exactly
what is in a mess you do in that
contract.
Thank you madam chair members of
the committee I can that
Secretary Blalock into that it's
a to have a center where they're
developing behavior health
programs at want to expand on
that trip I look.
Thank you so much Mr chair
members of the committee
Representative crowd to that
particular we work within an
issue at times but I'm pretty
sure that particular of budget
item has to do with the creation
of the center of innovation
that.
Right that infrastructure
building that I mentioned more
talk about building community
based health services so if
we're doing a new service we
work with them to help build the
infrastructure for the providers
around the Medicaid billing and
mortality to be sure that we're
implementing that that
appropriately into any reduction
of that contract just muted with
slow down a bit our mental
health expansion.
Thank you for that I appreciate
it very much my next question is
on
Line thirteen of the high level
talks about a DVO and then on
line eighteen.
It looks like you're putting
money back into the DV also
online thirteen there's there's
a deduction in line eighteen
it's increased number one can
you tell me what is DVO I don't
understand that afternoon in can
you explain the relationship
between the the reduction in the
increased.
I'm madam chair members of the
committee so that DPO is that
domestic violence Stander
It meant fees and so that they
collect fees from the offenders
and I was a reduction in a red
that projected revenue and so
behavior health took that out of
there budget and we swapped the
general fund for the loss of the
revenues.
Okay thank you that helps and
then my final question on this
sheet.
Is on line thirty six and thirty
seven.
It there there is a swap can you
just speak to that swapping
General funds in the purpose
behind that and everything
please.
Yes madam chair members of the
committee this is the swap that
we have talked about in the what
is being one of the major
differences in between again at
that recommendations in the
original agency request which
was
but you know with a five percent
cut as through was required at
the time that the agency
submitted the budget one of the
places that they found savings
was in that foster care and
support line item.
So instead of putting the money
back into that line item what we
did is say let's give them the
money two years on that
preventive services contracts so
that is what that's what is
and as a Mr Reagan's Berg and
the secretary have commented the
executive and is keeping more
money in the foster care and
support line item and the
department may need more money
to cover expenses that have to
do with fostering connections
and supporting transitioning
your.
Okay it just in in an
observation it appeared that
you're taking kind out of the
agency in using the fund for
contracts instead of using in
house person and I I think I
hear it's a it's a little
different than that is that
correct.
S. madam chair members of the
committee we moved it into the
contracts contracts category
because that is where you would
fund into services like in the
in the community so there would
be contracts with community
providers to provide preventive
services when families were
referred to them so that money
needed to be in the contracts
category whereas the foster care
and support money is in the
other category okay all right
thank you for that I appreciate
request final question is for
the secretary I noticed in your
behavioral health services
that from FY twenty to FY twenty
one yeah one hundred percent
general fund budget increase I
went from seventeen million up
to thirty four million receiving
another recommended another.
Four point five percent increase
how are you how are you
measuring the outcomes of the
doubling of that that budget
item within that division how do
you how do you measure that that
was a good investment.
Thank you so much Mr chairman
and committee Representative
Crowder
I I really love that question if
I can something that we talk
about it on I I think you saw
the all the data from the
original slide is also some of
the appendix about the regrowing
of that those services which is
been so important I think for
New Mexico and proceed with the
what we're doing it's so vital
in so I would say part of the
measure of our successes with
that we were able to grow the
services and I'll be honest with
you Mr chair and members the
committee Representative Crowder
when I first came in twenty
nineteen we talk about regrowing
community based mental health
services in quite a few people
told us we simply were not gonna
be able to do it we're not gonna
be able to do it very quickly at
all and I think that seeing that
growth of those services to the
money coming to us we're getting
that money out we're and we're
building evidence based services
supported by Senator of
innovation so that their
services but I think members of
Mr members the committee
Representative Crowder I think
probably part of your question
is what is it impacting kit the
bill to services the kids are
going to the services how do we
know it actually helping kids
and so we have a new assessment
that we're doing it's called the
child adolescent need
constraints assessment tool
called the canyon and it has
increases the part that adverse
childhood experience part of
that assessment tools norm so
that you can do it multiple
times within time frames and
what it does is it allows you to
see whether or not the child in
the family building that
resiliency whether their child
will be there to overall child
well being proving increasing
and if it's not then we can
thinker we can do different
services we can look at service
providers and how their how
they're working on it we can
make those changes so that we
can really for the first time I
think in New Mexico get a window
in the weather not our child
will be probing of based upon
that based on that assessment
tool the other thing I'll say
that we are doing all the not as
directors and that Mr members of
the committee Representative
product is also be sure that
we're building out the evidence
based practices and that there
that.
The models that we're building
out at high high high integrity
to the methodology of those
programs that we're building so
that we're building high quality
services that are that are
working with those kids that are
able to work with those families
as well and then the last thing
okay and and the chairman of the
committee with a crowd I know
you'll hold this accountable for
this we should start seeing real
improvement and our child well
being metrics our child our
child a report card of that we
work on with the LFC we look at
that data but also some of those
interim data measures and so one
of them for example of how
successful are we and and
preventing children from going
out of state in keeping them
here in the community that have
we've been able to lower that
number of the kids out of state
how many of those services that
we put in place for kids with
relatives so they're able to
stay with relatives in that end
up to be institutionalized and
at least those preliminary data
measures suggest that we're
headed in the right direction
because all of the data markers
are are going are going in the
right direction so far.
Thank you so much for that I
appreciate it I'd like to follow
up on that one quick question to
that agency but Jackie
as the LESC went through the
budgeting process I know you
guys do a tremendous amount of
analysis what what did you use
your help as far as the
performance measures and
outcomes when you did your
research on the budget.
So madam chair are.
Members of the committee and the
behavior health program all of
the expansion that was passed
back in twenty twenty all of
those new programs there are we
do we just put performance
measures in place in this budget
so if you look at that
performance that performance
measures sheets there's a whole
bunch of new
measures in there that was
should reflect whether or not
the department is performing and
whether or not the programs that
we're funding are actually
having an impact but currently
that measures that they have in
place for the current fiscal
year
are not reflective of the new
programs because they were just
getting started the measures
that they do have the behavior
health services program pretty
much consistently meets or
exceeds.
Okay I I just anytime you double
the amount of money going into a
program.
I thought you would see some
kind of a job some kind of a
boost in I'll try to remember to
ask the same question next year
and say I think by then you have
the adequate information
measured so that's all my
questions thank you Mr chairman
thank you Mr secretary.
Thank you very much
Representative Crowder next
we're going to go to
Representative Castellano.
Representative because thank you
Mr chairman of this.
This questions for Mr Whitlock
I'm volume to it it says in FY
twenty the program received a
ninety percent budget increase
to address.
This is really high caseloads in
staff turnover but if if I go to
if I go to the.
To about one of policy reforms
and with.
it says well concerned about I'm
reported abuse are serious and
ongoing the dropping cases has
resulted in a program addressing
the backlog of investigations
currently about twenty percent
of investigations over do we
still open after forty five days
what we don't to address that if
if the budget was increased by
ninety percent of what we've
done to address some three lakh.
Thank you so much Mr chair
members of the committee
representative at the on on
a couple of things I think first
of all when we started in
January of twenty nineteen our
vacancy rate as part of that is
talking about vacancy rate
increase will our vacancy rate
for kids that was around twenty
three percent of the two high
and our staff member of the it
was pretty bad and our staff
really struggling because of it
we got that they can do right
down all the way to a wedding
present.
And then and then pandemic
happened we don't anticipate
that so it did go back up right
now the the numbers that I was
looking at this morning we've
gotten it back down to about
thirteen percent which is a
little high we can eleven
percent probably really good
number for us and that keeps our
caseload in a place where we
feel comfortable with
the second okay about the
backlog is that with that I know
but if you if you don't mind I
can share my screen again really
quickly here and are you sure
that that kind of part of my
screen as you can see that there
so that backlog.
I'm so sorry to make you dizzy
if I am it so that back of the
updated information as of today
for those over to investigation
they are almost nonexistent at
this point.
The inner we drop those they
were actually January twenty
nineteen those over to
investigations were closed at
thirty five hundred which is one
of those things I think I told
you that this committee that Mr
chairman of the committee when I
first came on board in twenty
nineteen is one thing to keep me
up at night and that is now down
below below sixty five cases
statewide and only six cases and
Bernalillo county right now that
really has that backlog of those
over the ignition we made a real
impact in that and then our
staff is doing awesome work of
setting up processes and put in
the work to be sure that we
don't get back we don't
backslide into that go in that
direction again.
Mr chairman.
I thank you and I want to
commend you and your staff it
seems like it's dropped
dramatically in.
I want to thank you guys for the
hard work.
Thank you very much
Representative Castellano next
we're going to go to
Representative Lane.
Thank you Mr chairman of I have.
Two questions one deals with
dollars and cents and then one
does does with a performance
measures on the dollars and
cents question Mr chair I I
notice in looking in our our
volume three that for FY twenty.
There was a little over six
hundred fifty thousand that was
transferred out of personal
services
but then we look at the personal
services calculation worksheet
the last page in our different
sheets.
There are.
Just about four hundred and
fifteen vacant FTEs according to
column C. and then column D. as
in delta there's there's a
vacancy rate on funded vacancy
rate of twenty point four
percent so given that unfunded
vacancy rate percentage but then
looking at the six hundred fifty
thousand it was transferred to
personal services can you help
me reconcile those two things.
In the.
All
of this ticket you Mr favors
Elaine I was gonna ask a with
with programs that is that
particular division is that
across all the CYFD.
Mr chair so the the vacant F. T.
unfunded vacancy rate is is all
programs combined overall
vacancy rate.
Thank you.
Mr members the committee now
what of the.
The district Mr checking.
Thank you there.
No problem Mr chair and members
of the committee so
I think you have to I think it's
too it's a complicated number
because it's a cost of several
different programs and that the
moving of money out of personal
services employee benefits is
overall we increased the budget
and personal services
So I'm the six hundred that
you're talking that six hundred
thousand that you're talking
about where where is that in the
budget that you're referring to
it.
I'm I think it might be the
money the you might be referring
to the money that is for the new
program.
so Mr chairman in volume three
page one hundred ninety nine of
our material.
For HSD code sixty nine hundred.
The.
The column that's labeled FY
twenty total transfers it shows
that there was six hundred fifty
one thousand transversal
services for FY twenty.
That's where that data comes
from Mr chair.
Mr chair members of the
committee I I can't answer that
question right now I have to get
back to you on that can Mr chair
if I may that's an LESC
document.
Is one of the other out Charles
years somebody else on that's
he's referring right out of our
manuals.
You madam chair can can I chime
in on that.
So the executive it and looking
at volume three pages one ninety
eight and one ninety nine that
column labeled FY twenty PSEB we
identify that that was actually
not the FY twenty personal
services employee benefits
column that's actually the FY
nineteen number so that there's
something that needs to be
reconciled their within the LFC
document just want to clarify
that and then also since you
know we talked about it during
the presentation Secretary
Blalock in the CYFD team it made
strides in lowering the vacancy
rate and agencies do have budget
authority during the fiscal year
to transfer funds from the
personal services employee
benefits category to contracts
or other costs and back then
they did have a vacancy rate
that was high and so there
potentially was a vacancy
savings that they transferred to
another category but as
secretary talked about the
they've made strides and feeling
a lot of the vacancies
throughout all the programs
within CYFD.
Thank you madam chair and my my
only other question has a deal
with performance measures so if
I I could turn those sectors
attention madam chair to page
twenty one.
This is under agency code P.
five seven eight for protective
services.
The second output that is
measured there is right of
placement moves for one thousand
days of care for children and
for FY twenty was five point
eight four which which if you do
the math comes out to about
every six months a child is
being.
placed in a different household
if I'm interpreting that data
correctly.
and and I will not that's that
is an improvement from FY
nineteen which is in our volume
to but my question madam chair
is what are we doing to continue
to makes that rate dropped
because you know we talk about
these being
vulnerable children and if if
they're getting moved every six
months that's concerning thank
you madam chair.
All right response from the
agency I'm not.
Yes madam chair members the
committee Representative Lane
you know that right of movement
is such an important outcome
measure because it really points
to the overall health of the
protective the protective
services system in as you
mentioned Madam chair of land
members of the committee we have
not done a very good on that
outcome measure in New Mexico it
is pointing in the right
direction Madam chair
representative and I appreciate
you pointing that out we have a
long ways to go with that
particular measure it wonder is
this such a great outcome
measure is that the a very good
of mental outcome that we need
to push to and there's a variety
of other outcomes that let us
know whether our headed in that
directement around kinship care
what we know about kinship
carers when children get with
can when they are able to stay
accommodate and stay there and
the need to have much fewer
placements and so if you look
madam chair and Representative
lane of the committee in twenty
nineteen we demand our kinship
care numbers thank insecure
place four percent overall
kinship care placements twenty
three percent and we've grown
those from four to forty and
from twenty three to about
thirty eight percent of into the
gonna take some time for that
larger measure to catch up to
some of the things that we're
doing in in madam chair there's
a committee representing the
other thing I would mention is
huge for us there is community
based health services one of the
number one reason that a child
can not stay in a home or in a
place that is because of the
destabilisation it's resulting
from the health crisis and we
don't have community based
health services that we can
bring in and wrap that child in
that home it means we end up
moving that child and that is
the wrong way to do it it's not
good for the child generally
speaking we want to keep that
child and rap and the services
and so we're starting to build
community this now services all
over the state in order to to to
have those services available
but that we're still in the
early stages and there's as you
saw Madam chair representative
is the community.
A committee in the data we
didn't have very many of the
services that all twenty
nineteen into building those in
continuing to connect those
children we have to continue to
expand those and that's why
that's such an important part of
our budget this year.
Thank you madam chair I do not
have any further questions thank
you very much Representative
Anderson.
Thank you madam chair I know
it's getting late in the day and
I'd ask for a.
Please the shortest responses
madam chair I wanted to ask the
secretary I heard the on the
Google response of it made me
think I bet that's a statewide
initiative mobile response to
sat cracked incorrect.
Is madam chair members the
committee Representative
Anderson of mobile response it
needs to be statewide we're
building it from scratch and so
we're focusing on the a few
places where were initially
launching it of the plan is to
get a statewide quickly as we
can.
Thank you very much if if after
I'd be curious to places is it
is your budget of include an
expansion of mobile responses
did I misunderstand that or is
that just a continuing funding
of the current level.
Yes madam chair and members the
committee Representative
Anderson it's to create mobile
response in New Mexico for you
and so it would be a twelve
staff for sixteen and we're
immediately starting it in a
place where we're able to get
federal funding to help with
lunch and build the
infrastructure and so those
counties that were approved with
the Chavez and the ball and
Palencia and then to be totally
transparent and honest as we can
build those and get those up and
moving in a way that works we're
gonna continue to expand it
because it's such an important
service for New Mexico.
Thank you Mr secretary then Mr
Secretary I was going to ask
about M. S. T. which you and
I've talked about before the.
Highly successful evidence based
results that have been achieved
and the the eight counties that
are under way with M. S. T. and
this funding level both LFC DFA
DFA includes five more counties
is that correct or incorrect.
Madam chair representative
Anderson members the committee
that that's correct that would
allow us to continue to build
multi systemic therapy wherever
we've been able to find
providers who can help us do
that.
Thank you very much for that
then the last Mr secretary.
I was very pleased with your
slide on not prevention and
kinship.
Specifically I was pleased to
hear of a problem that is is.
Of far too overwhelming for
every member of this legislative
body and that of course is New
Mexico's two thousand eighteen
ranking as number one he and you
suicide.
I I was pleased to hear of your
your training the money for
training of other initiatives
were mentioned as well it leads
me to the question Mr secretary.
Are you satisfied we are funding
everything we can to address
this problem.
Madam chair the that lives the
committee representative
Anderson.
it.
I think that the that the
governor's budget for CYFD get
there is what we need to do
because there's suicide
prevention that's the primary
intervention which QPR and some
of the other things that I
talked about that we are that
we're launching at the way in
that are in our budget and then
there suicide prevention and
secondary and tertiary
prevention and that's building
the community based health
services and being sure those
trauma responses services are
available to our children we
also work hand in hand with the
department of health I know
secretary Colin.
Email Representative a two you
madam
madam chair members of the
committee yesterday and they
have considerable suicide
prevention programs as well that
we also really need appropriate
funding for and then as well as
a agency inspectors grace and
with Dr bonus building their
behavioral health it really has
to be a multiple multi
departmental approach it's the
only way we're gonna move it and
we so desperately need to move
it Madam chair of Anderson as
you mentioned because those
twenty eighteen a data point
will we have the highest you
suicide in the country I know
that's not acceptable to anyone
on the committee and so I don't
know that I have a yes or no
answer but not completely
conversant with the where the
budgets are for my sister
Department there but I knew do
know that we have a plan across
state government to get to it
and if we have that that budget
in order to deal with do it we
can start making an impact.
Thank you Mr secretary I
appreciate your honesty and I
understood your answer Sir thank
you very much for the good work
you're doing of of certainly of
supportive of your efforts to
revive bring rebuild New
Mexico's community based of
behavioral health systems
Because it was only eight years
ago that our governor cute these
of fifteen agencies of fraud and
shut them down and earlier today
I heard a bill on the health
committee that is addressing an
action from fifteen years ago
when we chose to discontinue
rural behavioral health and I
salute you Sir for bringing it
back let me know what I can do
to help thank you madam chair.
All right thank you ask everyone
to be briefed on the answers to
be brief Representative Herrera
please.
Thank you madam chair.
Thank you Secretary Blalock I
just want to
I just want to thank you so much
for the work that's been done on
kinship guardians of that was a
bill I carried and I just want
to I just want to remind this
committee if it hadn't been the
leadership for the leadership of
chair Lundstrom and the David
Abbey I don't think we could
have gotten this done it was a
short session we had thirty days
we got it from the Senate in
fifteen days I saw I thought how
much gonna do this and really it
was chair Lundstrom who really
save the day we heard this bill
on kinship guardians two days
before we had to come back a
second day that passed at one
thirty in the morning of the day
we adjourned at twelve noon I am
so grateful to the work of the
secretary and the work of our
chair and I just thank everybody
for it I think it shows it paid
off if we have increase that to
forty percent and just remember
he did this during the pandemic
because we got that built
through in what I don't know
February and then we shut down
in March so to to be able to
take those numbers up in such a
short time is is a tremendous
credit not only to the.
All the people at CYFD but also
to the chair of this committee
that the really went out of her
way to make that happen I just
want the record of that thank
you that's all I have to say
madam chair ready thank you
representative Representative
Dixon.
Thank you madam chair and
Secretary Blalock I'm question
regarding the kinship.
Placing our children with
members of thank you know their
family that is wonderful I'm
wondering how that affects the
federal funding that title.
Four dash E. funding I noticed
that we've been concerned about
a reduction in those funds
coming into the state and so I
was curious if you could address
that thank you.
Thank you madam chair members of
the committee and Representative
Dixon so we we've improved our
for the leverage by quite a bit
in the this last year our
finance and R. EST director of
the who's on this call deserves
a lot who's on this meeting
there's there's a lot of credit
to cleaning up some of the ways
that we've been doing our forty
reimbursement so we've increased
our forty reimbursement the last
twelve months I just simply by
doing a better job at
and then the second thank you we
that we've improved our forty
leverage in our federal funds is
when we lost the Senate posture
we had it you read that those
children would be more it will
be more eligible and I won't
bore you with forty eligibility
to to link back to nineteen
ninety two twelve or rules and
where the child is on the
petition is filed and we had a
low penetration rate in New
Mexico with the New Mexico
insider make sense based upon
our poverty level and so
something was missing and so we
improve the federal
reversibility by cleaning up how
we recorded how we do it
extremely but then also for
these kids in extended foster
care we improved our processes
so that we're doing you
eligibility determination from
the committee care and so of a
lot of our are both foster youth
there about fifty percent
federally eligible our kids in
extended foster care about
seventy eight percent federal
eligible right now we ought to
get that number up to more than
eighty percent and so that's the
way we've been doing it and then
madam chair there's the
committee Representative Dixon
also to point out the P. a bill
that Representative percentages
mentioned that does subsidized
guardianship are you that bill
actually opened up more federal
dollars for us to to think we
for kids that are placed with
relatives and that's been huge
for us and we're just launching
it we're just starting at the
impact we have really big hoax
that's going to continue to make
a big impact in New Mexico.
Thank you very much I thank you
madam chair across.
Thank you very much
Representative small thank you
madam chair thank you Mr
secretary Mr secretary an
analyst within protective
services there's the three point
seven million dollar difference
coming from Karen support going
to contracts I think I heard
agency but khaki say you explain
how this originated based upon
the budget during when we were
in far leaner and more
concerning times in twenty
twenty.
Mr khaki analysts Secretary
Blalock did I hear correctly
that even though LFC may
continue to recommend some of
that three point seven million
dollars B. swaps between the two
that with that easing of
pandemic related lockdowns more
travel there may be a need to
balance that out and perhaps
have set of less transferred
from Karen supports to
contracts.
And analysts and secretary.
Yes madam chair members the
committee represents small if I
can and it's okay I'll just it's
easy for me to have the visual
up that's all right I think this
is the difference madam chair
versus small you the you're
talking about that transfer to
care in a care home care and
support contracts are prevention
and yeah I think the big thing
for us Madam chair
representative the committee is
a couple of things that we
believe will increase that care
and support.
Price tag for us including that
extended posture I mentioned
because even though we're more
of those kids are federally
eligible the school of the
nonfederal match that we're
paying more more of those kids
will come in because of the
tiered implementation and we
also have rolled out a new right
system that will lead to more
money going to children
now it is vital that also lead
to bigger price tag and then met
madam chair Representative small
as you just mentioned a
returning to out of state travel
as soon as we get through this
pandemic which cannot happen
soon enough will also need more
and more can't afford hours
that'll be that'll be a needed
sense.
Thank you Secretary Mr khaki is
there anything to add again not
questioning that.
And perhaps some questioning
madam chair khaki that is there
a reevaluation for if that ratio
is appropriate or or.
The LFC see any potential
changes related to what the
secretary said about potential
increase costs there.
I'm our recommendation was based
on the original agency request
that showed you know that that's
where that's where the agency
chose to take the savings that
when they had to get the budget
down by five percent they chose
to take savings out of the
foster care and support and when
we evaluated the our budget
recommendation and there was
additional funding that could go
back into the budget like that
it wasn't going to be so austere
that there needed to be a five
percent reduction on it was the
LFC recommendation that instead
of putting money back into the
foster care and support category
that it be put into preventive
services the money that is in
the foster care and support
category for the FY twenty two
budget is more than the actuals
in FY twenty it's not a lot more
but there is sufficient funding
and the foster care support
category unless there is a a
pretty steep increase in costs
there.
Okay thank you very much chair
just to other of one other quick
question in a quick statement
Matt and share Secretary Blalock
and again to the analysts and
perhaps to be followed up
offline.
It seems like the non
reversionary language has been.
important to some of the changes
secretary you make the case
secretary that some of the non
emergent.
The language has been essential
to some of the changes that
you've implemented
I know that we work against
including that non reversionary
language I would ask the
analysts and maybe for following
up after is there still room in
some areas for that and and then
perceive a need for that non
reversionary language or and I
know DFA believes there is
I will I think that's one of the
only other real differences
that's kind of stood out in
during today's presentation.
Thank you madam chair members
the committee represents all of
us to say quickly
I I think other than our staff
and leadership so quickly
supporting the strategic plan
and putting in long hours and
and include where to get these
of the progress that we show
today.
The second most important thing
for us was the nonrecurring
language in twenty nineteen
because it allowed us the
flexibility of money so that we
could realize and efficiency and
then reinvest those dollars to
start rebuilding CYFD into the
agency that we all wanted to
create and we would a request we
are requesting that we have
those nonrecurring languages
that language for next fiscal so
that we can continue doing that
restructure and that result.
Thank you thank you Mr secretary
I appreciate deeply the first
answer from miss the khaki and
going deep into that
I and I the last thing madam
chair.
Mr secretary an analyst the
still all high and
disproportionate number of
indigenous.
And in Hispanic another use of
color within your services I
will look forward to continuing
to see the aggressive efforts
to right those the wrongs of
thank you very much madam chair.
Thank you very much just go to
Representative Garcia.
Thank you madam chair too quick
of a lot of Representative Lane
touched on on a deal of
turnaround on kids going out to
foster care back in the CYFD
custody my question is on the
turn around when you were a kid
from a parent to a foster care
back to the parent back to the
foster care again how does that
affect the the the child and how
does affect the care workers the
faster people or you put in back
to the C. foster how was he
going to differ Veterans.
I thank you madam chair of the
committee representative Garcia
and so as I understand the
question correctly it's when a
child enters foster care and
goes back to reunification
occurs to the go back to the
parent and then there's an
additional concern so we might
remove again and in those
situations you know the our
highest priority is to keep a
children with parents whatever
the we we're able to say we do
so that's both out of state that
you worked and helped federal
law works in a lot of ways why
are child protective services
an argument justice system
exists is to keep children in
the community with a parakeet of
supported one of the things that
we are watching that too good
measure data metric for us all
the to keep an eye on is that
repeat maltreatment when a kid
comes in the foster care and
then returned home to parents do
they come back to us and if they
do come back to is what who we
drafted in for services with
that family to a prevented or
what could we have done in order
to make a different decision to
the child that return call
you'll have to pass and we've
been working to improve our our
practices on both that on the
first one we've really been
looking at investing more of
those services so that we can
work directly with parents and
keep them there and that's part
of a a differential responses
from that we just lost a few
weeks ago and we have that out
now in a couple of key County in
the state including rural
counties Irvin County and and
that's designed to be sure that
we've done everything we could
to keep those families state and
to gather because we know
statistically speaking that's
where children do the best in
the second prong we've
implemented a structure decision
making tools and other risk
factors including the child
Allison the district assessment
tool that we're still in the
process of rolling out so that
we can get a better sense of of
being sure that we have to
provide your eyes our eyes and
we have a good year.
On rubric for our workers and
our staff to really make that
determination so that children
being rude I when it state and
ready to do so and when there's
enough support there in the hall
so we're working on both of
those but it's an issue that we
still need to we we need to
continue to improve our.
Madam chair and the secretary of
the the problem I see is
Thank you to get away from my
mom because she's on drugs or
whatever and you have enough
foster your well some people for
five or six years then the
parent strain dialed to do to
get away from the foster parent
get back to the mother or the
father whatever it is and then
they fall off the wagon of what
to trial will back into CYFD you
replace him back in the C. more
forty preparation back in
another home that's disastrous
for a kid.
Thank you so much madam chair
Mister.
Members of the committee and
Representative Garcia I think
it's important if we do return
the child to the home is part of
the education to do so with
appropriate services I'll point
to that you may remember madam
chair and members of course you
the slide show the growth and
and and I'll services into into
that I'll services one of the
best community based therapeutic
services that we can do to be
sure that those babies can stay
home and be safe in when we were
uniformed with those and then
I'll services in this fiscal not
a single one of those babies
come back into foster care in
last fiscal the only ninety four
percent of those babies were
able to speak with a home and
didn't return to us in so that
addition of those support
services is so key to help those
families be in a position where
they can safely have the state
would be able to reunify the
state all.
Thank you to to be law I like to
have a chat with you offline
possible madam chair that's all
I have for the for the respect
for time thank you madam chair
all right thank you I want to
thank everyone and I want to
particularly thank Mr Secretary
for your work in Gallup we've
got some very demanding
situations that here lot of it
COVID driven and and the need
for round.
Mental health and behavioral
health services number of the
people that we have here and I
just want to personally thank
you for working with our city in
our county and and and and
everybody and
particularly with our.
Of domestic violence shelter and
a number of other things so like
to extend my thanks to you and
and your staff with that being
said I'm gonna go to
Representative small for the
motion.
Thank you very management that
thank you very much madam chair
madam chair I would move the LFC
recommendation and also
understanding then catch a clean
up perhaps.
Revisiting the non reversionary
language.
We have a motion is our second
to that motion.
Representative Allison.
I have three three P. signs up.
Representative Allison is the
second and again is there any
