To this and sometimes it's
broken out by categories so what
we'll do is we'll just go
through it page by page will
have
Representative Martinez
explained that to everyone and
certainly Mr Burciaga and Mr
happy will be able to help with
what the components are within
house bill one.
But before we do that as we
always do when we start out in
HSC as a new session I'd like to
have my members introduce
themselves to the public start
with Representative Anderson
will go through the through the
group.
Thank you madam chair
my name's Phelps Anderson
Representative Anderson.
Representative guess sixty six
and Roosevelt Chavis Lee
county's thank you Sir.
Madam chair I'm Catherine brown
I represent the eastern half of
Eddy County it's district fifty
five.
Thank you chair Jack Chatfield
Representative district sixty
seven which is seven counties in
northeastern New Mexico.
Thank you madam chair Gail
Armstrong Representative house
district forty nine captions a
court on Valencia County.
Madam chair representative
Randal Crowder Representative
the northern two thirds occur
curry county.
Thank you madam chair good
afternoon everyone I'm Candie
Sweetser from Deming
Representative Luna Hidalgo in
Grant County.
Thank you madam chair my name is
Nathan small I'm very proud to
represent house district thirty
six and on the on the county.
Senator also thank you madam
chair Anthony Allison
Representative district four
which includes six Navajo
chapters and for the communities
and San Juan County.
Thank you madam chair
representative I'm a full stack.
Which includes.
Representative most of
the Santa Fe for us to be off.
Thank you.
Madam chair members of the
committee my name is Dale
Hochman Vigil I represents house
district fifteen which is
northeast heights north valley
in one precinct on the west side
about working.
Thank you madam chair my name is
Roy I represent house district
thirty four so that any any
county to the Texas state money
into the border with the purple
Brett the Republic of Mexico.
Thank you thank you madam chair
I'm state representative
Christine Trujillo out of house
district twenty five smack dab
in the middle of Albuquerque.
Thank you madam chair my name is
Jerry Garcia in house at six
sixty nine covers parts of San
Juan McKinley football
Bernalillo within physical.
This come in this.
The committee since two thousand
sixteen point given up with the
amount of working with the chair
thank you for Representative
Representative Dixon.
Thank you madam chair and
members more Dixon
Representative huh sister twenty
two thousand dollars.
The state.
Thank you madam chair
Rhinelander Representative house
district three which is for
apple several counties including
the cities about.
Thank you madam chair on
candy Spence Ezzell state
representative district is
getting really ready.
Residents of the extra vitamin
all outlined here.
And I'm Representative Patty
Lundstrom at least for the next
month I'll have both McKinley
and San Juan county I represent
house district nine and I've had
the honor to serve as the
appropriations chairman since
twenty seventeen I'd like to ask
our staff to introduce
themselves bill.
By the bill for the staff of the
committee with us today is right
my mother can do what we
assisted us and secretary of
state we have a from that server
helping us out from the house of
going on
Jonah.
But Friday thank you very much
thank you bill and we'll go
ahead then Representative
Martinez if you would take us
through house bill one thank you
madam chair thank you members of
the committee on here with that
Mr over to I got the executive
director of the city council
service as well as David Abbey
six of director of the
legislative finance committee to
help answer any questions you
might have.
Madam chair members of the
committee of the former house
bill one which appropriates nine
hundred fourteen thousand one
hundred dollars from but
provided cash balances for the
legislative expenses of the
second special session of the
fifty fifty legislature.
Include the following.
The twenty two thousand three
hundred dollars for the house of
representatives.
Three hundred five thousand four
hundred dollars for the Senate.
And two hundred eighty six
thousand four hundred dollars
for the Legislative Council
Service for its session
expenses.
Madam chair members of the
committee section two of the
bill appropriates from the
general fund for expenditures in
fiscal years twenty two and
twenty three for leadership
staff and its operational
expenses of leadership offices
as follows.
Fifty thousand dollars to the
house chief clerks office in
three hundred fifty thousand
dollars to the Senate chief
clerks office madam chair
members of the committee
additionally contingent upon a
certain transfer to the
appropriation contingency fund
being made pursuant to other
legislation the special session
the bill includes appropriations
from that fund for expenditures
in fiscal years twenty two
through twenty five as follows
five hundred thousand dollars to
the administrative office of the
courts for pre trial services
monitoring in one million
dollars to the department of
finance for administration of
funds pursuant to the federal
American rescue plan act of
twenty twenty one and with that
we stand for questions.
The Burciaga would you like to
make it.
Madam chair and members of the
committee good afternoon I do
not have any additional comments
at this time.
Thank you very much let's go to
the committee
My laptop we have any questions
here.
All right Representative Ezzell.
Madam chair thank you very much
thank you Representative.
When you get with this money
this.
My question is this is just for
the special session that's where
everything that is great.
We're in here is.
The fees for the demographer's.
That going to be under.
On page two.
Both the school.
Our our.
Health.
Hi mark this.
Thank you madam chair and
representative is I'll I'll pass
it on to rebel for that
question.
Thank you representative madam
chair and representative result
if I may ask for clarification
are you talking about the more
for that we have on contract
already research to Pauline are
you talking about other staff
and may have been hired other
stuff.
Matt madam chair and
representative.
Madam chair and representative
my understanding is that that
has been included thanks for the
house in the three hundred
twenty two thousand dollars for
the house of representatives
additional staff.
Representative asked the
question please Representative
Ezzell on that point.
my understanding was most of
those budgetary items were put
into.
The sixty day session.
So it was budgeted for December
is that correct.
Madam chair I believe it was
Representative I believe there
are some discussion about
whether or not that any of the
four leadership offices would be
hiring separately for that I
even if memory serves me
correctly when I talked to the
chief clerk of the house I
believe the house was not going
to do that either the house
Democrat or Republican
leadership offices are so now
that I think about a little bit
more thoroughly I don't believe
there's additional funding for
their if however the leadership
office has money in their year
round budget they might be able
to use that as well as my
understanding that's correct.
Back to Representative Ezzell.
Madam chair of thank you for
that explanation I was just
saying that I did not realize
that that money is already paid
for that.
That's good enough thank you
very much.
Percent of the the purpose of
the property.
Thank you madam chair
The question is on page three
On the line fourteen question.
Representative on the
line fourteen I guess I'm
thinking why are all the costs
associated with the special
session in December going to be
in and paid and and and done by
the end of the fiscal year two
thousand twenty two.
Thank you madam chair and
representative for the question
rope you answer.
Yes madam chair Representative
Anderson the.
Subsection B. that you're
talking about relates to those
two appropriation three hundred
fifty thousand dollars each.
The house and Senate chief
clerks for leadership staff so
this will be separately
appropriate at this point but my
understanding is that the
expectation is that these
amounts will continue to
Be part of the ongoing budget
for the leadership offices from
here forward.
Thank you for that I understand
that
then online seventeen I was
curious
section three is is is a funding
that is not coming from the
general fund
but it is however contention
upon the transfer of federal
funds of which apparently have
already been received in the
state treasuries remark question
is.
What.
Contingency is there.
What need is there for
contingency on those funds.
Chairman representative R. as
everyone is aware of the
governor's proclamation includes
efforts to appropriate funds
from our pro.
And in that bill is being
drafted in our discussion with
the legislative finance
committee.
I understand that the.
Money that has been received
from the federal government is
going to be transferred to the
appropriation contingency fund
some of the legislature can
appropriate from there so that
is the contingency that's but
that's here in other words if
that bill passes then this money
will be appropriated to propose
to offices the administrative
office of the courts and DFA.
Are there.
Madam chair any further
I understand that administrative
office of the courts and and the
other recipient of DFA.
Does it suggest a bigger number.
Then just those two
appropriations.
Question.
I can help with that today on
the house floor we introduced
the house bill two which is the
A. R. PA state funding.
In that rack up there is
additional money and there that
would be here.
Two categories also so.
Look at line five on page four
five hundred thousand to the
administrative office of the
courts the pre trial services.
I believe that we also have five
hundred thousand.
Available in the rack up for the
bill House Bill to so the total
that they'll be getting as a
million dollars.
Thank you madam chair that would
be from the same source yes it
would and then for department of
finance and administration it's
the same thing there's a million
dollars in the feed mill and
then there is yes a million
dollars I thought here or is it
a half it's a million that would
go for local government
assistance with federal grants
so what we've done.
Because we've got some of its in
the feet bill some of us in this
house bill two that was just
dropped a few minutes ago.
Thank you madam chair
you're welcome and and
Madam chair that answers my
question thank you very much.
Representative.
Thank you I guess my first
question what was the total cost
of this bill and I'm coming up
with about three point one two
four million is that correct.
That is correct okay and then my
second question was similar that
the I can understand if it's for
the special session but then
madam chair kind of explained
that it's that's the monies that
are being asked to be
appropriated in the special
session this one started in this
bill so my questions have been
answered thank you thank you
madam chair.
Representative Brown.
Thank you madam chair
representative so I'm looking on
page three of the bill and this
is section three one sixteen.
And those the contingency
language about the transfer
federal funds received in the
state treasury could you tell us
how much we're looking after.
Overall.
Madam chair members of brown
will get David Abbey up here to
answer that.
For
sure that the total amount that
will be transferred.
Representative into iterations
account so.
The US.
From money's total about six
hundred million and the bill the
chairman Lundstrom reference
should have about three hundred
and thirty five million and
that's a problem on the screen
and this has a million and a
half.
Thank you madam chair
Representative Mr Abbey.
So could you tell us what the
listening is a between these are
I guess Corona virus Corona
virus
related funds how does that link
up with pre total pretrial
services.
Sure that the money.
included general revenue for the
state that was the subject of
litigation read recently and
they were for for ways to states
were allowed to use that general
revenue money however another C.
report last month.
By our staff for the committee
pointed out that one of the four
uses was to replace lost revenue
and LFC staff estimated that the
lost revenue was one point four
point four billion.
One point one billion left so
it's advantageous to show that
the state earned the money by
virtue of losing revenue and
then there's no requirement to
spend the money by a certain
time and no risk of reverting it
so so this is that one point one
billion is going into the
appropriation contingency fund
which is part of the General
Fund percent the language like
this involved this bill and
house bill two and even less
special slip last session's bill
the money for unemployment.
Past the same way.
Okay have chair Representative
Mr Abbey so I'm just curious why
pre trial services and not a
number of other
I guess I was rambling but I
think my point is because the
state lost revenue increase up
the state state to address its
needs in any way it can and pre
trial services for example where
the subject of a lot of
discussion this interim about
the crime problem and in the
biggest city in all around the
state pre trial services are
very important part of trying to
Just promote public safety so
again because the state earned
the money for lost revenue the
state is in a position to spend
it to address the greatest needs
and I think many will recognize
that crime in Albuquerque is
this and other parts of the
state as a top priority to
address okay thank you madam
chair appreciated everybody else
on this on our Representative
Garcia.
Madam chair thank you David the
state lost R. one point four
billion dollars in lost revenues
and we have one I mean billion
I'm sorry and we have one point
two billion to spend.
my concern is.
A rural New Mexico New Mexico
will get this money because you
know I have people that have
brought shovel ready projects
since we were we going to be
left at the end of the day madam
chair.
Madam chair representative.
This was discussed LFC today in
the last few days the vast
amount of non recurring revenue
surplus general fund are from
monies and other state funds as
long with STBs in general
obligation bonds so when you
think about the LFC
recommendation all this money
will be accounted for and there
were many many items that will
benefit rural New Mexico
including roads
Nurse training programs.
What benefits all over the state
of the the recreation money
which could help the rodeo arena
in your district which is very
important so lots of little
projects could benefit.
Thank you madam chair to
redevelop the usual one room
mission would be left out you
know because the bigger city no
prospect up and it's very
important that we don't do for
New Mexico and if I could say
one more thing the thinking in
of chairman Lundstrom spill was
to spend about a third of the
are for money and leave the
powder dry for the regular
session and deal with all the
other needs of the unified.
Thank you David thank you madam
chair Representative Dixon.
Thank you madam chair.
As for the
regarding the last.
The million dollars to the
department of finance and
administration this is it
administrative accounting and
reporting.
But I'm wondering if you have a.
Addition
to our small community is in for
their ability to have access to
the telegram.
That is correct that is part of
the plan for this money as well.
What else.
Representative small for the
motion you have anything else
Representative issue like to add
to the committee thank you.
Madam chair I move approval of
house bill one we have a motion
for it to pass of house bill one
of a second for representative
Allison is there any opposition
to this motion.
The chair first bill.
Doing an extra fifty thousand
dollars chair for a.
Representative.
I thought we were back to
regular operations the bill
reminds me that do we have
anybody on the public it's got a
COVID Mike.
Our.
Yeah I can't remember that madam
chair yes Sir.
But at the point of information.
Could you
I'm I guess I'm sitting here a
curious about your thoughts
about the upcoming committee
meetings relative to house bill
two and other legislation that
might be headed our way through
research and for.
We will be here tomorrow to hear
house bill two was referred down
on the floor we'll go through
that tomorrow I don't know
exactly what time I'm not sure
if since everything is at the
call of the chair on the floor.
We'll be back up here I'm sure
Tuesday tomorrow afternoon
sometime but we do need to take
that bill up and and then get it
across to the to the Senate.
Thank you madam chair already do
we have anybody that.
Okay that's good so they don't
need to worry about that.
and I would like to ask
Representative if possible when
you get down to the floor that
there'd been attached FIR is
this group's real familiar with
what you're doing.
But I'm not so sure that the
rest of the body would be so if
we could have an FIR that would
be great already thank you
