Thank you. Um.
First on our list, uh, today we
have the retiree healthcare
Authority, uh.
Simon Miller. Yes, uh, good
afternoon, Madam Chair, members
of the subcommittee. My name is
Joseph Simon. I'm your analyst
for the retiree Healthcare
Authority and with me at the
table, uh, for the last time
ever, the two Simons, uh, Simon
Miller with the Department of
Finance and Administration and
also Neil Kiefer with the, the
director of the retiree
Healthcare Authority. So the
agency code we're on is agency
343 behind tab 3 in your
binders.
Um,
The retiree healthcare authority
receives uh most of its revenue
from payroll contributions as
well as premiums paid by
retirees who participate in the
plan. There is an earmark, uh,
of, uh, revenue transferred to
the retiree authority for the uh
from the tax suspense fund, but
the agency does not receive any
general fund, uh, direct general
fund.
And uh, the recommendations are
for expenditure authority. As
you can see from the different
sheet, there's an extremely
small difference between the LFC
and the executive
recommendation, uh, about, uh, a
little less than 200,000 on a
budget of more than $400
million. So uh uh very small,
um, difference between the two
recommendations. Just to quickly
review the two programs, uh, on
page two of your different sheet
packet, you can see the
healthcare Benefits
Administration program, which is
where the uh
operational expenses of the um
of the agency. So actually
paying the health claims that
come in to the agency are paid
out of this program. Uh, you can
see those recommendations for
contractual services, which are,
which are those funds, uh, for,
um, actual services to members
are exactly the same. The only
difference here is in the amount
transferred to program support.
You can see that on the other
financing uses line.
Uh, and just to explain that a
little, little in a little more,
I'll, uh, turn to page 3 of your
packet, that's program support.
You can see here, um, Madam
Chair, members of the
subcommittee, both the LFC and
the executive recommendation
including included additional
funds for the retiree healthcare
Authority to hire additional
staff, um, the only difference
here is the, the uh executive
recommendation had a, had a
slightly lower amount in
contractual services and in the
other category. That's due to,
uh, them adjusting.
Looking at prior your uh
appropriations and actual
expenditures and, and adjusting
down a little bit based on lower
prior year expenditures, uh,
than it was needed. Um, and with
that, I'll ask Mr. Miller if he
has any comments and uh.
And hand it over to Mr. Keefer
Kiefer for his presentation.
Um, thanks, Madam Chair, members
of the committee, uh, Joey.
differences, so I'll pass it
over to the director. Thanks.
All right. Thank you, Madam
Chair, members of the
subcommittee.
Um, I do want to thank you for
this opportunity to present our
uh budget recommendations as
well as a few updates in regards
to our presentation. I also want
to thank, uh, both Mr. Miller
and, uh, Mr. Simon for the work
they did on this. If you'd
indulge me for maybe one minute.
I do have staff with me today. I
do have my deputy director Linda
Atteno with me, my chief, uh
financial officer, uh, Sherry
Ayanni and my general counsel,
Mr. Mark Hayden.
If we turn to slide number 2,
you will see just a brief
overview of our board of
directors. Uh, the one key thing
I want to point out here is our
board is made up of 12 and it is
a broad representation, as you
can see from our board that we
do have representation not only
from many different
stakeholders, but also a lot of
different agencies within the
state, uh, a couple of those
being the pension systems who do
have representation on our
board.
Moving on to slide number 3,
just a little bit of background
with regards to retiree
healthcare authority. Uh, we
were created back in 1990 to
really try and fill a gap where
retirees were struggling to find
insurance. And so by doing so,
this is a way to pull us
together and to do a little bit
of purchasing power with those
retirees. Um, at that time,
there was no pre-material
funding and we started paying
benefits for 16,000 and on the
January 1st, so there's about a
six month lead up time for this.
Uh, currently where we stand
today, we do have a current
solv.
beyond 2055, uh, with the work
that we've been doing, um, as
far as our compos composition,
we have over 93,000 active
employees. Uh, we have close to
66,000 retirees. Uh, we have
employer groups that are ranging
in the 304 that does change
sometimes, you know, based on
the participation of those
groups, um, but as far as our
retirees, we have over 48,000
participating both in our
pre-medicare and Medicare, uh,
their spouses, dependent
children, and we continue to
monitor.
as far as the average age of
these retirees, uh, being 70 and
at the age of retirement 62.7.
Moving on to slide number 4, I'm
not gonna get into too much
debt, but this is really just
shows what the benefits that we
offer. We do provide some choice
to our pre-medicare members and
allowing them to have the option
of benefits for an HMO and a PPO
plan, but we also help them when
they go into Medicare. We help
provide benefits through a
supplement plan or we have 5
different options as it relates
to Medicare Advantage plans. In
addition, we have some voluntary
benefits. These are 100% paid by
our members, but we do our best
to, uh, uh, get the lowest
amount as far as premium costs
by leveraging our size along
with
their other IBAC uh partner
groups when we go to RFP, but we
do offer two dental plans
through Delta and Blue Cross. We
have Vision through Davis and we
offer life insurance through
standard.
Moving on to slide number 5,
this really gets into the uh
recommendations. Um, I know you
got a uh a brief overview
already by uh Mr. Simon uh
Joseph, and with that as far as
our request, we do know that
it's a $5.2 million dollar
request that we were asking for,
uh, which is similar to the LFC
in regards to our growth, uh,
really what we're looking at is
the healthcare Benefits
Administration, uh, when we look
at as far as that amount of
406.6 million. This accounts for
99% of our budget, the other 1%
is what we utilize for program.
heart. So you can see where our
retirees do use their benefits
and that is where our cost
really goes.
Some additional highlights and
things that we do as far as in
regards to monitoring our
program and utilizing the
different tools available to us.
When we look at slide number 6,
we, we, we do a study every year
during our annual board meeting
and really looking at our
solvency to see exactly how we
are progressing.
And one of the things that we do
know and chart on number 6 is
when do we start deficit
spending. This is the time
period where we do see that our
revenues would actually dip
below our expenses.
Um, and it's something that we
are always watching. We always
want to make sure that we're
pushing this out, uh, because if
it does actually entail that we
have to start pulling from our
trust fund, we start losing some
of the investment interest that
we gained from it, and that
would also affect the ability
that we're trying to do of
lowering our funded liabilities.
Um, so that's one thing that we
continue to monitor, but you can
definitely see from this last uh
um annual board meeting that we
did have an increase on both our
pre-Meddicare, Medicare, uh,
plans, um, in regards to some
other changes that we had. We
did see where the
Medicare Advantage plans, uh,
did have an increase to the
inflation reduction Act that was
passed at the federal level. It
was putting a cap on some of
those prescriptions. And so with
that, we did see some additional
incurred costs, which would be
driving part of our claims.
Moving on to item number 7,
which is the Gatsby 74. Uh, this
is another, uh, uh, tool that we
use and it is required to the
Government Accounting and
Standards Board that we do uh
participate in filing, uh, I, I
got be number 74, uh, with this,
you will see our total OPEB
liability that was done by
actuaries coming in at $3.3
billion. Um, how that relates to
the previous years, you can see
that it has gone up a little bit
from last year. Part of that was
that IRA and the anticipation of
some of that additional expense,
as well as a few other.
Things within the methodology of
how we were working to evaluate
our OPEB liability as well as
our revenue that we do receive
and, and, and continue to
receive, uh, overall though,
when we look at our assets
compared to our total pe
liability, we come in at $1.7
billion.
Uh, we do know that this is
about an $82 million increase as
I did state to a lot of those
different reasons as far as uh
driving our claims, uh, which is
entail pushing up our
liabilities. Um, but as far as
where we stand today, if I look
to that bottom line for our
funded status, we can see that
we are currently residing at
46.99%, almost 47%. Uh, this has
been an ongoing improvement to
this agency. If you're looking
back to the previous years where
we were at 44, 33, and 25. Uh,
this has been uh ongoing work
through our board, having to
make some
Tough decisions and changes, uh,
not only but through our
retirees who were affected, uh,
but it is showing that we have
made progress in lowering those
uh unfunded liabilities.
Part of those assets that we do
have is going to be shown on
page number 8. This is in
regards to our trust fund. If
you look to the far right as of
December, which is the last
report we have. We were almost
approximately $1.6 billion
looking to the left to show a
little bit as far as our growth
over the last 10 years. You can
see where we were just under 400
million. Uh, so this is
something that this agency has
really prided itself on the
board, uh, leadership and really
trying to make sure uh that we
continue to work with our trust
fund to grow it and to really
help lower those liabilities.
With that trust fund and the
growth that we've seen, one of
the other things that we have
recognized by moving on to slide
number 9 is we are proposing a
Senate joint resolution, which
is number 2, and it is looking
to really protect those funds.
These are funds that employees
such as myself, colleagues that
I work with, uh, for the state
with municipalities, uh, the
schools, uh, counties, uh, all
these different groups make
those contributions. It's
through those contributions that
help fund this trust fund and
making sure that we are able to
lower unfunded liabilities, but
it also helps us to plan for the
future.
And make sure we can weather the
storms when maybe there are
times where there's going to be
an increase in costs such as
some of the federal regulation
that passed, uh, we were able to
smooth it out and feel a little
bit more cautious and allow for
some time to see exactly what
that impact is. So we know that
this is money that they've been
contributing all these members
over the years as well as our
retirees and so we want to make
sure that we are able to protect
that and that will be a
resolution we'll be bringing
forth, uh, with that, Madam
Chair, I appreciate it and I do
stand for any questions.
Anything from DFA?
Um
mountain chair members of the
committee, uh.
Nope, nothing from me.
Thank you
Uh. Thank you, Madam Chair. On
your book here on, on page 5.
Um.
You have on your 3rd bullet
point there unspent funds revert
to trust fund.
Uh, Madam Chad, Represented
Duncan, we did have some funds
that did revert back to our
fund. And can you tell me how
much that was?
Madam Chair, uh, Representative
Duncan, I don't have it off the
top of my head. It's something I
could get back to on. Um, I
would have to look to my CFO as
well. I do know that, uh, with
us we did have some of our
contractual services where we
had some budget left and I don't
know that we maxed out on our
personal services, so there was
some additional funds that was
there, but I don't remember the
exact amount.
Madam.
Uh, Madam Chair, Representative
Duncan and checking with my CFO
was about 225,000.
Thank you, Madam Chair.
Um,
I'm just, I might be a couple of
comments like, and then I'll
take um uh.
Um,
mind looking
I was looking mostly uh but it
looks like it's leveling off
here is it.
Are you projecting a further
growth?
Uh, Madam Chair, we do have a 7%
as far as what we use for our
trend, uh, with that, we do try
to make additional contributions
to this trust fund whenever we
do have our revenues that are
exceeding our expenses and that
has been something that we have
been able to do over the years
and we do look forward to uh
this future year of making some
additional contributions to it.
And how, how would you base
those contributions.
How do you come up with this
contributions, how much you will
add to the fun?
Madam Chair, one of the things
that we do is really is, it's
looking at our uh contributions
right now, we actually do take
in a little bit above our
projected budget of revenue, uh,
some of that is we are trying to
tie in our expenses to our
revenue. What it doesn't show is
that we do actually come out
with a little bit above that and
it's so those actual additional
dollars that we receive are what
we actually look to transfer to
the trust fund.
Madam Chair, just very, very
quickly if you're interested,
our volume 3, if you look in
your volume 3 on page 35, the
retired Healthcare Authority has
shared their financial
projections with it. And the
long-term financial projections
are reflected there just for
your information,
Mr. Simon, thank you so much.
Um, and without any other I try
to move the executive and ask
the staff to take a look at the
differences between the two
recommendations.
Any objections to the motion.
Yeah
Thank you, um.
Without any objections.
We have a community accepts the
motion. Thank you.
step we have uh Department of
Information and Technology.
Hi, good afternoon, chair,
members of the committee, I'm
Emily Hilla, the LFC analyst for
the Department of Information
Technology.
Today we have Secretary
Barreras, the secretary of duet,
as well as Drew Lovelace, the
director of the Office of
Broadband. We also have Nicole
Masius here from DFA to talk
about the executive budget
recommendation.
Chair, members of the committee
were going to be in business
unit 361. I would also like to
point you to a couple different
pages in your volumes that you
have in front of you.
So for volume 2, I would
recommend you all to turn to
pages 114 to 121. In addition,
we have a couple different
sections, uh, regarding do it
and broadband in our volume one
and so that starts on page 75
through 77.
As well as peaches 164 and 165
in our volume one.
So, oh, go ahead.
We're like, give us just one
minute we're waiting for the.
Please continue. OK. Well you
all are getting to the peaches
in your binders and in your
volumes. I'm just gonna walk you
through our high level, which
looks like this. Uh, there's
kind of a lot going on in the
differences between the budget
recommendations, so regarding
general fund revenue, the
executive recommendation
includes a 63.7% increase over
FY 25, which is around $5.9
million over FY 25, whereas the
LFC supports a 5.8% over FY 25%
increase in.
General fund revenue, which
equals $540,000.
Main differences in the
recommendation are coming from
our enterprise services. You can
look on lines 22, 23, and 24 on
your high level.
Uh, this program historically is
not general funded and is funded
through enterprise revenue.
However, the agency did request
general fund revenue to cover
radio subsidies for its P25
radio system project that the
the executive partially
supports, but the LFC does not.
Other big differences between
the budget recommendation is
that the executive supports a
$650,000 general fund increase
for the Office of Broadband,
which is administratively
attached to do it, whereas the
LFC recommendation keeps
broadband operating budget flat
with FY 25.
Other increases in the executive
recommendation that are not
included in the LFC is a $2
million increase or 30.7% for
the Office of Cybersecurity,
also administratively attached,
whereas the LFC recommendation
keeps this flat because that is
what the agency originally
requested in its budget
submission.
With that being said, other
differences is that the uh
executive supports a partial
expansion for the Office of
Geospatial Information Systems,
whereas the LFC recommendation
does not support any requested
expansion.
With that, I'm gonna turn it
over to Nicole Mascis to talk
about our program support.
Thank you, Madam Chair, members
of the committee will go to
program support.
Um, if you go to P771, that is
the program support for do it,
um, like Emily said, there's a
difference of about $60.9,000.
The difference being transfers
and revenues, um, the LFC
recommended
That they do not support the
agency requested uh for the
transfer from OA, um, however,
the executive does support that.
That transfer.
Um, from Obi to support program
support. This is so that um Obi
is administratively attached to
do it and so in order to ensure
that the FTE and um
administratively they're
supported, they're going to
receive that funding. Um, there
is no difference in FTE and
there were no differences in
performance measures.
I'll hand it over to Emily for.
Thank you, chair, members. We're
gonna be on page 6 of the
different sheets. Uh, this is
gonna be where we see some of
the differences in the general
fund revenue is for the
compliance and project
management program.
The executive recommended a
74.4% increase in general fund
revenue over FA 25, whereas the
committee recommended a 52.8%
increase.
The executive recommendation
exceeds the LFC by 14% in new
general fund revenue due to the
executive support of a partial
expansion.
Now, when we get into the base,
the committee recommendation
supports a 440,000 or 46.5.
% increase in personnel costs,
and the executive supports a 45,
457.5,000 or 48.3% increase over
FY 25 for personnel. But that
number for the executive
includes partial expansion.
If we're just only considering
the base operating budget
without expansions, the LFC
recommendation is 11% above the
executive in personnel spending.
Again, looking at the beasts,
there are no differences in the
contractual services
recommendation or in the other
costs category between the two
recommendations for base
operations. However, the
difference is that you are
seeing on your table come from
the executive support for a
partial expansion. That
With considering the executive
recommendation for the
expansion, the committee
recommendation is $200,000
lower.
Then the executive.
With that, I'm gonna turn it
over to Nicole to talk about our
enterprise services program.
So we'll go to P773.
Within the innerprise services
program, there's a difference of
$2.5 million and that's general
fund. The executive recommended
2.5.
And for um.
Radio subscription subsidies.
Um, these are based on the
monthly, um,
Disbursement that the secretary
will kind of lean on, um, kind
of moving forward, but it's it
for P 773 and I'll turn it over
to um Emily for additional
comments.
Um, yes, Additional comments,
um, as you'll see 4 P 773. It's
kind of not outlined, perhaps in
the most digestible format, but
both recommendations support a
transfer of 5.2 million in other
state funds to the Department of
Finance and Administration, and
this is a transfer of the SAR
program and resources to DFA,
um, this is included in Dot's
budget recommendation and also
as well in DFA's budget
recommendation.
So with that being said, chair
members, I'm gonna move on to
page 9 to go through the
equipment replacement revolving
fund, just super quick since
there were no differences
between both recommendations as
they support the same use of
funding, so we can just jump
into P789, which is the Office
of Broadband Access and
expansion.
As Nicole kind of pointed to in
program support, um.
There is a $482,000 general fund
revenue request for the Office
of Broadband that previously has
not been requested before. So
With the Office of Broadband and
cybersecurity.
There is a transfer of general
fund revenue to program support
to support these
administratively attached
offices. However, since this was
never included in the Office of
Broadband's budget before the
LFC recommendation keeps this
doesn't fund this at all, and
keeps all other spending
commensurate with FY 25 due to
previous spending patterns of
the office.
With that, I'll turn it over to
Nicole for any other comments
for the Office of Broadband
before moving into the office of
cybersecurity.
Um, I would like to mention for
the executive recommendation, it
was submitted in the agency's
request to include that
transfer, um, for the
administrative services portion,
um, and that is the transfer out
that you'll see in the other
financing sources.
Other financing uses that will
be transferred over to the
program support team. Um,
I move now to P791 cybersecurity
office.
Um, the main difference there is
$2 million in general fund um
between the executive and the
LFC. The executive included $2
million in contracts, and that
was to be used for
implementation of a web
application firewall, expand
cloud application security and
risk assessments.
Um, I'll turn it over to code.
Uh, just additional comments
that I mentioned at the
beginning of the presentation is
that this was not included in
the agency submission, so it was
not considered by the LFC, which
is why there is a difference
between the two recommendations.
With that being said, before
turning it over to Secretary
Pereras and Drew Loveless. I
would just like to walk you
through what's left in your
packet.
Starting on page 13, we have our
performance measures. There is
one performance measure that was
not in consensus, but both
recommendations are in consensus
to discontinue it as it was
discontinued for this current
fiscal year.
Moving on to page 15, we have
our personal services and
employee benefits calculator. I
would just like to point out in
line K, the reversion amount
should be listed as 1.7 million.
It's listed as 1.2 because the
cybersecurity office, which was
created in FY 25 showing as a
negative, but that's just
because the office did not exist
in FY 24.
So the reversion amount in
personnel at the end of FY 24
was 1.7% across all programs,
1.7 million.
And finally, chair members, we
have our differences in special
recommendations. Again, we are
not voting on special
recommendations during this
time. However, if you have any
questions about any special
recommendations, Nicole and I
are happy to answer those for
you, um.
If we see on page 18, the LSC
recommends 16 million in general
fund in non-recurring special
appropriations, whereas the
executive supports 93.7 million
in general fund appropriations.
This difference is coming for
the executive supporting the
Office of Broadbands, 70 million
satellite connectivity project,
whereas the LFC does not.
Additionally, on our last page,
we have our reauthorization
recommendations. The executive
supports 3 reauthorization
requests whereas the LFC only
supports 2.
With that being said, chair and
members of the committee, I'm
gonna turn it over to Secretary
Barreras and Drew Loveless to
talk about their agency
presentations.
Good good afternoon, Madam Chair
and committee members.
Thank you for your time this mor
for this afternoon.
I'd like to take a moment to
introduce myself. I am Manny
Barreras, the cabinet secretary
designate for the Department of
Information Technology, known as
New Mexico do it.
I'd like to highlight a few
accomplishments during my short
tenure of 5 months in this role.
Uh, one of my first priorities
was to meet with Cabinet
secretaries to understand their
concerns and challenges, uh, as
customers of do it.
Through these meetings, a major
concern was identified within
the contracts of procurement
oversight.
Following this
I discovered our compliance and
project management office was
spending 70-80% of their time
focusing on contracts and
procurement.
Which delayed agencies getting
timely contracts executed.
The software this issue, we
partnered with General Services
Department.
To move this inefficient process
to the state purchasing
division.
We feel this ship will
streamline processes for quicker
contracts.
An execution for the agencies
and allow do it to concentrate
on true project management
oversight. I wanted to thank uh
GST for their partnership, uh,
specifically, uh Secretary
Silva.
A few other updates, uh, we've
assembled a team that will work
directly with agencies to
improve our accounts receivable
and billing.
Uh, systems. I also have taken a
collaborative approach to unite
our bureau by fostering a more
cohesive and collaborative team
environment. With all that uh
chairing committee, I want to
thank you all for your time and
hard work and, and your support
for our fellow New Mexicans. I
would like to introduce my team.
And uh I'd like to introduce
Raja Sambaam, uh, our state
chief CIO.
Jason Johnson, our deputy chief
CIO.
Uh, Gerald Cloy, our budget
director.
Uh, Michael Rohlbacher, or
director of Public Safety and
radio communications and Renee
Navaris, our public information
officer. I'd also like to thank
Emily and Nicole for their help
in putting this all together.
Appreciate it.
Um, I'll go ahead and.
You want to introduce your? OK,
cool. Um, we'll go ahead and
move forward with the uh
presentation, if that's OK.
I don't, I'm not sure if you
have the slides or not. Do you
have a copy of this? We have
copies if you need.
What do you?
Office of Technology. We're
gonna try to get that up on the
screen, OK.
a privilege
Um, we don't have the.
don't have the hard copy.
We're gonna get that right up.
Oh, OK
Yeah, if you have the hard copy,
please pass those out.
we can start. Great. Thank you.
I think if you guys want to go
ahead and go to uh slide 2.
So the information of Department
of Information Technology was
created in 2007. Uh, basically,
we provide IT support services
for 76 state agencies, boards,
and commissions.
We are not a public constituent
facing agency. We provide
enhancements via enterprise
services and enable
interoperability across all
agencies allowing for seamless
communication and collaboration
while increasing our
cybersecurity posture.
Uh, site, my apologies, I was
slide 2, if you want to go to
slide 3. Our overall structure,
uh, the department is organized
into 3 different divisions,
which is our enterprise services
our compliance and project
management.
And our program support.
And we also have two
administratively attached
offices, Office of
cybersecurity, and Office of
Broadband and access and
expansion.
So, um, under the, uh, two
administratively attached
offices do it, do its
administrative services division
provides program support for
these attached offices.
Up on top, you got the
enterprise services, enterprise
services, which is not just
would wanted to note that we are
not generally funded, uh,
provides enterprise services to
76 agents, boards, and
commissions ensuring process,
efficiencies, standardization,
and economies of scale.
Our compliance and project
management, which we call EPMO
currently oversees a project
portfolio of over $1 billion and
then program support takes care
of do it and two
administratively attached
agencies. We operate on a cost
recovery model.
Um, any delinquency of cost
recovery from services offered
impacts our bottom line.
Uh
If uh fiscal year 25, do it FTE
status.
We, we have a current vacancy
rate of 17.8% in 2024, we had
177 positions and have increased
that to 196. We have increased
our FTE and lowered our vacancy
rate. Our goal and strategy is
to reduce vacancy rate by
another 4% within the next 60
days. We have 12 positions that
are currently in recruitment
process, 7 advertised and 4
about to advertise and one about
to hire. So we're really closing
that gap um.
Um, in regards to our overall
New Mexico do it, we want to get
our vacancies right and we want
to fill our positions to help
support our entire team and our
and our two attached bureaus.
We flipped the page here where
it uh do it request adbacks.
Again, I want to thank the
committee uh for all the support
and dedicated work to the IT
department. Here are a few items
we'd like you to consider for
adbacks.
4.5 million will be utilized to
assist state, local, tribal, uh,
let me, let me start over.
Federal, state, local, tribal
entities and first responders
such as law enforcement, fire
emergency service to help
subsidize radio subscriber
monthly fees for those who
joined the New Mexico State, uh
DTRS system.
We'd also like to add back 2
million, which will be utilized
for cybersecurity to provide
business continuity to existing
services and subscription-based
licenses.
On the enterprise side of the
house.
We'd like to add back the 1.5
million enterprise services.
Examples include AI, proof of
concept.
Proof of concepts, bringing in
SMEs to assess and evaluate to
improve our efficiencies.
So I think this is super
important as well with all the
emerging technologies and the
discussion of uh AI.
Which is running rapid here at
the roundhouse and we want to
make sure that we can have the,
uh,
Have the funding to help assess
some of those uh items in
technology, um, 482K, uh, which
would be O' fair share to do it,
which was not included in the
budget.
And from my GIS perspective,
we'd like to add the 100 100K in
in GIS contract services, which
are the professional services to
include administrative services
such as budgeting, billing, etc.
We thank you, um, and I know we
wanted to get to some questions,
but I wanted to go ahead and
hand it over to uh Drew
Lovelace, the director of
Broadband.
Thank you, Secretary.
Mad, Madam Chair, members of the
committee, I appreciate the
opportunity to have a couple of
minutes here. I just want to
very briefly, uh, recognize the
staff that is in the room for
the office of broadband access
and expansion, uh, as well as
the staff that's watching
online. We've gone in 2.5 years
from employee number 2 myself,
uh, all the way up to 27
employees now. We are currently
sitting on just under a billion
dollars of federal and state
funding, and we're pushing it
out to make sure that every New
Mexican gets connectivity. Let
me tell you, it's a hard task,
but we've done a pretty good
job.
In the last couple of years,
we've gotten $117 million of
ARPA funds out the door and then
awarded into grants.
Additionally, with the Connect
New Mexico council, uh, has the
Connecting Mexico fund. There
was $100 million for uh three
different programs in there. One
was infrastructure, one was in
grant writing engineering
planning support, and the third
one was in a student
connectivity program. Of those 3
programs, $99.99 million dollars
was uh given the expenditure
authority to the Office of
Broadband to get it out quicker
2 years.
ago, we up to date have
announced awards for $74.5
million. Uh, so we are in the
process of getting those out the
door. I think we've uh been able
to show a good track record of
putting the grants out and
making sure connectivity and
we're excited in this month,
we're seeing our first ARPA
projects being completed from 2
years ago that we announced
awards for.
I want to just 4 things, uh,
moving forward and actually, if
I can just briefly take a
moment. My son is in the
audience today, Brixton
Lovelace, uh, he is one of two
main reasons I come every day
and I'm proud to do this job.
My, my daughter is at school for
the deaf, and she does not have
the day off, but uh my son does
from Santa Fe Public school, so
he's here to be able to join me
today. So again, proud, proud to
be able to do this job because
this ultimately is going to
impact their generation most for
New Mexico.
Uh, with that being said, there
are 4 things I want to
highlight. 3 of them are flags
that I would like you to
specifically look at for uh
differences in the executive
recommendation versus the LLC.
One, Secretary Barreras has
already highlighted it, uh, as
well as Emily. We would like to
see that $650,000 to make sure
that it gets their fair share
fees. They've been supporting us
for the last 2 years, it's
important that we do this going
forward. Secondly, uh, we have
the Connecting Mexico funds, the
expenditure authority was moved
to us. We've shown that we've
done something with it. These
are infrastructure projects,
infrastructure.
It takes time to build. And
while we have many grants that
are going to be completed on
time by June 30th. We want to
make sure that uh we have an
extension of those funds, and we
have many members supporting
that here in the audience today.
I'll ask them to rise in just a
second. The 3rd item and it's
the second difference that I
want to flag is a $25 million
appropriation from last year.
Uh, we've had, we do
infrastructure, $25 million a
single year appropriation is
very difficult for us to turn
around and actually do something
infrastructure wise when it
takes at least 2 years to get
through rights away.
permitting processes. And so I
want to highlight that because
specifically, we are running a
$675 million federal program
that is open right now and that
funding will be dedicated
towards matching for priorities
that are not funded in that
federal program, including
underserved locations, as well
as community anchor institutions
and low income multi-dwelling
units, apartment complexes that
we do not have enough federal
funds to get to. Uh, so that's
an absolutely critical to have
that extension on that $25
million.
4th item and my 3rd flag for the
committee here is the Accelerate
Connecting New Mexico program
that's a $70 million program
that we have proposed. And uh it
is one that we, I thought about
as a
Low Earth orbit satellite
program that it would be an
appropriation to do an RFP
tackling three things. One, the
barrier to entry for the
receivers for satellite. The
second item in there is a low
income subsidy for low-income
households at 100% poverty level
or below. And the third item of
the barrier to entry is actually
getting some support to install
those. There are many New
Mexicans who cannot climb on the
roof, whether they're elderly or
whether they are disabled and
making sure that that support is
available. Now, I want to just
briefly highlight the, the ask
the members in the
audience from the ISPs and
tribal communities that are here
that would support the extension
of the funds for the Connecting
Mexico Fund as well as the $25
million.
They could just raise really
quickly if you support those two
things. Thank you very much. And
then, uh, just lastly on this
low Earth orbit satellite, it is
a different technology. Uh, we
have heard a lot of concerns
from the community, including
many of the members behind us,
and we are committed to working
with them on increasing
different technologies in that
RFP to make sure there's more
competition as well as listening
to some of the concerns on some
of the low-income subsidies and
making sure when deployment of
these longer programs, uh, get
completed, that they will uh be
rolled back so there's kind of
competition.
in the area. So those are my, my
4 items and my 3 flags
specifically, and I would be
happy to send for questions
after Secretary Breras.
Presentations, everyone, um, I'm
right, we're gonna start with
Representative Doo, and then,
uh, Representative director and
acting secretary and acting
director. I would like, I've
been looking for the
cybersecurity. So I learned that
they're you. Can you explain,
um, what you're doing for
schools.
CIO
thank you Chair and members of
the committee. I really
appreciate the question. We are
going far beyond you get closer
to the um mic so they can hear
you online. Thank you. Thank
you. Thank you, Chair and
members of the committee. um,
thank you for the question. So
we are exceeding far beyond our
range as it relates to
cybersecurity to PAD.
The last few years we have.
Opted to share the resources
with them in terms of hard
dollar, right? We get the money,
we gave it to them. And that
didn't go effectively with PAD.
So the second uh turnaround time
we changed the language so that
we get to oversee how they spend
that money.
So
Um, then finally last year, we
modified it to say we are going
to provide the services for you
on your behalf so that we can
get consistent reporting and
consistent, uh, services across
the ecosystem. I am happy and
proud to say 189 school
districts, including public and
uh charter schools are covered
under our uh attack surface
management and even more.
You probably saw some items on
the news in the last couple of
weeks.
About, uh, software that is
being used by many school
districts here in the state has
been compromised, so technically
speaking, we were ahead of the
curve. We notified the school
districts and said, hey, your
information may be.
Out in the open, based on our
threat intelligence and
notification. So for the amount
of money that we received
through this body and other um
policymaking bodies, what we
delivered is awesome, return on
investment. Imagine I'm, I don't
want to get into the detail and
I open forum, but I can
definitely share more on our
executive session.
Let's say even if 10 schools are
compromised.
That's 10 x 3. I don't even have
that much budget.
With that, I stand for any
further questions.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Thank
you, Secretary. Thank you.
Director, thank you for that.
Um, so I, in your indicators, it
wasn't clear to me, but so
you've reduced ransoms. How many
ransoms did school?
Um, it is in double digits. I
don't have the number on me
right now, but I can definitely
get to you. But last time, if I
remem remember correctly, we
have mitigated more than 26
across the ecosystem.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Thank
you, Secretary, Acting Deputy
and director. And so what about,
it says on here that you're
helping counties and
municipalities where
Municipal
Political
Subdivision run hospital fall in
this.
Such as Sierra Vista Hospital,
which was compromised yesterday,
uh, thank you Chair and members
of the committee and thank you,
Representative for the question.
So it is a two-fold approach.
Basically what we did was start
the process small and scale it
once we standardize it. You
know, I followed the four Ss,
right?
Socialize it, simplify it,
standardize it and scale.
So that process has been working
very effectively. We started
with 76 agencies, boards and
commission here on the executive
branch site. We made it
available for both judiciary and
the legislative branch.
But we don't have much of takers
because of some.
But it is a standard
administrative process. We don't
get into peek into your data,
business data, business process,
nothing. It's just like fleet
management that GST does, right?
If you have a car, we maintain
the fleet.
Very similar to that, you don't
differentiate. And the bad guys
don't differentiate between
judiciary and executive. They
find the easiest path, the, you
know, the most vulnerable, and
they found it until it's gone.
But we also need to understand
we operate in an interconnected
world.
Today, if I press the send
button, it can send a message to
the judiciary. It can send a
message to the legislature.
We are operating in a collective
world. So bad guys know that
too.
So, if we posture saying, oh,
you know, you want to be
independent.
Two things come to mind are 3
things come to mind. 1,
economies of scale is being
lost. Efficiencies are being
lost. Reporting is being lost.
If you ask me as a policymaker a
question, hey, how many did we
stop? I can only speak to
executive. I cannot speak to.
The judiciary are the other
branches of the government.
Going back to the local
governments because these are
processes that I can monitor
passively on our my team can
monitor passively. For example,
um, I'll go with uh Burco,
hopefully they'll, uh, excuse
me. So if I use Burco.
Dogov as a website, you know,
where traffic goes, I can
monitor it.
Passively and give them the
heads up.
That's how we reached out to the
school district saying, hey,
something funky going on with
the traffic here. Please be
other.
So, so, Madam Chair.
Secretary, Director, are you
doing that at county or
municipal run hospitals.
Whatever that they provide me as
a domain for me to monitor
because I don't have direct
insight into all the domains
that they may own or they may
subscribe to,
if they let me know,
it's in. OK, awesome. Thank you.
So that covers 106
municipalities and 33 counties,
yes. Thank you. OK. OK.
Oh thank you
I also add a little bit of extra
context. Uh, this last year, my
office, uh, launched the state
education network, which was
with a different agency, the
public school facilities
Authority and uh through a
memorandum of understanding,
we've actually been running that
now, uh since July 1 of this
last year. Uh, it was a program
that took about 8 years to
launch. Uh, again, my office is
about 2.5 years old. We've been
working closely with them and
taking that over because we do
broadbands, they do schools,
right? Uh, along those
lines
E rate
is a federally, you know, funded
program out of the FCC, uh, and
we've actually gotten in award
uh for a grant program, uh, to
go after money for cybersecurity
specifically for the state
education network. We have our
first kind of 8 entities on that
right now, and we've worked
closely with uh with uh Raja on
this as well to make sure that
we're integrating these these
two platforms. But this is an
important distinction because
E-rate can actually be used for
libraries as well and can also
be pushed out into telehealth.
into the future. And so building
this type of platform and you
know, solidifying it with
education first and then moving
into others will give us some
capability into the future to
allow other entities that
they're allowable under the
funds, like healthcare
institutions, you know, onto
that same network where we can
do more cybersecurity and deal
with some of the administrative
headaches that go with securing,
you know, internet for those,
those folks and getting the 80%
funds from the feds.
You actually, that my next
question was going to be about
E-rate, and if we have a
language change, so that 3.
Uh, Madam Chair and
Representative, uh, I'll
actually have to get back to you
on that. I believe we still need
to make that language change uh
to uh to be able to expand that.
Thank you, Madam Chair, and that
would just bring in more federal
dollars.
I just wanted to point you to
page 19, which has our
reauthorizations you asked about
cybersecurity and public
education. There was an
appropriation of 5.5 million
last year appropriated to the
Department of Information
Technology. We are both
recommendations recommends that
reauthorization as nothing has
been expended or encumbered from
that appropriation, and I just
also wanted to highlight that.
Previous appropriations to the
department for cybersecurity
pertaining to public education
were reauthorized and repurposed
for other initiatives.
Thank you for that information.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Um, I
just got a couple of clarifying
questions if I could, um,
cybersecurity, you're requesting
2 million. Is that a real
Mr. Chair, um, I'm sorry, Madam
Chair, uh, representative, yes,
that is.
Thank you, Madam Chair, and
then, um, Drew.
In my neck of the woods, San
Juan County.
Not a lot has been done.
toward the west.
Um, we're talking about
satellites.
in those areas. Can you tell me
where, Madam Chair,
Representative, yes, San Juan
County is one of the probably
the larger areas, uh, you know,
that, that really needs
attention and that's not to to
say that, you know, East
Mountains just outside of
Albuquerque is, you know, not
underserved, right? But you
know, holistically across the
state, the western part of the
of the state uh has some of the
least connectivity, and that is,
that is exactly why we are
looking at uh a deployment for
satellite. Uh, we work very
closely with, uh, you know,
Places like the the Navajo
Nation Broadband office, but
when you think about some of
those remote places, it can be a
million dollars plus to get to a
small grouping of homes. And,
you know, when we look at how we
invest not enough money, you
know, we're trying to push as
much of that fiber out into the
rural communities as possible,
and this is where we work, you
know, very closely with, with,
you know, some of these other
entities to try and make sure
that that happens.
But if it's a million dollars
plus, we need other
technologies. That is why we've
been, you know, fiber first.
But all of the above approach.
You have to use satellite and
it, there's only one player on
the market right now, which is
Starlink. We've had great
communications with uh Amazon
Kuiper, they'll be coming onto
the market and there's other,
you know, New Mexico-based
companies looking at high
altitude platform uh
technologies for wireless, and
we're, you know, pursuing
conversations with all of them
because when it comes to that
place that is so remote, we are
going to have to have all of
those technologies. Thank you,
Madam Chair. In no way do I want
to take um
And knock out people that have
already um put a lot of money
into their local communities
either. So, but when you, like
you said, when you, when I, I've
been to a place on the
reservation where it's um 5
miles from here to go in a chair
and representative, uh, you
know, the Napa Nation Broadband
Office is working on building a,
a fiber loop of their own, but
even they recognize in their
plans that it's gonna have to be
like a little hub and spoke
approach, and they're going to
be using wireless technologies
as well.
Thank you, Madam Chair, I
appreciate that. And then my
last question.
The 4 4.5 mL of radio subsidy.
Is that a recurring?
My apologies, uh, 2.5
reoccurring 2 million
non-reoccurring.
Yeah, chair representative to
clarify the request was a 4.5
million, 4.25 million recurring
requests the executive has 2.5
million recurring and then 2
million as a non-recurring
special appropriation, however,
the office does estimate that it
will be a 6 million recurring
costs, which is around a 64%
increase from the current
general funds, um, that is in.
Their operating budget.
OK
Thank you, Madam Chair. That,
uh, for some reason I thought
that was a non-recurring. It
said non-recurring and, and uh.
It's uh I think the executive
had split it between recurring
and non-recurring, and I think
what Secretary Barreras was
talking about, since that is not
included in the LFC
recommendation for you all to
consider. Thank you. Thank you,
Madam Chair.
representative. Thank you, Madam
Chair. Thank you, presenter,
secretary, um, I have, um, two
questions.
So when you said the vacancies
in your presentation were closer
to 30, I believe, and that you
were working on it in um
The uh PS calc the uh in that
worksheet it says that there are
50.6% uh vacancies.
Can you clarify those
discrepancies.
Thank you, Chair. Yes,
Representative Silva, we
understand that the personnel
calculator is just a snapshot in
time, and so this was around
October, November time frame and
do it has hired more people, so
their vacancy rate, their
vacancy count has decreased as
the secretary had mentioned, um,
if you could go back to the
specific site that that talks
about their staff.
Slide 4.
but I will defer to the
secretary to talk about their
current staffing levels.
Yeah, as you can see in 2024, we
had overall um authorized 177
positions, right? And then uh
fiscal year 2025, we had 196,
which was an increase in, in
actually FTE count.
Uh, we were able to fill
You know, 161 of those and, and
then vacancy rate we had over,
you know, currently 35, right?
So, uh, when you look at it,
we're getting more, more FTE.
We're filling a lot of those
positions and, and, you know, so
we went from 2024 to 21% down to
17.8%. Um, 1 of my goals, uh,
you know, in, in being the
cabinet secretary and working
with our department is to fill
all the vacancies as quickly
and, and fast as possible. We,
we wanna be able to have a full
support mechanism behind us as
we got a lot of different
projects and as you can tell,
um, as I spoke about earlier.
BPMO manages over $1 billion in
projects and we handle, you
know, within 76 different
agencies. So, uh, currently we
have 12 additional positions
that we're looking to fill here
pretty quick, hopefully within
the next 60 days, we'll drop
down to about another 4%, so
we're hoping.
Somewhere to be about 12 to 13%
here in the next 60 to 90 days.
Excellent. Thank you, Madam
Chair. Thank you, secretary. Um,
my other question is, um, this
committee has seen a a number of
agencies having um.
huge increases in their IT
costs.
Um, and asking for
appropriations and so I'm
wondering if all of those
appropriations get approved and
those agencies, would that
change your bottom line at all
and where would that additional
revenue go. Thank you, Madam
Chair.
Yeah, I think if we go back, I
mean,
You know, New Mexico do it is.
Really, um, let me go.
Yeah, so, so with that being
said, you know, we are an
enterprise.
And you know, we, I can give you
an example. We have Microsoft
365 that we currently work with.
We've spent um and made a large
investment, and we've worked
with uh Microsoft and their sub
subcontractors to negotiate
rates that are beyond contract.
By being able to.
You know, purchase, right, based
on the economy scales of whether
or not we have 23,000 licenses
or 30,000 licenses, we can get a
better price from our
manufacturer or that vendor.
By doing so, we can pass those
costs along to
The different 76 different
agencies, the more, the more
agencies that participate, the
less the, the less of the rate
we have to charge. So that's
kind of how our system works,
right? So we base it based on
economies of scale.
We negotiate with the
manufacturer or their
subcontractors, the more the
more licenses we buy.
less of the price we could
request.
doing it for me, also added a
little extra context. Some of
the things that the Office of
Broadband is working on right
now and getting, you know, more
fiber out into rural places can
also help in some of this in the
in the coming years. One of the
bigger issues that we see is
these legacy older copper line
systems and especially for, you
know, state agencies that may
have, you know, T1s or, you
know, a couple of them have
combination of old DSL
technologies basically put
together. The maintenance on
those networks is significantly
higher and in those rural
communities trying to replace
that equipment can be very
difficult. And so as we build
more broadband out into these
rural areas and more of the
state agencies are able to
procure, you know, cheaper
services through, through a
fiber-backed system or maybe a a
fixed wireless, you know, system
that will also help reduce some
of these costs, but we're kind
of at this weird inflection
point across the state where
these legacy systems cost a lot
to maintain.
And it's the only thing that's
out there at the moment, as we
do the builds.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Thank
you, um, for that answer, cause
I'm trying to figure out like,
as a committee, how do we
prioritize some of the IT and
how might it impact if.
Some agencies get all the IT
support and then some others or
other departments don't and so.
How do we
Discern about those line items.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Thank
you, Representative Thank you,
Madam Chair. My questions were
answered.
Thank you, Madam Chair. I just
wanted to commend Drew and his
team, uh, for the resources you
have, you've been doing a great
job, um, I have some questions
on the, the specials, but we'll,
we'll get to those when we get
to them. Thank you.
Um.
And there looks, there's these
are big amounts of money um.
And
Madam Chair, thank you. So if we
do not get the funding, that
means we're going to do a lot
less, and that means that we
continue to have a large funding
gap. So right now we're tracking
about $2 billion shortfall in
our infrastructure needs across
the state. Most of this is in a
middle mile and just making sure
everyone's on the same page,
middle mile is similar to your
uh interstate, right, your, your
Department of Transportation run
highways, when you have to have
a lot of that information going
back and forth between uh cities
like Albuquerque, El Paso,
Dallas.
Going to, you know, one Wilshire
down in California, transmitting
all the information around the
world, that middle mile is
absolutely critical and not
having that type of
infrastructure when we're doing
a a program like the Beat
program that is focused on last
mile, the step down the driveway
connecting people's homes, means
that it's more expensive to get
to those homes. And so that's,
that's a lot of the difficulty.
Uh, and then we just comment on
the federal funds again, go
through unserved, underserved,
and then focus on community
anchor institutions such as
government buildings,
healthcare, uh, locations.
and then 4th is those low income
multi-dwelling units, and we
only have enough money to get
through the unserved and a
little bit into the underserved.
And so these extra
appropriations for like that $25
million extension will go a long
way to adding more of those
locations in there and to the
point about the extra cost of
internet for government uh
buildings can also help address
some of those things. So that's
why it's so critical that we
have these funds, and it takes a
long time. So let's make sure we
don't leave New Mexicans behind
now.
I appreciate that. I also
attended the the conference, uh,
broadband mile was discussed as
well.
You know how a lot of the
providers and everybody came
together, especially during the
fires and and the flooding and
and all those sort of things
and.
I was really impressed at the
collaborative efforts of how we,
how they just joined forces, but
I do recall that middle mile um
issue and everyone coming
together and how they're they're
trying to resolve those.
That's funny, but we're still
seeing that we're gonna fall
short here. I'd just like to see
how we can, you know, myself
work with our with our budget
team to to to come to uh less of
a gap here in our budgets, I'd
also um.
And with that, um, are you
afraid?
Uh, Madam Chair, so I just, uh,
you know, you were there, uh,
Godfrey and Jay at Mescal or
Apache Telecom, uh, Penasco
Valley Telecom is in the room
here. Other members from the
exchange carrier group, they
really do need to be commended
for their efforts at the
Mescalero salt fires down south,
the big lift that they did in
working together, uh, and where
they usually kind of compete in
some of those zones and actually
create reconnected, you know,
connectivity and going around
the mountain to come back and
get uh connectivity back to
uh uh Rioso, you know, in within
4 days, uh, they had, you know,
911 services in a couple of
days, uh, you know, got
connectivity back to places that
weren't burned in 4 days and
then got cell service back in
about 7. Huge lift, and it's a
great model and how companies
and government can work
together. Um, and I just, you
know, want to give him a lot of
praise. That's something we're
trying to continue on. It's
informal. It's called the
emergency broadband operations
team. We've been meeting trying
to figure out how we would make
that or replicate that other
places, um, but it is something
that we also don't really have a
lot of funding for more middle
mile resiliency. And that's
something that's going to be an
ongoing need and issue going
into the future and something we
would like to address. It's just
going to take time because the
number is so big.
You for that, and I would really
encourage you all get together
to to show up that there isn't
uh those, those the duplication
going on and where it is and
really have maybe make them.
The informal, a little more
formal, so that we can, you can
report back to us and let us
know how that is coming about
because we want to see those
cost savings with something this
expensive.
Um
And, and just how that is uh um
moving forward and I know, and I
trust you, you, I, I, I know you
work. I know how you, how you
operate um.
And um I just want to make sure
that those conversations and
there is having those
conversations because we all
want this to happen. We need the
infrastructure without the
broadband infrastructure, and
we're talking about all these
other big infrastructure
projects and everything else
going on with their education
and with, you know, quality
across our state for everybody
an opportunity. This is how this
is like.
You know, foundational, um, but
I also want to make sure that
we're, we're not, um,
duplicating, we're not spending
extra dollars. One thing that
didn't come up was the um, is it
the chest? Uh.
Can you, can someone.
And talk about that.
Madam Chair, I have a point.
There's checks and then there's
chess, um, two different ones.
Um, one of them is for section
7, and another is a
cybersecurity initiative for
higher education institutions,
um, that one? Yes, OK. So, um,
for that cybersecurity
initiative for the higher
education institutions, the
executive, I think, recommended
$10 million. Um, there is uh
additional language for that
one, and then I'll let Miss
Emily talk to the LFC.
recommendation for that.
Yes, chair, um, if you look on
page.
It's not here, but there should
be included a um
150 million cybersecurity
special, um, in the LFC
recommendation with language
saying up to 10 million is for
higher education institutions. I
don't know why it's not included
here so we can follow back up
with you on the difference, oh.
I don't have it.
It's the first thing I think I
was just, oh I have it now. You
see it, uh, it's the very first
special appropriation, sorry
chair members under
cybersecurity, uh, the
executive, as Nicole said, has a
10 million um support for that,
whereas the LFC is 15 with
specific language with up to 10
million for higher education
institutions, um, and that
should cover all
Higher education institutions,
including tribal culture.
Yes, that is uh chair with the
language says in the LFC
recommendation up to 10 million
for higher education
institutions. However, it
doesn't have to be up.
10 million if that's not what
the true cost is. Alright, I
appreciate that. Thank you,
thank you for that
clarification.
Um,
That there aren't any other
questions, I moved the LFC, but
I ask, uh, that the staff look
at the differences, uh, between
the two recommendations.
Motion from vice chair Sanchez
and the second from
Representative Duncan, and.
community accepts the motion.
Thank you all for coming in.
There's a lot of you here too.
We'll ask you just to quietly
move on while we get the next.
Um, ethics commission on board.
Thank you.
Alright, let's get ethics
commission.
Uh, good afternoon, members of
the committee. Today we will be
discussing business unit 410. My
name is Doctor Allegra Hernandez
and here next to me is my DFA
counterpart Diego Jimenez, and
executive director of the Ethics
commission, Jeremy Ferris. If
you would like to examine Volume
2, it will be on page 141.
The state's ethics commission
was created in legislation in
2019 and was approved by the
state's voters in the general
election in 2018.
The commission consists of 17 7
commissioners, excuse me, 5 are
appointed by the governor and
leadership within the
legislature, the remaining two
are appointed by the 1st 5
commissioners. The commission's
primary duties are receiving
investigating and adjudicating
complaints against public
officials, public employees,
candidates, persons subject to
the campaign Reporting Act,
government contractors,
lobbyists, and lobbyist
employers.
The LFC's recommendation
provides consistent growth for
the ethics commission while
following the budget guidelines.
The LFC's recommendation is $1.8
million or 5.2% increase.
Overall, the executive
recommends funding for an
additional FTE and makes a
slight reduction in to
contractual services.
The LFC recommendation reduces
the contractual services and
other uses to support an
increase in personnel with
consideration to the out of
cycle salary adjustments.
The LFC's recommendation for
personnel, which amounts to $1.5
million fully funds all existing
positions for the contractual
services category, the LFC
recommended $151,000 which is
consistent with previous
spending as the commission spent
166 on contractual services in
FY 24 and we're given in an
additional FTE and FY 25, which
should alleviate some
contractual costs.
And the other category that LFC
recommended $144,000. Finally,
the LFC did not recommend an
additional FTE for the ethics
commission while DFA did.
The LFC did not recommend this
special, which you will see at
the back of your packet due to
concerns that it partially
contained reoccurring costs.
However, the committee could
consider increasing the LFC's
base budget recommendation by
$65,000 in order to meet the
security request of the ethics
commission, which the executive
director will discuss further if
the committee chooses to do
this, the funds would go into
the 400 category. Thank you. I
will now turn it over to Mr.
Jimenez for his comments.
Thank you, Leger. uh, Mr. Chair,
members of the committee, uh
Allegra.
Did quite a thorough job of
explaining the differences, but
I guess I would just like to
highlight that uh from the
executive perspective, the, the
recommendation includes an
additional FTE which the uh the
commission.
Needs and um they're very good
about
Keeping all of their positions
filled and
Well, both of the
recommendations do take a
similar approach and in shifting
some funding from the
contractual services category to
support um
Personnel costs.
Um
The legislative recommendation
from the executive perspective
goes a bit far and
Reducing below.
Not only the current operating
budget, but below the
contractual
The actual contractual expenses
from from the previous fiscal
year. With that, I think I'll
add it over to Mr. Ferris.
Uh, thank you, Mr. Chair, um, or
Madam Chair, um,
First off, I want to thank this
committee for its support of the
ethics commission, um.
Over, over its years, um,
Rebecca, I mean, Representative
Doo, I, I know that, you know,
you stand apart in that regard,
but um, no, seriously, the HAFC
has been very supportive of, of
the ethics commission. um, we're
only in our 6th year, I'm, I'm
at the end of my first term, and
it's been a real privilege to to
start a state agency and, and
really the HEFC has been kind of
behind the ethics commission
and, and allowing us to
incrementally grow our, our
budget kind of as we've grown as
an agency from the very
beginning. And you know, we're
Or now a real agency. We're up,
we're up to 10 FTE and we're
divisionalized we and yeah, I
really thank Representative
Garrett a few years ago was
pivotal and, and I'm here today
with um our, our ASD staff. So
we have uh Amelia Burley, who's
our deputy director, Wendy
George, who's our CFO and um
Sharon Garcia, who is our
financial coordinator. So we
have a real, a real team here,
um, both of these
recommendations are, are good
for the commission. They both
kind of keep us on, on the
growth trajectory, the executive
allows for another FTE and there
will come a point where I think
we do need another, another FTE.
We have far more work than can
can reasonably handle. We turn
away a lot of issues and a and a
lot of submissions just because
we don't have, we don't have the
capacity. Um, but we, we have a
very talented, um, so these are
both, these are both strong
recommendations from the
standpoint of, of the ethics
commission. um, I do, I do want
to emphasize that the the 65
000 that um.
Doctor Hernandez just mentioned
that the, that the ethics
commission requested in terms of
a special, but Dr. Hernandez
just suggested could be placed
in an actual reoccurring as part
of the 400s. That's money we we
need. We need, we need more
money in the 400s or we need
money to respond to um a
security incident that we had
over this, this past summer. We,
we need more security upgrades
at our offices, we rent space
from the University of New
Mexico and, and over this past
We had a serious security
situation. We were doxed in
relation to one of the the civil
civil actions that we supporting
laws. We were doxed on the
internet. All of our information
that we received 1000 mails, all
of which we transcribed. I
worked with the FBI, the US
Attorney's Office, Secretary
Bowie, a DPS, the state police,
they all kind of came, came to
our aid in that moment. Um, but
we need more physical safety
infrastructure at, at our
offices.
We're not like the
Attorney General's office of the
Department of Justice where when
you walk in, there's Plexiglass
and there's a guard there. We do
rent space from a university,
but there are things that we can
do such as restrict them in a
video system that, that feeds
into UN and police, and we are
out there enforcing our state's
governmental ethics and campaign
finance reporting and
procurement laws, and that, that
does lead to tension in this
past summer, that tension boiled
over and when we do need funding
to to provide for more
structure. And so I would very
much appreciate it.
If, if you took on board the the
suggestion that that Doctor
Hernandez, uh, recommended with
the additional money in the LFC
for the 400s.
And Mr. Chair, with that, I'm
I'm happy to to.
rap silver.
Thank you, Chair. Uh, thank you,
Director Harris and and team.
Um, I am shocked to hear the uh
attacks that you all received in
your office.
And as a commission who is
tasked with watchdogging, um,
many in, in many public bodies,
um, that's not surprising
either, um, but, uh, we should
make every effort to protect
staff and um and the commission
there, so.
Um, and I'd also say that the
ethics commission helps us
strengthen the public trust that
we're all, um, we all took an
oath to uphold and so thank you
for the work that you do. Um, I
do wanna make sure that you have
the staff necessary to, uh, to
investigate and do your job
well, um, and I'm also gonna
advocate for the those 65,000
and recurring in the 400s. So
thank you very much for your
work.
Chair. Thank you. uh Duncan and
then uh Rep.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Uh, just
one quick question for you and,
and, uh,
23, there was a 97,000 revision
and then 24, there was a 294,000
revisions.
Um, absolutely, so, uh, Mr.
Mr. Chair and Representative
Duncan and FY 23, I'm showing
that, yeah, we had a 97,000.
and then in
FY 24, we reverted 82,000. The,
the bulk um of those reversions
in FY 23, we reverted quite a
bit in in contractual services
and then in FY 24 down to 50,000
in contractual services.
The maine of our reversions will
always be in contracts. We, we
encumber more money on contracts
than than we're likely to spend.
So we have contracts with
Real-time solutions and IT
support staff to run our
Our online web-based docketing
and case management system. We
have standing contracts for
whenever that docking case
management system has. And so we
have a standing contract with an
IT contractor to come in and
correct those bugs and recover
documents when necessary.
That IT contractor doesn't
always bill to the order that
service. We also set aside
hearing officers and for
paralegals and the extent to
which a hearing officer builds
on on their contracts, um, will
depend on how many hearings we
have in that fiscal year. And in
these fiscal years, we didn't,
we didn't require as much in the
way of hearing officer services
or, or paralegal services that
we had contracted for.
As, as we go fiscal year to
fiscal year, we're learning how
to kind of our previous
experience of how much we're
actually spending. But in the in
the kind of beginning fiscal
years of, of learning this
agency and
You know, what cases would
actually likely go to a hearing,
what cases would go to civil
litigation. We're getting a
better understanding for how
much to encumber on it. And so
the trend of our reversions in
the 300s is down, and I think it
will continue to go down, but I
always think that fiscal year or
fiscal year, there will be an
amount that will be it'd be
difficult to, to, to run a boat.
Exactly on, on the contracted
amount conservative in terms of
the
The service. Thank you, Mr.
Chair.
Um
You know what a shame that we
have to even have your
department.
Um,
and I'm, I'm just talking.
You know, I, I'm not so sure
that you're.
Thank you for your response.
Well, I appreciate that, Mr.
Chan, Representative Duncan, we
do, um, we do more than just
enforcement. I mean, yes, there
are cases where we have to get
out and, and file a lawsuit or
or the state ethics commission
does a lot in the way of, of
training and an advisory
opinions and advisory letters
wanting to requests for advice,
um, on the procurement code or
the governmental Conduct Act,
and that's, that's a service
that
That I think you as the
legislature want. I mean, we
come in and fill the gap for a
lot of those smaller communities
that can't afford a general
counsel or and those, those
folks are subject to the same
procurement code and yeah, from
time to time, they need, they
need help and advice too, and
that's part of, it's not only
that we're coming in as the
heaviest, that's what gets in
the papers. Um, but we do, we do
far more than than just that.
Thank you for that opens it up
for me a little bit and we
definitely.
up
Thank you, Mr. Chair and thank
you, um.
I, I, I would guess
Representative Duncan, when they
closed my ethics complaint,
everybody started laughing and
said it was going to free up a
bunch of a lot of, a lot of
Jeremy's time to work on other
cases. So I'm I was thinking
you're gonna say some of the
savings was you close my case.
Um, how can we get a report
before the full committee on how
much New Mexico spent, uh, with
risk management representing
Uh, state employees who've been,
have had ethics complaints
coming for you.
Um, uh, Mr. Chair and
Representative Dell, I'd be very
interested in, in that
information. It's been a few
years since, since I've asked
risk management for a kind of
tallying on the amount of, of,
of money that risk is is putting
toward contract defense counsel
and in
State ethics commission's
administrative cases, and I've
always thought that if um if the
state ethics Commission Act is
going to provide um
Contract, defense counsel, risk
management in um.
And state
Ethics administrative cases that
that the state ethics commission
should have sufficient attorney
staff to be able to litigate
those cases vis a vis the, the
outside risk management council,
a lot of, a lot of the um the
complainants that filed are
prose in order for the state
ethics commission that kind of
vindicate our our state's laws
and to respond to, you know,
paid outside attorneys that the
commission needs commensurate
staff and contract council. And
so that's, that's information
that, that I would also be very.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and
that's, that's
Fair point. Um, is the expanded
authority, did you ask for the
expanded authority and the
expanded role that you would
play that's resulting in higher
demand of your services.
Um, Mr. Chair and Representative
know the, the authorities that
the commission exercises are
those that are set forth in in
the statutes that were enacted
in 2019.
Thank you. And then how does one
file a complaint against members
of the staff at the ethics
Commission, the Office of the
Ethics Commission. You would,
um, Mr. Chair and Representative
Doo, you would, you would do
that in the same way that any in
file it with us and then uh the
commission would um
would refer that matter to the
Department of Justice, which
would then be responsible for
that matter.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Has that
happened yet?
Um, Mr. Chair and Representative
Doo, um, I can't speak to
individual complaints, um, but
that has happened and we have
referred matters to the
Department of Justice.
Thank you, thank you, Mr. Chair.
Uh, do you have any other
questions? I think we're missing
one for a quarter, so we're
gonna have to wait till somebody
comes back before we take
action, so give us a minute
while we.
drag somebody back in. Thank
you, Mr. Chair. I'm happy to
answer any other questions that
you might have about the ethics
commission.
So we have a quarter
Mm
I think 12345. So I would ask
for a motion, uh, to take the
LFC from someone, please.
Oh, sorry.
I don't know why I did that.
I thought I was taking
Um, so, I, I make the motion,
uh.
Uh, in the opposition?
Uh, you do have a, do pass.
And
Madam Chair, um, excuse me, does
that include, oh, Mr. Chair,
excuse me. Uh, does that include
the $65,000 additional in the
base budget or no?
OK,
the base at this point. So uh we
have to build our budget.
Thank you.
It's not just you guys, it's
everyone, so.
So next we have the agency 440
they were in the lobby.
Sofas in the
Alright, looks like we have.
When you're ready.
440 Office of the Superintendent
of insurance.
Get started. I think we'll start
with our analyst if that's OK.
Thank you, thank you.
Superintended.
Thank you
Madam Chair and members of the
committee, uh, my name is Julisa
Rodriguez, um, and I'm the LFC
analyst for the Office of
Superintendent of Insurance, um,
as a Madam Chair said, we are
going to be doing OSI, that's um
business unit 440 and it should
be behind tab 4 of your packet.
Um
To let's see, here at the table
with me is the superintendent of
insurance Alice Keen, as well as
Ariana V. Hill. She is a DFA
budget analyst for the agency.
Um, I'm quickly gonna go over
the main differences in the
reoccurring budget or the in the
in the recommendations for the
reoccurring budget.
Um, so this agency OSI does not
receive any general fund
revenue, so anything that you'll
see is not general fund, uh, the
two recommendations aren't too
far apart, um, Billy recommended
114,000 more than the executive,
um, that's a difference of
between the LFC recommending a
2.1% increase while the
executive recommended a 1.1%
increase.
Um, as far as the differences,
you'll see that the executive
recommended slightly more in the
for personnel costs, and that's
for 3 FTE as well as some
insurance premiums, um, while
the LFC recommended funding for
one FTE, um, as well as some of
those insurance premiums and
that additional staffing on both
ends is for the new prescription
drugs and pharmacy benefits
Bureau, um, other differences
include the um in the other cost
category and then contractual.
services and that's for data
analysis, um, as well as like
Operational stuff like IT radio
communications, rent and
telecommunications.
Um, this agency did have a
couple expansions, and you can
see the differences there, um,
with the executive recommended
slightly more than the LFC.
Again, those are for personnel
for the new bureau that I just
mentioned, um, while the
executive recommended more
personnel for that, for the
expansion, the LFC recommended
more in contractual services,
um, and that's to kind of do the
initial startup cost for that
new bureau. Um, those are my
remarks on the differences for
the reoccurring budget and
Ariana will cover the
differences for the specials.
Good afternoon, Madam Chair,
members of the council. Um, we
have 3 items that were basically
the same for the executive and
LFC, um, one of the major
differences in in the
non-recurring, um, the executive
included 25 million special to
subsidize medical malpractice
insurance premiums for providers
statewide and, um, the executive
recommended 25,000 and LFC did
not recommend, I mean 25
million, I'm sorry, and uh the
LFC did not recommend.
anything for that. And with
that, I will pass it over to.
Oh, thank you, Madam Chair,
members, uh, thank you for this
opportunity. Uh, I think you've
seen the differences. Let me
walk you through a little bit of
uh what's, what's going on in
detail and it may, I hope, if
it's repetitive, uh, I'll try to
be quick. Um, do you all have
this in?
Do you have the slides
in hard copy and we have the
slides on the prompters as well,
so take your time and and be go
through it. Thank you. Great.
Uh, thank you, Madam Chair. Uh,
well, as you know, we are a
mission driven organization,
OSI's mission is to protect
consumers, foster competitive
marketplace.
Ensure that the insurance
companies are financially sound
and treat their customers fairly
and ensure that the producers
who sell insurance are honest
and trustworthy.
Our projected operating revenue,
the day to day operations of OSI
are funded entirely as, as was
mentioned, uh, through revenue
generated from the insurance
industry through assessments and
licensing fees, that's for the
insurance operations in uh FY 24
OSI collected 38.8 million in
assessments and licensing fees,
they're distributed in this way,
16.9 for our insurance
operations 17.9 to the fire
fund.
Uh, the fraud fund and the Carry
Tingley funds, 2.5 million are
fraud assessments, 1.2 million
are title assessments and
260,000 are consult uh
continuing education fees. $6
million was contributed to the
general fund, which includes 3.3
million distributed throughout
the year, and at 2.7 million
reversion.
The next slide
OK.
We need an
The next slide, I think.
Projected operating revenue.
Um
I think we, we basically went
through that. It's I just
described, uh, the OSI budget
request and recommendations. If
there are any questions, I'll go
to the next slide. The OSI
budget requests and
recommendations. This is rather
busy slide, but we tried to put
everything on it.
Which is always a challenge, um,
as you can see, uh, we're
divided in three ways. We have
insurance operations and we have
fraud operations and title, uh,
the total number of FTEs with
all that is 114. Uh, the numbers
are, are, are, uh, and we're
just trying to give you our
operating budget. We have, we've
taken the PCF out of this
because that's a large number
that doesn't show you what we're
doing day to day, um, the
salaries.
benefits uh for our
Operating, uh, in, in the
insurance operations, 10.8
million contractual services in
FOI 25, we're asking for 2.8
million. Other costs 1.9
million. Insurance ops total is
15.5 million.
Uh, the fraud program, uh, 3.2
million total FT 16. The title
program 1.3 million in total
FTEs 4.
Um, so that was what we spend in
FY for FY or we're spending for
FY 25. Uh you can see that
there's been a difference in
what we requested and what was
recommended, um, as you can see
if you go through the difference
between the exact and the LFC
recommendations are really
minor, uh, the, the, uh, and the
Are a big issue for us is that
maybe the two FTEs, uh, we had
requested a larger number, but
uh right now we're at 114 and
the recommendations are either
117 through the exact and 1:15
for the LFC.
Uh,
next slide.
This is to put the whole thing
together where we do add in um.
The PFC.
Uh, so the, uh, as we went
through this before, the
salaries and benefits are 13.4
million contractual services,
6.1 million what we spent, and
30.9 million.
Another financing uses 15.5 for
a total of 65.8 in uh FY 25 and
let me explain the the other
cost, which is really the PCF.
We put in 30 million for the
PCF, uh, I guess it's been a
A tradition maybe not the right
word, but it's been done for the
last number of years, uh, but
when we look at the trends,
every year we come back for a
bar and over the last 4 years,
it's gone from 50 million to
100, uh, the total has gone from
50 million to 110 million, so
it's the difference between the
30 million, just so you know,
uh, because the claims numbers,
we can't predict coming out of
the PCF. And again, uh, somewhat
repetitive, but uh salary and
benefits, 13.9 or 13.
7, depending on which LFC.
16.2 and 6.4 in contracts, 30.8
stayed the same for the PCF and
then other financing course
again, uh, a small difference,
16.1, 16.2, uh, so that at the
end of the day, as uh Julisa
said, the difference is
$114,000.
The non-recurrent recurring
summary.
Uh, what we're looking for is I,
I'm sure uh you've heard that
we're working on the healthcare
consolidation bill. We think we
need 1,5 for that.
The fair plan is another big
bill that we're working, uh,
representative Vincent uh is is
co-sponsoring that, uh, this the
fair plan, um, as some of you
know, is a residual market plan.
It's, it's offered to, uh,
homeowners who have been
rejected by the uh the open
market. We're trying to uh raise
the limits from 350,000 to a
million for residential and from
uh 2 from 2 million to 5 million
for commercial.
Uh, we had initially thought uh
when uh Representative Vincent
first spoken about it, it was
gonna be a pilot program focused
on Riodoso, but now we're doing
a statewide uh focused across
the state and
I'm sure you've all heard about
the fair plans of California,
you know, whatever the way the
fair plan is financed, it's not
through state funds, but we
wanted some sort of a backstop,
but it's an assessments of the
industry and usually we, they're
given, you know, they give us
the money to pay the claims and
over the next 3 years, they're
allowed to across the state to
increase the uh increased
charges with the surcharge that
goes away after it's done. We've
looked at some of the numbers,
uh, a home around 200,000.
if we uh uh based on uh the 10
million that we already was uh
assessed this year. It was the
first assessment and I think 20
years for, for the hail and the
re Josepher would be like $5 a
year, so $15. So it, it, it
doesn't uh hit the consumers in
such large amounts. That being
said, uh, are the insurance
premiums for property casualty
have gone up dramatically. The
second issue we're asking for,
um.
The medical malpractice
insurance subsidy, uh, we
requested 18 million. Last year,
uh, there was a governor uh
appropriation that we were asked
to distribute and we distributed
it to the individual providers
and uh.
We are asking for 25 million to
continue the program now in the
OSI budget uh to do the
subsidies. Uh, it's, it was well
received. It was on independent
providers, uh, I've got some
more, um, some more information
on the back, but I know I've
been asked to be short, so, uh,
an OBGYN just to give you an
example, the OBGYN's uh uh
premium, I think, uh, is around
$57,000 and we were able to uh
re
them 100%. The other, the other
practices we reimbursed 60%.
Again, focused on OBGYN because
that's one of our, our real
issues. Um.
And then, uh,
The other thing is we need, uh,
we're, we'd like a non-recurring
request to cover some of the
insurance fraud and auto theft
preventions, the total would be
571, I think for both, uh,
400,000 for the uh
For the uh
Broad fund and let me see title,
300,000.
And again, they'd be from the
fraud fund and the title fun not
not from the general front.
So I think those are the major
requests, um.
If you have any questions.
Um, I'll go to our committee now
for any questions we'll start
with you.
Thank you, Madam Chair, and
thank you, Superintendent panel
LFC.
One question that I've been hit
with quite a bit, which, you
know, I'm getting a lot of
pushback from the insurance
companies, but I'll, I'll handle
that.
Um
As far as
If you took a regular just an
insurance company. I don't want
to mention that offhand, but
just a regular insurance
company. Why is our interns
through the state.
More expensive. It isn't right
now our insurance is below
market at the California fair
plan is above market where I
have my actuary here, we're
gonna pay, uh, what's actuarial,
uh, you know, warranted, uh, but
at this point I, I have a, I
ask, I, I have problems of why
the insurance industry wouldn't
want this on one sense because
they're able to recoup the money
through a surcharge. So to me
it's sort of mystifying, uh, the
one thing is we are changing in
that new bill, the governance.
Dramatically changing the
governance. I went to the
current board and asked them to
do the emergency plan for
Reidoso, and they still haven't
moved. I think with what's going
on, um,
The climate change and all we're
dealing with, I, I, I've asked,
uh, the insurance industry to
stay up, you know, to have a
number of members on the board,
but what we want is right now
they have local agents. What,
what I think I'd like them to
come in is with experts, climate
experts, actuarial experts,
financial experts, so they can
really help us as we deal with
what's going on, not just
throughout the state throughout
the whole western zone. So we're
asking for a more, uh
I think professional board, not
that, not that the agents aren't
professional, but what we're
dealing with is much more
underwriting and and more
sophisticated modeling, and I
would like to have that
expertise available to the whole
board.
Thank you, Madam Chair, and I'm,
I like to use the word climate
shift and not climate change,
and I wish we could bring some
more people in because it's not
the climate that's burning our
houses down. It's the forest
that's burning our houses down.
We need to reduce the fuel.
I don't care how how hot or cold
it is outside when those forests
catch on fire when the wind's
blowing 50 miles an hour, they
are going to tear, they're gonna
burn people's houses down. And
it's the most devastating thing.
That you have to see, uh,
because we still, we, we got
help on the way now because
we're gonna try to offer some
insurance, but, um, you know,
those people hadn't been able to
come home because they have
nothing to come home to.
Medical malpractice, uh, Madam
Chair, medical malpractice
insurance subsidy. Would you
explain that to me? Well, again,
this is another area where the
uh premiums have gone up
dramatically. We, we are hearing
from the independent providers,
it's really hitting them hard
financially, uh, so we were
trying to give them some relief
on, in the market, uh, so we
subsidize that first layer of
premium that they get, which is
250,000 last year, especially
the
OBGYNs because we're losing,
we're losing OBGYNs
I'm told, uh, you know, in great
numbers because of the, the cost
of malpractice. When we looked
at the specialties through the
PCF.
Uh, the, the numbers of the real
high numbers are like uh OBGYN
surgery, neurology surgery,
orthopedic surgery, and those
are, those are practices we want
to keep in the state. So we
didn't help them on the PCF.
Surcharge, but we did help them
on that first layer and we got
some, some very nice feedback
that it was giving them some
relief.
Thank you, Madam Chair, and I
just
So the taxpayer, the taxpayers
are gonna subsidize.
Malpractice insurance for trial
attorneys.
This is, this is for the pardon
me, this is for the providers.
OK. This is for the independent
providers, not the hospital
employees. These are the
independent providers that, you
know, that aren't.
In the in the hospitals have
their own practices and frankly,
the statistics basically say the
independent providers usually
Provide a a high level of
quality care.
OK, so I guess what I'm getting
at is.
The taxpayers are going to
subsidize medical mal.
For people to sue.
The providers.
I, I would
Representatives in Senate
respect what they're really
trying to do is
These providers have to pay the
premium to stay in business
and, and that I can, I can only
solve so many problems at once
and, and this really is, we want
to keep the providers here. OK.
Thank you Madam Chair.
Uh, we have on that point but uh
vice chair I think what he's
getting uh is um.
We're having to help pay higher
premiums as a result of medical
malpractice. That's what he's
getting at. The taxpayers are
subsidizing that.
Yes, represented Madam Chair,
Representative, I, I appreciate
that, but it
And I may have some thoughts on
the whole that bigger issue, but
right now this is the only thing
that we, we can do.
At OSI we're gonna go on to.
Thank you.
Um
touching on that, um, how do you
get around the anti-donation?
Representative, I, I do not have
the legal opinion, but I can get
it for you, but we were told it
was appropriate and had no
problem last.
Madam Chair. Um,
You
Your office, how much did you
revert in 23. I just when
there's a large and why.
Uh
Madam Chair Representative, I
think, let's see. Oh, we have it
get some help.
I knew we had it, um.
Superintendent, we can have DFA.
It looks like they might want to
chime in if you need them to as
well.
This is for 24. It's 27.
I don't I'm 23. I apologize. I'm
not finding 23 here. Do, do you
have that number? Madam Chair,
we have a number and this is
from our office and our staff,
but it was about 31 million.
23.
And
Yeah
Representative, I'll have to
look into that. Our budget is
the operation budget isn't even
that big, so it might be, we
have some clarification on that
and LFC, do we, do we have that?
Thank you. Madam Chair, members
of the committee, the 31 million
from FY 23. That was from the
Healthcare Affordability Fund,
the agency, you know, uh.
We sent the money back because
it should have stayed in the
healthcare affordability.
Um, when you look at reversion,
um, it's not really been like a,
a program that the way it works
with OSIs, their version of not
a small portion of it.
Portion portion portion of that
for their operations.
And then whatever's left over
from those assessments it goes
to their enterprise agency and
that's, you'll see that through
our our enterprise agencies as
well. Thank you. Thank you.
Thank you. And now we'll go to
Representative Dao.
Thank you, Madam Chair and thank
you for the presentation. I'm
getting confused on what
enterprise agency means because
everybody's asking for increased
budgets and we're covering more
things that
How
Could you explain to me what
that means to you to be an
enterprise agency.
I thought it means it pays for
itself. Representative
Enterprise agencies, they, they
generate fun, they generate
revenues and those revenues then
go to the general fund the
excess of them can go into the,
they go to the general fund, so
I'll have LFC expand a little
bit on that.
Representative, yeah, so OSI
does not receive general fund.
They, um, so their budget is
composed of other revenues from
different types of sources.
You're talking about like
insurance fees, doctor and
hospital surcharges, fraud
assessments.
things like that that are
related to the agency that the
agency then uses to.
Thank you, Madam Chair. That's
what I understood it to be, but
we're asking for.
Whole lots of money to be put
into the fund. So that's
something beyond.
Your act, your current duties
that where you should.
Be able to contribute to the
general fund.
Now the general fund's
contributing to you.
No? OK. I'm sorry.
OK madam, yes, um.
Those funds, even though they're
not general funds, uh, you know,
the agency, those are funds that
like the agency theoretically
corrects, we still, you also
appropriate those funds to the
agency. So you're correct that
like we can think about it as
just like revenue that you all
appropriate to the agency, even
though it's collected at the
agency, they're still.
OK it would be, it would be uh
it would go to the general fund,
but they just, they, they keep
them there and we have to
approve those uh appropriations
just as we do as um other
agencies.
And thank you, Madam Chair. I
mean, this is really just me
trying to figure out the
appropriations committee because
I hear like state parks saying
we're an enterprise fund, we
have to raise our rates or, you
know, fish and wildlife saying
we need to raise our licensing
fees because we're an enterprise
fund, so I, I
I was just trying to get
clarification. I'll have to ask
offline.
OK. Um,
Can you explain, Madam Chair,
can you explain?
When you're saying that you're
going to support independent
practitioners.
I
Is the demand greater than the
funds you received and how did
you decide who you would and
wouldn't, I mean, like how does,
how does one ask you to
supplement their insurance costs
and how do you decide who's
eligible?
Madam Chair Representative, it
was a program that was started
by an executive appropriation
and so we were asked to
administer it.
And the way we administered it,
we went back to the carriers,
uh, they told us who were
independent providers and we had
them and we sent the money
through them.
Because they, you know, they
knew all the individual
providers, we didn't, Madam
Chair, can I get a list of those
providers?
Um, can I check if I'm permitted
to give you all the names. I
just it's publicly funded. It
should be public information. Is
there a reason why I shouldn't
just to clarify, you do have a
list. You, you've provided it
before, but it just takes some
time for, we can get that to
you.
Madam Cur, it's extremely
important to me that I see that
before the next committee, and I
say that because
I know why some of these are
OBGYN costs are going up.
And
I'm, I'm philosophically opposed
to the reason why they're having
suits. And I want to make sure
that we're not picking and
choosing the types of providers
that we're going to supplement.
So I hope I'm wrong. I don't
want, I don't want to get into
it here because this is a budget
funding hearing, but I hope that
there are OBGYNs that are.
Madam Chair Representative, uh,
as far as I know, and we will
check, we gave them to everybody
that the carriers told us they
were insuring and uh we made no
choice we made no distinction,
personally, we relied on the
information we got from the
carriers. I, oh, I'm not, I'm
not putting that on you. I'm
just saying I'd like to know who
they are.entative Doo, it is, is
statistic, I mean, data showed
us throughout time that the
highest um malpractice, um.
Insurance, uh, are with OBGYNs
across the board and then other
specialists so New Mexico really
doesn't even have that many, so
we'd be able to get that list
I'm sure pretty quickly. Thank
you, Madam Chair. Thank you,
Madam Chair Representative, we
can probably give you charts
that show you the uh premium for
the OBG week for all the
practices I think which if I
think that would be helpful.
Thank you, Madam Chair. If you
That's fine. I want to know the
names of the providers. You can
give me whatever chart you want.
It'll just help me how I vote in
in the committee when we go in
deeper to detail. Thank you.
You, uh, Representative, those
are, those are good asks and and
give us extra information, um,
next on the list.
Vice chair's name of, um, so I'd
like to thank you for all the
work that you're doing. I know
there's, there's quite a bit of.
Um, on, on this, in this one
agency, so I wanna, I wanna say
thank you for all the work and
and we're looking at a lot of
policy this year.
Uh, so my question is in the
policy that we're looking at,
um.
How
Have we, are we?
Are we looking to put that in
the, in how you've, you've
identified one that uh
represented Vincent's working
on, but I know there are others
and and the governor has some
initiatives as well. So can you
expand on that?
Thank you, Madam Chair. I think
you're calling that we're
working on the consolidation
bill for the hospitals and
providers, uh, Senator Do he and
Representative Sapanski are the
sponsors for that, that started
last year with SB 15, uh, when
and what sort of was the impetus
for last year was the
Presbyterian Unity merger and
people's, there was no uh agency
that was able to approve it or
really look except I had a tiny
win OSI had a tiny window
because they had two health.
Uh, insurance plans and uh the
insurance code allows you to, if
you change in ownership to
determine who the ultimate
owners are and what's really
going on straight up through the
uh the ultimate owner, uh,
we've, uh,
The legislature recommended that
we put SB 15 in, which was sort
of I call consolidation light,
and then uh we went uh we were,
we were advised and we followed
the advice from the legislature
to go out and do stakeholder
meetings and community meetings,
which we did, I think from June
to September, I.
I, I don't know, I think we had
18, maybe I don't have the exact
number, but 18 to 20, I would
say around the state, uh, and we
learned a lot from that and the
bill has been modified or
expanded to cover that up, cover
the things that we came out in
the stakeholder meetings and
also to add what we didn't add
last year, which was really
enforcement and monitoring
provisions, um, we're meeting
with the hospital association,
the medical association,
Presbyterian.
people, you know, reacting to
the current, current bill that's
dropped and uh.
We'll probably be back with some
changes.
That's the other, the fair plan,
uh again, and just back on
consolidation. So we started
last year, it it was, we knew it
was a problem, but, uh, what's
happened is the problem, at
least nationwide has become much
more uh people become much more
aware of it with the seward, uh,
you know, problem out in uh the
Northeast that hospital went uh
that hospital system uh was
bought by private equity and uh
was uh
Ended up in financial
difficulty, uh, so there's,
there's even federal focus on
this now.
Uh, the fair plan, again,
something that just started uh.
With the Riodosso fires, um, we
had a fair plan. It had been
working well. Uh, there had been
no assessments for years, the
Riodoso, there was a hail storm
out east. I think there was
about 105 of an assessment was
made to cover those costs and
the way it works is the, the,
the policyholders pay premiums
and you build up a reserve, not
a capital that you have normally
in an insurance company, but
there are some money to pay
claims, but it reached a point
where there wasn't enough.
Uh, from what I understand, uh,
uh, but for State Farms sending
money in one night, uh, we
wouldn't have been able to pay
the claims on the uh the hail
and redoso side and then there
was about an $8 million
assessment for the Riodoso
fires. That being said, we
looked at the amounts, uh, they,
I guess 2 years ago, they had
been 250,000. They were raised
by my predecessor to 350,000.
When we looked at Riodoso, we,
we started with the 750,000
thinking that would be good for
that community, uh, as an
experiment then when it became
apparent that we had to go
statewide. Uh, we moved to a
million, um,
I, I think the beauty, it's the
whole thing's.
Heartbreaking that what we're
dealing with, but uh what we're
trying to, it isn't a cost to
the to uh the, the
The
A direct cost to the New Mexico
taxpayers to pay for this. It's,
uh, industry assessments, but
the surcharges are spread
through throughout the state,
uh.
People can't rebuild without
insurance, you know, uh, I mean,
that's why we want Riodoso to
happen quickly so they could
rebuild quickly and that again
that board was not responsive.
Um, we, we know that there.
The chances of another, you
know.
Incident is probably.
You know, after California, my
concerns, uh, and representative
Vincent knowsis my concerns are
after California. I don't know
how open the market's gonna be.
We know there've been lots of
cancellations and renewals
around the state. Uh, I asked
for subpoena power this morning
that went through one committee
because we don't even get full,
uh, the, the information we're
getting from the industry is not
always
As detailed as we'd want it, I
can ask for information.
But with the subpoena, we can
get a lot more information, so,
uh, we're trying to get, we're
trying to get a real picture of
what's going on.
And then I guess there's one of
the consolidation, the fair
plan.
What was my other? Oh, the, oh
the prescription drug
transparency. We're doing a lot
of work with PBMs and, uh, we've
been tasked with trying to
figure out what's going on,
where the, where, where's the
money being made from the
manufacturer straight through to
the, the consumer, um.
I don't know, uh, let's see. I'm
sure I'm forgetting something,
but, uh, I must say I'm only
able to do this with a great
staff. I have dedicated people,
uh, that are, you know, really
care about what they're, what
they're doing for New Mexico.
They really care, you know, my
property and casualty people
care about, you know, getting
in, you know, looking at the
numbers, getting, getting this
fair plan up. They've been
working very hard on it. We're
looking on the other side, we're
looking at changing the credit
score, uh, for, for.
so, um.
We're trying our best, uh, and
I'm, I'm the one thing we did
ask for is a uh is uh an
appropriation. I, we've
increased the pay band, uh,
amounts to above, mid midpoint,
uh, for some highly qualified
professionals that we were
having difficulty recruiting. I
have a chief actuary now that's
sitting here. I have a pharmacy
that's sitting here. I have uh a
fin financial analyst that we
desperately needed, so um I'm
very excited about that and.
is happy because I haven't
recruited her to be an actuary
yet.
I've tried hard, uh, and, and
then we, we wanted to retain and
recruit, uh, and we've, uh, with
the help of SO, we've really
changed uh some of the numbers
that we've paid across the
agency and it seems to be
successful.
I really appreciate that. And
the reason why I asked you that
is because the majority of us
here are brand new, uh, uh.
Members of appropriations of
finance, so they need to, I
wanted them to get a full scope
of what we've been discussing,
you've been a highlight in our
LSC committees and and talking
about all these things that are
going on. Um, I too have some
concern with the, the medical
malpractice insurance subsidy
for OSI with an $18 million.
Request this year, uh, last
year, I believe we did, was it
$33 million that we gave to
the governor's executive
appropriation was 15.
something
last year. That was the first
time we did it.
Thank you. And it came from her,
the governor's appropriation,
and it works so well that we
wanted to continue it and
evidently the executives
supporting that as well in in
their budget recommendation.
Julia, can you clarify that for
me? Yes, madam.
Um
So the the request that she was
just mentioning, that's like the
medical malpractice subsidy to
independent providers, etc. The
30 million that you were
referencing is the um
The amount there's a couple
amounts that that were made to
address the patient compensation
fund deficits, um.
The patient comments if patient
fund deficit is like.
Sort of different from the 1520
million that they're requesting
as a subsidy, um.
the way I didn't clarify
that's a very interesting
question. Um, the PCF, as you
know, is in a deficit.
And uh
Over the last few years, my
predecessors and I continued it
have not been charging the
providers, the actuary
recommended amount, uh, it's
been less than that because the
premiums have been so high for
them and uh so, so the, so
there's a deficit and uh what,
what happened, we asked for the
30 million and, and I think that
was that a was that a budget or
was that the governor
appropriate, I can't recall we
got that was a special that we
that we again distribute.
to lower the the premium rates
for the independent providers,
not for the hospitals.
Thank you. Thank you for the
clarification. Um, I think we're
gonna have some, um, more
discussion about that and
The, the, and can you go over
the moun, is it the the
executive recommends to, to
support those um
There was a specialists like the
OBGYN is at the 25 million I'm
looking at not just OBGYN,
yes,
yes, it was raised by the
executive. We asked for 18 and
they raised it to 25. Thank you.
Thank you for the clarification,
um
on that point,
so these costs went up as a
result of a.
Medical malpractice
going up
the reason we're yeah, medical
malpractice insurance has gone
up dramatically. Is going up,
right?
Nothing to do with the caps.
This is uh this is under the
underlying risk that the
independent insurer with risk
here in New Mexico and probably
tied to some of the large
judgments.
I think that's the, that's what
we're getting at the, the
judgments that are going out is,
are causing for the for the
increase in in the requests that
we're seeing in this budget, and
that's, that's a crux I think of
the major uh the questions that
we've heard today. So I'd like
us to um maybe get a little more
or examine that a little closely
as we're looking at the budget,
um, as I've heard that from our
my committee members today and
it's my job as a chair is to
kind of get the the general so
we can um really work with the
LFC.
If a to to um to reevaluate some
um I'm sure we can, we can also
share with you, we have some
charts, uh, we can show you the
increase in premium, which might
be helpful as well. If you can
get that to Julisa, we'd really
appreciate that. Thank you. Um,
I think those are the questions
I, well, I have a couple more
questions. Um, regarding LNH,
um.
It sounds like we're giving and
and with the.
With all these policies that we
have in front of us for this
session, we're going to be
asking you to do even more work.
Would you, would you, would you
say that that is true.
So I would like us to look at
the, the, the FTE that you
requested because of the amount
of work if we do pass this
legislation that we are making
sure that we, yeah, and
Um,
one last question, how many auto
theft fraud cases did uh you
handle last year?
And Madam, um, my, I'm sorry,
I'm used to talking to a chair,
um, and how many of those were,
uh, those cases were outside of
Bernelio County. Yeah, if we, if
I could, if we could look at a
breakdown of how many, so 50% of
those are in Bernalio County.
Just like to see that a little
bit better. I was looking at
some of our, our stats we have
here and they're, they're not
um.
Complete, complete. So, um, with
that, um, we don't have any
other questions. I would just
ask that all these issues that
were brought up multiple times
by multiple members of the
committee and I would ask the
committee for uh a motion. Oh.
if you haven't
Thank you, Madam Chair. Just one
quick question. Do you, do you
have subpoena power?
I, I'm asking, uh, excuse me,
Madam Chair Representative, we,
uh, we submitted a bill and it
went through uh this, this
Senate Rules Committee this
morning and was passed
unanimously.
And we have one other committee
to go to, which is, you know,
Senate Judiciary.
Madam Chair and um presenters,
can I ask what bill is I I is it
124? I think it's, it's Bill
124. I think 124.
Thank you for the question. Um,
and with that, uh, any other
questions from committee
members?
I see none. I would, uh, ask for
a motion. Madam, the executive
and asked the staff to look at
the differences between the two.
Recommendations.
We have a motion and a second
motion from Vice Chair Sanchez
Doo, do we have any opposition
to that?
Mm
No, see none. Uh, we have a
recommendation.
Thank you Madam Chair,
committee, thank you for your
time and uh you're very good
questions.
Thank you.
