s
There is generally a discussion
that you should look at these
below the line initiatives and 4
major buckets.
the innovations, or the
interventions.
Are they truly non-recurring
items and are they actually
recurring items that should be
part of the operating budget.
Uh, really, you have an
opportunity here and uh this
revenue situation to.
do something to test out
innovations, new ideas that need
a little bit of time to study.
See whether it's working or not
before you make a final decision
on recurring. Um, when you look
at this list.
This is just a high level of all
of the non-recurring pieces in
the public school support
recommendations. This
attachment.
That's landscape.
Just includes some of the
language and details for the
same items that are on here, so
happy to go over any specific
questions you have on these, I
will point out that there are a
lot of similarities between the
recommendations that you have
before you, uh, including
recommendations on structured
literacy items, there's a
similarities around items
related to CTE and of course,
support for the state support
reserve fund.
You'll see some very large
differences.
For instance, on line 13, where
the executive is requesting 90
million for the Indian education
fund.
Um, some differences as far as
CT and where the buckets of
funding are coming from.
And then you'll see a difference
in some of the row type
appropriations that are for 3
years starting lines 45.
Um
I'll just point out one of them
online, 55, which is an
initiative that is in the LESU
recommendation to support
students who are unhoused, uh,
but with that, I will go ahead
and
Take questions and John and
Jessica are here as well in case
we need clarification on Elias.
I, I saw Representative
Chatfield and then we'll go to
Representative Herndon.
Thank you.
Really hard for me not to say
thank you, Mr. Chair.
We need to get,
get a little something over
here, you know,
um.
You know, I, I've voiced my
concern in education committee
the other day about the Perth
grow.
I'm looking at it again and, and
I see uh other things that I
don't like about it, and one of
them is that actual budget last
year, there was
Uh, 40 million in career
technical education. So the
first thing that I, I don't care
for about it is the money was
appropriated for a 5 day school
week, which nobody wanted,
didn't participate in, and then
they were forced on us and then
we had to go to court to get our
rights back to have the four-day
school week. So the money that
was appropriated for a 5 day
school week was put into a fund
that has then been used with
out
Going through the appropriate
appropriation process. It's been
used and it's now almost gone,
and we're asked to
re-appropriate.
responding to that fund, uh,
which was created out of money
that was not intended for that
purpose.
And the original use with $40
million into career technical
education, which I love.
Now the uh the proposal puts
nothing into the career
technical education, puts it
into um innovation zones, which
is a kind of a
Random
Idea to me, you know, what is
our innovation zone. It could be
a lot of different things. And
my number one, I can live with
all that stuff, although I don't
like it.
But it cuts out.
L E S C oversight.
And it cuts out LFC oversight of
$1050 million. I have spent a
year scrambling over.
Peanuts.
21 million, 500,000s, and this
is a request for 150 million
just in good faith just, I don't
you worry about it. We'll, we'll
take care of you. We're gonna
make sure that you're OK. Let's
just put 150 million over here.
Governor's got it.
Um, I don't think these guys
should give up oversight, and I
don't think that
The LFC should give up
oversight.
Put the oversight language back
in there and I'll quit.
Why
Uh, without the oversight
language without, you know,
there's a difference between
approval.
And uh I try to remember the
language but it wasn't approval.
It was Alonso consultation, not
upon approval. And so I have a
serious problem with that. I, I
had it, that problem in
education and the more I look at
it, the more I, like I say, it,
it moves the money out of CTE,
um.
So that's my complaint, uh,
let's say you, Sonny, let's say
you, John, uh, whatever.
Uh, thank you, Representative
Chatfield, uh.
We do share some of your
concerns about the language and
sabel to 201, which does require
PD DFA to approve an
accountability and evaluation
plan in consultation with LFC
and LESC. Uh, we do see this as
sort of a beginning.
Process. So for this 150 million
that you're referring to, there
would be a consultation process
at the beginning to ensure that
there was an evaluation plan at
the end of the 3 years.
There is
Implied in all of this
instruction that
If they can't pull it off.
The recommendation within 3
years is to repurpose that
funding.
Although the initial
Bill is asking us to consult on
what the evaluation should be so
that there's some joint
accountability on what that
measure of success is.
Uh, you are correct that the
bill doesn't give us the
approval authority, uh, which
is.
Typically an executive function.
So they can waste it in 3 years.
I mean, uh, I wanna see it put
to good use. I would like it to,
I would like that bill to have
the words approval.
In it.
Uh
Don't know how, I don't know if
I can make that happen, but I
would urge you.
Please put the words approval in
there, not consultation because
uh if they can't make it happen
in 3 years before make what
happen? It doesn't even tell us
really all that clearly what
we're gonna make happen in 3
years. I, I urge you to insist
on the words approval, uh,
I mean, consultation just uh
like a umbaya. I, I don't.
No, thank you. I, I would like
to see the words approval. I, I
trust you, you all, I respect
you, your experience, um, I
think we have highly qualified
people here. I don't see any
reason.
To give our oversight up, I, uh,
what do we gain by giving up
oversight. We didn't say that,
we didn't disapprove anything
they, they uh have.
Put forth here and asked to do
just
Uh, why, why do they want it
with no oversight? I mean,
whenever I lead a team in, I
want every possible qualified
person backing me up to make
sure I don't make a mistake. Uh,
the
Requests were no oversight, it's
just baffles me that they
requested it, and it baffles me
that we gave it up.
Representative Chatville, I'll
just add one thing I think is.
I, I, I don't want to speak for
Sony or LFC staff, but I do
think.
The recommendations both from
LFC and LESC to some extent have
some staff vetting.
These are not, these are not.
Necessarily request that the
department just came and said,
give us all all this money for
all of these things. These are
programs that we've
Either currently exists or that
we have seen uh opportunity
culture for it's the one out of
Carlsbad. These are programs
that have a little bit of
evidence behind them and we have
a pretty good, but to your
point, it's not, it's not a I
will also say representative
that.
Um
You will likely have a chance
since the bill will go through
Senate and House E to make
amendments to that.
Thank you, uh,
Sonny Lo please don't say that.
Having been, being a member of
House education, LFC and LC and
probes. I, I'm gonna echo the
concern. We, we've talked about,
at least for LESC that we, there
should be more joint
collaboration.
Uh, when we talk about buzz, you
know, budgets, not just like one
time we talked, I talked about
it earlier about an ongoing.
I do
Also have to express my
concerns.
That by just allowing the
executive to have access to
these funds.
And it not being gone through
the proper interim and vetting
process, right? When we're
looking at the interim for both.
Committees
We should be looking at what are
things that we have endorsed,
what are things that we based
upon the research by the
numbers.
And so I, I too, and I realized
that this isn't for the
approval, but I need to say that
I do think that we.
Should not, just like we heard
earlier, 19, whatever, 90
something, they give up their
oversight over these. I think
this is another where where we
as the appropriators,
Do not give away the one thing
that we are the two things we
have, we build laws and we make
appropriations, so I just want
to flag that as not that I, not
that I have a concern with the
money. I just don't think that
we, you know, again, we say is
consultation, I think it's
approved.
Uh, represented her and then
represented.
Uh, representing her, is this
still on?
Representative Chatfield's point
or no? It's, sorry, I'll come
back to you and representialysis
on that point. Yes, OK.
Thank you, um, I immediately
from the first time I saw this
line, I'm wondering.
I'm gonna take a little bit
different angle on this.
Whether it was K5+, K3 in the
day, Title One.
Low income, at risk, we put
these monies in these pools,
because we decided it's what
rural communities wanted or we
decided it's what rural
communities needed and then the
money now is getting reverted.
They didn't take up K5+, which
was supposed to be targeted at
low income Title I, and then
those dollars were going to Los
Lunas. And so I want the dollars
in my district. I want the money
in rural New Mexico. If the
governor was so adamant that the
5th day was what
4 day school weeks needed.
Then if anything, that $150
million should go to the schools
that had the 4 day school week.
I mean,
give them the money. I mean, if
this was about
The dollars that go into the
school reform fund.
Are the low takeup.
Mostly in the rural communities.
But they have other programs
they're asking for that they
don't get funded. Hatch wants a
veterinarian clinic. I get like
$2 million in capital outlay,
but the veterinarian clinic is a
career technology pathway we
need. We're trying to get grow
money together for
archaeological surveys. Our
cities are on fire, our forests
are on fire. I don't know where
I'm gonna get the money. It's
not in the budget. I'm
If we were so concerned about
the kids in the 4 day school
weeks getting some sort of form
of school improvement, then give
them the 150 million.
Otherwise, why do we need to
replenish a fund that's supposed
to only be reversion funds. Is
that what it was set up for? Was
reversions.
Um, Representative Dell, you're
correct, that was a pool for all
the unused K5 and extended
learning time funding.
It's been depleted.
In the last few years from
legislative appropriations out
of those.
Balances. So we're predicting
that there's going to be $150
million legislative
appropriation to fund it?
Currently, there's 2
recommendations from LFC and
LESC to.
Infuse it with another 150
million from the general fund to
do these 3 year pilot program.
What pilot programs? I'll punch
you the lines, um.
Starting 53.
Down to 61. Those would be the
current proposals, the executive
has a similar ask on lines 87
and through 89, but those are
coming from general fund and not
the reform, which was the line
item 87, 88 and 89 are the
executive recommendations for
3-year pilots, but those are
coming from the general, so are
there bills associated with
these that we could get, could
you point, I see the, that there
needs to be appropriating
language.
Can you give us a list of the
bills? I'm so lost, like, so I,
I mean, I feel like a freshman,
I really do cause it just now
dawned on me like, OK, we're
building the budget on this side
while they're introducing Senate
bills to accompany these on the
Senate side. I don't know why I
didn't know that before. I
think, is that right?
Mr. Chair and representatives,
Yeah, it does. I get it. Um,
we're trying to decide for
school districts, what they need
to the tune of $150 million
whereas the school districts are
asking for 150 here, 200,000
there that I don't know how to
fund. That's what I see. That's
what they're operating budgets
for.
Well, then what's this for?
These are for specific
initiatives where we're trying
to test out, are there different
ways of doing business to get
better results on everything
from math.
To attendance
That then you can look at how to
scale up.
And
Funded a much greater level than
what's funded here on a pilot
basis. So, so I'll just take
hatch as an example cause it
seems easy and obvious to me.
They get the um the truck bed
for their greenhouse vegetation
growth,
because ag community.
They have a reason why. I don't
know what your indicators are,
but their indicator is they're
in a community and the average
farmers in the 60s and 70s,
hands-on learning, increased
outcomes. So we do the, the
trailer for the
The um
They're growing
Vegetables inside a shed. I
think of the name right now.
Anyway, so then they say, OK, we
need veterinarians. We don't
have large animal veterinarians
or small animal veterinarians.
It's a state issue, it's a
community issue. So they're
trying to raise money for their
veterinarian clinic. Where does
that fit in this? What do they
get to apply for?
They, they could use
the 40 million from CTE.
Or they could use the.
Billions of dollars that are
going through the state of
capital outlay through their
local mill levies.
Uh, that if they wanted as part
of their a variety of different
lending sources that if that's
their priority that they could.
OK. Thank you.
So I'm gonna go back to
Representative Herndon who had a
question right after Represent
Chatfield, so, and then we'll
get to representative Pereira.
Thank you, Mr.
I
know what to call you.
Funny.
Mr. Sunny. So I, I'd like to go
to page, uh, to the back of the
of our handout looking at item
number 65, specifically, and so
I, I see that the LFC LESC, no
the uh executive.
Uh, supported those wellness
rooms it's a pilot project and
so what do you have, Mr. Sully,
to show that they were not
successful, so that they would
not get any support.
representative, the wellness
room pilots has been paid out
the opioid crisis recovery fund.
Uh, the recommendations do not
necessarily use that same
funding source, so I think John
can talk to you a little bit
about.
Whether that's in the LESC
recommendation.
The evidence on this is still
emerging, um, as you're probably
well aware.
It could be a potential pilot
for the reform fund.
As we're doing that with other
initiatives. The question does
become
When you look at the Martinez
Yazi lawsuits, the court had
concerns about very small.
Highlands
Whether that was enough to scale
at a size that would make a
difference for student outcomes,
um, I think there was a bit of
concern that at $200,000 it
would not be scalable enough to
demonstrate um
You know whether wellness rooms
are actually affecting student
outcomes.
Um, at a level that
would meet evidence, so at this
point, there's not a
recommendation from LSC for
wellness rooms.
So, um, Sunny and Mr. Sully, I
would say to you that the amount
that was put in here was more
than 200,000, and that's what
you should have looked at. It
was 1.1750,000. So there was a
combination of federal money as
well as grow money, this 200,000
was the only money that came
from opioid settlement funds. So
if you also look at the fact
that the um
Healthcare authority presented
its own information about the
increase, uh, in teen mental
health, uh, over the past two
years. I don't know how you can
come to that conclusion with
such a narrow view of only
200,000 opioid funds. Mr. Sully.
So, uh, I think that that's
really important, particularly
when you go to the schools
themselves and it doesn't sound
like this occurred to ask those
students where their mental
health rooms actually are
replaced. There were 14 of them
around the state. There's a
request for 14 more, and then
what was the outcome? I know in
looking at just the New Mexico
Academy for the Media Arts, it
has been incredibly successful,
as well as in Taos and down in
Alamocordo, and I would tend to
believe that.
You had no conversation with him
at all, and then to make uh a
recommendation of no money.
So I just submit that to you to
look at and to take note of.
And then um
I just, I, I, I'll just go do
some of the big items that I see
on here, and I'm gonna go back,
Mr. uh, Sonny and, and Mr. Saly
looking at the, the black
education Act and the Hispanic
Education Act. So specifically
it's showing no money in either
one of those, and I know that
those um individuals who were
working in both of those areas
for a long time for them. And
you have no or do you have any
information showing that what
they did with that 500,000.
was unsuccessful.
For you to put $0 there.
Uh, representative Herndon, I
think back to the question on.
Uh
What is, what are the
intentional uses of this
funding, and are they at scale
to make and dent.
And still now comes as relayed
by the market. Uh, these
appropriations did not appear to
have specific activities other
than conferences.
Which we typically find don't
have a lot of evidence
suggesting that that
Improved student outcomes
necessarily.
Uh, there is also questions
about whether there was
sufficient funding to meet the
provisions of these acts, and
the black Education Act does
require some study by PED uh
focus on anti-discrimination,
the Hispanic Education Act
requires a study.
Uh, and liaisons.
Which the department has
indicated to us is.
Being funded out of this
non-recurring pot. And if you
think about the comments I made
at the beginning of this
conversation.
We've been really trying to get
our arms around what is an
actual recurring cost?
Operationally for the department
versus what's a real
non-recurring.
Appropriation.
And what is something that's
innovative that the state may
have an interest in testing out.
Over a series of years.
These requests from the
department did not meet that.
Um, standard of having scale nor
activities that would align to
improvement. We do see though
that the Hispanic, or, the Black
Education Act and the bilingual
Education Act.
Funding is coming out of PD's
operating budget for the
Hispanic Education Act, they are
paying.
Which may be worth considering
as you go through this. I'm not
sure I understand that it's come
the black education that um
activities are going to be
funded out of a different area,
but it's not a line item and
Is that what you're saying?
Currently it's being funded out
of the department's operating
budget. This is a non-recurring
ask for. So for the, for the
fiscal year that's about to end.
So that's where the 500,000 came
from, but I, I think.
I guess my, my question and
challenge to you on that is to
get to compare this to the Yazy
Martinez, um, lawsuit is, is not
a good comparison. If you look
at the number of students who
are uh who would be affected by
the Black Education Act as
opposed to those affected by
Yasi Martinez. Yasi Martinez
didn't even consider the black
Education Act, so to say that
you're gonna now compare them is
not reasonable. And I also say
to you that from the date that
this
Act was passed to this fiscal
year, there was no funding. And
so this was the first funding
and then to say it, it has no
substance or, or effect upon um
Upon the population, I think
it's incorrect because I looked
at the number of people who were
graduating and that graduation
rate did increase.
I'm sorry, you were gonna say
something, Mr. So. This is
something the committee can.
Work on. You're just flagging
that these are priorities.
I have something I can add, um,
really the
we've we've been asking this
question, we really realized
that the Hispanic Education Act
and the Black Education Act
really didn't address.
The huge disparities. So I, I
know that uh a representative
Yanita Gurola has put in
legislation to ask for a study
of this and how we could revise
that act to make it really more
meaningful to 70% of our
population and I would, I'd
suggest uh Representative
Herndon that we also take a look
at the act itself, the black,
um, um,
yeah, and and look at that, look
at that language and, and, and
ask for the LASC to do a study
on that too, so that we
can actually make it more
productive for the results that
we want.
And, and I think we have to go
back to the original legislation
because kind of did nothing on
that on that point, I would, I
would concur with a
representative that cause we, we
did have this discussion and it
just needs to reflect um.
What
represent Gurola is doing, and
we need to do it.
With all these acts to be kind
of look and uh look alike so
that we could have those those
measurable outcomes reported
back to us. I spoke, um.
Pretty in depth with the PED
with our our secretary and um.
I would say that that that's
that's what we need to do, so I
then ask LFC that if we get
those, those, um.
They're just studies now. I
don't know if it needs to be a
study. I just think we need to
reflect the same kind of
language that we see in the Yaz,
you know, through the Yaz Martin
Martinez um initiatives that we
had in in the Indian Act.
That's all I would say, thanks.
OK, I, I will drop that and say
it's something we need to
consider. You keep referring it
back to Yase Martinez, and
again, Yasi Martinez did not
address the African-American
student at all in that, in the
lawsuit or in its decision, but
I also would say to you is that
if you're saying it needs to
refer to 70% of the population.
We talk about 3%, and that's
what the argument has been all
the time. Your 3%, so you're
insignificant. So, but the 3%
where you see significant growth
in in
Within that population does make
a difference. And so I think
it's wrong, for one year after,
after first spending almost 10
years of even getting it funding
and then you get it funded for
one time and you say the funding
is, is, uh, not sufficient to
show any results. I think that
we need to look at that a little
bit more. I just want to point
out two more things in terms of,
of items that I'm seeing here is
that um if we look at the
universal uh
First, I want to talk about
community schools. So one of the
big issues that has occurred is
the funding for community, uh,
school coordinators. And when I
look at community schools, um,
Sonny and Mr. Sli, is this the
funding for the coordinators who
are incredibly important to
students in Title I schools.
Uh, yes, representative on line
42, that is the funding for the
coordinators, uh, what we did
find is that as a result of
their appropriation decreasing
this year.
Many of these schools actually
use their operational funds to
cover the costs of those
coordinators because they saw
the value, and there was an
increase in the SCG to pay for
some of those expenses as well,
so we're sort of shifting away
from the state controller.
Hiring these coordinators, one
concern we've heard is that
Sometimes coordinators are
viewed as a side separate
funding source. So they're
sort of authority within a
school building is at odds with
the principal at times. So the
more that these coordinators can
be an integral part of those
agencies and those operating
budgets. I think the.
Less antagonistic nature of that
collaboration.
Uh, will improve. And, and I
think that there's certainly
some value in having someone on
site who can coordinate their
services, it becomes a real
question on whether the state
has a role in that and what is
it? I think we would argue that.
Maybe seed funding to get these
coordinator positions started is
a good role for us to take.
Um, but as far as ensuring that
implementation is
Um
Very tight at the site level,
um, we would encourage schools
to, for lack of better words,
put more skin in the game.
That's an interesting
observation, I guess, I, I don't
know. I have spent a lot of time
talking to the school, uh,
community school coordinators,
those who are actually working
in position and looking at their
interaction with families, and
it has been, I, I found it to be
incredibly impressive and also a
way of making sure that those
students remained in school.
One of the things that I will
just um
I, I will just ask you about,
I'll leave that for now. I hope
that that continues to be a
discussion in my discussion with
the community school
coordinators will continue in
these Title I schools, but
looking at the university school
meals uh supplemental, and so
in, in talking to students and
the food that's available. I'm
just, I'm wondering what is this
money for? So we have a free
lunch program now.
And um,
What does this represent?
This, this, this is a program
that the legislature put into
place and the governor signed to
pay for free meals for kids who
aren't poor and don't qualify
for free and reduced lunch.
Right, and that was the
discussion I've had with
students, a number of them about
the, about the lack of the uh
Viability. I use that for lack
of another word in terms of the
food that's offered these
prepackaged meals. And so we had
been having a lot of
conversation with the food and
I, I think farm group who came
here who are willing to be a
part of that. And so how do we
have a discussion with them if
this is the money that's been
put in so that these
organizations are opportunities
that are grown in this state are
are being put into food that
will be healthy for our children
and not food that they.
we find not to be healthy
themselves. Part of the program.
was to
Pay a higher rate per meal or
higher quality.
Uh, and when the department went
to put in place the and they're
paying.
Or that higher quality, but
they're not actually getting it
right now and when PED went to
put in the rule, the school
districts.
Oh
And so we're basically.
Paying for prepackaged food
cause the schools didn't want to
go back to.
Preparation on site with the OK,
let's change the school
administration.
And uh we'll put it a different
group in there,
but my last, you're paying a lot
more for something that you're
not getting that is absolutely
what is happening in the
students are actually
complaining about that. I just
want to clarify that these
appropriations are deficiency
appropriations, so they're
paying for.
Uh, the allocation, yeah, that
they didn't receive yet.
OK, so my last one and I'll stop
is I, I'm looking at a school
safety summit that there was the
of all the things that I've
talked about, that was the
decision to put in $200,000 for
that, exactly what is that?
Uh, Representative Herndon, my
understanding is that this is a
annual.
Summit that to talk about school
safety.
And you can see some results.
Representative, I'll actually is
this talk about the defibri this
is the one that is by Lieutenant
Governor Morales and I. This is
a summit that is put on to
discuss and bring to light some
of the issues regarding
Um, school safety.
All 89 deserts and other
agencies are um invited to
attend, and it's at low cost to
them. So this is the safety
summit like we have other
summits, like we have reading
summits across the state. This
is in the 3rd year of this
summit, so this was something
that has a need was created and
this moneys help fund.
Presenters, information, and
help to put on the actual summit
for our school districts and for
our local law enforcement
agencies, including the FBI,
state police, local law
enforcement, and school police.
And where's, where's the results
of the data that came from these
summits and showing the
effectiveness. I'm not sure, uh,
Representative He what you would
like to see as far as results,
and we talk about having a
A summit and we're sharing
information, the fact to be, you
know, it, it, it's pretty much.
It could be anything. It could
be how many incidents that we
had. I mean, this is um
something that
Allows us to continue the
conversation and make sure that
our schools are safe. Now, what
does that mean? Does that mean
that we don't have a major
incident? Does that mean that we
don't have?
You know, where we have fewer
incidents, so.
I think that the results is the
attendance, possibly, and the
interest has been done as far as
to gain as far as the number of
School districts and the people
that choose to come to this,
which is upward of 350, I would
say.
So I, I, I think the only thing
I'm asking representative Baca,
I'm not saying you shouldn't
have school safety summits
because I looked at what
happened to Benny Hartgrove on
the grounds of Washington Middle
School. And so that was a safety
issue. What I'm asking you is,
you say that there have been
these hundreds of people that
are coming when they come, there
must be some recommendations
that are coming from these
summits for the past 3 years.
What are those recommendations,
how they've been implemented and
how they made a difference in
school safety. That's all I'm
asking you. I'm not saying you
shouldn't.
do that. And I, I'd like to see
him, and if you have them or
whoever has that written uh
those written documents or
written paper. I, I'd like to
review it. Right now, the next
uh biggest uh uh safety issue
that I can see is having
defibrillators in every single
school that is funded with
making sure that the batteries
don't run out and people know
how to use them, so they keep
our kids safe. So that's all
I'm, I'm through. That's my
conversation.
Representative Ferrara.
Is it a, is it OK if I go back
to the 150 million, I just want,
these are the these are the one
time appropriations, right, that
we're looking at. Yes. OK, so.
3 years.
One time for 3 years. Yeah.
OK.
Basically, what we've been doing
is a bunch of
Initiatives on a year by year
basis.
Sometimes they get 500,000,
sometimes they get.
A different amount depending on
what's available. This is trying
to give PED a runway.
And school districts are runway
for at least 3 years to pilot.
Some projects to see if they
work or not. And is this
something that we want to build
into.
Below the line on a recurring
basis or even scale it and
putting it.
So that's, it's reforming how
we've been using the reform fund
is what the attempt is.
I guess, I guess I just want to
make some comments, uh, if, if
that's OK, about.
You know, the innovation zones
and in the Carlsbad example. I,
I want everybody to understand
that's cause they have the
maddox Foundation behind them.
That's why they were able to do
so much down there, and that
was, I don't know how many
millions of dollars they spent
there, but I, I think we really
need to understand that, um,
they are, they are now starting
to spread out, you know, they
concentrated in Carlsbad,
they're trying to spread out
their money to the surrounding
rural districts because, you
know, they're all feeders and
they all kind of have to work
together, but
I don't know what that amount of
money, would you know that John?
The amount of money they put
into this, uh, the new way of
designing career technical
education and all the
innovations they did down there.
It was huge and it was over, I
wanna say a 3 year period, I'm
sure it had to be over a 34 year
period.
Anybody that
can follow up with the, OK,
so, so I'm just saying, you
know, and, and we've we've we've
talked a lot about that, um,
I've been to some committee
hearings where we talk about it
and, and you get schools that
really want some
Really pre latitude and I
understand that it kind of all
depends on the superintendent,
you know, that you have, and if,
if they've been around for more
than one year, with 2/3 of our
superintendents being new,
they're not going to tackle
these. I, I'm, I'm just gonna
say it, it's too heavy of a lift
for them.
They're just trying to figure
out their budgets at this point,
so I, I guess I'm just.
It's a lot of money, it's
cautionary talent. I'm just not
sure how much that should be,
that's what I'm saying, um.
Uh
This support for math
achievement really a big
difference between the LFC and
the LESC. I assume we're um
gonna go out to bid on these
projects and whoever comes in
with the best idea is gonna take
the
that money and run with it, is
that how that's gonna work?
Representative Pereira, I don't
wanna pre assume that all of
this is going to get through,
but I think from at least the
LFC's perspective.
We would hope that all of these
and it.
Research
Evidence-based
experimental, the highest level
of
Um, research you can do on
whether something has a real
effect.
I think in that case, though, it
may become the
The idea that rather than having
an RFP process.
You're more directive about
whether
Someone gets a treatment or not
and studying whether the effect.
Of that treatment.
was successful, and that
That might be a little bit
different.
Only those schools that have the
capacity to apply for projects.
No.
On a one year basis, and this to
do, that's, that's helpful to
know because, you know, I'm
getting, I'm getting all these
nonprofits coming to me. They
got a STEM initiative and oh and
then and they got a stem
initiative and yeah, and that's
not what we need, and I, you
know, God bless him. I, I, I get
what they're trying to do, but
unless we have.
Unless we have a really
vigorous.
Professional development system.
That's gonna look at, uh, you
know, evidence based practices
and then have an evaluation
built into it which the grow
money has. We won't get
anything, and I, you know.
I did have, you know, when we
did the um increased science
program. It took us
I, I also worry about just 3
years. It took us 5 years before
we got positive results, and,
and the month before we were
gonna close down the program.
Uh, because we didn't have, we
didn't have the evidence base
stuff we went the month before.
We were gonna close down the
program, it came in, this was 5
years later, saying, yes, you
made significant differences in
the lives of children. I mean,
it takes a while to do this
stuff.
So, so almost 3 years, I'm just
gonna say isn't almost enough,
but, but we'll let it play out.
I'm, I'm glad it's, it should do
professional development because
that's where we need it, you
know, we always say elementary
school teachers didn't go to,
didn't get their degrees because
they love math so much, you
know, it's usually cause they
love kids, and we need that
professional development. So
I'll stop there, but that
that's just my comment the
potential that some of these.
Initiatives when we get to that
3 year period, we may need to
reauthorize and and do a new
tranche of funding to get um
more research about how they're,
how they're operating for a
longer period. It's just hard to
tie up 5 years' worth of.
Of money right now.
Yeah.
Mhm. Right.
Correct. OK. On this point? Yes,
on this point. Thank you. Um, so
last time I asked about the mass
at achievement and the extra
things, um, the stem type stuff
you said it was in there also,
is that not still there,
because, you know, so I know,
it's learned math in the
classroom, but they really learn
it when they're doing robotics
or doing these other things so
you answer that? Yeah, and I
think you're really touching
upon how the science of math,
there's sort of this tension
between procedural knowledge.
And inquiry really.
Both of it needs to happen.
Um
I think the objective here is to
say we wanna know if.
Maybe STEM professional
development.
Affects math achievement. So
really what we're trying to find
here with these appropriations
is whether it actually has an
effect.
on math.
Performance. How you get to
that, I think is gonna be part
of this.
Accountability and evaluation
plan process that all these
agencies will be developing on
the front end.
And then at the end of the 3
year period.
The measurement is going to be
OK, maybe these teachers got
this professional development
and this group didn't.
The students actually improve
math performance, and then make
a determination on maybe we
figured out what the science of
math is at the end of the 3
years, and this should just be
part of the recurring base or
It didn't work or we need more
time to study. I think it gives
us a lot of options at that
point to make stronger decisions
on what to do next.
I just, as a fun fact, I looked
at my first year on the job,
which was about 10 years ago.
They had 2 special
appropriations.
One for emergency funding for
schools.
One for instructional materials.
$4 million.
And now your're faced with about
At least for this year, 140
million.
Or dozens of initiatives that
are being paid from one time
funding on a recurring basis. So
how do you reconcile as oil.
funding tapers off as the state
continues to grow recurring. How
do you figure out what, uh, we
think this is a good in a very
high level way.
With
You know, very rigorous research
methods.
To give you the best information
possible to make a decision.
Can I just add on to that?
But in 20 years of teaching math
when I taught robotics, those
kids got excited about that.
They got excited about school,
and they graduated. My computer
science, the girls, the ones who
got excited and and and and saw
that they could do it,
continued on. So it's, it's kind
of a, you learn the math, but
you have to know that you can do
it in in a lot of especially the
girls, they have to be
encouraged and they have to see
that they can do it by actually
doing, you know, applying to
different things, but.
I understand what you're saying.
So I'm just giving you a hard
time.
I appreciate you giving me a
hard time.
These were just had.
here, here.
A representative Dale, I would
say.
Part of a good research agenda
is to make sure you have a
representative sample.
So by having a dedicated source
that is going to represent the
population of the state, you
would design your experiment to
ensure that.
There would be some morality.
Participants in in these
initiatives.
We're also, in addition, in all
these recommendations.
Making appropriations that you
would traditionally apply for
and that a lot of rural schools
do take advantage of, so it's a
multi-pronged strategy of
increasing the recurring base.
Providing non-recurring
appropriations that schools can
apply to.
And then this third leg of.
Having an innovation fund that's
research based and will help you
make stronger decisions about
how to build the budget in 3. I
love these questions. I, you
know, I just want to say I tend
to go with the LESC uh
recommendations because they
know education and and they take
deep dives into this. So I'm,
I'm just saying I'm not on
education anymore, but I, I was
for years and um
And you know, we're one of the
only states that has.
In our recommendation from the
executive of the LFC, and the
LESC.
And they are the closest too.
Um
Our, our educational
institutions, so I just want to
say my
My, I tend to go with their
recommendations for, for
whatever that's worth. I'm just
putting it out there.
I do want to say that, you know,
this year you can see it both
the LESC and LFC are
recommending this $150 million
transfer.
I think it really gives, I think
we have both.
Had challenges in measuring
success for a lot of these
initiatives. And so I think this
represent a represents a
concerted effort to
collaboratively.
Establish a
I'm so sorry, representative,
I'm turned the other way.
Thank you, Chairman Liu.
Uh, just do that just for just
to get out there. I'm gonna, I'm
gonna bring this back to what I
think our purpose was as the
narrow focus, right? I'm gonna
bring it back, so my, my
questions if they're, if you
have to use more than a couple
sentence to answer. I haven't
done a good job. Uh, I'm looking
at line 9 and line 71.
OK.
I see one, I see structured
literacy implementation.
And on 71, I guess that is the
Actual building.
OK.
So my question is,
This structured literacy and
implementation is that
professional development and
summer reading institute, or
what else is paid out of line 9.
Laine is the summer reading
program. OK. There is a
recurring 14 million that's not
on this page that goes towards
the training, and you are right
on 71, it is 30 million for the
building.
OK, um,
Now I'm going down to the line
item for Ed Fellows and I see.
I think it's line 21.
I just want to flag that I know
that we did have 20 in there.
Now we went down to 15 and my,
my humble request is if we can
look to see about getting closer
to that, even if it's just a
little more towards that 20
million. I do think this does
address or educator pipeline and
shortage.
Um
Line, um,
31, panic buttons, OK. We have a
request of $1 million in there,
so my question is,
Does, is that just for K-12 or
does it include pre-K, higher
ed, or BIE schools.
Representative Baca, that
currently goes to PD just for
K-12. It's a subscription.
To have these mobile panic
button apps within schools.
And I don't believe it goes
towards early childhood or
higher education.
Thank you. Um, and if it's, we
could fly that and see what it
would be just like we talked
about yesterday for school
safety to expand it to these
where we have
More students that have access
to that resource for school
safety.
Line 68.
This is the school bus
replacement.
OK. Is this in addition to the
how buses are, are funded um
through the transportation
department is this for um
electric buses, is this for?
Uh, just please tell me how that
differs as a one time
appropriation than the regular
funding for transportation, uh
represent Baca, this line is
just for the buses that are on
their 12th year needing
replacement, and they're just
for diesel buses at this time.
The department did not make a
request for these replacements,
this fiscal year 26.
So this is just because they did
not make one we're capturing it
here to replace those buses that
have basically served their
usefulness, is that correct?
That's correct. Yes, so this is
they did not indicate there were
any buses at that 12 year mark
for this.
Thank you for that. I mean, we,
we definitely need buses and
hopefully they have air
conditioning, right?
Um
My, my last questions and I
would be remiss if I didn't talk
about CTE.
And let me get to my line items,
line 29.
Lane 49.
And I saw one more place, uh,
line 74. OK. I see CTE addressed
in three different areas.
So can you tell me then just
make it very simple, so.
Um, line 29. What is the
intended?
Use that it's in both the
executive and LESC and if it's
not there, where is it captured
on the LFC recommendation.
Uh,
representative Baca's.
Very interesting question, what
the intent was, um.
This is one of those
appropriations that has
A lot of different
Spending.
purposes that the department has
determined is appropriate and
related to CTE.
You've got about
15 million for innovation zones,
which is generally been
internships.
You've got about
11 to 12 million that has gone
out just formula to schools
called NextGen CTE.
Much like Perkins, and you've
got about 1.4 million for CTSO,
so student organizations, you've
got a little bit of it going to
PED for their personnel.
You've also got some of it going
to um.
Other trainings or development
of CT assessments. So it's a
Large bucket with many different
uses.
Um, that's what the 40 million
has been used for, at least in,
in, and thank you, and I, I
just.
I think that it would be helpful
to kind of, if we can get that
on one page and kind of talk
about and again follow up later
cause I don't need it now.
But to say cause I, I, I think
that many times if we just if
they're just part of the general
fund or they where they're not
specific.
Then we sometimes those funds
are not, don't end up there. So
if, if somebody could just kind
of figure out how these
different pots of money, what I
don't want
is our amount of monies or are
to be decreased, and I want to
make sure that as we are moving
towards preparing our students
and for engagement and for
certification to see how we are
making that investment and how
hopefully it tracks and
continues to grow, so that's
something that we can follow up
on and uh
I appreciate those answers.
Representative Lu Han, and I'll
just keep looking back and
forth.
Thank you, um, thank you for
being with us today and.
all your information, it's a
lot. Um, I'm, I'm kind of
referring back to our first high
pro, you know.
Um, Meeting on uh.
all this and so I think I'm
following you a lot better than
I've ever followed you, so thank
you, um, and understanding how
some of these, these fundings
are shifted or or grouped
together, so in the grow funds
and and all that, so I'm gonna
just have one line item for out
of school learning summer
enrichment, and high dosage
tutoring programs, um, my, I
would just like to, to say that,
um.
And I was language here, in the
language that we have for that
line item in HB 2,
I'd like to recommend some, uh,
some different language.
For that, and that would be um.
Having the 15 million in
recurring funding to
This isn't recurring though.
Is that correct?
Correct, that's all
non-recurrent have this non this
uh funding to sustain and expand
affordable comprehensive out of
school time programs for
school-aged youth statewide
through a competitive out of
school time grant program.
Of which
Half of it would be dedicated
for local and statewide
nonprofit community-based
organizations and have.
Uh, to be dedicated to public
school districts, um, how we.
I might have, there might be
some tweaks to that language,
um, Mr. Liu, but I'd like your
help in kind of revising that
if, if you will.
But I think that that's the
language that's currently in
place.
is a little prohibitive and I
like to like to work with you on
that.
I represented, I think, uh, you
might also see Senate Bill 93,
which reflects the language you
you coming before you as well.
Yes, but I think there might be
some tightening up the language
that we should do, um, during
this, this time because some of
that language may be um, I
would, I wouldn't say
problematic, but uh, you know,
we need to review it, and I
think that's what I'd like to
do, um, for our committee. Thank
you.
Representative Dao, I think you
had your hand raised and then
Representative Herrera. I, I
feel like I'm really trying to
catch up, so, um, the outdoor
classroom initiatives.
There's this is line 21.
20.
Um
a million dollars. Is that a
half a million dollars? Is that
the full amount or is that?
What does this represent an
increase or that's the full
amount for outdoor classrooms.
Representative Dao, that is just
flat with the flat. OK.
And then on 22 on the summer
enrichment internships, do they,
do they only have to be in the
summer or if someone's a senior
and they only have a few
credits, can they do an
internship during the school
year?
Uh
Representative Dale, I believe
the language from the prayer was
just for summer.
OK.
Have you guys, has anybody
talked about that or are you
interested in flexibility?
Representative Dale much like
with represent Wuhan's request.
This is an opportunity for you
to make adjustment. Do you know
what that was?
Uh, Representative Dow, that was
just an appropriation in house,
so this, there's language in the
House bill. Is there a reason
why we, if, if a student only
has a few credits left their
senior year.
And is there a reason why we
wouldn't have flexibility in the
internship. Representative, I
don't think the language, the
language is quite broad. I don't
know if it would preclude.
Participation in the program. Is
that, yeah.
Representative, part of, part of
this is that um
Everything has like an origin
story, right? um.
The state started funding summer
internships with federal funds.
Out of COVID relief in 20.
What I believe
And so the following year as
that work we've we've decided to
start funding some of that work
with state funding. And I think
the language around summer
internships has sort of stuck
because that's where it was
first used that money actually
went out to municipalities and
other folks to provide
internships for students.
I don't think there's
necessarily and actually a lot
of the conversations about
work-based learning.
Getting school credit for
work-based learning, all of that
stuff could could happen during
the school day or school year.
So to Sony's point, I think
that's something that you can
think about in the language and
whether or not it's how it's
used in this, in this bucket as
well as the one that represented
Ibaka mentioned around CTE and
work-based learning because
there's a bucket of money that's
also been used for internships
from that $40 million
appropriation as well. OK, well,
that, that is, I was gonna ask
next if this is the only one
that was somewhat restrictive,
but it, the more flexibility,
the better because we
Even though it's not, it's not a
high school credit requirement
anymore, right? The work-based,
the work study credit. No, it's
not a it's not a requirement,
but it is as we change the
graduation requirements and the
department is actually working
on trying to map internships and
these kinds of work towards
standards so that kids can get
credit.
All right, thanks. And then, um,
29 career technology education,
the next gen and innovation
zones.
Maybe if you can just send me
the definitions of those so I
don't waste anyone's time. And
then support for the homeless
and, and uh low-income students.
How is, is that a trans, oh,
there's no money in that line,
OK, cause now it's 30 million
down below, is that right? OK,
I'll ask about that. Um,
State support reserve fund. What
is that?
Uh, Representative Dow.
That is an emergency fund for
PED to use if they need to.
Backfill SEG funding that was
short.
Uh, because the unit value was
raised uh to the level that it
was this year. The department is
anticipating that there will be
a shortfall if there's not.
Funding to to shore it up. So
was that prior call to like the
emergency school fund or is that
a different fund? OK, all right,
um, and then school improvement
and transformation. Sounds like
an evidence-based research
project to me, but I don't know.
Uh, Representative Doo, if you
turned to the 2nd page online
61. You'll see it in the LFC
recommendation here at
29 million. OK, you'll see it in
the LESC recommendation on
online 40.
And I believe
The executive recommendation had
it.
In section 4 recurrence. So you
have it and that's part of the
150 million. OK. All right. And
then,
The behavioral health supports.
I don't know if you guys are
getting calls, but I'm getting
calls from like the school
social workers and stuff saying
that their pay is not equitable
or they're not on par with their
peers, you.
Are you guys looking at that? Is
that somewhere else?
Um, Representative Doo.
There is a lot of, there is a
bill coming forward that's
attempting to place some of
these non-teacher positions onto
a salary minimum.
Uh, as well as just all
personnel in general.
I will say the data we have is
severely lacking, and it is not
a uniform approach some schools
contract out for these services
while others have those
in-house. So getting a, a firm
handle on how many people are in
this work and how much they're
getting paid as something we've
struggled to, to get our hands
around and representative of the
other, the other tricky piece of
it is that some of these folks
are actually paid out of
Medicaid. That's what I was
gonna ask. So they're not, it's
billable.
Some of it is, it is not all of
it, I think with the Medicaid
expansion more of it is that it
used to be.
OK. And then down below in the
this is the 150, what you're
going to do with the 150 million
for the, OK, um, the early
literacy and reading support, is
there a reason why you're not
using the early childhood fund
or I'm.
Uh, out before I do that, I just
want to clarify something I said
earlier, the executives
transformation money is on line
88, and their row not recurring.
But for the early literacy
funding that you're referring
to, this is
The
44848
literacy, this is the training
that has been typically done for
science of reading.
Um, PD has given this to K
through 5 educators, they are
now working on middle school.
This was part of the funding
online 48 was used to pay for
those middle school training.
Do, do I only look for this
conversation at the LFC or do I
look at LESC and LFC.
Uh, Representative Dow this
year, this this was used to pay
for those secondary educators
this year, you will see those
recommendations on line 56. So
it's
OK.
I, OK, I got you.
On the STEM network and
innovation zones.
Is there flexibility at the
local level and how they
implement that, or is it
defined?
Representative, the network is
actually based on a couple of
years' worth of work to, to do
what Representative Vander
mentioned earlier, you have a
lot of disparateate STEM
resources all over the state.
This would create a a hub at a
higher education institutions.
So the 2 billion per year for 3
years would actually pay for the
operations.
Of that up.
And then to coordinate all of
those other resources around the
state, so that money would not
go directly to schools.
2 or the 6 billion for the same
network.
The innovation zones.
This is where CT gets a little
bit confusing is because EED at
one point used CTE buddy to
create innovation. This is
something that has happened in
other states as well.
To essentially high school
transformations and
Proficial development, technical
assistance to those schools.
In the spirit of, of the Perf
grow uh sort of project if you
will.
Uh, the transformation,
innovation zones in this
particular area for LESC is
about studying whether or not
because DD is already doing it
with, so we chose to put it here
as a way to measure. OK. All
right. So then this is another
just like maybe you guys are
confused about grow. Maybe I'm
the only one confused about
growth. So then in section 9 on
appropriations, says house build
two junior girl appropriations,
but they're in the 25 side,
they're not in the executive LSC
LFC, but I thought all of that
junior grow money, it was for 2.
So if someone gave.
$50,000 to the FFA last year.
They were giving $25,000 a year
over 2 years or 50,000 over 2
years.
OK.
OK.
This is simply just the amount
that was appropriated right.
What?
This row that's not the same
girl.
No.
OK.
This is thank you guys for being
super patient with me new grow
money
that not but decided by the
department, not junior money.
It's not junior individual
legislator money. Correct, I
hear you. I hear you. OK. All
right, well, that, I mean,
another, I mean, this is just my
beat a dead horse.
If the majority of the folks.
Believe that an intervention is
better than than another r
member.
That happens to be in the
minority, does not get to bring
back a little bit to their
district for school program.
Because the majority vote.
will go towards a larger pool.
I'm not I'm, I'm not, I'm
saying.
Do you hear what I'm saying?
OK, thank you.
Can I add something to that. The
innovation zone, to grow many
specifically is to benefit a lot
of rural schools. The innovation
zones, and a lot of the CTE
really really targets use.
In small districts.
Can you, can you explain to me
how, just so I can understand
different than an REC I, I
don't, um, you'll have to
explain to me because they apply
for grants and they're really
smart. OK, all right, thanks,
I'll put you to to Santa Rosa as
an example, we can talk more
about it later, but there
there's somebody who's already
participating innovation zones,
it is found out to be very
successful for that.
Representative Herrera, and then
is anyone else?
Thank
you, everybody, and um try to
keep it, you know, what I see
here is what we're missing,
actually, you know, recruitment
and retention.
Uh, it's huge, and I, and that's
up to every school district to
go do that, uh, and I know
that's included in their SCG and
they carve it out of there, but,
but with the, I think we're
still short 700 teachers, and I
don't know how many educational
assistants and um
I actually think that that's
another bill and maybe, maybe
I'll introduce it, uh, just,
just because I don't, I think
schools need more help in that,
uh, and, and we really haven't
given them the the money to do
that, and then I also want to
say, you know, I learned.
When we were doing, I, I want
everybody to understand this is
a very volatile workforce,
because we did that increased
science, and after 3 years I had
this plan that everybody would
get trained and, and we did, you
know, we went through 3 sets of
teachers and we trained
everybody. I said, yeah, we're
done and my staff came back and
said, no, everybody changed
classrooms, they need more
training, so I just want to say
whenever we do this, we have to
remember, you know, principals
have teachers change every year
what class they're doing with,
so.
so I I'm just saying this for
the record that you have to
remember that it is, it's really
one of the most volatile
workforces I've seen. And, and,
and they change drastically, and
they'll get a new degree and
they go to high school or
they'll come back down to
elementary school, so, so these
numbers have to be constantly
monitored because of that. I
just want everybody to kind of
understand that I'm not pointing
to anyone one thing.
Uh, but the training will have
to go on and on and on and on.
Question,
when we do like these ones, why
don't they have the grid lines
on them?
Well,
we're we we
we should actually put in a
larger piece of paper, I think
that it can get quite dizzying
when it's too, too many lines,
but one thing we may be able to
do for you, representative if
that's helpful is like sometimes
shading in between each so that
it's.
Like a faint kind of
I get glasses.
The magnifying glasses, yes.
But representative, we can, we
can get uh something that's more
legible if that would be
helpful.
That would be really helpful.
I, I just want to add something
on the system, Susan, cause it's
really true, but that's why
we're starting, we're working
with the superintendents and
principals. I personally left
two schools because of toxic
principles. So we have the
leadership element and there
because there's discretionary
money, frankly, I met one
teacher, level 3 is making
$89,000 a year. I won't say what
district it's in, but there's
ways that principals have used
their money to keep their top
teachers.
So.
And plus we're now we're coming
out of COVID and
The impact on student social
emotional learning. So I think
that's gonna improve.
Anyway, it's a whole system.
Not specific on that.
But there may be some element
we're going in to look at, um,
Riquet quality
Uh, cause
We will have 2 years of kind of
kids that didn't get that.
Normal pre-K.
Treatment, and that's something
that I can follow up with our
staff to see how they dealt with
those kids just weren't even in.
In pre-K for the most part. What
we, what we do see
representative is your 3rd
grade.
students who just took the
first.
Uh, standardized assessment.
Show a dip. And so they were
kindergartners when the pandemic
happened and we would anticipate
you might see that bubble coming
through.
Well we'll definitely keep
track.
