Representative Crowder.
Here.
Representative Dixon.
Here.
Representative Ezzell.
Representative Garcia.
Here.
Representative Hetta.
Representative Hochman Vigil.
Representative Lane.
Representative Lara.
Here.
Representative Sarinana here.
Representative Swetser here.
Representative Trujillo.
Vice chair small.
Madam chair here.
Representative quorum
Representative Anderson is
present as well thank you okay
we do have a quorum madam okay
thank you very much thank you
everybody for tuning in today
I just wanted to remind the
committee that unless you are an
actual sponsor for Senate bill
we're going to ask that the
actual sponsored with the bill
on I know of last week we
allowed for some of that but
unless there's a extenuating
kind of a circumstance we're
gonna ask the actual Sanchez
show up it's just too hard to
try to explain a bill that you
may not be familiar with so with
that being said the first bill
that we have on our agenda
Senate bill one eleven and so
Senator Lopez here please.
I'm bill is she is she on or
Mike because I I can't really
tell I don't think so Madam
chair she is not okay let's go
ahead and move on to Senate bill
one forty four and that would be
Senator Campos.
Go ahead Sir thank you very much
madam chair members of the House
appropriations and finance
committee it's a pleasure to be
here with you this morning thank
you for the work you've been
doing throughout the entire
session.
Senate bill one forty four as
amended was amended by the house
Education Committee expands the
definition of educational
technology infrastructure in the
public school capital outlay act
to include not only hard over
for broadband connections at
school buildings but also
hardware and services necessary
to connect students teachers are
both at their homes it also
requires the folds apple valley
council to develop guidelines
for a statewide educational
network integrating regional
network hubs public school
capital outlay make them funded
network projects and the council
of Germans
The gentleman will then be
necessary for education which
also includes a student
productivity school bus
connectivity internet
connectivity at school district
buildings a multi district
regional education or statewide
educational network.
In essence madam chair members
of the house appropriations and
finance committee we
respectfully submitted an
amendment to you also and I'll
try that in a minute but in
move forward the house Education
Committee
this bill was amended there and
it was amended to match the
definition of educational
technology infrastructure
language in a similar bill which
is house bill one forty one.
In the bill also have a proposed
technical amendment to the again
I just talked about that but in
essence what it does is it
removes the new language
regarding the network
integrating regional network
slows to to the part of statute
that defines the broadband
deficiency program at the public
schools facility authority.
Currently the bill has it
placed.
You're the end of the part of
statute describing the public
school capital outlay fund and
with this technical amendment
what it does is it puts it in
close proximity to where or it
should be within statute and
then lastly madam chair members
of the house appropriations and
finance committee
and we just got word court last
night and we're really excited
about this part in this is in
relation to the new federal
stimulus so the American rescue
plan of twenty twenty one
signed by president Biden
yesterday includes an expansion
of the federal E. rate program
to also purchases of home
connectivity equipment for
students till now the right like
the state funding was limited to
expenditures for broadband to
school sites SB one forty four
will allow public school capital
outlay to provide the required
match usually ten percent for
these expanded the right
expenditures so in essence so
madam chair members of HFC this
particular piece of legislation.
Expensive definition provides us
the opportunity to continue with
if you will those connections
right now we don't have for
students and teachers and the
great part about this if this
bill passes it to process in
line with the matching funds are
going to be important to ensure
that our students are whether
they be in the northwestern part
of New Mexico southeastern part
regardless of the part of the
state that the the reside in to
then have the ability to to be
connected to to the internet in
the course of services so in
fact madam chair and persons of
HFC I respectfully stand for for
questions but with that if I may
also asked if the caliphate
chair over and or send a little
with the legislative finance
committee.
Restatements well before you do
that I need somebody to move the
amendment for discussion.
And I'm sure I move the
amendment.
Okay we have a motion by
Representative Sweetser in a
second I think it was and is
well or or Anderson okay.
Into many voices through so
we've moved the amendment for
discussion and I would ask that
sunny or or miss Fisher talk
about the amendment so we're
clear on it I know anytime I see
that we're striking something
out that somebody else did hi
I've become a little concerned
so let's let's talk about that.
Sure thanks chair Micaela
Fischer I'm a program evaluation
under the legislative finance
committee so all of this
amendment does is take some
existing added language is part
of the original bill.
Ginnelly please stay in one part
of the NMSA that was at the end
of what describes what the
public capital outlay fund does
it working with our with your
credentials in college L. E. S.
C.
we found out it be better placed
closer to the part in statute
that describes the broadband
program at PS FAA so none of the
languages changed from the
original bill we're just saying
it should go should be plugged
into one part of statute the
public school capital outlay
council act rather than the
other.
Okay already all right let's go
to the committee on the
amendment is there any other
questions from any of the
committee members anybody from
how CENIC.
Okay I don't see anybody so is
there any
objections to moving the
amendment for approval.
Okay they are bill has been
amended.
Let's go back on the bill.
Questions from the committee.
What's the pleasure of the
committee.
That Senate bill one forty four
as thrice amended two passed.
Thank.
We have a second this bill to
discussion.
Representative Sarinana.
So I'm.
Does this bill have an
appropriation outside of using
the ten million dollars from the
public school couple returned.
Chair representative is not it's
the ten million dollars that it
allocated to each year to buy
apple's capital outlay.
And I believe this question is
about two point five is used but
it does not have any additional
creation at work.
this Madam chair thank you.
I remind the committee to look
at the FIR and you see with the
funds affected are are not
general fund.
It is they public school capital
outlay fund so if we could all
right let's go to Representative
Anderson.
Thank you.
Madam chairman I just had a
quick question to the sponsor
and
the this on the American rescue
plan of funding the building of.
Source of funding for this you
never
all the Representative Anderson
excuse me Representative small
can you move can you just
automatically mute everybody.
I asked the members to do that
so I'm gonna ask you to do it
make sure that everybody's for
the president.
All right let's go back to
Representative Anderson thank
you madam chairman I'll be
shortened to the point of
Senator
we're talking about the American
rescue plan we're talking about
a new source of funding for the
this expansion
all excellent news when I hear
the match requirement I suppose
it's premature Senator to ask
for any details on that match
requirement but
I suppose clearly on a ninety
ten the money available will
go ten times further question.
Madam chair representative in
your correct and that's the
beauty of this of this
legislation practices and of
course with the resources that
are coming to the state for that
match that's going to go ahead
and again give us additional
purchasing power to develop if
you will the technology for our
residents if you will in our
school districts across the
state so it's it's good news for
us and we need this legislation
in order to make this a
workforce of from matching
perspective thank you madam
chair thank thank you senator
for that answer and I wish you
the best of luck because it
sounds as though your timing is
is better than perfect thank you
madam chairman that concludes my
question our illustrious
Representative Brown.
Thank you madam chair Senator
Campos I'm wondering about the
very last page of the bill it
talks about the council having
permission essentially to
find for internet connectivity
connectivity on school buses and
I'm just curious if we have any
school buses so outfitted right
now.
Senator do you know the answer
to that and madam chair
Representative Brown it's an
excellent question I'm not
familiar with any of them that
are connected right now but the
whole intent would be
particularly in our more
isolated areas is to ensure that
we do have that of availability
to maximize if you will the
educational offerings to our
students but if I but I would
like to defer to either Senator
to account to help with that
response because that's an
excellent question but I just
don't have the answer for you
right now right one of the staff
go ahead sunny.
Madam chair representative I
don't have a specific answer on
which schools might be school
buses might be retrofitted to
provide wifi but given that
typically the appropriation to
replace school buses is
generally close to the cost of
just the standard bus without
additional upgrades I would
assume most buses do not have
wifi capabilities currently.
Chair and senator so I just put
a word in for students who live
in rural areas of the state and
have very long bus rides I'm
familiar with
some students in my district to
travel nearly two hours on a bus
ride one way and this would
really be are wonderful for them
to be able to do some homework
all up there on the best so I
appreciated saying that would
build thank you very much madam
chair.
Right.
Thank you let's go
Representative Crowder.
Thank you madam chair Senator
thanks for your bill I'm
curious.
How this will all blend together
with all the other broadband
bills saying the they are
efforts to move that the central
location and to do it.
Is there an overarching plan to
make all these bills that
together with the schools work
with do it work with everyone
else.
Madam chair senator and chair
Representative Crowder another
great question as we move
forward within that the intent
over period of time is through
door to.
We do have the over arching
technological components in one
area however through the public
school capital outlay in the SFA
with the guidelines and with the
resources that are established
within this particular.
Department of this would be
having it'll have to be worked
in concert with deployed in
others and the initial.
Medications that I've had with
individuals that deal with
technology is that this would be
considered as one of the tools
one of the components so right
now it is in the collaborative
stage but it's not directly in
statute in terms of that these
resources would be then directed
to and and issued directly
through what but there is a
strong collaboration to ensure
that their use for the
technological purposes as
intended thank you.
Senator thank you I think I
think I heard you say
Good it's not active the funds
will actually flow through do it
but but there will be a a
process where they work together
is that correct Senator Madam
chair representative Crowder
you're correct so within that of
course if the if the bills pass
signed into law the resources to
public school capital outlay of
course with the guidelines
established through through the
council and would continue to to
to be followed and school
districts would have to apply to
the the council itself for the
resources and it would be a
partner not not in statute but
in issuing and coordinating
technological services it is
across the state so the
educational component through
this particular measure would be
an integral part but not
directly associated with do it.
Okay thank you again Sir madam
chair is there are fast so so I
know this is an LFC endorsed
bill.
Would it be okay to ask
The LFC analyst if there is a
framework being contemplated are
they I someone's got to be
managing all of these broadband
bills I just wanted to be okay
just.
You speak to that thank you
madam chair go ahead.
Madam chair representative
Crowder that to your earlier
question my understanding is
that.
The bill that's creating a new
office said do it right now is
house bill ten which I believe
Representative Sarinana and
Sweetser are co sponsors of so
they may want to correct me here
because I'm wrong but part of
that bill is
does require PSSA to formally
coordinate with do it M. as at
offices established of course
that's contingent on the passage
of the bill but that would be a
way to formalize some of equity
it's going to happen
There's also another in the
capital outlay for mark the LFC.
Proposed there's another five
million dollars for tribal
libraries and schools
specifically that would be a
similar thing that would be
specific for those schools but
for a similar similar to Houston
to match the right funds to try
to connect
students insistence on tribal
areas as well.
You know it is really good news
that we heard you know about the
the the new stimulus bill that
they're expanding the right uses
for a year you know when when
we're first thinking about this
bill is Senator Campos back in
the win.
All you know we thought it was
kind of nice to have that we
have in additional use of this
already existing ten million
dollars to try to connect
students what's happened now is
we're gonna be able to not only
do that but leverage it you know
up to ninety percent federal
funds which is pretty exciting.
Thank you madam chair thank you
look at the okay thank you
representative Garcia.
Thank you madam chair a thank
you senator present in this
today of my question is
Representative Crowder mentioned
earlier that there's a lot of
bills floating around
connective itty itself my
question is Senator madam chair
how do we propose no in more
rural communities how do we
propose on a connectivity with
these kids out there that house
are a mile apart from each
other.
You have any plans for that of
Senator thank you very much
madam chair and representative
Garcia the the the beauty of
what's happening today is the
with if you will the rescue plan
the resources that are coming in
from the federal government are
definitely going to assist with
connecting some people indicate
the last mile those went to
Kate.
The communication pieces but we
already have established pieces
that are in place and so in
terms of the plan itself if the
overarching plan to coordinate
all of the broadband and to do
it services over time along with
the educational services.
That in itself our will I
believe take several years in
order to continue deporting so
it's going to be up to us right
now to utilize we have
individually it and continue
with that coordination I believe
through our H. B. two through
sources.
Will be other resources coming
about and again it's going to be
up to all of us for the in terms
of the plan itself I believe
it's involving once we see after
the session what bills are
signed into law and we're you
our focus to the governor and
broadband is one up initiatives
of this year we definitely will
have a coordinated effort.
But again the plan itself is not
fully contemplated place but
again with the resources and
with the department so we do
have to deal directly with
technology I believe that'll
happen
I would anticipate over the next
couple years and become stronger
after that thank you very much
Madam chair representative
Garcia.
Thank you madam chair and
senator and the the reason I
brought up in in madam chair is
because rural New Mexico seems
to be left out a lot on on the.
An activities and so forth and
do a lot of people role is when
there's five six thousand one
block in in rural to me is when
we have five or six thousand a
mile and you know these people
out there don't have what most
people do have in the in the
urban community soul think of
what you're doing and thank you
madam chair.
Thank you very much as a
representative Allison.
Thank you madam chair.
Thank you Senator for bringing
this bill in the past few days
there's been a number of bills
and appropriations made to the
schools my question is do the
schools
They all know how to apply for
these benefits and resources
that's been made available to
them and if they don't then
where should I direct them
should they ask me questions.
So madam chair enforcer
Representative Allison.
One of the the the he's just
through every school district
that they are notified of public
resources that are available as
they applied for capital outlay
in this case utilize resources
for technology so within that I
would
Asked staff to help me a little
bit with this for one reason
because I believe that the
outreach is going to be
imperative as we move forward
because with all of the parts
that are changing the key to
outreach is going to be our
especially those districts that
maybe get the information but
don't have the necessary
technical support apply for the
resources we need to engage and
make sure that they do have that
so I don't want to go ahead and
save just to apply in one place
I would like to refer to staff
and they could.
Help me to
help all of us understand better
understand the outreach that is
going to be necessary that's an
excellent question often times
we feel that the school
districts.
Have the answer because of their
inspiration but in reality maybe
they're not keeping up with
a deadline so they don't have
the ability to put together if
you will the Syrian nation but I
believe staff can help one with
where to apply in the number two
how we can well the educational
outreach because we're gonna be
seen more than just the public
school capital outlay USFA.
Guideline changes and resources
available we're also can be seen
over a hundred thirty three
million dollars coming in that
will be directed to improve
technology so there's going to
be different the need for
education and outreach so if I
may madam chair defer to staff
and see if they would.
Defining the census thank you
wait we have a break response
from the staff on this currently
Madam chair representative the
thank the good thing about
having PS that they as the agent
to do this is they help schools
virtually collect connect all of
their buildings to broadband and
they have a lot of experience
with the right program it helped
tribal libraries coordinate
those applications as well so
there's a lot of regional
managers around the state from
PS that pay their own staff is
very persistent putting this
together so certainly I believe
there's a lot of outreach that
could happen through the agency
under this bill.
Thank you madam chair so is it
safe to say that the main point
of contact with the the P. SSE.
Thousands PED and the do it and
several organizations to get all
this done especially back in of
northwest New Mexico so what I
was looking for was main point
of contacts in each of the
agencies to bring all this to
fruition.
Thank you madam chair thank
senator.
All right a one thing I didn't
ask bill and Mike is there
anybody out the audience it has
to thank you or would like to
say a few words about this bill.
this is Richard R. Richard I
don't see anybody out there wait
a minute.
We have a Diane Lindstrom.
Okay let's bring her in.
One minute for COVID please
thank you madam chair good
morning madam chair members of
the committee my name is Diane
Stroman I'm a volunteer advocate
with a a part A. A. R. P. New
Mexico and we strongly support
this bill people ask why us
older folks are interested in
broadband and it's because
everything needs to be connected
now and we have grandparents who
are raising their grandkids
without any broadband connection
and without any equipment so
this bill would help provide for
those people thank you very
much.
All right thank you
all right committee we have a
proper motion and improper
seconds
is there any opposition to a do
pass motion on this bill as
amended.
Seeing none you have a due
process amended Senator Campos
on Senate bill one forty four.
The.
You're listening will.
Senate bill one eighty seven.
Thank you very much madam chair
members of the house
appropriations and finance
committee essentially a Senate
bill one eighty seven is being
carried on behalf of the
legislative finance committee
and the the bill all has also
been endorsed by the tobacco
settlement revenue oversight
committee of the bill is similar
to past years from the
legislature passed legislation
to divert the fifty percent of
tobacco funds that goes to the
tobacco settlement permanent on
and placed out revenue in the
tobacco settlement program funds
making all that year's revenue
available for legislative
appropriation.
Due to the ongoing arbitration
the legislative finance
committee department of finance
and administration of the
attorney general's office are
projecting a total of twelve
million dollars in tobacco funds
for fiscal year twenty to
instead of the usual thirty
million to thirty five million
the state typically would
receive.
The LFC fiscal year twenty two
budget recommendations
appropriate all of the projected
twelve million dollars for the
purpose of currently receive
tobacco settlement funds which
include hundred seventy one
thousand for tobacco use
cessation services at the Indian
Affairs Department.
Five point four million for
breast and cervical cancer
treatment and the Medicaid
program at at the Human Services
Department.
Four point five million for
tobacco use prevention cessation
services diabetes prevention and
control breast and cervical
cancer screening at the
department of health the two
million for special education
pediatrics and trauma ways to
control.
Do not again and environmental
health research and pediatric
oncology at the university of
New Mexico health sciences
center.
After appropriation of the
twelve million fiscal year
twenty two for these purposes
the tobacco settlement permanent
funds expected to have a fund
balance of two hundred seventy
one point six million dollars so
madam chair members of the AGFC
essentially that's what Sen
Clemente sevens thank you.
Thank you senator is there
anybody in the audience of the.
Got their hands.
On this bill.
And look like it so I don't have
anybody that would let's go to
the committee.
Any questions from the committee
Representative Dixon.
Thank you madam chair and
senator Campos and and I don't
know if this might be outside of
the scope of what we're
discussing.
But with regard to the
projection of twelve million
dollars in revenue from the fund
Madam instead of the usual
thirty to thirty five million
do we anticipate that getting
resolved soon.
I really appreciate the question
Representative Dixon I could not
different this time to be an
issue and with the legislative
finance committee she does have
that updated information
Representative go ahead.
Thank you madam chair Senator
Campos and Representative Dixon
yes we do expect this to result
be resolved in FY twenty three
so this as the senator indicated
is the result of arbitration
from two thousand four but we
should be back on track starting
again in FY twenty three and
back to the same level that we
normally have about thirty to
thirty five million of which
half of those going to the
tobacco settlement program fund
and are available for
legislative appropriation
annually thank you madam chair
for me I would like to add that
to keeping a full accountability
in terms of the stamps on each
pack of cigarettes that are
sold.
It's very important for us in
order for us to continue and
that's part of the issue when it
comes to the arbitration when
you don't have the full
accountability in terms of
resources that are being
collected that again does go
into discussion and what we're
trying to do also is to ensure
that we solidify.
Ability in terms of the
cigarette sales in the state of
New Mexico thank you madam chair
thank you very much tipsy.
All righty thank you senator I
don't see any other hands up so
what's pleasure the committee.
And I'm sure I move the defense.
Madam chair okay we have
Representative Sweetser
for the past motion
Representative Dixon the second
is there any opposition to this
do passed motion.
Seeing none Senator you have a
day passed Senate bill one
eighty seven thank you madam
chair members of the house
appropriations and finance
committee.
All right thank you next as
senator Neville Senate bill
three forty one.
Thank you madam chair us three
forty one is specifically
designated in the appropriations
act to specify that
appropriation of the community
schools fund be subject to
appropriation by the legislature
there's about a ten million
dollar general fund amounts and
then there's another ten million
dollars a please federal dollars
a let Rachel come in and be a
technical expert equipment that
essentially if we don't pass
this bill those money stay here
where they're at and we don't
get to utilize and unity schools
funded site non reverting fund
and it is in place the intended
to be there for a number of
years to three years to fund
community school grants Rachel
you might want to click chime in
and give us a little more detail
I think I saw you on here.
Yes yes Sir madam chair
Senator at the
The fund right now house bill
two includes a ten million
dollar general fund transfer in
a ten million dollar
Education reform Fund to
transfer contingent on enactment
of this bill so the twenty
million dollar transfers in
addition to an additional three
million dollars appropriation
from the public education reform
Fund for use
next year to continue our work
implementing community schools
and this will just allow you as
a body to exercise your
appropriating authority over the
next several years and determine
what amount of that twenty two
million dollars should be
appropriated to PED each year
that manager I'd stand for
questions.
I have a question Rachel is
going to have a separate fund co
down within the path of the aged
or houses how we gonna know how
it's being spent track in the
money.
Madam chair it already has a
separate fund code so you can
get into share and look and see
how they're making awards from
and how they're spending dollars
from it so that already exists
that you guys funded it
last year I think for the first
time.
All righty let's go is there
anybody in the audience the bill
or anyone that you see that we
need to wants to make a comment
on this bill.
Madam chair of I don't see
anybody all righty COVID okay
great let's go to the committee
is there any questions from the
committee Representative
Anderson.
We
are to the sponsor and really
the expert I think I heard you
say something to the effect of
last year we did something and I
thought to myself but I didn't
quite understand what that
something was but I think it was
adding funding is that correct
or incorrect questions thank
you.
Madam chair representative it
wasn't you appropriated money
for community schools last year
so so I say last year really
this year
Into the fund so the department
is using those dollars this year
to support twenty six community
schools both and their
implementation of community
schools in planning for
community schools thank you very
much for that answer that
concludes my questions madam
chair.
Thank you Representative
Representative Crowder.
Thank you thank you thank you
madam chair I found my answer in
the FIR thank you.
Representative Brown.
Thank you madam chair Senator I
I see that we have about looks
like thirty five or thirty six
community schools in New Mexico
I'm wondering if this is a list
that can grow if schools apply
for is just a static list at
this point.
Do we do in other words do we
have
we have a growing number of
community schools.
Senator are you I believe that
it's the ensure that is yes and
that's kind of the point of this
appropriation but Rachel you
want to fill us in on how the
process works and what to you
anticipate we're going to do
here yes so
Chair representative this the
short answer is yes you have
community schools opening across
the state using local dollars
and school district dollars
until the legislature started
funding this initiative so the
legislature funded twenty six
new schools in addition to about
this thirty year so several
years ago so that intent with
the appropriations is to
continue with
Learning the number of community
schools that are being
implemented currently but have a
of fees to the level of growth
of community schools over the
next few years.
Okay thank you very much I'm I'm
hearing really good things about
these
set up so I I'm encouraged to
hear that thank you madam chair
thank you all righty let's go
Representative Dixon.
Thank you madam chair and
senator Neville up for bringing
this I was wondering given that
interest and demand for
community schools is outpacing
the funding do we need to.
Sort of how do we address.
getting more schools the funding
that they need to be on the
track to become community
schools the the funding is kind
of two steps up to there's an
initial requests and then
there's the actual later
requests so that allows it to
pace out some Rachel your bills
in the work that yes so I I
would say two things madam chair
representative one is there is a
lot of federal funds that are
going to come to the state for
education or educational
institutions just got you know
four hundred and thirty million
in the December slash January
stimulus package there's another
nine hundred billion or so
that's going to go to public
schools.
Dollars can be used to implement
outside of the dollars you were
reading I do think the Senate is
considering you guys house bill
two out I believe with the three
million dollar community school
appropriation in the Senate's
considering increasing that a
little at PED also has title one
set aside funds that they used
to support community schools so
they've actually this year
funded more schools than you
funded
so I think all three of the
sources are are helpful in this
endeavor and then districts of
course commutes are at risk
funds generated through the
funding formula.
Part of part of the challenge
that I was not implementing too
fast and not ramping up at a
rate that PED can't.
Can't adequately oversee and
provide technical assistance and
support the districts need.
Thank you so much thank you
madam chair of no other
questions.
Right do we have anybody else
I'd like to ask a question.
Already was pleasure the
committee.
The Senate bill three forty one.
Thank.
Okay we have a motion and who
made the second place second
okay Allison okay so it's small
for the motion and Allison for
the second is there any
opposition to that do pass
motion.
State line you have to do how
Senator on Senate bill.
When you get one eighty seven.
Three forty one yep you madam
chair members already.
Right thank you senator was
looking at the wrong line okay I
have a couple of things I want
to share with the committee is
Representative Hochman Vigil on.
I'm here madam chair okay I'd
like you to give a little update
on what the plan is for House
Bill three twenty five which of
course is one of the generic
bills after the discussion last
night with the committee members
and then
certainly with the DOT can you
just give a brief update on what
the plan is as we move through
the Senate sure madam chair
thank you very much so House
Bill three twenty five which is
establishes the rural air
service enhancement Act past the
house floor last night I believe
it only had eleven in opposition
to it be added and amendments
which required
the establishment that federal
essential air services funding
was not already in use for
routes that would apply for the
state funding under this bill we
also added another element that
a competitive procurement
process must be utilized by DOT
when selecting carriers for
routes the amendment while was
successful but that as the
there's also a lot of eight
Senate Bill which started life
as an exact duplicate to and
that passed the Senate tax
committee yesterday believe and
so it'll be heard by the Senate
on the Senate floor sometime
soon I had a conversation about
the R. T. and senator Bobby
Gonzales about the amendment
that we put on and how we might
end up with a bill either the
house bill or the Senate bill
that encompasses all the
elements to be added to it last
night however we are going to be
taking away the elements are
with regards to federal funding
because that's gonna be
promulgated by DOT and rules I
just to make sure there's no
confusion as to who is eligible
to apply for these funds so
that's where we are madam chair
I'm happy to answer any
questions.
Okay I just thought it was
important for the committee here
and here this this is one of the
dummy bills that comes out of
HSC
just so you all know what the
update is as as we're moving
forward there's a second.
Demi bill that I'd like to have
Rachel talk about that would be
House Bill three twenty six I
believe and this is a bill that
ties to education financing so
Rachel was talk about three
twenty six because that'll be on
our agenda Monday so I just want
to give everybody a preview of
what this bill is about.
Yes ma'am
We.
Rules around bonding and
property taxes that don't allow
our school districts to use
those funding sources at techno
it's the two mill levy which is
referred to is
Senate bill nine the ten
military that's referred to as
house bill thirty three and geo
bonds to build teacher houses
and remodel teacher housing and
we've got a number of districts
that have limited capacity for
funding for those those projects
and so the committee sub takes
those three acts and in the they
choose sections allow is that
are those four acts excuse me
allows them to be used for
teacher housing
part of the part of the
prohibitions are the result of
an outdated nineteen eighty one
AG opinion
that I've looked at and what are
DO you could argue with the
opposite way as well but the
department has been PED has been
relying on that AG opinion to
deny a school districts use of
at least geo bonds in SB nine
funds for teacher housing so
this will eliminate that problem
and give additional funding
sources for the school districts
that want to build teacher
housing.
You know that I just wanna
Committee no that's a big deal
in the Gallup McKinley county
school district there's a a
number of teacher just
throughout our school district
the county's about five thousand
square miles and I had a.
Conversation once with our
superintendent and he told me
that they actually are the
largest administrator of real
estate in the entire county in
terms of real estate managers I
think they had like nine hundred
units or something and I imagine
that's between apartments and
trailers and and the small
houses.
Without teacher just in McKinley
county we could possibly get
staff and some of the rural
schools out here so that's what
this bill is about and as I said
you'll you'll see it on Monday's
agenda.
for HSA were hoping to get it
out on Monday is it's not ready
for today.
Well as we as we move along I
just thought it was important
for you all to know that it's
coming.
Is there any questions of Rachel
just in general and I haven't
seen anything but just in
general about this concept.
Okay it doesn't look like it so
Rachel will be looking for the
bill all okay we've got Jack go
ahead Jack Chatfield
Representative.
Your short actually it's a big
deal where are.
Okay so you also in here in here
school district have teacher
Jews.
Representative Ezzell.
Madam chair thank you very much
and one of my school districts
they do have teacher region's
teacher teaches the cardboard
thank down in that area too and
if it wasn't for those that
would be sadly lacking as far as
teachers go to teach at that
particular school so I just want
to point that.
Representative Sweetser I was
just gonna say the same thing
one of my district has teacher
edges and it really is the only
way they're able to recruit
teachers so thank you for that.
Okay Representative Crowder.
Thank you madam chair have the
the superintendents all been.
Brought into the loop on this so
that the also in support of it
sounds like this is a statewide
issue.
It they know this is coming our
of the body to.
Representative actually this is
a component but I believe that
we've added in to a house bill
six which is the impact aid
bill.
But because this is so important
we don't want this component to
go down if the impact aid bill
doesn't pass so it's kind of a
two pronged approach of trying
to get to this effort I don't
know Rachel which generally
your thinking on this certainly
we haven't even talked to
anybody but this committee on
what on what the bill does
so madam chair Representative I
would say at least you know
we've been talking with Gallup
public schools whose I this
issue for us several times
I sent an email out to PED a
couple of days ago asking them
to revisit the opinion that they
wouldn't let them use SB nine
and G. O. bond money for teacher
housing.
In in general it's expanding the
uses so it won't require a
district to use funds for this
purpose but if the district
wants to use funds for this
purpose they will be able to and
I don't anticipate that the the
superintendents or the
superintendents association
would have any issue with this
and they would provide a welcome
a welcome change to law so we
can do some work and reach out
to stand rounds and get his
opinion ensure that with you on
Monday.
Thank you madam chair thank you
Rachel I know there are prior
superintendent what was very
much in favor of trying to get
teacher just into the closed
area I have not talked to the
new superintendent so I didn't
know that's why I asked that
question.
One was the other and I haven't
talked to solve this carriers
thank you madam chair.
Representative Garcia.
Thank you madam chair members of
the committee thanks for
bringing this hold with three
twenty six of the all members of
this committee all rural New
Mexico proficiency problem of
all the shortages and when we do
get teachers who don't have
anywhere to put in to live so
thank you very much of Madam.
Okay Hey buddy also misspelled
on this dummy that we're gonna
be bringing forth on Monday.
Okay saying none will we'll have
that is one of our agenda items
on Monday and I imagine more
Senate bills
And with that I don't have
anything else do we bill are we
finished for the day.
Madam chair.
Well Representative Crowder you
have a question yes
Representative sure did we deal
with Senate bill one eleven the
very first bill on our agenda.
Not
we could either roll over we can
table it.
Madam chair if I might not
going.
I have been trying to contact
right Senator Lopez all morning
long.
And have not been successful
however that bill
Senate bill one eleven.
There is three hundred.
Two hundred thousand dollars in
appropriations in the junior
bills that would cover that so
madam chair I don't I think
would be appropriate just take a
look.
What's the pleasure of the
committee.
Matt madam chair yes.
Sorry madam chair
thank thank you madam chair
as I understand it a second hand
with Lopez it has been engaged
on the Senate floor.
I would suggest that we should
roll this the one time madam
chair and then coordinate with
her to understand whether it can
be tabled or if that needs to be
briefly heard on Monday.
Okay what we can do this we can
just roll over this but will
roll over one time and then it
comes off the calendar so is
there anything else we need to
do today bill no madam chair
already thank you everybody for
good committee hearing today and
we'll see all of you on Monday I
believe that the afternoon
committees are still starting at
eleven thirty I haven't gotten
any word any different so
certainly you'll you'll see that
as the notices go out so thank
you everybody thank you bye bye
Act.
