Here.
Here.
Here.
Excellent. Thank you very much.
We do have a quorum. uh, we have
one bill on our agenda today.
That's our feed bill, House Bill
1, of course, which gets heard
here. Uh, we have Le Chasey,
thank you, Director Bruciaga.
Also, thank you very much, uh,
Amanda, the House Budget
director who is also here. With
that, we're gonna go straight to
Madam Leader Chase.
Mhm. Thank you very much, Mr.
Chairman, committee members,
it's a pleasure to see you all
this morning.
You have um House Bill one in um
before you, and it appropriates
$211,900 for the legislative
cash balances for the expenses
of this um first special
session. It includes $83,800 for
the House of Representatives.
$60,400 for the Senate, $67,700
for the legislative council
service for its section um
session expenditures, excuse me.
The um second section is an
appropriation to the executive
agency and um the section A,
$10,000 to the Indian Affairs
department for the Mascalero
Apache Tribe.
This money reverts at the end of
FY 25, so in about 1 year.
The quick timeline ensures that
the funding is used for
immediate urgent and quickly
deployable relief for the
community.
Section B 10 million for the
Department of Energy, Minerals
and Natural Resources for fiscal
year 2025 for wildfire
mitigation, watershed
restoration, slope
stabilization, erosion control,
and post-fire management.
We learned from the Hermit's
Peak and Calf Canyon fires that
starting these services as soon
as possible is critical.
This portion of the funding is
available statewide.
Section C, 10 million for the
Homeland Security E Emergency
Management in consultation with
the superintendent of insurance
for fiscal year 25 and 26 to
provide on the ground support
for individuals and businesses
in filing for both public and
private assistance, the
department already has a strong
footprint in these communities,
and this will allow them to
increase those services and this
portion of the
Finding is also available to be
used statewide.
And section D $70 million to the
board of Finance for zero
interest reimbursable loans to
political subdivisions for fire
and flooding damage attributable
attributable to the salt and
South Fork fires. The Board of
Finance has the flexibility to
distribute emergency funding to
local governments and to
determine flexible repayment
options, including potential
forgiveness for loans.
The board has done creative loan
solutions in the past, and
Much is determined by rule.
The legislature could come back
in the 60 day session in 2025
and allow loan forgiveness.
For the 25% local match if
needed. It gives you time to
figure that out.
Section 3 is an appropriation to
the judiciary.
To the administrative office of
the courts.
Or assisted outpatient treatment
and competency diversion
programs. These are existing and
um
Perhaps a renewal of um
AOT programs in various judicial
districts, the AOC has outlined
a plan that would provide
support to areas with the most
most capacity and ability to
support these programs,
including the first, 2nd, 3rd,
5th, and 12th judicial
districts.
And with that, Mr. Chair, I
stand for questions. Thank you
very much, Madam Leader. I
should say we stand for
questions. Many thanks to um Mr.
Bursaga and Miss Dick Patty.
Excellent. Uh, thank you, thank
you both, uh, for the work and
for being here today. We're
gonna go first to Representative
Garcia.
Uh, thank you, Mr. Jared, uh,
Adam, I just have a concern on
the money for the mascular
Apache reservation at $10,000.
They have one year to spend it.
When do they get the money?
And cause a year is not a uh a
long time to spend $10,000 and
you know, it says it will revert
at the end of the year, that's a
concern to me because the time
frame is awful short.
Mhm.
Mm.
A
One
Um,
Mr. Sherman, Represent Garcia,
thank you for the question
because I learned something too,
uh, although I had, I had said
that it is
Intended to meet immediate needs
and as soon as the as the board
of Finance.
As soon as GFA releases it, they
will be able to access it.
However, it does not preclude
the legislature from
reauthorizing the funding.
In 2025.
Uh, thank you, Mr. Truman. Thank
you for that cause, you know,
$10,000 is a lot of money to
spend in 8 or 9 months.
And what happens in most cases,
it winds up reverting to the
state. But thanks, uh, thank
you, Mr. Chairman. Thank you,
Representative Garcia.
Uh, next, uh,
We're gonna go to Representative
Vincent.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. And I just
wanted to give you my most
sincerest gratitude.
For what you've done for my
community.
And
I know everybody has seen on
The television or you've seen on
social media what's going on in
my community, but until you're
really there.
You, you can't quite, you, you
can't quite grasp it.
And I feel like
When this fire first broke out.
And people started to lose their
homes and their vehicles, and I
just wanted to make one thing
very clear, if nobody's ever
been through.
A house fire or losing
everything you have.
These folks were evacuated.
And
Sent to places other than
Ridoso.
And some of them had no gas.
They had no money.
They had no food.
And I want you to picture.
As you're going out of town with
with a half a tank of gas, no
food, no water, no money.
What do you tell the people at
the
Motels
Whenever you have nothing to
offer.
And
I wanted to think
All the surrounding areas that
were
Good to our folks and let them
stay and out of nowhere, this is
when you really get to see the
good come out in people.
They started cooking for all of
the evacuees out of Ridoso.
And
Chavis County opened up their
fairgrounds for horses and dogs
and all that kind of stuff, and
you don't realize how much is
involved in it.
Until you start to see it all
come together now.
I've always been involved in the
operation side, but
I got to watch a 10,000 ft view
of what was going on on the
ground.
And our um
Our locals, all of our um
villages.
Uh, Mescalero.
They did an outstanding job and
they really did a good job for
our people.
And now here we are with this
bill that's going to help us
stand back up because Riosa is
limping around right now and
they're tough, resilient people
and with this money right here,
I'm hoping that we can get back
in the game soon, so I want to
thank you very much for that.
Thank you Mr. Chair. Thank you
very much, Representative
Vincent. Truly, um.
We'll go next to Representative
Luhan and then Vice Chair Dixon.
Thank you, Mr. Mr. Chair. um
I want to
After, after, um, the last big
fire we had in Cath Canyon.
And in in the north and.
Another fires we had, this is,
this is a a really um
I wouldn't say it's a wake up
call, but it is, it is.
What we need to be preparing for
the future of what's going on in
the state under
What climate change has brought
us, um, so I want to make sure
we have that message included in
what is going on and how we need
to be more prepared and more
diligent in how we're going to
look at our budget for the next
fiscal year. Uh, this is great
work, um.
What the state has been able to
do um from the past and now
again for uh Riodoso and the
areas and, and in the tribes, I
think this is.
Necessary, obviously, but um.
It
We need to be paying a little
bit closer attention to what is,
what we can expect in the
future.
Um, I do have a question, um, on
page 3, section B.
Um,
For the $10 million
Oh, maybe I'm on the wrong one.
I'm sorry, I have a couple of
notes here. Sorry, Mr. Chair,
we're
We're really working fast on
this, yes, so, uh, section B
when it is
Uh, talking about I believe
lines 7 through
17 in the description of what
the the appropriation will be
used for.
This is any, in any way, any of
that language would it include
broadband connectivity that was
lost uh due to the wildfires,
Mr. Chair.
Um, Mr. Chair and Representative
Lujan, this appropriation is not
intended to address broadband,
but FEMA funds do cover
broadband, and it's likely that
that would be the source of it.
Mr. Chair, thank you for that.
Uh, and for with that answer.
Um,
Is we know that broadband is an
essential function and need, um.
And infrastructure need for our
communities. Do we know when
FEMA would be uh or FEMA funding
would be released in this
emergency, Mr. Chair.
Uh, Mr. Chairman, I'm sorry I
didn't hear the answer because I
was writing notes about
broadband in another section. So
would you repeat that please,
please, uh, the, the question
was, Madam Leader, and thank you
Representative Lehan. The
question was when we expect FEMA
funding to start flowing.
Um, I am informed Mr. Chair,
Representative Lujan that um we
do know that sometimes it takes
a while for FEMA funding and um
so the actually uh Miss uh Dick
Patty just informed me that the
section D funding could also
address broadband needs.
So there might be um
So
Immediate relief there in
section D. Thank you. I do have
that underlined in page 4
section G, line 12.
Uh, specific pa public
infrastructure damage, is that
the language um that we would
look to, uh, look for those uh
relief.
For that infrastructure.
Mr. Chair.
Um, Mr. Chairman, uh,
Representative Lujan, yes, thank
you very much. I appreciate
that. Uh, but there is no
guarantee with that, so.
Um, without it being
specifically mentioned, um, do
you foresee or do, can we
foresee that that being an
unintentional consequence of of
us not specifically adding
broadband into the language
here, Mr. Chair.
Um, Mr. Chair, Representative,
no, I think that that is part of
public infrastructure. Thank you
so much.
Thank you very much,
Representative Hunt. Next we're
going to go to Vice Chair Dixon
and represent Pettigrew.
Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Um,
Madam Leader, I am interested in
uh section 3, and exactly what
um the $300 that is appropriated
to the administrative offices of
the courts. If you could, um,
just elaborate a little bit on
um what that funding will be
used for?
Um, Mr. Chair and Mount Vice
Chair, I, I'm glad you asked
that question because initially
we had thought that our our one
of our charges for this special
session was going to be
addressing assisted outpatient
treatment. And the uh courts
corrections and Justice
Committee spent a long time
looking at that legislation and
trying to work on that because
it had been a number of years
since we passed the initial um
legislation. What we
We heard that
um during the, the, um,
committee's work and public
testimony is that the um third
judicial district in Donanaa
County had at the time that we
first passed the AOT bill. They
had started a program and they
have continued it, but they have
had to fund it on their own,
which it was never intended that
way. Uh, former protem of the
And it, uh, Senator Mary Kay.
Pain as a family member who has
a um um mental health disability
and, and she was the primary
leader and inspiration for that
bill, and it was always her
intent and ours.
And I believe it may have been
sometime like in 2012 that we
passed it and we did not have
funding available to support the
program and the um third
judicial district has done it
kind of on their own and bare
bones. So they're ready to um
receive funding to beef that out
the way it was originally
intended. The first judicial
district was ready to start a
pilot project.
They were really primed thinking
that we would um be addressing
AOT in this special session. The
second judicial district my um
area had a mental health court,
but they had had to um cut back
on it.
Primarily because of resources.
So we had the 1st, the 2nd, and
the 3rd, ready to go, but what
we also
Because of these efforts, the
3rd and the 5th and the 12th.
Have um indicated and a
willingness to get started
immediately and we're estimating
that it would address about 70%
of the
Uh, individuals who seem to be
the repeat offenders because of
severe mental health needs, so
that we are actually addressing
what is intended to be, uh,
potentially, um,
I don't know. I don't want to
call them potentially dangerous,
but
These individuals may be a
threat to themselves or to
others, and um we're trying very
hard to get something in place
and by having the pilot programs
going with this funding, which
actually is intended. This is
only a one time that it's
intended um as the chair uh
indicated this morning that
there will be capacity to fund
it.
Uh, as an, as a recurring, um,
appropriation in the um in our
general fund appropriations. So
we will learn something in the,
in the immediate implementation
of the pilot programs and be
ready to address the whole AOT
issue with greater knowledge and
understanding in the 2025
session.
Uh, thank you, Mr. Cha. Thank
you, uh, Madam Leader. Um, this,
um, the pilot programs that
we're talking about, are these
evidence-based and data-driven
programs.
Um, Mr. Chairman, and now vice
chair.
I would say yes, because the
whole intent here.
And really what we have been
after in all of our efforts
regarding the um improvements to
our criminal justice system is
to base
Our decisions on science.
Thank you, uh, Mr. Chair and
Madam Leader, um, and just this
is my last question.
Um, these pilot programs as they
move forward, would they be able
to draw down Medicaid funds from
the the federal government.
Mr. Chair and Vice Chair, I
believe that is the case. And in
fact, um, we
We're told during our work in
CCJ that there are actually
Medicaid waiver programs
available for this particular
population. So I think that we
have an opportunity here to um
make some real change.
Positive change.
Uh, thank you, Mr. Chair. Thank
you, Madam Leader. I'm pleased
to see the inclusion of this and
appreciate the work, uh, the
hard extensive work that I know
the interim, uh courts and
criminal justice committee did.
Thanks.
Thank you, Vice Chair Dixon.
Next we're gonna go to represent
Pettigrew.
Thank you, Chairman. Um,
I remember my first question is
for director Berciaga.
For the audience and the people
listening in, can you give me
the difference in
Um, days.
Signature from from Governor's
signature.
Between an emergency clause and
a feed bill.
Days that money is available.
Madam.
Mr. Chairman, and
Representing pettig group.
This bill is considered a
general appropriations bill. So,
If and when it is signed, it
goes into effect immediately for
the Constitution.
Thank you, Chairman. Thank you,
uh, director.
Now for an em for a bill that
has an emergency clause on it.
From the time that that bill is
signed.
When does the money become
available?
Mhm.
Mr. Chairman and Representative,
there is no um
There are no applicability or
effective dates in here, so I
believe that the money would
become effective immediately. It
includes fiscal years.
25, 26, so I believe as soon as
it is signed, there's no
Specification in here that it
would uh become effective or be
available later. I believe it,
it would need to be.
Once it's signed,
Then it goes to the Secretary of
State to search the state with
chapter it once it becomes law.
After the Secretary of State
chapters that the law, it
becomes effective as far as I
can tell.
German uh director.
Two different totally two
totally different questions.
One, a feed bill, general
appropriations, once it's
chapter, money is available.
Take a bill that has an
emergency clause on it. Once
it's chaptered.
What's the timeline before that
money becomes available?
7 days, 14 days, 28 days, 6
months.
If the bill has an emergency
clause.
If the bill has an emergency
clause.
Mr. Chairman, representative, if
the bill has an emergency
clause, it becomes effective.
Upon the governor's signature, a
feed bill.
If, OK. Two totally different
questions. OK, so.
A bill with an emergency clause.
On chaptered,
When does the money become
available for use?
An allocation.
Mr. Chairman, Represent Petty
Grew.
The law becomes effective
immediately. The money becomes
effective as soon as DFA has it
on their books and is able to
make it available to the public
entities that are receiving it.
I do not know what that time
frame is.
Thank you, Chairman, and uh
thank you, director. So
basically, a bill was
And the feed, which is a general
appropriation as you define.
The money, once it's the, once
the feed bills chapter.
Boom, money is available.
And a a bill with an emergency
clause. Once it's chaptered.
Appropriations are made to the
appropriate agencies, money is
available, no difference really.
Mr. Chairman, representative,
that's correct.
Thank you.
To my point,
For the last several years and
over the last, well, we can go
back.
Decades.
Doesn't matter who's in charge.
Um, if it's, uh, Republicans or
Democrats.
We've added things into a feed
bill that don't belong into a
feed bill.
It got really out of hand in
2023.
They got out of hand again in
2024.
Things that don't belong in a
feed bill that should go through
chairman inappropriation
process.
No different than the discussion
that was had.
This morning
In the Legislative Council, with
respect to some of the things
that have changed with respect
to salaries.
Going that way. So here's my
problem.
There's no reason.
Or
Section 2 and Section 3.
To be in here.
This is a feed bill. The feed
bill is designed to to pay for
legislative staff.
All the operations and
everything for this for that
specific session.
When you're in a regular
meeting, a 30 day or a 60 day,
it also covers
Carrying through interim
committees all the costs and
everything that covers.
Uh
Governance
Of, of this building and the
people that serve.
Section 2
Belongs in its own bill.
Section 3 belongs in its own
bill.
They can both be processed. They
can both go through both houses.
And
Within however many days it
takes, the money is available.
I fought this and really hard in
2023. I fought it again in 2024,
and I've got to fight it now.
Now this is coming from a guy.
This is coming from a guy that
within
Good
Monday night
On June 17th,
Drove through the smoke, drove
the back roads.
To get up there
And get a child, a grandchild.
In some animals out.
And within 2 days was back,
sitting and working.
With my wife in the emergency
operation center for almost 2
weeks after that.
My wife focusing on bringing
food trucks in.
On donations so that we could
take the food trucks.
We get the food trucks could buy
food.
And we could feed over 701st
responders.
And at the same time, I sat in
the emergency operation center
helping the county manager and
the city mayor.
In other cities, helping with
whatever I needed to.
Representative Vincent and his,
his family did the same thing.
They were working hard to do
that.
I've lived in Redosa part-time.
Off and on.
Well, I'm an old guy, so.
We'll just leave it at that.
Being up there taking care of
that.
I went through, I went through
the floods. I helped determine
what needed to be cleared out
what did need to be cleared out.
So that the next flood that came
down.
Didn't have more disastrous
impact.
Unfortunately, not all of those.
Mattered.
Because of the amount of flow.
I agree that this money needs to
be there.
1,000%. But there's a difference
between convenience.
In principle
This money doesn't belong here.
It belongs in its own standalone
bill.
It needs to have an emergency.
Clothes on it?
And it needs to go through.
Because that's the right thing
to do.
But this is the wrong process
for this, and it has been
misused for way too many years.
We keep having these
conversations in interim
committees and other committees
where chairmen were
You know, it's broke. We need to
fix it.
Well, it's time to start fixing
things.
It's time to start bypassing.
Oh, this is the easy way for the
minority to get something in.
Oh, this is the easy way for the
majority to get something in.
No.
We need to stand on the
principles of what it's supposed
to do.
I stand against this, not
because it's the wrong, it's,
it's the wrong thing to do.
It's the wrong way to do this.
We all know it, but we do it
year after year.
3 years ago?
He gave millions of dollars to
Albuquerque in a feed bill for
ankle bracelets. After they
fought to defund the police.
I don't understand some of the
things that we do.
With this money should be in its
own bill, same as Section 3.
Should be in its own bill, and
it should stand on its own
merits.
Mr. Chairman, I have one last
question. As I understand this,
please wrap up, yup.
As I understand this in section
2 item B that are actually, I
may have the wrong item.
I don't go uh I A, the 100.
is allocated
There's a gran.
The remaining money in this
bill.
As a grant loan option.
Is that accurate, Mr. Chairman,
um, director.
Miss
Mr. Chairman, Representative
number one, I can't comment on
the merits of the bill.
Technical aspects with respect
to your specific question, I
would defer to the leader. Mr.
Chairman, Representative
Pettigrew, it is um
It is our understanding and this
is based on the premise that
FEMA will be providing those
funds, and yet if FEMA does not,
then the legislature could um
enact a loan forgiveness. Mr.
Chairman, let me make the
question more specific.
The 10 million in section A.
Specifically issued grant or
loan?
Mr. Chairman, Representative,
those are, those are grants.
OK.
So, Mr. Chairman, Leader.
The
Other 90 million.
As a loan
And has the opportunity for
forgiveness.
Mr. Chairman, I represented
Pettigrew at 70 million, yeah.
Sorry, my math's a little slow
today. I appreciate the, the
conversation. I do not
understand how we can take one
group.
And another group.
And treat them differently.
Again, another reason why this
bill needs to be, this needs to
be its own bill, it's own
legislation. Thank you.
Representative De la Cruz.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I, uh,
have the privilege of being on
this committee and I have the
privilege of being on the
legislative Finance Committee.
And
Being able to see and
participate.
In these committees, which
In uh entail hours and hours of
listening to financials.
And financial issues on every
aspect of state government.
And with that said, we
understand the length and
breadths that it takes to, to
get things financed for for our
state and all of the various
aspects of it.
That being said, I appreciate
leadership bringing this and
consolidating these efforts,
particularly and selfishly,
because I do have family in
Ridoso that we are going to be
able to offer help quickly.
And so, I just want to say that
to the membership and to the
public because
You know, it's kind of nice to
see state government moving
quickly once in a while. Thank
you, sir.
Thank you very much
Representative De la Cruz. Uh, I
don't have anybody else on the
list. I'm gonna, uh, sort of
wrap up briefly, Madam Leader,
and your two experts, thank you
very much.
Um, uh, first, uh, we've
discussed it that for there is
at least a 25%.
Forgivable intention and perhaps
more that is part of the $70
million that's going to the
board of Finance. Madam Leader,
I want to thank you and your
co-sponsors, particularly the
gentleman uh from Lincoln and
Ontario, the going to the board
of Finance, and I want to
compliment our excellent staff
work. This will be a more, we
hope and fully intend for this
to be the most nimble allocation
of disaster dollars.
Uh, uh, learning hard lessons
and building on the work in
response to Hermit's beak calf
Canyon, um,
That is very important. It's,
this will end up being Madam
Leader, I want to thank you the
most rapid and most significant
early response.
Frankly in his uh the gentleman
from Lincoln Onarro and also the
gentleman uh from Lee and others
have pointed out, continuing and
ongoing disasters that are
happening in Lincoln and Onarro
counties. Uh, this is responding
in real time to that.
Madam Leader, I also want to
thank you very much for the
funds that go to Emner.
Every day that it's not raining
every day once we get into the
winter time where folks can
safely get out, they will be uh
taking down burnt trees. They
will be reducing erosion. They
will be building tech dams and
other things that again through
hard lessons that have been
learned are will lessen the
severe impacts, particularly
from flooding. It's not gonna
fix things, but it will, again,
immediately make things a little
bit better, and this might
allows that work over the next 2
years for folks to know that
they're going to have solid and
long-term work.
Uh, we know that there's more
that's needed, Madam Leader,
also I want to call out and
thank Department of Homeland
Security and Emergency
Management.
As Representative De la Cruz
pointed out, we heard yesterday
how our Homeland Security
Department for the state of New
Mexico is helping New Mexicans
in Lincoln and Otaro counties
work through the claims process,
whether that's for insurance,
whether that's through FEMA, to
have a New Mexican working there
with them, we heard is very
positive, I wanna thank DHSEM
for their leadership. This puts
Significant funding to help them
through that process no matter
where someone lives, no matter
who they are, they will now, uh,
there is funding for them to
have an advocate that works
through what is a very traumatic
process, uh, and I appreciate
the vice chair for pointing out
that um
The uh
Funding that's going for
competency diversions and for
assisted outpatient treatment to
respond immediately, bolstering
programs that are up and running
now, and we fully hope the
executive is able to stand up
additional programs with this
additional funding that amounts
to a 6% increase, uh, for FY 25,
um, we fully hope for and will
work to support that uh
implementing positive results in
communities across the state,
particularly.
The most impacted.
So I thank you very much, Madam
Leader. I wanted to go through
the members, I also do want to
draw your attention. We have a
GFFS general Fund Financial
summary, um, if you'll look
first page, bottom right, this
includes the 103 million that's
contemplated in this legislation
for the special session
non-recurring.
And as you'll see in the bottom
right, there, this leaves us
with a 30.6% reserve continuing
to meet what is his what the
past LSC has set, which is a 30%
reserve,
uh, with that, um, Madam Leader,
is there anything that you want
to uh say before we go to the
vote?
No, just again, thanks very
much, um Mr. Chairman, and for
all of you, your work on the LFC
and for the um budget staff and
of course, we always appreciate
the alleged counsel service.
Thank you. Thank you very much.
OK, let's go to the vote,
please.
Or actually, excuse me, uh, as
the ranking member, uh, uh,
reminded, thank you, uh, we'll
go for a motion.
In a second. OK, it's been moved
by Vice Chair Dixon, seconded by
uh ranking member Armstrong.
We'll go to the vote now.
And we did Alison.
Yes.
Representative Armstrong. Yes.
Representative.
Representative Brown.
Representative chapter.
Yes.
Representative De la Cruz. Yes.
Representative Figueroa. Yes.
Representative Garcia. Yes.
Representative.
Yes.
Representative Hail.
Yes.
Representative Khan. Yes.
Representative Vincent. Yes.
Representative
No, ma'am, and I'd like to
explain my vote.
Representative
Ariana?
Yes.
Representative Dixon as chair.
Yes.
Yes.
Uh, Represent Brown to briefly
explain your vote. Yes, Mr.
Chair, we will be brief.
I don't want to lose sight of
what Representative Pettigrew
has raised as an issue. I've
been here long enough now to
have seen a number of
Feed bills.
And the best feed bills are
simply feed bills without any
other packing of, of
appropriations.
So I, I think we really do
seriously need to consider
having a process that gets us
back to some purity in the
system.
The other needs that are
expressed in this bill.
Um,
could quickly be addressed uh
through the methods that, and so
maybe it takes bifurcation or
trifurcation, but there's a way
to move quickly.
With an emergency clause on the
bill, so I think we would do
ourselves a favor if we stuck to
a more pure process. Thank you.
Thank you very much. Bere
briefly.
Thank you, Chairman. Uh, just
reiterating and thank you
Representative Brown, for what,
what you had to say with respect
to this. Once again, we just
made a decision of convenience
over principle.
This is wrong.
This bill could stand on its
own.
And, and we have the capability
to push them both, all three of
those bills.
Right through without doing
this, and this is wrong.
Thank you very much. OK,
members, thank you very much for
your work, for your, uh, uh,
great questions. Thank you very
much, Madam Leader. Thank you to
all of the staff-sponsor
Representative Vincent.
Representative Vincent, thank
you and congratulations on
delivering for your community.
OK, with that, we're adjourned.
We'll see everybody back on the
