The, uh, to, uh, fix those
differences. And so that's the
first time we're doing that.
Thanks to Director Bri and so
many others there. With that,
uh, I don't know, we'll go to
you, Mr. Liu first from the LFC,
um, glad to have LESC at the
table. Wanna note members for
all of the members who are here,
uh, we have made the decision in
consultation and appreciate very
much, uh, Mr. Senna, uh, in the
past, these have essentially
been sort of the legislative
LFC in the executive, uh, having
the LESC legislative educated
Education Study Committee as a
full participant and we're very
excited for Mr. Senna to be that
through all of this work, we
feel, and I think there's a lot
of agreement across areas is the
right way forward. So excited to
to do that for the first time
this year as well.
So take us away, Mr. Liu.
Thank you Mr. Chair. Um, for
those of you who are new, my
name is Sonny Liu. I'm the
public schools analyst for LFC.
Glad to be joined here with
directors John Senna from LESC
and Simon Miller from DFA is one
of his last budget hearings, um,
we'll be working from tab 9 in
your binders, you'll see this
large packet, uh, labeled public
school support.
Um, I'm sorry, I did not bring a
magnifying glass for for all of
the lines, but we'll do our best
to uh read the lines and go
slowly. You'll notice at the top
of this page, there's references
to volume 12, and 3, which you
should also have at your table,
uh, those page numbers reference
public schools within these
documents, um, if you want to
dig into those as well.
Um, but I was joking with them
earlier that
There's a lot of wealth of
knowledge in this room, so it's
likely that someone has the
answer in here, so please feel
free to to ask. That's actually
Mr. Liu, that's a great point. I
want to recognize Secretary
Padilla from the Public
Education Department, her team,
they are here today as part of
that wealth of knowledge. Thank
you for being here.
OK, so I'm gonna do a little bit
of housekeeping and describing
how you read this document, and
then we'll move into the
executive LESC and then LFC
differences.
So starting on the first page
from lines one.
21.
These are all changes to the
state equalization guarantee
appropriation.
Since it's just one line in the
budget, this chart helps you see
what's being added, what's being
subtracted, what are the changes
happening to that line. And so
what you're gonna read these as
Adding from up, from top to
bottom.
So you'll see on line 2, that's
the base amount.
From the previous year, and then
online 27.
That is the total for state
equalization guarantee
appropriations.
Um
In the second column, you'll see
what the fiscal year 25
operating budget was for the SCG
and the changes that happened
last year.
And then you'll see the
executive, LESC and LFC
differences on the columns to
the right. Uh, and with that,
I'm gonna turn it over to Simon
to go over the executive
recommendation.
Good afternoon, Mr. Chair,
members of the committee, um,
again, my name is Simon Miller
and I'm an analyst at DFA.
Um, like Sonny said, this is a
big complex budget makes up.
40% or so of the entire
statewide general fund recurring
budget, uh, so we won't go
through all 167 lines, but we'll
try to point out the
The biggest differences and
biggest increases in each of the
budgets. So I think that the
best place to start is line 77.
So
The public school recurring
budget.
can be broken down really into 3
components. You have the state
equalization guarantee, you
know, the, the, the formula
funding, and that makes up 95%
of the recurring budget.
The remaining 5% of the
recurring budget is in uh what
we call categorical and below
the line recurring.
If you add all of those up
together, line 77 tells you what
the general fund recurring
increases for all three of the
budgets, so that's like, you
know, the big picture overall
increase. Uh, so for the
executive budget recommendation,
it's 234 million or 5.3%.
The LESC recommendations 373
million, that's the increase,
uh, at 8.4%.
And the LFC recommendation, um,
Uh, at 263 million or 5.9%.
So with that, uh, we'll first go
over the state equalization
guarantee or the public school
funding formula, which is gonna
be uh lines one.
Through line 24.
And the, the biggest increase in
all three of the budget
recommendations is uh
compensation for educational
personnel.
That increase, when you look at
compensation and insurance
together, that's basically 60%
of the increase for uh DFA and
LFC recommendations, um, and
slightly less than that for the
LESC recommendation. But, but
compensation is a very big
component of the budget increase
in all of the
All 3 recommendations.
So you'll see the executive
recommendation has a 3%.
Um, compensation increase, which
is the same as the LESC
recommendation.
The LFC recommendation has a 4%
compensation increase.
And on line 17, you'll see also
that the LFC and LESC
recommendations increase the
minimum teacher salaries.
Um, right now it's 50,000,
60,000 and 70,000 for level 12,
and 3.
Uh
Their, their recommendations
increase it to 55, 65, 75, um,
but that's, that's not included
in the executive recommendation.
And um for insurance, line 19.
All 3 recommendations are very,
very close at around 38 million.
And what that funds is
Roughly a 10% premium increase
for health and risk insurance.
Um, well for PSIA and for APS.
What
ESIA and APS end up adopting. It
is a separate process from the
budget.
Setting today. So they'll adopt
their rate increases in the
spring. However, this
For your information, this 38
million would fund about 10% uh
premium increases.
And finally, and if I'm rambling
on too long, please tell me to
be quiet. Um,
The last thing I'll mention in
the state equalization guarantee
before I pass it over to John
is, uh, you'll see on line 11,
uh, all three recommendations
have about 50 million for
increased K12+ units, um, so,
uh, a couple of years ago, uh,
you all passed a bill that
provides additional funding for
schools that go beyond 180 days
or beyond 155 days for 4 day
week schools.
And um
In the current school year, we
saw a pretty big increase, I
think like 36% increase in the
number of schools that
qualify for those K-12 plus
units, meaning that they go
above 180 days or 155 days for 4
day school weeks, and so the
increase is there, um, in each
of the budgets accommodates the
widespread lengthening in
calendars.
And with that, I will pass it
over to John. And real quick,
thank you. uh, I'm also wanna
recognize uh Chair Andres Romero
from the House Education
Committee. Thank you for being
here too.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Uh, I
wanted to say thanks for uh
including us in this process,
uh, I think our committee did a
lot of good work over the
interim, and actually a lot of
the things I'll talk about today
are, are, are products of that
interim work and and policies
that our committee has endorsed,
leading into the session.
So I won't go over all the
things that
That Simon said other than to
say, uh, we are very close
across all three wrecks on, on
most of these components. Uh,
I'll call your attentions to
line 8 and 9.
And this is um tied to lines 45,
and 6. These are changes to the
state equalization guarantee
formula. So over the last two
years, our committee has done an
ongoing study of the state
school funding formula to
determine whether or not it was
um distributing money
appropriately, getting money to
students who need it most, um,
and making sure that it's
transparent and consistent
across across years. And so
online 4, you'll see that we're
adding
income index, family income
index units.
The family income index is a
mechanism that you all passed a
few years ago to to better
identify poverty at the school
site level.
So we're able to actually match
student households with income
levels to better identify
poverty. Over the last few
years, you all have funded the
family income index program.
Which provided money to specific
schools.
This mechanism actually, this
proposal takes that mechanism
and applies it to school
districts, so that money that
you already fund through what's
called the at-risk index.
will better flow to students
that need it most. We're so
we're better identifying poverty
to align uh for actually, um, is
the appropriation associated
with that. Lines 5 and 6 are
essentially deductions from the
base, having to do with the the
change. So we're not actually
taking money out, we're sort of
swapping things around based on
that proposal.
Um, lines 8 and 9, you'll see in
the LESC reck are 40 and $51
million respectively.
Those are appropriations that
are part of uh the policy that
you'll see in House Bill 63.
Uh, that includes those at-risk
changes, but also includes an uh
an increase to the secondary
factor.
So schools are funded based
primarily on the number of
students that they have and the
kinds of students that you that
they have. And so at different
grade levels, students
essentially generate different
amounts of money.
So, for secondary students
currently,
The formula
funds 1.25 units. So essentially
a 7th through 12th graders is
worth a unit and a quarter.
Our proposal would actually
increase that to 1.3 units, so
school districts and charter
schools would actually generate
more funding.
For secondary students.
The reason for that is because
we've heard from communities, as
well as from you all in your
interest and career and
technical education that those
programs are expensive to run.
And that school districts need
consistent and sustainable
funding for those programs.
Additionally, our, our committee
also uh had a middle school
working group this past interim.
Where we pointed out again that
middle school is that place
where we start to see drop offs
in proficiency rates, we
actually see increases in
proficiency rates to 6th grade
for most students across the
state.
And at middle school is where
you start to see that peak and
then a drop off.
Associated with that drop off is
an increase in chronic
absenteeism, and just sort of
lack of engagement from students
in general. So this policy
proposal would include 6 through
12th grade, increased the factor
in funding for those students,
so that school districts and
charter schools can better serve
those students in those critical
transition periods.
And with that, Mr. Chair, I'll,
I'll stop it, like I said
before, everything else is
pretty similar across SEG uh in
our recommendation.
Thank you, Mr. Chair, and to
wrap this up, the best thing
about going last is they
basically covered most of the
differences.
Uh, the only one thing that
hasn't been talked about is line
14 and 12.
Which are adjustments for
membership enrollment declines.
So, as you're probably well
aware, our student population
has been shrinking for the last
decade, um, and so as those
workloads shrink, um, these
adjustments are making
assumptions for that, which was
part of the LFC budget guideline
direction. Overall, the SCG
changes, which is what is
calledly referred to as above
the line, you'll see on line 28
and 29.
with the executive at about 4.8%
increase, LESC at 8% and LFC at
6% for operational funding that
goes to schools.
We'll now move into the next
section, 2 sections referred to
as categorical and below the
line, and this is where it
changes a little bit. You're
gonna read this as
From left to right. So if you
look at
Transportation line number 32,
maintenance and operations.
The executive recommendation
isn't adding 160 million, it is
just an increase from 104 to
116. So you're looking at these
as differences left to right,
and I'll go ahead and let um
Simon.
Thanks, honny. Um, Mr. Chair,
members of the committee, um,
like Sonny said, well,
Go to the next part where we
talk about categorical
appropriations and below the
line recurring requests, we'll
talk about those together, um,
just because there are certain
items funded as categorical in
Some of the recommendations,
others funded as low light and
recurring in.
And the other recommendations,
so it's more of an apples to
apples comparison to sort of you
look at them together, um.
So that the first line I'd like
to direct your attention to is
um line 47.
And that's, uh, universal school
meals.
The executive recommendation and
the LESC recommendation, uh,
have that appropriation as
categorical, um, the executive
recommendation is at 50.7
million. The LESC
recommendations at 55.7 million.
And
The LES, or sorry, the LFC
recommendation is is not zero as
it shows on that line, uh,
there's is actually in below the
line recurring on line 61.
And you'll see the LFC
recommendation at 42.2 million.
So, uh, there's a
Fairly large discrepancy between
the recommendations on that
item, uh, and I'll, I'll like.
Sonny speak more to the LFC
recommendation, but that that
amount of 42.2 million is
roughly equivalent to the amount
spent on the program last fiscal
year.
Um, and FY 24.
And the, uh, so the, the LF LESC
and executive recommendations,
uh, build in an increase for uh
participation increases and meal
rate increases as well.
And uh
You'll see, um
There on on line 61, uh, under
the FY 25 Obud, the current.
Your budget is 41 million.
And uh the department is
projecting a shortfall of about
8 million.
And so that shortfall is funded,
um, in all three of the
recommendations for the current
year, uh, as a non-recurring
appropriation.
Uh, online.
One, no line 96.
And
The next item I'd like to point
out is, um,
Um
So, so there is a lot of
similarity across categorical
and across um below the line
recurring, um.
But, uh, like I said, one of the
biggest differences was
universal meals, and uh next I'd
like to point out on line 64, 65
and 66, there are some items in
the executive recommendation,
uh, that aren't in the other two
recommendations, uh, line 65 is
the learning management system
or as you all might know it,
Canvas, which is the online
platform for, you know, um,
course work and remote learning.
And uh uh currently PED.
funds that for districts out of
a non-recurring appropriation.
And uh the LFC and LESC
recommendations still have that
appropriation in non-recurring,
uh, whereas the executive
recommendation moves that up
into a recurring item. Um, and
then,
On line 66, you'll see a uh
school safety appropriation in
the executive recommendation of
5 million.
Um, that's for, uh, mass
emergency communication systems.
Um
The LESC and LFC recommendation
don't.
Have that item specifically in
recurring, but there is some
money in non-recurring uh and
capital related to school
safety, um, that, uh, I'll leave
it to them to talk about it, I
guess.
So, um, with that, go ahead,
John.
Uh, thank you, Mr. Chair. I
won't go through, uh, too much
detail. Um, I did want to point
out just sort of to add on to
what Simon said about your
universal school meals
appropriation.
Again, that's something that you
all uh passed a few years ago in
Senate Bill 4.
Um, the reason that we have it
in the categorical, just as some
context categorical
appropriations are are usually
appropriations that are tied to
some sort of statutory
requirement. So you got and and
a formula. So transportation,
for instance, you fund uh a
transportation allocation here,
and then PED uses a formula to
distribute that money to school
districts based on miles and
riders and some other factors.
Because, um, school meals
essentially runs on a formula,
PED.
gathers information from school
districts to determine who
qualifies for federal federal
subsidies in the national school
lunch program and breakfast
program, and then you all are
paying the difference between
What districts get in federal
reimbursements and what it costs
to pay for all other students
who might not qualify for for
those subsidies. And so because
there is a sort of formula
distribution, uh, for that
program and because you all have
have passed the statute that
essentially promises to pay for
those meals, we felt it
appropriate that we put um that
appropriation categorical.
Again, as Simon said, uh, LFC
has it in a uh related
recurring, so still recurring
funding, just a slightly
different place in the in the.
the budget.
Uh, very quickly online, 64, 65
and 67, um, as Simon said, and
this is where this document can
get a little bit confusing.
Um
The executive has
recommendations for those 3.
Uh, those 3 line items.
LESC has uh the bilingual
multicultural black and Hispanic
Education Act initiatives on
line 109.
So if you're looking for a match
somewhere, that's on line 109.
The learning management system,
uh, LESC also recommends the
same amount, but that's on line
132. And then finally for that
school safety as Simon said.
Um, both LASC and LFC have
worked together uh with staff
from the public school
facilities Authority and have
decided to propose a $50 million
appropriation.
That would go directly to school
districts.
Uh, on a formula basis for
school safety initiatives,
right, so similar to what Simon
said, uh, uh, pretty big
difference in the amount,
obviously, but to fund school
safety initiatives, including
infrastructure and other efforts
at school student safety and
wellness.
Uh, the last thing I'll talk
about very quickly is line 38.
And this is part of your
transportation.
Uh, appropriation or category.
You all have probably heard from
your school districts on a
pretty regular basis over the
last few years about
transportation funding, um, some
of that has to do with the, the
transportation formula and how
money is distributed.
Our committee and staff did a
study on transportation on the
summer of 23, talking to school
districts and school
transportation officials, and
that line 36 at $5.2 million is
a number that represents
Essentially an inflation
adjustment, uh,
Amount to get school districts
back to what was a high water
mark for transportation funding.
In the mid 2010s. So at one
point, you have been funding
transportation at a certain
level because of economic
situations, you've, you decrease
that funding we've been working
our way back to it, that
additional, that additional
numbers what our staff came up
with that would get us back to
that historic high water mark.
And with that, I'll pass it on
to Sonny.
Thank you, John.
The last thing I want to point
out is line 71 through 72 and
This is the operating budget for
public education, the public
education department, um, this
is what goes directly for them
to staff and do contracts and
operate their agency. You'll see
at the very end of this huge
packet, a different sheet which
we can go into more detail if
you'd like, but the high level
General fund amount here is 3
million in the executive
recommendation and the LESC
recommendation, which is a 12%
increase and an 800,000.
dollar increase at the LFC
recommendation, which is 3%.
All in all, back to what Simon
said earlier online 78 and 79,
you'll see the total recurring
increase for general fund, um,
and once again, that's 5.3% for
the executive, 8.4% for LESC and
5.9% for LFC, and that ends the
recurring piece. Moving on to
the next two pages, these are
what we would call non-recurring
or one time appropriations and
you'll find these in section 5
and later sections of house
building.
2.
Um
Once again, much like the
previous section, you'll be
reading these left to right. You
can see the non-recurring
appropriations in the FY 25 up
but column, and then you'll see
the recommendations for each um
organization on the right there.
I'll turn it over to Simon to
point out some of the different.
Mr. Chair, members of the
committee.
Um, moving on to non-recurring
general fund appropriations to
line 80 through line 124.
The first item I'd like to point
out is line 83, out of school
learning, summer enrichment, and
high dosage tutoring programs,
um, summer learning programs,
high dosage tutoring, both
evidence-based strategies for,
for, um,
Improving academic achievement
and both, uh, you know, all
three recommendations have a
pretty significant investment,
um, the LESC recommendation
increases.
Uh, that amount though from 15
million in the current year to
20 million for
Um, next fiscal year, whereas
the LFC and
CFA recommendations are flat to
the current year at 15 million.
Moving on to line 86, Special
Education initiatives.
You'll see 4 million in the
executive recommendation and 4
million in the LESC
recommendation, um, and 0 in the
LFC recommendation.
So
This
The vast majority of state
funding for special education
is.
run through the SCG 800 million
or so, don't quote me on that,
but that's roughly what it comes
out to in terms of the special
ed, uh units generated in the
formula, this appropriation here
is specifically for the
department.
For professional development
initiatives and um uh technical
assistance to help districts
comply with the individuals.
Disabilities Education Act.
And uh this has been funded the
last couple of years at
5
6 million, um, and, uh, uh, it's
11 item I'd like to point out
because obviously a big
difference between the LFC and
and the other two
recommendations.
Line 88, structured literacy
implementation, that line is
where the uh summer reading
program lives.
And uh it was funded at 30
million last year, and all three
recommendations, uh, are in, in
lockstep uh funding that program
for another.
Another year.
Um, line 89, you'll see a
secondary literacy.
The executive recommendation has
an amount here for uh as
non-recurring.
But you'll see LFC and LESC.
funded that item um out of the
grow fund, which will uh
discuss.
Here in a little bit.
Um
Finally line 92, the executive
recommendation makes a a very
significant investment into the
Indian Education Fund, uh,
that's a non-recurring amount of
90 million.
And that amount is for the next.
3 fiscal years, so, uh, 30
million in FY 26.
30 and FY 27, 30 and FY 28.
Um
And
The LESC recommendation has an
amount of 5 million on the line
below that.
Which um
is about equal to the amount in
the LFC recommendation, uh, but
the LFC recommendation has it,
again, out of the growth fund.
Um
OK, moving to line 100.
The educator Fellows program.
Uh, this program provides uh
paid fellowships for aspiring
teachers, uh, it's different
than the teacher residency
program because these aspiring
teachers don't have to be in a
Uh, an education program, it
could be uh studying into
something entirely different
than education, but want to go
into teaching for their career.
The LFC and L sorry, the
executive and LESC
recommendations hold that
appropriation flat to the
current year at 20 million, and
the LFC recommendation uh cuts
it to 15 million.
And I promise I'm almost done.
Um,
Career technical education. Uh,
this is another one, it's line
108. This is another one that's
a little bit confusing because
it lives in different parts of
the budget, depending on which
recommendation you're looking
at.
So
Overall, the executive and LFC
recommendations have a $40
million non-recurring
appropriation.
The
LESC recommendation is at 30
million right here.
But their recommendation also
has
45 million in the grow fund or
innovation zones, which have
historically been funded out of
CTE appropriation.
The LESC recommendation
obviously also has a a change to
the funding formula, which would
Direct a lot more uh SEG funding
towards CTE programming. So, um,
Definitely the the most
significant investment in CTE is
is in the LESC recommendation.
And with that, I will turn it
over to John.
Uh, thank you, Simon. Thank you,
Mr. Chair. Um,
In hopes of not confusing you
anymore, because that's a lot of
lines, um, I think more than
anything, what I, what I want to
say here is that um as we start
to track across lines, you're
going to see a lot of agreement,
and I'll just use career
technical education is one
example. So if you look at line
129.
You'll see in FY 25 of $40
million appropriation for CTE.
So you're already paying.
For $40 million worth of CTE and
and and innovation zones and
other work-based learning
initiatives for the current
fiscal year. I wanted to point
that out because as Simon said,
if you, if you add up that
amount next to, next to it, the
$14 million in the exact rack.
15 million in the exact wreck on
line 108.
And I think there's one more,
you're going to get back to that
40. So all three wrecks are
between 40 and $45 million.
For CTE and innovation zones and
other work-based learning
initiatives.
On a year over year basis.
As Simon said, on line 150.
My eyesight's failing me. 159
it's, you know.
We're doing our best, um, on
line 159 LESC does recommend a
$45 million over three years for
innovation zones. And for those
of you who aren't familiar with
innovation zones, those are
essentially high school.
Transformation funds. So it's,
it's helping school districts to
create graduate profiles which
are required in the graduate new
graduation requirements that you
all passed last year.
It's about rethinking how
secondary engages high school
students. It's about helping
them think through how
work-based learning can be an
integral part of their uh
experience in secondary, and you
all have been funding innovation
zones for the past 2 years, the
3rd year of innovation zones,
um, and so we put it in this,
and we'll talk a little bit more
about Perf in a minute, but this
is a 45 million 3-year
appropriation, so $15 million a
year, which is essentially what
you're
funding for that program
currently.
Um, I did want to point out, uh,
as Simon said, the exec is
asking for $90 million for the
Indian Education Fund. We, none
of us really talked about it,
but there's already $20 million
appropriated across all three
recommendations in that
categorical space. So the Indian
Education Fund, there's $20
million in all three
recommendations to go directly
to the fund, which is what
you're also doing for the
current fiscal year.
As Simon mentioned the exec is
asking for 90 for the next 3
years, so essentially 30 million
a year for the next 3 LESD has
$5 million a year, which is a
25% increase for that particular
fund, um, the department also
has a pretty significant balance
in that fund and has access to
the fund to continue to fund
other initiatives for tribal
entities and school districts
that that serve tribal students.
So we thought this was an
appropriate um amount.
And again does match what LFC's
recommending but on a 3 year.
thesis.
Otherwise, I think we're so
close, I won't, I won't confuse
you anymore and I'll let you
talk some more, some more about
it.
Thank you, miss.
Thank you Mr. Chair and John and
Simon. I will, I do wanna note
that lines 80 through 124 are
from the general fund.
When you look at lions 125 to
153.
These are coming from other
state funds. We've just put them
here so that you can understand
that there are different pots in
which these initiatives are
being paid from, um, but they
all are put on here so you can
get a better apples to apples
comparison.
Um, I, I do think that there's a
few areas that I wanna note, um,
where there's a lot of
agreements, you'll see online
88, you heard about the summer
literacy uh program that the
governor mentioned in her state
of the state. This is where that
resides similar recommendations
from last year on this, on my
116.
40 million to the state support
reserve fund to maintain the
existing unit value for this
year, and of course, as John
mentioned, uh, generally the
same ballpark amount for CTE
programs. Uh one thing that I do
want to point out is line 123.
In the LESC and LFC
recommendations, there is a
transfer of 150 million from the
general fund to the public
education reform fund, and that
is going to be.
transferred
The 3rd page on Lion 154.
To 166.
Or PD initiatives out of the
reform funds. So you can think
about the appropriation online
123.
Going into the reform fund and
then to the department.
At the very end of this table.
The last thing I want to talk
about before we jump into
section 9.
Um, is a recommendation online
143, which is $50 million as a.
Distribution to
Schools for security and other
capital improvement.
Needs. Uh there is a bit of a
difference that you can't see
necessarily from the numbers
here, but the LEC recommendation
is a distribution based on
student enrollment and the LFC
recommendation is a distribution
based on the SB9 formula that
the council currently uses for
um capital improvements. Uh, and
with that, I'm gonna talk about
section 9.
These appropriations.
are for 3 years. So last year,
with the growth fund, the
government results in
opportunity fund.
Uh, you as a legislature made a
down payment on certain things
that you wanted to give time to
show results, and those were
given a 3-year time period, um,
most notably, you'll see online
156. 60 million for educated
clinical practice, that is split
into 3 years, so 20 million for
This year, next year, and the
following year.
For this cycle.
The executive LEC and LLC
recommendations are also
recommending three-year
appropriations for the specific
initiatives in this section.
I'll let Simon start with the
executive recommendation on
that.
Um, Mr. Chair, members of the
committee, uh,
I'll turn your attention to
lines 154 and 167.
So, or through 167, as Sonny
said, these are the pilot
projects.
That are recommended by each of
uh
DFA, LFC, and LESC.
Um, the first one that I'll talk
about here is line 162, um, that
I
Uh
For um math achievement.
So
The, uh, DFA recommendation is
15 million, so 5 million a year.
The LESC recommendation is very
similar, at 15.6 million, and
the LFC recommendation is, um,
Uh
Quite a bit higher.
At uh
What is that per year, Sonny?
12.4.
I could use some help with math
achievement, I guess.
Um
So, uh, as you all know, our,
our math scores across the state
are um lagging behind where
We would all like them to be,
so, uh, this funding will be
used for uh some sort of new uh
interventions to improve um
math teaching across the state,
and they can be studied uh to
determine if, you know, uh, to
see which interventions were
effective, it actually improving
scores and which maybe we're
not. And um at the end of the 3
years, you all can determine
what to do next, you know,
increase funding, move it to
recurring or, or end the program
outright. Um, the next item I'll
talk about is line 165, school
improvement and Transformation.
Again, the executive
recommendation has
18 millionaires, so 6 million a
year, and this is related to,
uh, uh, federal designations of
of struggling schools, uh, each
year, uh.
Federal government requires PED
to designate schools based on
their performance, um.
There's sort of a
16 tier grading system, if you
will. It's, you know, it's not A
through F, but, uh, some
different classifications.
And, uh, this funding here would
be used by the department, uh,
To
For compliance monitoring of
struggling schools to ensure
that they're um implementing
their school improvement plans
as required by the federal
government.
Um, the next item is line 166.
And again, that's another thing
that the state is really
struggling with is attendance,
uh,
And so this funding here would
be uh it's 6 million a year in
the executive recommendation and
about 10 million a year in um
the LFC and LESC recommendations
to um
For, for, for targeted
interventions to improve
attendance in uh areas where
Attendance is um
Lacking.
Um, uh, thank you, Mr. Cheryl.
Turn it to John.
Uh, thank you, Mr. Chair. I'm
gonna focus uh just on a, on
probably 3 items, uh, 158, 159,
and 160.
158 is a $6 million
appropriation again from the
Perth actually, I'm going to
back up just a minute. For those
of you who aren't familiar with
the public education reform
Fund, it's just a little bit of
context.
Um, a few years ago when the,
when the legislature created the
K5 plus an extended learning
time programs in 2019.
Uh, you all appropriated a
pretty substantial amount to the
school equalization guarantee.
That money only went out if
school districts.
Chose to participate in those
programs.
As a, as a backstop to that, you
will also created the public
education reform Fund.
So whatever money was not spent
because districts did not
participate in those programs,
reverted not to the general fund
but to the public education
reform Fund.
Since then, as those reversions
have been in that fund, you've
actually appropriated money from
that fund for other education
initiatives, other non-recurring
uh programs and and and efforts.
The money's running out because
you eliminated those programs,
you you're no longer
appropriating money to K5+ and
ELTP, so there are no longer
reversions to that fund. So to
Sonny's earlier points about the
transfer.
That transfer is actually
replenishing the public
education reform fund, for the
purposes of these 3-year pilots.
So just to give you an idea of
that, that fund was created to
catch reversions, and they're
now repurposing it as a as a
tool to fund these 3-year
pilots. It's a place to put some
money.
The STEM Education Network is an
effort that our committee has
been working on for the last
couple of years, the $6 million
is actually $2 million a year
for 3 years. Uh, it would create
a center of excellence, and this
will be, this is coupled with a
piece of legislation, create a
center of excellence at a higher
education institution, in order
to coordinate STEM resources
across the state, both for K-12
and for higher ed and and
workforce. So it's not strictly
a K-12 initiative.
Uh, as I mentioned before, 159
is that innovation zones, pilot,
uh, again, you've been funding
it for a couple of years, but we
think putting it here allows
Two things. One, it allows
school districts who are
participating in this project.
To know that they're going to
get year over year consistent
funding for the duration of the
pilot, so that you can build
capacity and plan for those two
years, and we think most
effectively implement those
programs during that pilot, uh,
period.
It also allows us time to
evaluate those programs, right,
because right now, because
funding is uh year over year,
folks aren't really sure what
they're going to get. They're
probably not implementing as
well as we'd like, and so this
gives us an opportunity to
evaluate it on a 3-year basis.
160 is $30 million for supports
for students who are unhoused.
This, this stems from a pilot
that was actually funded with
private money uh originally, in
3 school districts.
And provided essentially cash
payments to students who are
unhoused, homeless students.
Students who received $500 a
month.
And were then required to come
to school, obviously, but also
participate in after school
tutoring and other supports, um,
and the school district was also
required to to uh implement some
support structures for those
students.
The pilot again was in 3
districts, so pretty small at
this point, but demonstrated
some really promising results.
students experiencing
homelessness usually have a
graduation rate in the low 60%
students who participated in
this pilot actually graduated at
higher than 90%.
So we, we, uh, we think there's
some promise in that program,
and that's why we're suggesting
putting it in this particular
perf again, to have that
consistent 3-year pilot and
study, and then we can evaluate
and you can all decide whether
or not that's something you'd
like to continue in the future.
Uh, otherwise, we're very close
in a couple of uh other places.
As I said before, another
example, 165, uh, there is some
money for school transformation
and improvement in both the
exact.
And LFC wreck from the from the
Perf.
On line 119.
You'll see a one time
appropriation for school
transformation from LESC's wreck
for 10 million. So very close in
the year over year amount, uh,
as Sonny said, both a difference
in where it's funded, uh, but
also the source.
I bet you're all thinking, wow,
we're almost done.
So I'll keep this short. I'll,
I'll talk about line 163, which
is your innovative staffing.
Uh, initiative.
Line for LFC and LESC.
This came about for those of you
who were in Carlsbad, um, this
last interim with LFC, we've
been really interested in what
they've done down there with the
team teaching.
And looking at how we increase
the leveraging of our best
teachers, um, to reach more
students. Uh, this is uh a line
item, both in the LESC and LFC
recommendation, um, to test that
out for 3 years, and, and I
think a lot of these
Joint recommendations um are
reflective of the work that both
committees have been trying to
do together the past uh interim
and a few sessions, so.
I will wrap this up by saying
that.
Uh, one big difference is that
the executive recommendation in
section 9 is from General Fund,
and then LESC and LLC
recommendations are from the
public education reform Fund,
just as a distinction.
There are a lot of pages after
this. Um, there's a page that
shows you the differences in the
language recommendations from
each.
There's differences in uh.
Some differences and specials
and supplementals, which you
will hear more about later.
And there's also some consensus
targets that have been agreed
upon for performance. I will not
go over those for the sake of
time, but if you have questions
about them, please feel free to
let us know. And with that, Mr.
Chair, I believe we're ready for
questions.
Great, uh thank you, uh, all
three,
members, please keep the
questions to the budget items
that the three presenters uh
presented upon. We've got a good
and growing list. We're gonna
start with Representative
Pettigrew, then go to
Representative Garrett, then
Representative Chatfield or
ranking member Chaffield.
Thank you, Chairman. The
majority of my questions, um, go
from one from page 4 all the way
to the end.
Joking.
Based on what you just said, I'm
sorry I had to, I had to be
lighthearted a little bit.
Chairman, I have one specific
question for you.
Or we can going to be voting on
an LLC recommendation today
because if not, we, we are not
that today is uh an initial
opportunity to begin diving in.
We've structured so that there
will be multiple opportunities
plus a large working.
determined with that. I'm gonna
take the questions I have. I'm
gonna do some homework online,
on pages 4 through the end and
uh get together with Sonny
later. Thank you. Thank you. OK,
next we have representative
Garrett and ranking member Chat.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Um,
Uh, sunny on lines 8 to 9, um.
We discussed the unit value
raising 6th grade and then grade
7 to 12 to 1.30. I don't see did
LFC.
Grapple with that at all.
That's something that LAC has
been looking at for 2 years.
Uh, thank you, Mr. Chair and
Representative Garrett, um,
LFC was a part of the task force
to look at the funding formula.
Uh, and
We have been in close
communication with John and his
team over the interim about
this, so um I do want to thank
him for the work and his team is
that they have put into this,
uh, but we have been flagging
this for a while, that if you
think about our elementary
school student population.
It's been shrinking for a
decade.
And your largest cohort from
2015 is now freshman in high
school.
And in 3 years, they are also
going to drop off.
And that secondary membership is
gonna keep dropping year after
year for another decade.
We're a bit concerned about the
long term effects of raising the
secondary weight because while
it may be a temporary increase,
it'll be uh accelerating in how
much schools will be losing
units for the next decade.
So we have some current concerns
about uh increasing the factors
to this level. We don't disagree
that the needs are great in
secondary, particularly in
middle school, uh, but at this
time the LFC is not recommending
an increase to the secondary
weight.
Thank you, Mr. Chair, and I know
we'll work on it more because
it's really student actual
individual enrollment drives the
unit value. Some more later, on
line 56 on the row clinical
Practice. I know that it's 20
million, 20 million, 20 million
over several years and
In the past, um,
Nonprofits and others could
respond to an RFP to access
funding for their programs. Will
there be new opportunities for
groups and two groups have come
to me to see, uh, one of them
was golden apple, and there was
another group that came to me
and asked, will there be
additional RFPs, or will they
stick with the ones that
received funding in year one of
that.
60, 202,020.
Mr. Chair Representative
Garrett.
As a legislature, the only
guidance for that appropriation
that you provided was for
educator clinical practice. You
did not specify which groups or
how the department should
implement that appropriation. Uh
so ostensibly the department
could offer opportunities for
those groups to be part of the
pilot. Um, my understanding is
that they have not been offered
access that this has gone
directly to teacher residency
program.
Rs
Um, through the higher education
and other preparation programs
out there.
I have seen in the past that
without guidance from the
legislature, there's a
reluctance to change course, so
I would keep that in mind, but I
don't think the language as it
stands prohibits that from
happening.
Thank you. And, and later PED
can get back to me on that
question. I'd appreciate it. Um,
let's see.
Uh, grow your own online one49.
Uh, it's the LFC has recommended
300 million. I thought, Mr.
Chairman, that that goes into
the HED budget as a.
Is that correct?
That 300 million would be in the
HED budget, not the PED budget,
um, Mr. Chair and Representative
to the 300,000 online, 149 is
what is in the Grow your own
teacher fund. That's the balance
that's currently sitting there,
uh, HED has not made a request
to use that fund, and so it is
essentially stayed there, um,
since its inception. So this
recommendation actually
appropriates the 300,000 A.
Fund. It is in conjunction with
the line 100, uh, we believe
that both of these are a version
of Grow your own.
Teacher programs, and so it is
being uh coupled with that
appropriation to provide um
opportunities for the department
to see which.
version of this works better.
Thank you, Mr. Chair, if we
could further pursue that, not
right now.
Um, and then my final question
is that um,
The Homelessness, the
homelessness program.
That's referred to on um 160. 1
thing that came up is when we
compare ourselves, our ratings
to other states. It's been said
that if we only had 1500 more
high school graduates, we'd
shoot up.
And I understand that, um, you
know, statistics lie or or they
they don't tell the whole story,
but it seems like this is one
effort that raises for those who
are looking at it statistically.
It's programs like that that put
us forward. Do, do you have any
comments on how we get more
graduates.
Mr. Chair Representative
Garrett, um, probably a lot of
ways to get more graduates
overall. Um, in this particular
case, the, the proposal would
pay for about 1500 high school
students, and based on our, on
our analysis, that's about half
the total number of high school
students who are experiencing
homelessness, and so, again,
this is, uh, doesn't have a bill
attached to it and so it would
go to the department for
administration, ideally with
folks who have done this before.
Um
And so this would this would uh
essentially target high school
juniors and seniors as an effort
to improve retention and provide
support to those students. If
you did it over the course of 3
years as we propose here, you're
essentially targeting about 1500
a year with some overlap as
those students uh progressed
through high school.
Thank you, John, and, and Mr.
Chair, it seems like this also
benefits rural and frontier
areas, it's not just an urban
thing. I, I know Cuba did it,
um, so thank you for sharing
about that.
And those are my questions.
Thank you.
Thank you, Representative
Garrett, Ranking member
Chatfield, please.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Thank you
all for the presentation. Uh,
transportation line 31 and uh
and specifically line 37.
Uh
A while back, BED made some
adjustments to exchanging
population density for rurality,
uh, factor. Some of my local
schools, uh,
I'm pretty rural.
I'm pretty remote, uh,
had trouble getting, keeping
their school buses running,
they, the, the funding just
somehow how that formula worked
out, they, they ran short, uh,
Had to apply for additional
funding to be able to keep the
wheels rolling, y'all addressed
that and, and, and what, where
does that stand?
Uh, Mr. Mr. Chair and
Representative Chapfield, uh, as
you remember LFC did a
transportation study recently
and we presented those findings
to the committee, uh, be happy
to go offline and tell you more
about it, but the general
finding was that uh it's
A bit too early to tell what the
shakeup is for the distribution,
um, given that in previous
years, a lot of schools have
received more funding than they
needed and some schools have
not. And so 90% of the
transportation distribution is
covering existing expenditures,
uh, but with that change in the
formula for this year.
A lot of it was
Transferred to large urban dent
districts such as Rio Rancho and
Albuquerque because they had
previously been penalized by the
formula.
Uh, we have all recommendations
are raising the transportation
distribution, which should help
smooth things out, but
One thing that we are
recommending in the LFC
recommendation and I'll turn it
over to John and Simon for their
differences is the use of the
emergency transportation fund to
help those schools.
Come home on that. So we do
realize that there is some
fluctuation and volatility with
those changes, uh, but the
recommendation as it stands, um,
should be able to address some
of those differences. So, uh, I
mean that's exactly what
happened. A lot of that money
went to your bigger schools and,
and it shorted some of the
little schools and 90% of the
schools were, were fine. I just
hope that 10% of the kids in the
little schools are not out there
having to hitchhike to school.
We need to, we need to fund them
all, you know, we need to get
them.
the school. Second question.
Universal school meals, that'd
be on
Line 47, I think.
Uh, we have some great programs
to bring fresh New Mexico
produce fresh in New Mexico, be,
uh, things that are grown here
in New Mexico to our kids to
help them, uh, understand where
their food comes from, to help
them have good, healthy, fresh
produce. Uh, does some of this
funding address that?
Uh, Mr. Chair, I believe you're
referring to another line, which
is on 63. That one is similar in
that it focused on locally grown
produce and um
Other agricultural.
Industries in New Mexico.
So Mr. Chair, uh, does
Does that, how, how widespread
is that in our school system? Is
it, we have it in most of our
schools, just a few of our
schools. I'm not sure.
Um,
Mr. Chair, I don't have that
information, but I do think that
the level of funding at 2.3
million would suggest that it's
not statewide.
Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Thank you, ranking member, uh,
Chatfield. Next we go to
Representative Luhan then
represent Baca, then represent
Hereta from Luhan please.
Thank you, Mr. Chair.
I have a few, few questions. um,
Mr. Chair and um I've got a rep
chat to kind of uh all it span
on the universal school meals,
um, you had mentioned on lines
96, 97, 98 there in some of the
the the.
You explain those different
amounts. Can you?
Elaborate on that, Mr. Chair.
Uh, and my question would be,
are we meeting the uh
statutorial.
Um, efforts that we need to.
Mr. Chair Representative.
Um, line.
96 to 7.8 million.
That's to shore up the
projection for the current year.
So the current year budget is 41
million.
Plus 7.8 right there would bring
it up to, you know, close to 48
million.
Line 97.
is a deficiency from last school
year.
So last school year between the
recurring budget and the
supplemental.
Uh
I think overall the budget, the
money received is about 39
million. The program ended up
costing 42 million. So that's
the 3 million deficiency
appropriation for last fiscal
year.
And then what you see on Y 98,
Universal school meals,
potential cost overrun, that's
just in the executive
recommendation as a
Reserve if participation.
Increases beyond what's budgeted
in line, um.
47.
OK, thank you. That's that
helps. That, that's perfect.
Thank you. That does answer my
question, um.
Next, um, and understanding our
growth funding and how we're
applying that to this budget.
Um, I'm seeing or what I've
heard, and if I can get
clarification, is that there are
different projects that are
3-year projects what to me refer
to our grow.
fun just to be used for those
projects. Can you?
Um, maybe elaborate on that
because what I heard was online,
is it line 108?
That that is the total for the
growth fund, and if you can, and
then we're transferring.
Um, line 123, 1 150 million over
to lines 155 to 166 or any of
those, how is, can you elaborate
or put that together for us as
well.
Representative Lujan. So I think
there's probably a little bit of
confusion in the language more
than anything. So the grow and
the reason that it's in section
9 here is because we're, we're
using the public education
reform Fund as a grow type of
fund. So it is, we're actually
taking money from.
the general fund or suggesting
transferring money from the
general fund to the public
education reform Fund.
And then using those, that
money.
To pay for 3-year pilot
programs, much like Gro did, uh,
in the version that you passed.
Thank you. And what is the total
of that, Mister Chair.
So for this proposal for LESC
and LFC I should say, the
transfer is $150 million.
For those programs over the
course of the next 3 fiscal
years.
Thank you. So we can be looking
at $150 million as a
The, the, the change or the
addition to growth funds and
programs. Is that correct, Mr.
Chair?
Chair Representative Luhan, 150
million is a is a straight one
time appropriation from the
general fund to the public
education reform Fund.
And then that would pay for
those those lines, essentially
158 through 166 in different
versions.
Uh
would pay for 3 years' worth.
OK. I, I think we, I think I
need some more clarification,
but I'll get that, um.
Then I wanted to talk about
Mister Cha online 64, the
bilingual multi uh multicultural
black and Hispanication Act
initiatives, um,
So we see that with the
executive amount of 1.5 million
and then we go down to lines.
Where are they, uh.
1991 and
We see that we appropriated
funds last year and then there
are
There are no appropriations for
this year.
And
I just wanted some clarification
or I missing something uh
particularly with the Black
Education Act and the Hispanic
Education Act, and that
Being uh, I know that we've
combined it PED with the
bilingual program. Can you give
me some more clarification on
how
Or where those fundings or
recommendations are
Mr. Chair Representative Luhan,
so you're right, on line 64 in
the exact rec you have 1.5
million, which is essentially a
roll up of those 3 $500,000
appropriations that were funding
in FY 25, the ones that you
alluded to 89, 90 and 91.
So that's essentially a roll up
to that recurring line on the
exact wreck.
On line 109.
You have the LESC version in a
one-time appropriation of 1.5.
So that matches the executive
recommendation for those three
acts combined. Oh, I'm sorry,
95.
uh, get my eyes. Um, and then,
uh, and then I'll let uh Sunny
speak to the LFC.
Uh,
thank you, Mr. Chair. Thank you,
John. Uh, the LFC recommendation
does not include the 1.5
million.
Uh, in the past, the legislature
has made one time appropriations
such as this for the Black
Education Act, the Hispanic
Education Act, primarily to do
specific activities such as
updating the Spanish language
proficiency test, which
technically should be a one-time
cost. Uh, in other areas that
amount has been rolled into the
agency's operating budget,
you'll see they have personnel
that
Work as liaisons, such as the
one for the Hispanic Education
Act, uh, and other things
related to the black Education
Act. They have personnel within
their operating budget for that.
Uh, the concern here is that we
should, as you heard in LFC and
LAC this interim.
Uh, there's concerns that we
should not be looking at one
time spending as a recurring
cost each year. You really
should be bucketing that into
recurring area if it's truly
gonna be an ongoing operational
need. And so there's concerns
about leveraging it as a
one-time appropriation and also
the question of are there
specific activities that go
beyond what the department um is
statutorily required to do.
I appreciate that very much,
Sunny, thank you. That's, that's
very clear. My concern is, Mr.
Chair, is that we have a, uh,
within the Yazi Martinez lawsuit
that maybe we're not putting
enough attention on the Martinez
and then we have Planton's
plaintiffs that are very active
and perhaps could see this as
not being completely um
addressed through our
legislation, but based on what
um Sunny said, I think we need
some more, um.
Some more input from PED and
more specific ways of how we can
be more efficient with that
spending. Thank you, Mr. Chair.
you don't mind please.
The, uh
The department has indicated
that
Staff that Sonny was talking
about are, are funded out of
those one-time appropriations,
not out of the operating budget
and also uh
They would argue that they do
have recurring responsibilities
related to those.
Um, acts, uh,
Not to say Sonny is wrong, uh,
but we can sharpen our pencils
to see, OK, are those staff
funded out of non-recurring or
recurring, um, that's something
we can work together on with the
department. Thank you, Mr.
Chair. I think we need to do
that in my very last thing is
what I always talk about is our
out of school funding and just
looking at how that's going to
be tied to how it's tied to high
dosage tutoring programs and how
um the spending act and making
that it's kind of a barrier to
some of our out of school
network programs, I believe. Uh,
so I'd like to.
I have, uh, address that
further, but I know others have
questions and it's a long
conversation today. Thank you,
Mr. Chair.
Thank you very much from Lujan.
Next, we have Representative,
uh, Baca and then Rosenbach.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Thank
you for your presentation. Um,
I'm sorry, Mr. Chairman, saying
that one of the things that we
went to through any
recommendation regarding the SCG
we want to make sure that we
cover
Both the the increases to the
minimums for our teachers and
also the insurance, and I go
back to last year.
As we sat here.
We funded education and then we
had many districts across the
state face.
Uh, budget deficits, so as we go
back, I want to make sure that
we're not gonna have to come
back and and do as far as
adjustment to the unit value
later on. So, you know, I, I
definitely appreciate the work
you've done, but I, I do think
that it was very tough for me to
sit here.
And see we had budget shortfalls
and deficits, and we're sitting
on a surplus of billions of
dollars, so that's my soapbox, I
trust we'll get that, uh, Mr.
Chairman, and, uh, one of the
questions that I want and you
guys have heard me, my focus is
school safety.
Uh, career technical education.
Wow.
So, Mr. Chairman and Sonny, I
would, I, I know we have to
dressed in different areas. I
want to know as far as our
Investment into school safety.
Through all funds.
From this year
As opposed to last year. In
other words, I want to make sure
that we're increasing.
Spending or or whatever the
whatever that is, was true.
Uh, Mr. Chair, representative.
And do some quick math.
Uh, last year you had 2 items
related to safety that
We specifically
Uh, easy to discern, such as a
million dollars for school panic
buttons and $200,000 for a
school safety summit. So that's
about 1.2 million.
This year, the recommendations.
I believe the executive has 5
million for school safety and
recurring.
LESC has 51.2, which includes
the panic buttons, the summit,
and an SB 9 distribution or um
capital distribution and LFC
also has 51.2 million. So,
The vast majority of that
increase in the LC and LFC
recommendations is coming from
that capital improvements piece
of 50 million.
They show and one of the things
because I I know and for you
guys, we're trying to track
funds here. We got our fun sheet
and I just want to make sure
that
Um, that we're, as we're growing
the budget for education, that
these areas as far as tech.
Security is also growing. Um,
Mr. Chairman, do you also have
as far as CT? I know that's also
addressed in a number of
different places, I believe like
129, line 108, just to name a
few. Can you, Mr. Chairman, give
me quick math on
The total investment to CTE
types of activities.
Uh, Mr. Chair and
Representative.
The
Current investment is 45 million
in non-recurring for this year.
Uh, the executive, when he had
all three funds that they're
using is at 41 million.
ESC is at 75 million, but
When you break it down to the
actual amount this year it's
about 46.5. They've added a
career development.
Success pilot on line 109 at 1.
5 million.
And then the LFC recommendation
is flat at 45.
Mr. Chairman and uh Sonny, the
other, the other big priority
for me is social and emotional
learning, SEL.
Um, we're, where is that very
quickly. I don't need as far as
address in this budget because
Um, you know, the tragedy goes
out as you, as you guys heard,
we have another shooting in
Nashville yesterday. Our school
to that family of Texas Hall.
So I just want to make sure that
through school safety,
Through the SCL.
that we provide support so that
we don't face a similar tragedy.
Mr. Chair Representative Baca,
I'll point you very quickly to
line 121 in the EESC
recommendation, we have $3
million for behavioral health
supports, um, that would fund
those kinds of uh supports for
students, and I would just say,
in addition to what what Sonny
said about uh the 4040 to $45
million per year for CTE that
the that the SCG revision and
that increase to the secondary
factor, um, even though not
explicitly targeted CTE.
is going to help school
districts, uh, sustainably fund
career technical education for
secondary students, as well as
provide potentially some of
those supports for secondary
students that include counselors
and social workers that provide
critical social-emotional
support for students at that,
that period.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman and
thank you. I'll just say that,
you know, it's very difficult
balance between sometimes that
we're saying that it could be
used for CT. Sometimes we have
to actually have to say what
it's gonna be done or used for
so that we're not
Using it to cover the costs
because when we talk about
Attendance.
And we talked about engagement,
getting kids in school.
Those types of activities that I
focused on school safety, CTE,
social emotional learning.
We will lead to in increased
engagement and hopefully bring
our kids back so that we can
provide and do the things we've
been set out for. So, Mr.
Chairman, thank you.
Thank you very much,
Representative Baca. Next, we
have Representative Herrera,
then Representative Duncan, then
Representative Herndon.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Thank you,
gentlemen. Great report.
I've been looking at this budget
for 7 years and it's still
confounds me, just wanna say
because different sections of
the government call it different
things, and it's on a different
line. And so and then when we
asked how much are we spending,
we have to go to this line, you
have to go to 3 different lines
to see what it is. So I keep
asking if we can't somehow.
Rectify that situation, but
that's just um my wish.
I don't know how to vote on it.
Um, anyhow, I, I just want to
say, uh, John.
I'm not an LSC anymore or
education so so, but are is
there legislation uh about the
uh the SCG. Are we, are, is the
legislation prepared for a vote
in the uh education committee
for that.
Mr. Chit Representative Vedetta,
yes, that's House Bill 63.
That's the full uh SCG revision
that includes the at-risk
portion, uh, addition for
English learners as well as that
secondary increase that we've
been talking about.
Thank you. I, I, I supported
that memorial, so I'm not on
that committee anymore, but I, I
will talk to you about when
that's going to be heard because
I'd like to come in and hear
about it. Um, and then I guess
I want to talk, I wanna make
sure I understand this growth
fund. So the, the LFC has agreed
to take 150 million out of the
general fund and transfer it
over to um the educate um
PED, I guess, to run these uh
grill programs that are what
mines 150, let me get it, 150.
8 through uh
166. Is that correct?
Uh, yes, um, Mr. Chair.
OK. Just wanna make sure. I'm
sorry to belabor the point. So
the, the growth funding that I
think we have for everybody else
is still 190 million.
And that will be, I guess, other
committees will or other
committees other agencies will
be presenting bills, and but we
still have a fund for 190 for
that, for any other agency that
might want to do a grow thing in
addition to 150 million for the
education. So we're talking
about grow funds of what is that
19,150 almost uh what is that
300 $340,000 300 dollars and 3
million or 100,000.
Right?
Proximally, OK, I don't know if
I did my math right. OK, that's,
that's really what I wanted to
know because I too have a, I'm
working on a girlfri with the,
the department of uh aging for
grandparents raising
grandchildren, and I have a
private match of 5 million, I
think hopefully me going for 5
million, but I, I just wanted to
make sure that growth fund is
still open for other ideas, so I
appreciate that. Thank you.
That's all I have, Mr.
Excellent.
Thank you Duncan.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. I've, I've
just discussed.
Some basic questions for you,
um, and I guess my first
question, I sure would be on
line 46 and line 92. Can you
explain the difference of why
they're coming from different
pots.
Um, Mr. Chair Representative.
The
Item on line 47 or no sorry, 46.
That is from the general fund
and it's in part of the
recurring budget. The only
difference is that line.
92, 93.
That funding, it's still general
fund, but non-retur.
OK. And I just wanted to um one
of you under this, the
non-recurring, I'm always
concerned when we say it's
non-recurring, but I see it in
there year after year after
year.
And that's frustrating.
Um, and so I'm, I'm just a
little concerned about that. Um,
Online 65, the learning
management system we're talking
about for remote learning.
Can you tell me who that
specifically targeted for, I
represent um
district that we don't even have
internet nor do we have the
infrastructure to get internet.
So I was wondering if you could
tell me who that's going to go
for Representative Fernandez and
I were curious.
So Mr. Chair Representative
Duncan, so this is a system
currently funded the way it is.
It's called Canvas, I think they
use it for student services, but
also for for professional
development for teachers, so
it's an online platform that the
department uses for multiple
things.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. So it's
probably for teachers, not
students.
OK, OK, thank you. Thank you
very much for that. And then the
last item and, and I don't,
don't know if there's an answer
to this one, but as we face
shrinking enrollment, our
maintenance costs continue to go
up.
Mr. Chair, representative,
that's a very difficult question
because
There are a lot of school
facilities out there that are
built for much larger
population. And there's a lot of
emotions surrounding those
buildings within the communities
that are there. And so schools,
to your point, are seeing fewer
students.
And still large spaces within
the facilities and having to
grapple with asking their
communities to right size. Um,
that is a piece that isn't here.
This is, that's part of the
capital outlay system that
PSCOC, the public school capital
Olake council deals with. This
is the operational piece for
schools, but I'll be happy to
talk with you more about the
capital piece offline.
Thank you. Thank you, Mr. Chair,
Mr. Chair, if I could,
Representative Duncan real
quick. I think there is one
piece that does't affect your
operational and as Sonny said
earlier, if you look at lines,
uh, I'm gonna forget the numbers
here.
12 and 14. There are some
credits that that you all are
that the LFC recommended taking
against essentially pulling
money out of the formula to
reflect a dropping enrollment.
And so, um, I understand the
rationale behind that, but to
your point, especially in our
rural districts, as enrollment
starts to shrink, that doesn't
necessarily mean that you need
fewer services.
Right. So whether you have a
class of 8 or a class of 12, you
probably still need a teacher.
And so, um, just, just something
to keep in mind as you think
about taking credits from the
formula, enrollment decreases,
one don't happen uniformly
across the state. So one
district might be seeing flat
enrollment while another is
seeing declining enrollment, um.
Enrollment doesn't even
enrollment declines don't even
happen uniformly across the
school. You might have 5 fewer
6th graders, but a couple more
first graders, right? So as you
take money out of the formula,
it's important to keep in mind
that most districts are probably
maintaining services to a
certain level. I do think there
is a point at which you have to
districts have to look at that
enrollment decline and right
size, but there are some
limitations to what districts
can do and when you do it to the
formula, you do it to all
districts.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. I, I think
that answers it, um, and I would
never ever take anything from
the kids.
Are we giving the school
districts, uh, the ability to
say we don't need this or we do
need more of this. That would be
my other question. You don't
have to answer that. Thank you,
Mr. Chair.
Thank you, Representative
Duncan, and if there's an answer
to the question, I think that's
exactly what we want to see, you
know, ask a question, and be
able to follow up, dig a little
deeper, get really good feedback
from the presenters. If they're,
if not, that's OK too. Very
quickly, Mr. Chair,
Representative Duncan, I would
say that when you put anything
in the SCG in or out, those are
discretionary funds. And so
districts are able to make those
local decisions about what they
want to do. Thank you, Duncan.
OK. Representative Herndon.
Thank you, Mr. Chair and uh
presenters, I'd like to go first
to looking at Scoop bus
replacement, school bus cameras,
we're looking at lines 139 and
140, and I'd like to know, is
this money someplace else
because our goal is to have
clean fuel, and where is this
shown in the budget?
Uh, Mr. Chair and
Representative, that is going to
be in the capital outlay.
Bill, which is separate from
House Bill 2, the department.
Did not request an appropriation
for school bus replacements this
year, uh, in statute, they are
required to be replaced on the
12 year cycle. Um, my, I asked
the department potentially to
answer this, but
What I understand is there may
not be a fleet of buses that
have reached that 12 year mark
for this fiscal year, uh, and
that may be the reason why that
was not requested.
So even though the goal is 2030
for clean fuel.
And you're saying that that's 5
years away that until the buses
run out or the twelve-year
increment, we have no intention
of replacing it.
I just want clarification.
Uh, Mr. Chair, thank you,
representative for that
clarification. Uh, there is
currently a federal program that
will allow schools to purchase
electric school buses, they are
covering almost the entire cost
about 400,000. It's about
400,000 per bus. This line item
that you're referring to on our
high level, uh, has
traditionally been used to
replace diesel buses at about
120,000 a bus. So, um,
currently
The electric school bus
conversion is coming from
federal funds.
I would like to uh go to.
As you just a general question.
2 years ago, a Senate Bill 450
was passed, and Senate Bill 450
related to school coaching and
understanding AED training to
make sure that our students were
always protected, and that's
supposed to be an ongoing and
concurring uh event.
Where is that in this?
Mr. Chair, representative.
Um, are you?
If I could clarify it, are you
asking about the CPR, uh, and
defibrill defibrillator bill
that was passed. Right, but it
only, so that's an interesting
question because of the Senate
Bill 450 only related to the
training, and it didn't relate
to having exactly defibrillators
put into the schools. Right now
this year, there is a House Bill
57 that is referring to making
sure that defibrillators are in
each one of the schools. So is
that training in here that's
continuing and ongoing under
Senate Bill 450, so that it will
match Senate bill, uh, House
Bill 57 when it's passed.
Um, Mr. Chair Representative,
it's not in these budgets, uh,
that would, that would probably
be coming out of school
operational funds, which is an
SCG.
And then if I could take you
please to the line 149.
And to grow your own teacher
fund.
Uh, please tell me, I, I don't
know if I missed this, but is
that someplace else?
Uh, Mr. Chair Representative,
that's a good question. It is
technically housed under HED,
but the uh funds have been
sitting in the balance of the
grow your own teachers fund for
several years. This
recommendation simply takes the
300,000 out of the fund and puts
it to use or grow your own
teacher scholarships.
So I, I'm sorry, I don't see as
put to use because you have no
money in the budget for the
subsequent years. Help me to
understand your answer.
Um, Mr. Chair, representative.
Uh, we do budgets on an annual
cycle, so this is simply using
existing capacity for that
purpose of the legislature may
want to consider this as a
recurring expense in the future.
There is also another line.
Um, 100, which is for educator
fellows, that's been an ongoing
program that the department has
created from its federal
pandemic relief funds. It's also
similar to a grow your own
teachers type program, uh, and
that is something that's been
recurring despite coming from a
non-recurring source.
Mr. Chair, simply 2 more
questions for clarification line
126, you have the family income
support, and that amount was
that 10 million, 10,000, which
one is that?
Um, Mr. Chair Representative.
This section is.
Funding appropriations that came
from the public education reform
Fund, and as you noted in this
year, fiscal year 25, 10 million
of it.
Was appropriated from that fund
for family income index.
And the executive recommendation
you'll see it online 120 at 9
million from general fund.
In Section 5.
In the LESC and LFC
recommendations, you'll see it
online for.
Be incorporated into the SCG.
So Mr. Chair and presenters, so
what is the difference between
that fund and that online 160.
So in terms of supporting
families and then one supporting
a student. And so when I look at
the amount, you talked about a
$500 a monthly amount. So if
that would amount to only about
600.
Students, is that correct, Mr.
Chair, uh, Representative
Herndon, uh, so I think there's
probably uh the names are
getting mixed up a little bit.
So the family income index is a
statutory program that you all
created. I believe in.
21.
Um, and that you all funded that
and the mechanism that provided
money directly to school sites
based on essentially the number
of uh those so you know
socioeconomic students in that
particular school. In that
statute, there's a mechanism to
identify poverty in a school,
essentially. So that's, that's
different than what you're
seeing online 190, the name
sounds like they might be
related, but 190 is a specific
part. I'm sorry, 160.
See, Sonny, you needed the
magnifying glasses.
On line 160, that's a specific
new pilot that has nothing to do
with the family income index. So
the family income index support
was money flowing directly to
schools based on concentrated
poverty. What LESC is
recommending is using that
mechanism.
Sonny's point about 4.
To
To identify poverty in school
districts and then flow at risk
funds to districts based on that
mechanism. So that's actually
why LESE doesn't have a
recommendation for the family
income index support, because
we're now using that mechanism
to flow the entire SCG at risk
funding to school districts. So,
Mr. Chair and presenters, uh, is
this a form of the guaranteed
basic income program that has
been sponsored in you're not
doing that, Mr. Chair
Representative, no.
And then um my, my last
question.
is with respect to the
behavioral health.
Uh, uh, supplement under line
121.
And then I'm looking at the
amounts on line 136, and I, I'm
asking for an explanation here.
So 2 years ago or last year
there was an amount put in for
wellness rooms in schools, and
now I'm not sure I'm seeing that
the other problem with that is
that the money was not let
distributed until late in the,
in the school term. So help me
to understand, I see nothing for
LFC and executive and
then I see this behavioral
amount, behavioral health
supplement. I want to know if
that's for.
Wellness rooms.
Mr. Char represented Verdon from
the LESC perspective that $3
million would flow to the
department for behavioral health
supports, which could include
grants for, for things like
wellness rooms and other sort of
uh social emotional supports for
students and I'll let uh Simon
and and Sonny speaking to the
other. Mr. Chair represented in
the executive recommendation,
it's within the agency's
operating budget. I think
there's about 190,000.
In the operating budget
recommendation from the um
opioid crisis recovery fund.
So you won't see it here because
it's uh
embedded in the
The PED operating budget in the
executive recommendation. So
I'll just say I'll talk to PED
offline about that uh problem
that we were having. So, and
then Mr. Chair, uh, and
presenters, just one
clarification please, with
respect to the Black Education
Act and the Hispanic Education
Act where there is no money in
that line, but then you talked
about a different, a different
line item and you, your
responses were really quite
confusing. So is there money
funding those programs this year
or not?
Um, Mr. Chair Representative.
Yes, uh, in the current year,
there's some non-recurring
funding, um,
I, I can point to the line if
you want,
uh,
lines 9091, 92, or no, sorry.
90, 91.
There's 95.
Well, in the current year there
there's some small non-recurring
funds.
For the department's
responsibilities related to
those acts.
Um
The executive recommendation
moves that into recurring.
The LESC recommendation has a
non-recurring appropriation.
And uh what Sonny was saying is
I'm not to speak on your behalf,
but I guess here I go.
Um
The LFC.
has said that that funding is
already in the agency's
operating budget.
There's no need for a separate
appropriation.
And so, so what I had said
earlier to Representative Lujan
is
Let's figure it out, is, is, is
the money in the operating
budget or is it not? So we'll,
we'll follow up with the
department and uh we can discuss
that at the next.
Public schools support hearing
in a couple weeks.
Thank you, Mr. Chair and thank
you for this. I would really
like to have the answer to that.
Excellent. Thank you very much,
Representative Herndon. Uh,
next, we're gonna go to
Representative Silva, then
Representative Doo, and keep
going.
Thank you, Chair. um, thank you,
presenters. I appreciate it. Um,
I have
Three questions, um.
I just want to name um early in
my new member orientation, uh,
Mr. Sana was talking about um
line items 8 and 9 as an
example, as we're being uh
oriented and I just wanted to
name my support, uh, for those
additional equitable funds for
middle schoolers and their
success that uh LESC is
included, so thank you for
adding those. Um, so I guess
that wasn't the question, but
more of a comment. Um, I also
want to
clarify something. I want to
ensure that there's some
significant recurring investment
in career technology education,
um, part of my district has uh a
large unincorporated community
of Chaparral that uh would
benefit greatly I think from
CTE. My understanding of reading
through the budget is that uh
the CTE line items are currently
non-recurring line items. Am I
reading that correctly? And then
I'm finding them online 129,
143, 1.
59 and 108. Is that correct, Mr.
Chair Representative.
That's mostly correct. Uh,
In the LFC and executive
recommendations.
All that funding is
non-recurring.
Other than what districts have
been able to fund.
You know, through their own
discretion within their SCG
distribution. So, some districts
have, some districts have.
So they're
It's some funding used for that
in the SCG, but the specific
appropriations are non-recurring
in the executive recommendation,
non-recurring the LFC
recommendation.
But the LESC recommendation does
move some funding into recurring
or if you look at lines 8 and 9
that you just mentioned. Not
specifically for CTE but that
funding.
Can will be used in part for
CTE. OK.
Thank you.
Um, my last question is, um, I'm
page 100 of the uh uh volume one
of the Policy and performance,
uh, page 100, the last paragraph
says in addition to pandemic
AIDS, school districts and
charter schools continued to
grow unrestricted cash reserves,
carrying over balances of 656
million from FY 24.
Statewide cash balances grew by
33 million, or 5% from the prior
year and continue to represent
17% of program costs. Where does
that live in the story of this?
Um, Mr. Chair, Representative, I
want to turn you to another
document, which is your volume
3.
It's the spiral bound documents.
And if you turn with me to page
90.
I'll give you a second to get
there.
This chart shows you the history
of what we call unrestricted
school cash balances, and it is
funding that schools
have full discretion to use. Um,
it's not, it's, it's currently
in an account that rolls over
each the school year, um.
When the state makes it SCG
distribution to schools, we
don't pull back that money
that's unspent, it just resides
at the district or charter, um,
that receives their allocation,
and if any of it is
Essentially not used within that
fiscal year, it tends to go into
um several cash balance
accounts, this being the most
unrestricted and um
Flexible account.
If you turn to page 91, you can
see the balances by.
School district and charter
school.
Mr. Chair and Representative
Silva, I think it's, uh, I'll
just point out that over the
past interim, we did look into a
cash balances and there's a
number of different reasons that
school districts accumulate cash
balance or or hold on to cash
balances. Uh, some of that has
to do with, uh, what they, what
they feel is important to their
bond rating and and their
ability to to to bond. Um, some
of it has to do with some of
these districts are the
recipients of large amounts of
federal and state grants, most
of which operate on a
reimbursement basis and so
district.
have to have cash on hand in
order to front those expenses
before getting reimbursed by the
department or the federal
government or the federal
government through the
department.
Um, some of this occurs
naturally through vacancies.
Vacancy savings as districts
struggle to, you know, hire all
their teachers or all their
personnel. They can see savings
contribute to that. Um, and then
finally, the pandemic aid that
districts received, uh, nearly a
billion dollars in in education
pandemic aid, um.
You know, some districts were
able to to account for that
money and, and sort of use
pandemic aid rather than
operational, which means that
they may have saved a little
money in operational during
those years, in talking to
school districts, we have heard
from some of them, at least that
they anticipate that those those
cash balances will actually
decrease in the number in the
next few years as they start to
spend operational again on
things that in the, in the
previous couple of years, they
had to use federal funds for.
Uh, we continue to, to want to
look into it because we know
it's a complex issue and it
It's a perennial issue that
comes up with the legislature,
um, making sure that we're not
giving districts more than they
can spend in understanding why
they're not able to.
Great. Thank you. Um, I, not for
now, but for later, would love
to know if either um departments
or agencies if you all have
recommendations to school
districts about how much, what
percentage of their cash carry
forward, they should have on
hand versus when it becomes too
much or too little.
Thank you. Thank you, Chair.
Thank you, Representative Sylva.
Next, we have Representative
Dow, then Vice President.
Thank you, Mr. Chair and thank
you, Director for the
presentation, Sunny, and thank
you guys. Um, we're
cybersecurity on this?
Um, Mr. Chair Representative
Dao,
there are no cybersecurity
recommendations that are going
to PED, but um, my understanding
is that the department has been
working with Respect, um, on
cybersecurity, which is also the
the Department of Information
Technology has contracts with
them as well, so there uh
recommendations for
cybersecurity. I have to double
check, but I think there may be
some in your IT.
Uh, um, presentations that are
coming up. Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Thank you, Sonny. We're there
one time costs on.
Um,
Like the this districts getting
hacked and, and then having to
pay ransoms was, have we
resolved that or where, where do
we stand on that?
And it's all, it's just a
different agency, so.
I don't ask the question here.
Was it one time money and we
don't need it?
Um, Mr. Chair Representative,
you are correct that there used
to be one time appropriations
made to PED for cybersecurity,
um, but
I would have to follow up on the
cost to school districts that
have experienced those attacks
and from what we understand,
those attacks will likely
increase in the future. OK.
Thank you, Mr. Chair and Sunny,
I think this is for you too on
line 31 on transportation. Um,
does this include an increase of
costs for the 4 day school weeks
to go to 5 day if.
The 180 day is implemented.
Uh, Mr. Chair, Representative.
This includes in the base from
prior years when we did K5 plus
and extended learning, some of
that funding that was for those
extended days got rolled into
the base, which you will see
online 32. As for additional
funding, none of the
recommendations this year
include
Specific funding for extending
school calendars.
Thank, thank you. um, Mr. Chair,
and I think this is sunny again.
I heard in the governor's
speech, $50 million for I, I, if
I'm looking at the right bill,
Senator Shindo's bill for state
tribal education compact Act.
Is that
In BIA is that in the
innovation? What?
Or is it, is it completely, it
goes from the general fund
straight to Bureau of Indian.
affairs.
Mr. Chair, um, representative
that.
That's not in this education
budget it may live somewhere
else in the executive
recommendation, but outside of
My purview someone else in our
office when they present to you
on the budgets of different
agencies, they'll have an answer
to that. Thank you, Mr. Chair.
I'm just really interested in it
and I think maybe I can speak to
it so I think the compact may be
slightly different, um, the, the
150 million, I think that the
governor may have been 15 or 50
50 50, OK, 50 million, uh, is a
combination of the 20 million
that's in the Indian education
fund online 46 in the
categorical appropriation.
OK.
In addition to
If you look at line, um.
92.
The executive has $90 million
there for Indian education.
I believe that's, that's
intended as a 3-year
appropriation, so 90 divided by
3, 30, 30 plus 2050. So it's
this amount plus a recurring 20
million in the fund. OK.
Um, thank you.
Oh, thank you. Well, I wasn't
sure
Mr. Chair, I wasn't sure because
she said independent of PED so I
thank you for explaining that to
me. Makes me feel much more
comfortable because I'm super
interested in that. I think
that's exciting. Uh, depending
on what it looks like, you know,
I don't know yet, but, um, but I
am, this is also an old question
that could be resolved as well.
The K5 plus, um, before it was
universal, was targeting low
income at-risk kids. Um, there
was equal
Access by districts, but it was
the 4 day in the rural
communities that were least
likely to engage. It looks to me
on the 180 day and K5+ that
those rural communities are
probably still less likely to be
the ones engaging in K5+.
Mr. Chair, members Mr. Chair
Representative Dao, uh, 2 years
ago, you all passed House Bill
130, which um
increase the, the instructional
hour requirement for schools to
1140 hours. And so that bill was
intended to give school
districts the flexibility to
decide how they use those
instructional hours. Also part
of that bill was the K-12 plus
program, essentially saying you
can use the hours however you'd
like.
But if you actually uh have a
school year longer than 180
days, you get more money for 4
day school weeks, that number
was 155. So you could have 155
day school week as a 4 day and
be fine as long as you met the
hour requirements. If you did
151, 152, 153, you could get
more money, I'm sorry, over 155.
So there were uh parallel
programs for 4 and 5 day, um,
school weeks and they were able
to to access those.
don't have the numbers in front
of me, but Sunny does about
who's participating in those
programs.
Mr. Chair.
Show you your volume 3 of The
Spiral Bound. If you turn to
page 97, this has all of the
school districts and charter
schools and whether they are a 5
day or 4 day school week and
what their current school
calendar is. If it's a 5 day
school week and there are over
180, they should be generating
K12+ funding. If there are 4 day
school week and they're over
155, they should also be
generating K12+ units, so, um,
there's a resource.
if they're not meeting those
measures, would they be in red
and if they are meeting the
measures, would they be in
black? I mean, I don't want to
spend a bunch of time looking at
this cause but my next question
kind of depends on it, a Mr.
Chair representative the last
column is just the change from
last year. So how many days they
added or decreased from the
Well, Mr. Cha, Sonny, what I'm
getting at is we created the,
the, um, the reversion fund. I
can't think of the name of it,
the, the education reform fund.
And the money.
It was intended to reach the
children who need it the most.
And it kept getting reverted at
the time, uh, and this was the
same at pre-K as well. Um
targeted funds to the kids who
need it most, low income
at-risk, Title I districts, etc.
and when the do reverted to the
public education reform Fund,
they could be used for
innovative projects that may
have left the most at-risk
students district because the
district didn't opt in and then
in the innovation effort never
went back to that district. Are
you, are we making sure that
these innovative targeted
interventions, um, funds are
reaching those back to those, I,
I'm looking, I'm
thinking of out, if I was just
listening to the governor's
speech because I'm on a high
learning curve. I feel like a
freshman. I am a freshman by
definition, and so the governor
is saying, um, these 3 school
districts and one of them was
Albuquerque Public School, the
largest.
Now less funds are reverting to
the, to the
School fund the education reform
fund, I'm assuming there's more
people have opt in. How do we
make sure that those innovative
funds and these special projects
and the ones that have
discretion for grow, etc. Make
it back to the rural districts,
make it back to the districts
where those low income at-risk
underserved minority kids are
at.
The chairs representative.
The reform fund is contingent on
a bill.
That will require
Everyone at this table, DFA LFC,
LESC MPED.
To have an evaluation plan and
an intentional targeting of
those resources to study whether
these innovations are working.
So,
I hope that addresses your
concern on that. Mr. Chair
Representative Doo, I just, I
just want to clarify that money
no longer reverts because when
you pass 1:30, uh, you actually
put in $202 million to pay for
those instructional hours in
every district benefited from
that. So there's no longer a
program fund per se. Money flows
out through the SCG. This is a
separate pot of funding now.
Thank you, Mr. Cha. That, that
answers, go ahead, Mr. Chair,
just I want to follow up on a
question from
earlier, my, our analyst says
that in the do it
recommendations, there's a
reauthorization for PD
cybersecurity, uh, 15 million
for new cyber funds for public
and higher ed, uh, so they'll
have funding, 20 million in
total for cybersecurity,
including the reauthorizations.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Thank you,
Sonny. Um, so then, mm,
What is the definition of
unhoused?
Mr. Chair Representative Doo,
uh, those are students who meet
the federal definition under the
McKinney Vento Act. Thank you,
Mr. Chair, in this case, middle
school and high school.
For this particular pilot, yes,
just because it's a, it's a
pilot, we wanted to to see if it
was working and we and we saw
promising results in those
graduation rates.
Uh, Obviously, those students
are more at most at risk of not
completing high school in that
moment. So that's, that's the
particular focus at this at this
time. OK. Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Thank you, Representative. OK,
next we're gonna go to
Representative Hernandez, and I
apologize for missing after
Hernandez will be Representative
Sareana Henan.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Um,
colleagues, um,
Presenters, uh, a, uh,
been getting parts of my
questions answered, uh, so, uh,
the, the, the homeless
definition we're using a a
federal definition across the
board with the, you know, public
education department. I, I, I
assume, um, I attended a uh
community meeting that my school
district Central Consolidated
held and uh they did uh express
the, the increase of, of, of, of
The homelessness of, of
students, and I asked that
question, what, what do you guys
define as homelessness and uh
they said that it was, you know,
if, if it's also uh a student
that lives in multi-generation
household, and I, I guess that
that's what I want to get
clarification on that, um,
I think that this is important
as, as it is under the
governor's priority, uh, to, to
build homes, um, but, um, the,
the, the other question that,
that I have is, uh, you know,
I'm gonna jump on, um,
Representative Baca Soapbox. I'm
gonna join him on his soapbox
and uh uh cause when I spoke to
a teacher, uh, uh.
had told me about the payments
that she's having to make on
her, on her son's uh medical
bill.
And, uh, and I, I understand
that. I'm trying to understand
this, uh, is it district by
district, the, the premiums that
that teachers are paying is
varies, uh, or, um, and because
that was something that that
that the teachers are just, you
know, concerned about,
especially Central Consolidated
School District, um, whereas,
you know, we're
What it seems like they want to
get to is parity.
Of what is, is, uh, and, and
that's what they're asking for
and my question is, uh, you
know,
Would it take legislation to
bring parity across the board
for all of our school districts
to help, um,
Ensure that teachers are are
support staff don't have to
worry about, uh, the, the cost
of the insurance premiums? or is
that something that can be
fixed, uh, within the
organizational structure. Thank
you. um, Mr. Chair
Representative.
Um
There are 2 insurers of public
education employees. There's
Albuquerque Public schools, they
have their own pool.
Then there's the public school
insurance authority.
For everybody else.
Um, when you talk about parody,
I guess what I'm thinking of is
the percent of the premium that
the state pays.
There was a bill 2 years ago
that created
Parody in terms of what the
state, the percentage of the
premium the state pays for.
Um, public school employees
versus what the state pays for
regular state employees that it,
it used to be, uh, the income
brackets were lower.
Uh, now they raise them to where
the state or the, the employer
covers 80%.
Of the premium for people making
less than 50,000.
70% for those making in between
50 and 60.
And 60 60% for those making more
than 60,000. So that was the
legislatures.
And, and the executives uh
attempts.
Uh parody, um,
So if that's the parody you're,
you're uh
Getting out then, then yes, that
that was addressed a couple of
years ago.
Uh, Mr. Chair and Representative
Simon is correct that there's
parody now in law between state
employees and public school
employees, but between school
districts, they have the ability
to decide locally how much they
are willing to cover as far as
employee benefits from the
district. So you may have like
76%.
Uh, of the employee benefits
being covered in one district
and in a neighboring district,
it's probably like 70, so
there's variation across
districts if that's your
question.
Based on their local decision
making. Um, you could ostensibly
write a bill to set an amount,
but you've.
Essentially done at this point,
create a floor.
That creates parity between
state and schools, and it's up
to the local districts how much
they want to go above that
floor.
I think, I think what, what, uh,
Mr. Chair.
Uh, what the teachers are asking
is, in my district school
district is to be treated like
state, you know, to, to get what
state employees are getting, and
I think I'm, I'm gonna go ahead
and introduce legislation for
that.
We
Thank you very much for
Hernandez. Uh, next, we're gonna
go to Representative Sareona.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Um, I
just have one question on line
62. What's happening there? Is
it somewhere else, the money,
we, we know we have to have
steam, um, initiatives.
Uh, Mr. Chair Representative
Sarignama, uh, so obviously the
LESC recommendation does have $6
million for Steam there. We've
heard from the department about
the, the need to fund some of
those initiatives, and it's,
it's funding that they have
received in the past to a
certain extent, it didn't get
any in the current fiscal year
and so this restores
Mr. Chair representative, um, on
the LFC recommendation, that has
all been moved to line.
162.
As a gorilla appropriation for 3
years.
With Mr. Chairman, for the math
achievement?
That one
to cheer us.
OK
What about the other ones?
Technology and science.
Uh, Mr. Chair, represented by
might be dating myself, but I
was here when the first steam
appropriation recommendation
happens. Um, that appropriation
has
been around for nearly a decade,
and we have not seen a
substantial increase or change
in proficiency of performance.
Um,
It may be important to focus
more intently on something such
as math.
Rather than cobbling it amongst.
a whole host of other
Subject areas to see what's
really working. One thing that
we do know is that there's
really no science of math, like
there is for science of reading.
Um, I think this is a real
concerted attempt to be pioneers
in that and developing that here
in New Mexico.
Mr. Chairman, but
As a fellow math teacher, um.
You know, you learn a lot from
physics and you learn a lot from
all these other areas that help
you um push ma and help the kids
understand math, so I, I, I
understand focusing on math, but
I think the other ones are
almost as important as math, but
um, OK.
Thank you.
Thank you, Representative Reana,
Represent Brown.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Long presentation. I have just a
couple questions, um.
So, um,
We're, we're um looking at
appropriating as the
recommendation 40 million,
roughly for her tech.
The first question is, how do
the DFA LESC and LFC arrive at
that number and in particular,
do you do a needs assessment?
The school districts across the
state ask them what do you think
you need for funding?
To either stand up or expand or
remodel for a CTE program. Are
you actually getting input from
the districts to help you arrive
at these numbers, Mr. Chair.
Mr. Chair Representative Brown,
uh, I think there's a little bit
of of two answers. One is, uh,
you know, you all, we've all
been fortunate enough that
there's been funds available to
fund career technical education
from the state for the first
time really only a few years ago
prior to that school districts,
uh, depended on federal Perkins
grant money to fund career
technical education, you all
created the next gen pilot,
again, I want to say in 2019,
um, and to fund exactly what
You're talking about some
startup costs, some other things
that uh we weren't able to pay
for with federal funds. Since
then, you've all continued to
add to that appropriation, and
it's essentially been how do we
continue to expand uh CTE. We
can, we'll get you a copy of a
report that we presented to our
committee earlier that that
looks at how those how your
funding has expanded the use of
career technical education
across the state, including um
Increasing number of what we
call CTE completers. These are
folks who have completed a an
intentional pathway that may
culminate in a certificate or
credential, workplace
credential, and so the number of
40 million, I think is something
that we've looked at as
continued funding, given where
we're at in, in, um,
Sort of not quite saturation but
getting very close to that. Um,
it also pays for, I should say,
some of that innovation zone
that I talked about earlier, as
well as work-based learning. So
internships for students, other
work-based type of learning that
where students are actually
going out and working and
learning some of those skills on
the job. Um,
I should also plug a, uh, what
we're calling a CTE working
group that our deputy director,
Jessica Hathaway is is
conducting right now and is
doing exactly what you asked, is
talking to superintendents and
their CTE coordinators about the
actual costs of these programs,
those vary from obviously
materials that, you know,
welding programs need materials
to do their work. Um,
Recruiting personnel to these
programs is sometimes difficult
because uh some of these folks
could make much more money in
the in their in their chosen
field, then coming in and
teaching. So what does it look
like to fund these on a on a
recurring basis as part of that
conversation, and again, not to
overdo it, but just to plug in
that this this SCG secondary
increase is getting at that.
Um, this recurring costs that we
know districts are going to
have, while maintaining
non-recurring funding for those
kinds of startup and facilities,
costs that might be needed.
Thank you for that. Uh, Mr.
Chairman and, and John, I heard
you use the word saturation, so
is it your impression that 40
million is plenty.
Mr. Chair, representative, I
probably shouldn't have used
that word. I should say we've
increased how many people are,
are have access to those funds,
I wouldn't say we're at
saturation.
Very good. Well, Mr. Chairman
and, and panel, I, I've heard a
lot more in the last couple of
years about the need for more
CTE in New Mexico, um, I think
we've been doing 40 million, is
it for 3 years in a row now? Is
that, uh, Mr. Chair, is that
about right? And, and so
There's one school a high school
just outside my legislative
district that needs $50 million
to stand up a CTE facility and
equip it and and so forth and so
40 million wouldn't a piece of
that wouldn't help them very
much. I know there's bonding and
all those things, but they have
A strong desire on the part of
the students to get CTE going
now, and they're in a
Small, small dilapidated
facility and they, they could do
so much more, but they need more
now.
So I just want to, and Sonny's
got something to say, Mr. Chair.
Uh, Mr. Chair.
When John referred to 2019. That
was when the legislature enacted
the CTE pilot program, and it's
meant to be 7-year program. So
we're coming close to that 7
year pilot. And this original
appropriation was
About 4 million.
And part of the federal law says
that if you have CT funding,
much like special education,
there's a maintenance of effort
requirement. Um, so if you
increase CTE funding on an
operational level, you cannot
decrease that appropriation.
This amount has been a
non-recurring for 6, almost 5 or
6 years has grown to 40 million.
Um, but it's intended to be a
pilot, so it doesn't actually
countable.
The biggest concern that we've
had is that to your point, there
hasn't been a study of how much
is needed for CTE, um, this
amount was
And increase substantially from
the original amount, it's since
spun off into 3 different
initiatives, one that's just a
formula program called NextGen
that goes out to every high
school.
One that is called innovation
zones, which is a lot about
workforce preparation and
Connecting employers with
schools and their students and a
bunch of work based learning
programming that you're also
finding in other agencies like
Workforce Solutions. Uh, we have
some credentialing programs
through higher education. I
think there's a lot of
Potential overlap amongst a lot
of agency recommendations, and
so I don't think anyone has
really.
done a full inventory of what
the state is doing related to
this, and there's also multiple
directions. Is it mostly for
student engagement and
graduation? Is it for career
readiness and pipeline programs.
We haven't as a state evaluated
the effects of this, these
programs on this or understood
what the goal is. Mr. Chairman
and Sonny, so when will that
evaluation take place?
Uh, in the statute, Mr. Chart
says every year, we have yet to
receive a report from that, I
think,
Mr. Chair and and panel, um,
you've kind of answered my next
question. I was uh planning to
ask you how you differentiate
and how you put into these
categories of recurring and
non-recurring, and I know what
non-recurring means is basically
one time or I guess you call it
3 year spread. I'm not sure if
you include that one.
Yes
Say for example, with CTE it's
40 million this year, 40
million, 40 million. Does that
trip you into
A recurring category. Is there a
rule on that? And you did
mention a valuable piece that I
had forgotten about maintenance
of effort.
Um, and that is, that is a big
consideration, of course, but,
um, basically, could it become a
recurring, Mr. Chair, Mr. Chair
Representative, so far the
federal government has not said
anything about it yet.
Um, the statue, the Carls
Perkins Act to say that pilot
programs do not count towards
MOE.
It will remain to be seen
whether the feds consider this a
pilot program or not. OK. And
then finally, thank you for your
indulgence, uh, Mr. Chairman. I
have a question regarding wine
60.
And that has to do with advanced
placement and international
baccalaureate. Um, I want to
know a little more about the
Baccalaureate component of that
is that
Being used in some of our
districts now, is it popular? Is
it growing? Uh, I have a niece
who did a baccalaureate program
and was beautifully prepared for
uh college uh through that
program. So what is the, shall
we say the supply demand on
Boloriate, Mr. Chair, Mr. Chair
Representative Brown, we're, I'm
gonna have to get back to you
with exact numbers. Uh, this
line item essentially pays for
the testing fees. It it it helps
to support students who can't
afford the testing at the
accommodate those programs.
There are a few uh international
baccalaureate schools throughout
the state. I think there has
been growing interest, but we
can get back to you with the
number of actual schools and
certificates. Thank you very
much, Representative Brown. Uh,
next, we're gonna go to Vice
Chair Dixon.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Um, thank
you for the presentation. I'm
glad that we um get to talk
about education over multiple
hearings so that uh we can uh
absorb, um, and think about
stuff uh in between because it's
a lot, particularly, um, if you
don't serve on the energy
committee or um sorry, education
committee.
Um,
I have, um, I have a couple of
questions, 5,
and I'll start with, I think the
easiest one, which is line 102.
Uh, Mr. Chair and presenters at
the Nova Space Telescope.
Just wondering what that is.
We,
Mr. Chair, uh, Vice Chair Dixon,
you know, it's a toss up. We're
just like, you know, just
drawing straws over here. Um,
the Nova space telescope is a
data system that the department
uses one to keep track of all
student data, so there was a
data system that used to be
called stars, and it's, it's
essentially where all student
data across the state.
I reported into, so every school
district and charter school has
would have their own student
information systems, where they
track attendance and
demographics and all those
things at a district level when
reporting to the, to the
department, all of that
information flows into one big
system, and that is Nova.
Thank you. That's great. I
thought it was a there's
probably more. It's yeah, it's
not, I don't think it's as
exciting as it sounds. Um, so
John is right. The star system
houses all the student and
teacher information. Nova is an
engine that
kind of cleans up the data
before it gets into stars.
That's the only addition I would
add to a Johnson.
Perfect. Uh, thank you, Mr.
Chair. Thank you. Um,
Uh, let's see. Sorry, I have
these in order. Um,
I want to sort of piggyback off
of what um Representative Brown
was asking about regarding CTE
and I, the questions were
fantastic and very much in line
with one of the things that I
was wondering about. And so,
Um
It sounds to me like we don't
have a sort of a comprehensive
study on the impacts that we're
seeing from CTE. Is that
correct?
Mr. Chair.
I met him by his chair.
LFC and LEC uh I think John can
point to some of their reports.
They have been looking at the
program and funding and who's
receiving it. Um, we have gotten
some uh reports from the
department on surveys they've
taken on participants and
whether they felt like
There was a benefit from the
program. We have not been able
to
Determine whether the
intervention itself is actually
improving outcomes.
Mr. Chair, uh, Victor Dixon, one
more thing on the space
telescope, um, it's, it's in
addition to gathering all that
data, I'm getting, I'm getting
messages too. It's also helping
to get that data into other
dashboards that the department
uses, including its
accountability dashboard and
Evistas. So it's a one stop shop
that gathers and then does other
things. So it is fancier than I
thought. Um.
I, I want to say one thing about
career technical education
before getting to your question.
It certainly includes a lot of
the things that we traditionally
think of as what we used to call
vocational education, things
like welding, things like
automotive, other kinds of
plumbing and those kinds of
things. I do think it's
important that we recognize that
CTE is not just those things.
We're also talking about
Teaching.
Teaching is, is, and we have
what are called career technical
student organizations, what we
think of like future farmers and
those kinds of organizations,
where we have something called
educators rising.
And schools have educators
rising programs, what we might
have, I think we used to call
them future educators of
America, right? So I I think
it's important that we broaden
our understanding of CTE beyond
sort of those hands on, uh,
vocational kinds of things that
we used to think about. It
certainly includes some of that,
but is broadened beyond what we
might think about. So I think
that also gets to your question
about um evaluation and sort of
accountability is, I don't know
that as a state we've identified
what the measures are.
Right? So in some cases, you
might look at uh welding is the
example we use all the time.
Whether or not a student is
getting a an industry recognized
credential as a particular
outcome that we want from a
particular program.
That's very different from an
educator's rising participant,
for instance, who
probably still needs to progress
on a more traditional college
path. So we want to think about
college, high school graduation
and engagement, as well as
remediation at the higher
education level, and of course,
retention and graduation from
bachelor's or master's degree
programs. So the sunniest point,
I think we, we still need to
identify what some of those
outcomes are that we're going to
look for before we can decide
whether or not those programs
are actually working.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Thank you.
Um, and so one of the things
that I think would be great is
if in the interim, um,
potentially this could be a
joint program evaluation with
LFC and LESC because it is, you
know, I think it's very
important, but I would like to
make sure that the money that
we're spending is getting the
results that we think we want,
um, and that we know we're
funding it um at an appropriate
level. Um, so thank you.
Um
Mr. Chair and and presenters. I
wanted to follow up on some
questions that Representative
Garrett highlighted, uh,
regarding line 160. And I was
really struck by the fact that.
There are, um, I think 3000 New
Mexico students, give or take,
um, that are unhoused, and when
we talk about increasing the
graduation rate, um, you know,
the difference that 1500
students could make, um, and
then the 90%.
Success rate of the small pilot
program.
I am very interested in seeing
that expanded, um, and so I
really appreciate LESC putting
that in, um, their
recommendation. What I'm
wondering is, in the executive
and LFC recommendations are
there other proposals or funding
mechanisms that would do
something similar uh to help
students in that demographic,
um, be more likely to graduate.
Mr. Chair, uh, representative.
The executive recommendation has
Some funding
But at a much lower amount.
There's a, uh,
Section 5 or uh non-recurring
appropriation of a million
dollars on
One of these lines.
Um, Mr. Chair, Madam Vice Chair.
One of the objectives that we
understand from this proposal is
to increase attendance by these
students, um, the LFC
recommendation primarily focuses
that online 166 as part of that
bucket of interventions.
Thank you, um.
Thank you for that. um, thank
you, Mr. Chair. Um, I would
definitely give interestingly,
so looking at line 166, um, both
LFC and LESC are at
approximately the same.
Amount if I'm
Uh, it looks like maybe a
difference of 99,000, um, very
small font, loving it. Um.
So it would, it would be
interesting.
a little bit more of a deeper
dive, uh, later on to
understand, you know, if, if the
proposal in line 160, uh, would
be sufficiently different uh to
warrant, um, doing a pilot. Um,
Mr. Chair and presenters, um,
let's see, question number 4 out
of 5, educator fellows, uh, grow
your own clinical programs, um,
How are those programs, how?
What is the method for tracking
the success of those programs
because um I'm gonna pick on
Representative Garrett, um, she
mentioned golden apple.
As one of the um entities that
provides some of those services
to help mentor and and train um
educators. And so I'm wondering
as we, you know, have different
buckets for funding for similar
opportunities, how are we making
sure that we're getting um the
best bang for our buck, so to
speak.
Vice Chair Dixon, so
Um, first, I think there's
probably some distinction to be
drawn between each of them and
and potentially uh the
importance of, of each of them
as separate initiatives but
connected in, in, in as you
speak, we call it the educator
ecosystems, right? And the
pipeline. And so educator
fellows, uh, as Simon mentioned
earlier, it was created with
federal funds.
At the time, it was the
intention was to get more
adults.
In the classroom post pandemic
because we understood students
were going to need additional
support. So how do you decrease
that student to adult ratio in a
classroom.
That was one of the intents. The
second one was, how do you get
folks who maybe never thought
about working in education to
get into a classroom and
experience what it what it looks
like to work in a school.
And then pursue an education
related field. So that could be
teaching, but maybe it's also
counseling and social work, and
in one of our, our visits this
summer to, I want to say Santa
Rosa, they're using one of their
education, educator fellows, uh,
and they're working on a social
work degree.
Right, so educator fellows fills
that sort of more adults in a
classroom, almost in the in the
same way an educational
assistant does.
Well potentially funding
funneling more folks into the
education field, not just
teaching.
Grow your own specifically
focused on current educational
assistance as a way to provide
uh education, like scholarships
and other things, and I think as
we've expanded the opportunity
scholarship and other
scholarships in the state, it
probably hasn't been used as
much as it would have been
without those other, without
those other scholarships, and
again, that was a pathway for
folks who are already working in
education.
I would like to transition to
being a teacher out of uh
educational assistant, for
instance.
And then finally residencies,
right, are are are what we
consider sort of the gold
standard for teacher prep. So
that can be someone who's in a
traditional four-year.
teacher prep program doesn't
residency in their final year,
you're currently funding that so
that they get a $35,000 stipend
for that year-long residency.
All of that to say.
We, uh, we worked on a, on an
evaluation of residency for
LESC, uh, just this past fall.
Unfortunately, one, it's a
little bit early because uh only
in the last couple of years have
we really expanded residencies
to affect a large number of
students. Prior to that, it was
probably less than 50.
Now we're between 400 and 500 a
year.
Um, the difficulty for our
evaluation was that the data
systems.
Between higher education, public
education department and how
school districts are placing
those uh residents.
Sort of all over the place and
and really prohibited us from
making any, any
Conclusions about the program.
We're gonna continue to evaluate
that. We've spoken to the
department, they're in the
process of creating new data
systems to make sure that all of
those things align, so that we
can study retention, right?
Obviously, completion of those
programs.
Whether or not when they finish
those programs, those teachers
stay in the state, one of the
requirements of residencies is
that they actually stay in New
Mexico for at least 3 years at
the school where they were uh
Where they did their residency.
So we need to continue to look
into that, and I think there's
some groundwork that's been
done, but certainly some
improvement as well needs needs
to happen.
Um, Mr. Chair, and vice chair.
I think John is right, the data
systems are
Not communicating with each
other out of about, I think
2000.
Data points. They were only able
to find 200 teachers to study
whether these programs were
different from each other.
I think the good thing about how
you have structured this as a
legislature is that you have
funded multiple programs. So
over the next 3 years, you may
be able to see differences
between them and make a
decision, cost beneficial, which
one is going to give us the
biggest bang for our buck.
I will say that there's also
another alternative, which may
be pretty untenable, but I
should mention it. You could cut
these programs in half and then
see if there was any changes
from not having that many.
slots, and you could see what
happened to those that did not
get this opportunity and those
that did. It's very tough
ethical question to address, but
that is one way to see whether
an intervention actually had an
effect on outcomes.
For the record, Mr. Chair, Vice
Cha Dixon LESC would not
recommend that and none of the
recommendations do, but I'm just
putting that out there as a way
to evaluate effects to your
question.
Thank you, and thank you, Mr.
Chair. um thank you all. Um,
last, um, last question that I
have, um, is how, how raising
the teacher pay levels as a
recommended, I'm in the LESC and
LFC budgets, uh, you know, by
that $5000. How does that affect
the budgets of local school
districts, because is do they
have to?
In some instances, cover
additional costs or how does
that, are they held harmless,
how does it work?
Mr. chair by Dixon, so our
estimates include what we think
it would cost for school
districts to give those raises
to teachers. So ideally,
Um, they, they have enough money
to to deal with that. One thing
it does do, uh, I should say
that these also include whenever
you raise teacher minimums, you
automatically raise principal
minimums, because principal
salaries are statutorily tied to
teacher level 3 teacher
minimums. And so they
automatically get a uh an
increase. We're we're hearing
that that's going to have an
impact and it always does,
especially in small rural
districts is how much you pay
your superintendent, because
superintendents, there is
No statutory minimum in
districts decide how much they
can afford to pay their
superintendent. So as you start
to raise teacher and then
principal salaries, um, in order
to attract a superintendent,
there's some local local
decision making that has to be
made there, um.
And, Mr. Chair, Madam Vice
Chair, I will say that it will
depend, depending on the
district. The top 20 largest
districts out of all of them.
Only Santa Fe is at 50, 60, 70.
Most of them are already above
55, 65, 75. That's the local
decision they can go above that
minimum, um, to John's point,
when you're in a more smaller
rural district, um, and you
have, say, an 8 to 1 student to
teacher ratio, those costs
become more um
difficult to stomach because of
scale inefficiencies, but in
general, we're seeing across the
board most districts are
actually well above the current
minimums.
Thank you, um, thank you for
answering my questions. I know
uh Representative Pettigrew had
another question, uh, but it,
he'll add it to his list, uh,
for following up and then he can
report back to everyone. Uh
thank you, Mr. Chair.
Thank you, ma'am vice chair. Uh,
first, uh, thank you all
presenters. Second, thanks
committee, wonderful questions.
I have a few that I want to add,
and then we'll sort of outline
how we're going to go forward.
Um, one.
With regards to career technical
education, it seems like the
point that we've come to is that
the
very substantial increase in
funding should, do you all agree
that we should be cautious about
programmatic recurring CTE
increases pending a more
statewide evaluation of needs.
Mr. Chair, I, I think we'd all
agree with that. Yes.
OK, great, Mr. Chair, yes. OK.
Uh, that, that's great. I
appreciate that. I think the
committee's asked some really
good questions, helped us sort
of get to that point. Um,
The 2nd, um, just as sort of a
note, and I think this is sort
of one of the underlying notes
goes to something that
Representative Duncan brought
up, it, I assume that there are
fewer kiddos, uh, riding school
buses now than there were um in
2017, 2018. Certainly, you know,
before that. Is that roughly
accurate?
Uh yes, Mr. Chair, that is
correct. OK. That, that is one
of the central challenges and
tensions, um.
As we're sort of seeking to both
stem and grow and stem out in
the stem.
acronym sense, the um
The one of the population
challenges and it's do as as
director Soli laid out, um, and
as an important note, I think
for all of us in 2019, which was
the first big, you know,
following the Yazi Martinez
decision, you know, we're, I
think the numbers, Doctor
Courtney gave, um, roughly 2.65
billion in SCG were um, you
know, we're gonna be 4.5 to 4.8.
Depending upon sort of the
levels, those are the various
levels that are outlined in the
three different scenarios. Um,
which is, I think, a strong
reflection of the legislature's
overwhelming commitment and the
search now that this committee,
I think is very much a partner
in along with uh with our
education committees in honing
in on what is gonna move that
needle, uh, and how we do it.
Um,
A question, how do we evaluate
innovation zones right now.
Mr. Chair, uh, it's probably a
good question for the, for the
department, but I'll speak to it
a little bit, I think they've
done some, some preliminary
evaluations about um whether or
not districts are.
Accessing career technical
education, uh, work-based
learning, whether or not they've
actually developed those
graduates uh profiles of a
graduate for those of you who
aren't familiar with that, it's
essentially saying a district
getting to decide.
What students who graduate from
their district should, should
know and be able to do, right?
And that has to do both with
academics and other sort of soft
skills, could be cultural and
linguistic uh values that their
community identifies. So there's
been some preliminary evaluation
work around uh uh innovation
zones. I don't know that we know
enough, uh, again, similar to CT
more broadly to say, one, what
are we expecting from them?
And to whether or not they're
that we're getting that.
The.
Mr. Li, Mr. Chair, I would just
add that um a lot of what we
found from the report that was
submitted on Innovation zones,
which I believe is being
conducted by New Mexico State
University, um, was about
practices that are happening, so
did, you know,
People who received the
innovation zone funding, reach
out to industry partners. Do
they feel more equipped to make
those connections and get
students opportunities, um.
A lot of what's I think driving
the national conversation is
that there is national research
that suggests that if.
There are students who
concentrate.
In two or more CTA courses they
have, they tend to have higher
graduation rates. I think the
concern is, is there a selection
bias in those analyses and and
we have yet at the state level.
Try to measure whether it is in
fact at risk students or seeing
the greatest gains from these
programs.
Great. Thank you very much for
that, Mr. Liu, and that, um, it
actually brings me to um my
second to last question. Um,
which is sort of a thought
experience um.
Thought experiment for me and
something I think we, we now
know more, or at least I know
more, and so we can ask these
questions of you all as experts
and help let that inform all of
us. But the sort of summer
reading program, the 30 million,
it appears in all
recommendations very new, very
focused, getting up and running.
I wonder if we can start
Beginning to measure or at least
ask whether it's quantitative or
even qualitative, sort of the
impacts and effects of something
like that, and this goes to Mr.
Liu's point around maybe on the
math piece.
Uh, versus sort of the 2019
through now SCG at risk
investments.
Um
You know, which has yielded more
impact to improving reading
scores, which are a key metric.
I'm curious, and, and we don't
have to have a hard and fast
answer now, but being able to
make those comparisons will be,
I think, increasingly important
for us, Mr. Chair, um,
So I think we have, we're, we
have a good opportunity right
now when it comes to the
literacy initiative and, and uh
I won't speak for the secretary,
but I'll say a couple of things
that I think I've heard her say
before, which is that, you know,
in a very quick turnaround, um,
last summer to to put that
program in place and they saw
some promising results from,
from students who participated.
I think we're in an interesting
situation in a in a positive
situation right now where we can
work with the department to
think through what are we going,
what are we going to look at?
Are we actually going
to make sure that the folks who
receive funding implement that
program with some level of
fidelity to that 6 week.
4 hours a day, you know, for
those 6 weeks, that kind of
thing. Um, so that at the back
end, again, we have some shared
goals for what that program is,
um,
And then we can measure those
outcomes against those
benchmarks that we set ahead of
time. I think that's going to be
really important.
I, I do want to say, and maybe
this is coming from the, from
the education perspective, that
of course, uh assessments both
in reading and math are
extremely important for you all
and for us as as researchers.
Um, as a one way to evaluate
success. Um, career technical
education, I think is a really
interesting example of something
that could result in very
tangible things like credentials
and certificates and industry
recognized credentials and
certificates, but also my impact
more sort of intangible things
like, well, you can count
attendance, but it's hard to say
whether or not a CTE program.
Increased attendance and
engagement overall. So I think
it's at least from from the LS
LESC perspective and something
we talk about a lot internally
is ensuring that we have both
these sort of concrete metrics
that you all need.
Well, also there's broadening,
um, what we think of as, as
measuring success. Is that civic
engagement.
Again, some of those soft skills
as measured in other ways. And
so doing both simultaneously is
going to be really important so
that we don't
Prematurely.
Say a program is working or not
working, if we haven't chosen
the right measures to evaluate
it.
Very fair points, um, leads me
to the last question and then a
summary, uh, line 101, um.
This theme, this is uh
Similar to many of the
conversations and questions in
that funding appears in the 3
different recommendations in
different areas at differing
levels, some approaching one
another, some, you know, where
one is higher than the other,
that I can say from direct
experience that these summer
internships have been used
very effectively across a broad
swath of uh the private sector.
facilitated by the county in
this case, Donatta County, um.
So
We can vary directly, uh, ask
the question.
During the summer are uh kiddos,
in this case adolescents who are
in these uh summer internships.
What is their involvement in
the, um, you know, are they
getting in trouble versus uh
adolescents who for whatever
reason aren't in this program.
One of the main reasons kids
might not be in this program, is
that the state doesn't set aside
sufficient funding to support
this internship.
So
I want to, while acknowledging
that there is robust CTE and
work-based on learning funding
across all areas. This program
in particular is one.
We can go back and ask some
questions, and I think get some
data as we go through this
session. Uh, last thing I wanna
thank Director B Riding, Vice
Cha Dixon, and a number of other
folks.
the hearing early like this with
a full committee before we break
into the subcommittee was so you
all.
We all can ask questions. You
guys have really stepped up to
the like, and with LESC is in
full and equal partner, Chairman
Rometo, thank you for being here
as secretary for the, uh, this
will start us off. Well, as a
full committee, here are some of
these things again, and then
also as a very uh
A very busy subcommittee, some
members will hear this again.
Um
And uh yeah, just wanna close
again by saying uh Simon, you've
been a great partner. We
appreciate it. Good luck, uh, as
you move forward and you're
always welcome.
Uh, back in the roundhouse.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Thank
you to all committee members.
Awesome. Thank you all very
much. So members, we're gonna,
folks need to grab a break.
We'll, we'll keep our quorum as
we keep going. Um, we're gonna
go to our
Yeah.
Consensus staff reports.
Uh, and we'll have a, let's take
about a 5 minute sort of break
really quick.
Um,
Let's be back at 4:25.
We can get set up and go from
there.
All right.
We're gonna get going again.
We'll ask Doctor Courtney to
come on up.
Right.
OK. Uh, thanks. uh, uh, members.
So what we have now
Uh, so Doctor John Courtney, who
is the deputy director at LFC is
here at the table.
We have, uh, you, the consensus
staff reports, uh, we all have
on the agenda. These are, I
know, these are also posted
publicly.
These are staff reports, uh, or
Consensus reports on what uh
Doctor Courtney explain it,
where the recurring funding.
Uh, yeah, there is no difference
in recurring funding uh requests
from the executive and uh
proposed from the legislative
Finance Committee.
Uh, we're gonna ask Doctor
Courtney to go through each of
these. Um,
And then uh following that, I'll
ask for a motion in order to
accept the budgets for each of
these agencies.
One quick note on that.
Everybody has in front of them a
letter from the Board of
Veterinary Medicine.
This came in
a few days ago, as we understand
it.
It does not refer to recurring
funds, which are the recurring
budgets that we'll be taking a
vote on, uh, yeah, in these
non-recurring funds that are
listed in here, um, is something
that as we work through
diligently in this process, this
committee, uh will have ample
opportunity to um
That sort of meet the request
that's laid out in this letter.
Um
So, uh, this is a bit new
members, the reason that we're
doing it is when there are,
again, there are no differences
between the request and the
proposal from the LFC in what's
been passed from the LSC budget,
um, we still want to have time
to go through them with Doctor
Courtney, but that we, it's sort
of the strong senses we need to
dedicate the time when there are
different requests and
differences that we need to
resolve. So with that, Doctor
Courtney.
Thank you very much Mr.
Chairman. Uh, OK, John Courtney,
deputy director over at LLC. I
oversee the uh the fiscal
analysts, um.
Who many of our physical
analysts for these agencies are,
are here to my right.
Um, from LFC, uh, the physical
analyst for a number of these
agencies including
Uh, my counterpart at the
executive Doctor Andrew Miner.
to my left
We have some of the agency heads
either in the audience or or
watching if they if they uh.
10.
Um, so, Mr. Chairman, what we'll
Do as you mentioned, is we'll,
I'll go through, um,
Though each of these, as you
mentioned, these are, are, we've
already come to consensus, if
you will.
You know,
I
My luck, by the grace of God,
what have you, um, a number of
agencies, uh, the LLC and and
DFA uh got the requests.
Uh, came up with the same, the
same number in terms of uh all
funds, not just, not just
general fungal, some of these
are not general fund agencies,
and it reached consensus on uh
on performance measures for
that's applicable.
We will have different sheets,
um, as we went through uh the
different training with Kelly
yesterday, as you remember, um,
these will not be as, as, uh,
usually the more the simple ones
that she mentioned, rather than
the
The more complicated ones, which
I think we will start to get
into tomorrow.
Um, so, Mr. Chairman, with that,
I'd ask you all to turn to page,
I'm not, uh sorry, the tab 2.
There'll be a different sheet in
there for the New Mexico
compilation commission. It
should be the first one in.
In your
there.
The New Mexico compilation
commission is headed by Ralph
Trujillo. He's our executive
director and legal editor.
They're responsible for
publishing, selling, and
distributing statues, opinions
and rules of the court.
Uh, HE opinions and other
publications along with drafting
Supreme Court rules to
instructions in court forms.
Um, their request kept overall
revenue flat with FY 25 and
includes the reduction of 25,000
fun balance and a corresponding
increase to
Other revenues for civil action
filing fees.
The request transferred uh
41.7,000 surplus from the
director's retirement, which
will be
Reallocated from personnel
services and employee benefits
to contractual services that
shift uh
reflects the elimination of
retirement contribution
liability for that director.
Um, and the LFC recommendation
executive recommendations both
support that request and reach
consensus for performance
measures.
So Mr. Chairman, we'll move on
then to um
352, educational retirement
board. Well you all are turning
your pages, I'll just also
remind you that, um, you know,
if you're interested in, in
seeing more narrative on any of
these agencies or future
agencies, the uh the LFC rec
will be.
In your volume 2, where you can
look it up in that top right
hand page by agency code.
So 352, the educational
retirement board headed by
executive Director David
Archuleta.
administers the educational
retirement Act.
Program for education employees.
Um, they pay for their
operational expenses, expenses
from investment earnings, they
don't directly receive general
fund appropriations, um, both
the LFC and the executive
recommendations support the
agency's request for reduction
in budget authority of 1.3
million. This is due to
reduction of 2 million in
contracts for investment
management fees over a portion
of that savings is shifted over
to the personnel category, um,
and the recommendations from
both the LFC and the executive
would fully fund the agencies 91
FTE.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Uh,
Moving on then to agency 360.
Again, this is behind tab 3.
The office of the lieutenant
Governor, um, Howie Morales,
who's our state ombudsman, um,
the Office of the lieutenant
Governors, FY 26 budget request
maintained a flat budget with FY
25 keeping general fund revenues
at 838.5,000. The request allows
the office to continue to
provide services to the
residents of the state, the LLC
recommendation and uh the
executive recommendation both
support the, the request and
came to consensus for
performance measures.
Chairman, if there are no
questions, uh, our next agency
is uh 3379, the public employee
Labor Relations Board or, or one
of my favorite acronyms that we
use of the uh
Of the agency's plurb, uh,
Director Par uh Violet is the
board's new executive director.
She started with the agency last
week, I believe.
Um, cler services as the, the
decision maker of first resort
for public employer and labor
organization dis disputes.
They're one of the smallest
agencies in state government,
with an operating budget of just
over 300,000. Um, both the LC
and the executive
recommendations include an
increase in the personnel
category to cover an expected
increase in health insurance
costs, uh, in the other
category, both recommendations
include funding for the agency
to improve webcasting and remote
hearing equipment.
Mr. Chair.
Um, next up we uh switch tabs to
tab 4, the first different sheet
and there will be for agency
404, the Board of Examiners for
architects, um, their agency had
is, uh, Hillary Gonzalez. She's
the director. Um, uh, as you can
imagine, the board of examiners
for architects ensures
architects are complying with
the provisions of statute, they
requested a budget of 590.4,000
for FY 26.
Which is $800 greater than the
FY 25 Obud. The uh BEA requested
to use 13,000 or 3.8% more of
its fee revenue and 12.2,000 or
4.9% less of its fund balance
for FY 26, that $800 increase
will be used for contractual
services to cover increased
audit and IT costs, um, they
requested a flat budget for
personnel services, RFY 26
executive in the LFC both
supported the agency's request
and reached consensus on
performance.
measures.
So Mr. Chair and members, our
next agency will be 449.
So we'll have to turn a few
pages to get to that one. So I
think we already have uh some of
tomorrow's different sheets in
here for you all.
That's the board of nursing.
Um, the board of nursing
regulates nursing schools and
Um, the board of nursing
regulates nursing schools in
practice. The board requested
and both the LFC and executive
recommended a 5.2% decrease. The
decrease requested by the board
was still well above FY 24
actual expenditures. The board
receives revenue from licensing
fees and slightly increased
personnel by 355,000, which
would allow the board to fill an
additional FTE.
And our next agency is uh the
Board of Veterinary Medicine.
Uh, agency code 479 agency head,
uh, Deborah Deborah Shank who I
just talked to, I know she's
here.
Um
So the Board of Veterinary
Medicine regulates the
profession of veterinary
medicine in accordance with law
for FY 26, they requested a 5.
15.7 1000 decrease, uh, which is
about 1% of the words FY 25 up
but that was supported by the
LFC and the executive
recommendation. The board
doesn't receive general fund
revenue, they're supported by
revenues from professional
licenses, permits and
examination fees. Um, and that's
the, the letter that you all
have that chair Small mentioned.
Um, they sent that to LFC, um,
uh, uh, a while back, I think it
was late last year, but after
the, the recommendations were
finalized, um, but, um, uh,
these asks are largely for um uh
non-recurring items, you'll see.
If you flip to the different
sheet for specials, and remember
we're, we're, as Kelly mentioned
yesterday, we're providing you
all with um this information
sheet for specials, um, you
know, as an informational so you
can think about this ahead of
time, uh, uh, before the
specials hearing which uh Mr.
Joey Simon will, will help us,
uh, help you all get through.
Um, so in that it's worth noting
that the executive did
Recommend um 125,000 for
veterinary facility and shelter
inspections, uh, the LFC did
not, but for the recurring
budget, um, uh, the LFC and
executive both uh met the uh
request of the board and are in
consensus.
Um, agency 479, Mr. Chairman.
We just did, sorry. 490.
Cumbers and Toltec Scenic
Railroad.
The agency head here is Kim
Smith Casford. She's the
commissioner, um, the Cobra and
Toltec Scenic Railroad
Commission requested in both the
LFC and executive recommend a
general fund increase of 14,000
or 3.7%, primarily for increased
property insurance premiums, uh,
those continue to increase as a
result of uh 2021 fire, uh,
since the fire policy limits
have increased to respond to the
wildfire risk exposure of the
railroad fleet and uh associated
with.
structures. Uh, the agency
anticipates a flat budget from
other revenues, which is
predominantly coming from ticket
revenues, um, and the LFC and
executive came to consensus on
both the the recommendation for
this agency and for uh target
measures on performance
measures, Mr. Chairman. Thank
you very much, uh, Doctor Corney
and uh representative Herrera.
Uh, thank you very much, uh, Mr.
Chair, and I would be remiss if
I did not recognize the people
uh in the room.
from the Kubrasy Tolteca
Railroad, and that is in my
district in Chama, and I just
want to recognize Ed uh Bodett,
who's the general manager, stand
I I say read your names, Abby
Martinez, marketing manager,
Alyssa Martinez, CFO, and Rich
Caspar risks officer, I so want
to introduce to you, um, Kim
Smith Caspar. I, she is uh the a
new New Mexico commissioner, we
have a commission.
Uh, Colorado and New Mexico, and
they both contribute to this
fund, and she is the first woman
appointed to represent New
Mexico in the 50-year, 53-year
history of the commission. So
thank all of you.
And, and just for a little bit
more, just so you understand,
uh, they have uh 2000 donors,
private donors and volunteers,
they get 45,000 hours of
volunteer time over the course
of the year. They have 92
employees 4 to 40 of those are
year-round employees, um, they
are recognized, they did a study
and they are a 20 million
economic uh economic engine for
the North, for the
northern part of our state, and
last year they had 38,403
riders, for that was up 14% over
the previous year, so I just
want to recommend an amazing
group of people who do amazing
work in my district. Thank you
so much.
Uh, thank you very much.
OK, uh, and thank you all for
being here. Thank you,
Representative Herrera. OK,
thank you, Doctor Courtney. So
that you took us through uh the
different agencies that know the
fact that there are no
differences, um, the, we've
addressed in here in the letter,
and as you've noted, uh, the
recommendation from the
executive for the $125,000
special, we'll take that up in
the specials hearing. We'll also
be having sooner earlier than we
have in past years. We'll now go
to
Any questions that members have,
uh, we'll go to Representative
Garrett and then Represent Bohan
and then represent Pettigre.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. John, just
one question on the veterinary
uh client data system, how many
clients are hosted on that
website?
Do we know?
Mhm
I have to ask Commissioner
Casper of humans.
I'm sorry.
Great, uh thank you. Is there,
uh, some from the veterinary
board Director Schenk please
director,
if you could come on up and,
and.
Please.
Combers and Tolte doesn't carry
horses.
It may have in the past, but
that is not an approved use. I'm
gonna say about 1800 maybe.
Close to 2000.
Uh
Thank you, Mr. Chair. It's just
quite a leap from 1700, which I
understand was under do it.
To 37.
6
37,000. So that's why I wanted
to know how many people are on a
data site that it's costing that
much. OK, thank you.
Thank you. OK, uh, next, we're
gonna go to Representative Luhan
then represent Pettigroup.
Thank, thank you, Mr. Chair. I,
I'm on the board of veterinary
medicine as well, so if you
wanted.
You want to stay, but maybe
it's, it's, it'll be answered by
LFC. So I just wanted
clarification on the the
supplemental, um,
Is that $150,000.
That was from the executive and
he had said something, there is
consensus on something. I missed
the point on.
On that, if you can repeat that,
Mr. Mr. Chair Representative
Luhan. So the, the recurring
budget which you all are voting
on today, that's we're all in
agreement on that. Um, there
are, uh, I believe there were 3
non-recurring requests, one of
which is represented on on that
document, if, if request was
made but not um recommended by
either the DFA or LFC, it won't
appear there. Um, but the one
request that uh DFA, um,
Uh, did recommend us on there
for 100, 125,000 and you'll,
you'll act on those at a, at a
later date when you have
hearings on, on the
non-recurring budget. I believe
the other two represented a
potential supplementals for
around the same amount each.
that clarification. Thank you,
Mr. Chair. Thank you,
Representative Representative
Pettigroup.
Thank you, Chairman, and one of
my questions was answered. We
are voting on this today,
so I will ask a few questions
and not hold off.
Um,
my first question, chairman, uh.
40 for the board of architects.
I understand that one of the big
changes, if I got my notes
right,
is contractual services. Can you
expand on that, please?
Sure, uh, Mr. Chair
Representative Pettigroup and
we've got the board here, so
please come on up.
So the, the information I have
is that that contractual
services increased will be used
primarily to cover audit and IT
costs, um, but I'd ask, uh.
No
Uh, the, uh, agency had the
director of the BEA Mellory
Gonzale here if she wants to add
to that.
Mr. Chairman members of the
committee I have with me my
chair, Mr. Ray Hill.
And just to confirm he is
accurate, it is gonna be for the
audit rates that the state
auditor's office does charge us
per fiscal year.
I got part of the audit process
but didn't get the rest.
Mr. Chairman.
Representative. It's an IT IT
costs also the IT and the audit
rates from the state auditor
that gets approved every fiscal
year.
Thank you very much, Chairman.
Thank you very much for that
answer. So who is your IT
consultant. Uh, are you using
the state of New Mexico? Is it
going through Drew and do it or
are you using an outside source?
Mr. Chairman Representative, we
are using do it and we're also
using a third party vendor, A&M.
OK.
And if I understand correctly,
we're looking at a
Which one are we
Increase from
I had of 589.6 to 590.4.
Would that be correct?
Mr. Chairman Representative,
that is correct.
Thank you
Mr. Chairman, my next question
is on 449, the Board of Nursing.
If I'm reading the different
worksheet correctly. It looks
like about a $600,000
difference.
And if that's correct.
Um, can you explain the
difference.
Uh, Mr. Chair members committee,
Kelly Clump with the Legislative
Finance Committee, I'm the
analyst for the board of
nursing. They, um, are not here
today, so I'll try answer. Are
you talking about the change in
the operating budget to both
recommendations cause there's no
difference in the two
recommendations.
Um, chairman, uh, Kelly, you
know, I'm looking at.
24 actuals of 2330 on PS&E
versus
Uh
The executive in the LFC
recommendation this year of
29447.
Yes, that is about a $600,000
difference. And
Chairman Kelly, can you tell me
why?
Well, Mr. Chair, members
committee, so, um, the board of
nursing has seen some turnover
if you turn to their PScal form,
you'll see on page 3,
the, the funding will allow for
at least 3 full full time FTE in
the 26th budget to be funded at
this level. Now, I will remind
the committee this is a
non-general fund agency, all of
their revenue comes from
licensure fees from nursing and.
Um, and you're seeing adjacent
professionals, um, so that's my
answer.
Chairman Kelly, thank you very
much. So I understand that we're
gonna have about a $600,000
increase. It's all gonna come
from the people that um our, our
pain into this or 3 new people,
so we're paying 3 people 200,000
a year. No, Mr. Chair, so it's
not an increase on above, above
60,000. That's just actual
expenditures. If you look at the
operating budget for FY 25,
they're operating budget was
2.9.
09.7 and the change is 29447, so
that's really only a $30,000
difference between the current
operating budget. Now, I would
say when it comes to personnel
on this form. It is driven by
the average cost per FTE that's
in that this agency, and that
includes all fringe benefits, so
retirement, retiree healthcare,
um, other insurances, and so the
average cost for an FTE is
probably over $100,000.
for people in general
government, but that doesn't
mean that that's their salaries,
that's the total cost for that
employee.
Herman, uh, Kelly, thank you.
Um, let me make sure I, I.
From a private business
standpoint, we use around 1.38,
depending on the business.
The 1.42 multiplier for benefits
and
Uh, above and beyond salary.
Is that about what the state of
New Mexico is using.
OK.
Thank you for the clarification.
Thank you very much and
Chairman, my last question on
the Cobras.
I, if I understand 490
correctly.
The primary increase is due to
fire insurance costs. Uh, Mr.
Chairman Representative Peter
Grew. So we will get that answer
for you, Joyce Simon will, will
work on that, on the previous
question.
um on this one, that's my
understanding, um, uh, I don't
know if you, if you've all been
on that curi and, and Toltec
Railroad. There's a really nice
pavilion kind of, you know, I
remember it being as on the top
of the mountain. I don't know if
that's right, but unfortunately,
we, we lost that.
a few years ago, and I believe
they had to, had to reconstruct
it, and I'll, I'll have our
analyst here, uh, Julisa, uh,
add to that if she's got
anything else. Mr. Chair
Representative, so the overall
increase for the Coberintech is
14,000. It's kind of split into
two pieces with the larger piece
for the insurance, that's
9.5,000. The other difference is
for um personnel increases.
Thank you very much.
For your, for your answers, for
doing what you do. Thank you,
Chair. Thank you, Represent. OK,
we're gonna go to Representative
Duncan, then vice chair.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Just one
quick question on the nursing
board.
Um, we, we had a great
presentation from uh UNM talks
about doubling their nursing and
and a lot of other programs.
This does not have any
Anything to do with that at all
yet. A couple of years, it will
have. Am I correct in that? Um,
so Mr. Chairman, so the board of
nursing is strictly a licensure
oversight. They don't do like
the recruitment um and education
these they do do continuing
education so that people can
stay in compliance and up to
date, but those are um parallel
systems, but not intersecting
systems, if that makes sense.
OK. Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Thank you, Sam Duncan. OK, Vice
Cha Dixon.
Thank you. Um, I just have one
question regarding the Board of
Veterinary Medicine, um,
director, um, Schenk.
Did do it,
explain why uh they can no
longer support the website and
client database.
I, oh, sorry, I'm really not
sure why they just told us that
they can't support our website
or client data system anymore,
um, I guess it wasn't in
compliance with
What they do
So
So they basically told us we had
to get.
Everything new. Um, so like I
had said prior that our
Client data system that we
currently had was $1800 a year,
and this one is going to be like
40,000 a year.
So that really hurts us in the
pocketbook, um, like the board
of nursing, we also just
It's, it's our licenses that we
get the money from.
Um, so I did just go through and
I think it was uh January 14th.
We did get the rule changes in
place, and we do have, um, we
did a price increase.
Across the board for all the
licensees, so I'm hoping.
Within a year, cause it will
start February 1st that we maybe
can get about $70,000 more a
year that will get in, but I'm
just asking for that 125,000
just to get me through one year.
And, and Mr. Chair Vice Chair
Dixon, we, we're, we'll have a,
our, um, do it analyst Emily
follow up with with do it on
that. And there, there may be
some potential opportunities for
cost savings, um, as they, you
know, both, both use uh
research.
from RLD, so we'll, we'll
explore that and, and, um.
Uh, see if we can, we can help
Director Schenk with that.
Thank you, Mr. Chair, uh, thank
you. Uh, that would be lovely.
Excellent thank you I share
Dixon. OK. Uh, thank you,
members. Thank you, Doctor
Courtney. Thank you to all the
uh members of these various um
Uh, agencies, your work is
greatly appreciated, and the
fact that we've been able to
come work together to find the
right uh amount is fantastic.
With that numbers, I'm gonna go
to Representative Garrett for a
motion. Thank you, Mr. Chair. I
make a motion to adopt all the
consensus reports we've heard
today.
OK, it's been moved by
Representative Garrett, signed
by Representative Herrera. Is
there any opposition to that
motion? OK, please show
Representative Pettigrew in
opposition.
Um, with that,
That part is done. OK, we're
gonna go quickly now to public
comment. Also want to make sure
um some colleagues have a dinner
this evening that that they'll
be attending, uh, so we're gonna
go to public comment, um.
And, and work to set 5 minutes
for public comment.
Is there, we'll ask if anyone's
online.
Uh, in the meantime, anybody in
person who would like to give
public comment.
In the back, please come
forward.
Mr. We actually need a motion
which recommendations you're
moving forward, LFC your
executive on that motion.
OK, members, so we're gonna go
back, we're gonna go back to
emotion, uh for this since we
adopt so many LFC, I'll ask for
a motion to adopt the executive
recommendations since they're
the same.
For
The, uh, all of the consensus
staff reports Mr. Chairman, I
moved to adopt the executive
recommendations on the consensus
reports we heard today.
OK it's been moved by vice
chair uh by Representative
Garrett, seconded by
Representative Herrera. Uh, is
there any opposition to that
motion?
We'll show representative
Pettigrew in opposition to the
motion.
Uh, OK, we're gonna adopt that
member's apologies for that.
Thank you, Kelly, for the making
sure we're specifically, uh,
setting aside that one. Now
we're gonna go to public
comment.
Thank you, Mr. Chair, members of
the committee. My name is Jill
Dixon. I'm the executive
director of the Food Depot, um,
and also here on behalf behalf
of the New Mexico Association of
Food Banks. We just wanted to
state publicly that we support
$2.3 million for New Mexico
grown and the approved supplier
program to ensure the continued
expansion of small and mid-scale
growers to build their capacity
to meet the demands of the
school meal program and also to
sell the food banks, so we can
keep
local food in the hands of local
people, particularly our
children.
Thank you very much.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman,
committee members. My name is
Tom Patterson from a cattle
rancher from Catron County, and
I have the privilege of serving
as the president-elect of the
New Mexico Cattle Growers
Association.
Uh, PED has requested, this was
just indicated, 2.3 million.
For the New Mexico grown food in
school program. My understanding
is the LFC currently is not
recommending any funding. New
Mexico cattle growers supports
the appropriation request.
From the New Mexico grown.
Uh, food in schools program that
the PED has made. It's
nutritious.
rich in protein.
New Mexico grown as food for New
Mexicans, which includes our
schoolchildren.
We learned that their food
doesn't come from the grocery
store. It doesn't come from
Albertson's or Smith's or Trader
Joe's. It comes from people who
look like their neighbors.
To toil diligently to produce
that food.
That's what New Mexico grown
does.
For schools.
In New Mexico beef.
If you support this program,
it's what our kids who might not
otherwise get a chance to to see
it or eat it, we'll be able to
have for lunch.
And it will be surrounded on the
plate.
On their lunch plate with New
Mexico grown fruits and
vegetables.
Cattle growers like myself.
Who have sold our beef into this
program and who planned to sell
more beef into this when state
meat inspection program is
implemented.
Respectfully urge your favorable
consideration of this.
Request from the PED. Thank you.
Thank you very much.
OK, I think that concludes our
public comment.
Um
We're, we do have a few folks
online. We're gonna be very
brief. Again, we have uh uh need
to for colleagues to out. Go
ahead please for Jason Riggs.
Uh, uh, we
Currently we
We can see the, but we can't
hear it.
Yeah.
Uh, we can, we are not hearing
the audio, we are seeing your
words appear in the closed
captioning.
Thank you very much.
OK, uh,
Let's try, um, with Elena
Paisano.
We cannot hear you, uh, all
we're seeing is the closed
captioning. Please go ahead.
Thank you. OK, our final comment
we're gonna see this just on the
closed captioning, which I
believe is being webcast, which
at least is good.
Go ahead, please.
OK, we, we're not seeing
anything come up on the screen.
I know members have to go, we're
gonna close public comment now,
uh, if we need to take
additional comment on this, we
can, uh, good that the closed
captioning work, uh, will work
to make sure the sound works as
well. Members, I wanna, we
conclude today's, uh, hearing.
Thank you all very much. We're
gonna go ahead and turn folks
loose for Saturday. We will be
here tomorrow but Saturday uh
we're letting everybody go so
hey, what's that?
You're adjourned.
time
Uh, and we'll see everybody
tomorrow at 1:30 p.m.
OK.
