Representative Duncan.
Representative Garrett.
Representative Hernandez.
Representative Herndon
Representative Herrera.
Representative Herrera.
Representative Little here.
Representative Luhan here.
Representative Pettigrew.
Here, here.
Representative Sanchez.
Representative Sareana.
Representative Silva.
Representative Silver.
Representative Vincent.
Representative Vincent, Vice
Chair Dixon.
Chairs small.
I'm here.
Great. We have a corum of
members, uh, one quick note,
we're going to be rolling Cenel
37. So take that off the agenda
for today. I'm gonna go ahead
and present how uh Senate Bill
376 and hopefully we're free.
Excellent. Thank you, uh, Madam
Chair and committee members, I'm
pleased to be here to present uh
Senate Bill 376. I'm here with
Secretary Armijo, uh, deputy
secretary Castillo Smith from
the Healthcare Authority, uh,
members, as we all know, our
health benefits plan. Uh, we've
had, um, shortfalls, these
stretches back for a few
reasons, including because we
weren't raising uh employee
premiums, uh, in an actuarially.
So, manner, then a Bill 376, in
addition to expanding coverage
for the New Mexico National
Guard, uh, and a number of other
things, uh, takes care of the
issue with the actuarial sound
annual projections, it increases
our employer uh contribution to
8020, putting us in line with
where we used to be a very long
time ago and where our many of
our surrounding states are
explain additional
particulars, I'll turn over to
um the Secretary Armijo and go
from there.
Uh, good morning, good morning.
It's really the opposite of
morning actually.
I good evening, uh, Madam Chair,
members of the committee, um,
uh, thank you for hearing this
bill tonight, um, I'm Carrie me
home I'm the cabinet secretary
of the Healthcare Authority, um,
and as you know, the state
health benefits plan, which
offers coverage to state
employees has faced a deficit
for many years, one that's been
backfilled with General Fund
year over year, um, at the same
time, New Mexico contributes
just 65% of the cost of
insurance for state employees,
which is the low
level of any state in the
country. The healthcare
authority has been working on
this data-driven proposal for
months, identifying ways to set
the state's health plan on a
fiscally responsible path while
making health coverage more
affordable for our employees.
The changes in this bill will
reduce employee costs by more
than 40% on average,
permanently, um, eliminate the
state health benefits budget
shortfall didn't decrease the
uninsured rate among members of
the National Guard.
Give local public bodies more
certainty around their costs and
save the general fund 155
million over the next five
years, including $20 million in
savings to the general fund in
FY 26.
Um, at its course and it Bill
376 does 5 things. First, it
requires the secretary to submit
actuarially sound budget
requests for setting state
health benefit premiums every
year. Second, it replaces the
outdated salary brackets for
insurance contributions with an
8020 split for all employees
eligible for state health
benefits. Third, it provides a
program to pay down a portion or
all of the premiums for low
income employees through the
Healthcare Affordability Fund.
Fourth, it creates patient
protections for initiatives
related to the establishment of
fair hospital pricing and 5th,
it creates a program to lower
premiums for members of the
National Guard who qualify for
Tricare Select Reserve, uh, and
with that, Madam Chair.
Thank you. Um, first we'll see
if uh there's anyone here in the
public that would like to speak,
uh, for or against this bill?
Great. You wanna come?
And then if you're online and
wanted to speak on um.
Senate Bill 376. Go ahead and
raise your hand and we'll, we'll
go to you next.
Madam chair members of the
committee, Carter Bundy with
asked me, We want to thank the
sponsor here and the sponsor in
the Senate. This is really
important for state employees,
some of whom are dropping health
insurance, making it more
affordable is one of the things
that will help our recruiting
and retention, something we need
in almost every agency, so we
urge your passage. Thank you.
Thank you, Madam Chair, members
of committee, John Lipshutz with
the New Mexico Federation of
Labor, uh, we stand in strong
solidarity, uh, solidarity of
any measure that uh would help
recruit and retain uh public
employees coming in, uh, coming
into the system. We have a
terrible, uh, lack of uh of
those employees, and so anything
that could be done to help fill
the ranks would be helpful, and,
and this is a great way to do
so. So we urge your support.
Thank you.
Madam Chair, committee members,
uh, my name's Edward Webster.
I'm the government relations
director with NEA New Mexico,
um, as my colleague said, my
brother's in labor, we support
them, we support this bill. Um,
we support every worker having
access to affordable quality
healthcare, whether they're
union, non-union, private sector
or public sector. Um, I do hope
passage of this bill though will
allow a conversation and an
opening for us to discuss also
having our K through 12 and
higher education professionals
also have some relief from their
healthcare.
costs. So we ask you to support
this bill. Thank you.
Good evening, Madam Chair,
members of the committee, I am
Brigadier General Nathaniel
Carper, Deputy Adjutant general
for the New Mexico National
Guard. Uh, thank you for your
time this evening considering
this important piece of
legislation, uh, the New Mexico
National Guard considers this
critical this bill critically
important uh to our service
members, as you all know that
the Mexico National Guard
responds frequently to disasters
throughout the state, a large
part of our service members that
respond to these disasters as
well as conducts our federal
missions are currently
uninsured.
Approximately 500
We often call upon these junior
enlisted younger soldiers to
perform some very difficult and
dangerous tasks when we asked
them to do these things, and
this will help cover their um
their needs in between those
orders and those missions, and
we strongly support this. So on
behalf of the New Mexico
National Guard, um.
Thank you for your consideration
and time this evening.
Thank you. So we're gonna go
ahead, uh, to some of our folks
online and we'll start with
Lindsey Hurst.
Madam Chair and committee, thank
you for the opportunity to speak
and thank you to the sponsors
for bringing this bill forward.
My name is Lindsay Hurst. I am
currently serving as the
executive vice president for CWA
Local 7076.
Our union represents state
employees at 13 state agencies,
about 2700 positions, 27% of
which are vacant. We
respectfully ask that you pass
Senate Bill 376. Every year when
the legislative salary increase
hits our paychecks, many of our
union members end up with a pay
cut to take home pay, because
they are bumped into the next
insurance tier, removing the
tiered system from the state
employee insurance system will
support our low and middle
income.
State workers and their
families. Thank you.
Thank you. Uh, next we have Ann
Keller.
Hello, um,
Good evening, uh, Madam Chair
and committee members. My name
is Ann Keller. I am an 11-year
state employee and the treasurer
of the
Uh,
communication workers of America
local 7076. I'm here in my union
capacity. I stand in support of
this bill and request your
support as well.
5 years ago, I was one of those
individuals, um, who, when my
salary crossed over the 60k
threshold, um, due to the
legislative cola, I began
bringing home $50 less every pay
period. Um, then I had made
before the cola rays. It was a
difficult two years trying to
make ends meet, um, and due to
the unintentional pay cut,
ultimately, I had to change
positions to get a pay increase
to reverse the effects of
crossing that $60,000 salary
threshold.
I respectfully request that you
support and pass Senate Bill
376. Thank you for your time and
thank you for listening.
Great. Thank you, Anne. Uh, so
we're, we'll go to committee
members now and I've got
Representative Lujan and
Representative Dao.
Thank you, madam chair, uh,
thank you for this bill and um.
I guess my one of my questions
is, and it, I think we have
this.
The benefit package that we have
now for the state is just, this
is incredible. Um, how are we
going to use this as a
recruitment tool, Adam Chair.
Um,
Madam Chair, Representative Lu
Han, uh, well, I think, uh, the
bill actually really does reset
uh the state's original
intention, excuse me, 20 years
ago when the statute was set,
the state was paying about 80%
of the health insurance costs.
Um, so we're really just trying
to modernize or get that back to
where it needs to be, um, right
now, New Mexico is the lowest uh
in the country in terms of
contributing to state employee
benefits. Um, so we really
this competes. Uh, I also want
to say that uh uh the state of
New Mexico is not competing
favorably even with our local
government partners, which are
paying 80% or higher of state of
their employee benefits, so, um,
state uh city employees, county
employees are getting a better
deal. So this will allow us to
be more competitive, um, and I
think as you all know, state
agencies are really trying to
recruit that talent, so it does
become another recruitment tool,
um, and it's additional funding.
Money back in the pockets of
hardworking New Mexicans. Thank
you, ma'am Chair, and, and I
appreciate that, but I really
think that we need to really,
um, focusing on this as as as uh
as we're looking to for those
recruitment those the spots. So,
and you, you mentioned the local
government, um, are they gonna
participate in the pool now,
Madam Chair.
Um
Madam Chair Representative Lujan
they can, um, any local public
body can participate in the
pool. Um, they set their own.
Contribution tiers for their
employees, but they can purchase
in. Thank you, Madam Chair, and
if they were to choose to join
the pool, would it be a a a
better package for them, Madam
Chair.
Uh mountain representative
Luhan. I'm not actually sure. I
think um it may be a better
package, although like I said,
um, the local government would
set the tears that some, some of
the local governments actually
pay 100%, um, the, the good news
about this is that it resets um
the correct premium, and right
now local public bodies are not
paying enough, right? because um
they are the premiums are too
low and so this.
sets that everyone will be
paying the right amount, um, and
the state won't be picking up
the cost as for it being a
better premium, um, it's
probably gonna just be
comparable, um, but there is
power in numbers and anytime
insurance people purchase into
the pool and improves the
purchasing power of that pool.
Thank you, man. That was, that
was to my point. Thank you so
much and I hope that that we do
look to have our numbers grow in
that way and this, this is
entices them in a sense so that
we can really stabilize or keep
those.
Those um premiums down and and
keep a healthy pool. Thank you,
Madam Chair.
Representative Dow.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Thank
you, Representative. Um, I have
to go back a little bit because
I was hearing several folks came
and talked to me today, and my
mind was going back to 2021.
And this is when we passed
Senate Bill 317, Madam Chair and
Representative, we do have some
new members on the, um,
committee, so I think that I'll
give it a little bit of context,
but at the federal level, the
health insurance tax.
Under the Affordable Care Act
was repealed in 2021. And I
think that was like at 3.75,
something like that. So the
purpose, and this is Nancy
Pelosi's words were to lower the
insurance costs nationwide.
But New Mexico, instead of
passing that savings onto the
small business, we just raised
our own tax, we implemented it
at the state level. Madam Chair,
Representative, is this what
we're talking about?
Uh, Madam Chair, Representative
Doo, no, uh, Madam Chair
Representative Doo, this is a uh
entirely different um bill that
changes our uh
The ratio for what we pay for
employees, uh, allows the
Tricare option for the National
Guard. The um the healthcare
affordability Fund is a source
of funding to help cover that
coverage for the National Guard.
So that's the only nexus. Thank,
thank you, Madam Chan. Thank
you, representative. So we are
going to take, I, I specifically
remember when we started that
healthcare affordability fund.
It was to pass the savings on to
or make premium.
lower for uninsured and small
business. Uninsured and small
business, and that was the
Healthcare Affordability Fund,
and I believe it was going to
generate around 133, 150
million.
Uh, Madam Chair, Doo, yet now
generates um over that, uh,
Madam Chair Representative, this
is covering, I'm told by the
experts, 6000 small business,
um, employees or helping cover
6000 small business employees in
the state for small businesses
who are choosing to receive
that. Thank you, Madam Chair,
and thank you, Representatives.
So then how much?
How much of the money that we've
raised from that bill, the
Healthcare Affordability Fund
shouldn't 100% of it be going to
uninsured and small business.
Uh, Madam Chair represented out.
It's available for that, it's
available for the individual
marketplace to support lowering
premiums, and I think it's over
50,000 New Mexicans who are on
the exchange, I'd go to the
experts for that specific
amount, um, expanding that to
help cover um National Guard
members who don't have any other
insurance coverage.
Is a is the approach that it
takes in the bill and
think that's a good one. Thank,
thank you, Madam Chair and thank
you, Representative. I don't
think I disagree with that, but
I certainly don't think this was
ever intended to supplement
state employees.
Madam Chair and Representative,
isn't that what our general
funds for which we had almost a
$3 billion increase surplus this
year.
Um, Madam Chair, Representative
Doo, so the, um, on page 8 of
the bill you can see the actual
purpose of the fund, um, so it
was broader than small
businesses. It was snake um
health insurance, um, more
affordable, so specifically to
reduce healthcare premiums and
cost sharing for New Mexico
residents purchasing healthcare
coverage through the New Mexico
Health Insurance Exchange. What
we're trying to do is make this
kind of leverage the same amount
of savings basically for people
who would be eligible to uh to
purchase coverage.
on the exchange, um, make that
sort of a comparable benefit for
low income state employees below
a certain threshold, um, so if
you are right that that wasn't
the original intention of the
statue, and that's one of the
reasons that we are coming here
with the amendment today. Thank
you, Madam Chair and thank you
for that. I do appreciate you
being honest about it, Madam
Chair and Representative, have
small businesses seen increases
in their premiums as well.
Um, Mr. uh, Madam Chair,
Representative Doo, um, we have
another expert at the table, uh,
from our team who might be able
to answer those questions.
Uh, Madam Chair and
Representative Doo, thank you
for the question. Um, there have
been premium increases, uh, um,
since the, that law passed, um,
and you know, insurance
benefits, uh, costs have gone up
since that time. However, this
year, um, the, uh, what is
in-house Bill 2, or at least as
it went over to the Senate, um,
actually does increase the
amount that small businesses
will be receiving, so from, uh,
for the last few years, they've
been getting a 10% discount on
their rates. This will be
able to actually provide an even
greater discount, um, even with
the, the additional funding that
we're proposing to provide for
the program that's for you
today, Mad, Madam Chair and
Representative, you can, you can
understand my concern. I was
here when the bill passed. It
was, it was, it died and then
there was a substitute and the
promise was that it would lower
premiums for uninsured and for
small, small businesses, and so
to see that when the growth rate
of our state budget has grown so
much that the burden
our small businesses has been, I
mean, that was right in the
middle of COVID, our businesses
have really suffered a lot. And
I, I don't want to say no to
low-income state employees. I
certainly don't want to say no
to the National Guard, but when
it's coming from small
businesses, it's one more, it's
hard for me to understand why we
didn't plan this out of the
growth of our state budget. I
think we're
What was our annual budget in
2021, Madam Chair
Representative.
Uh, I don't have that right up.
8 billion.
8 billion. Thank you, Madam
Chair Representative from we
have 8 billion to 11 billion.
Every bit of inflation that
we're feeling, small businesses
are feeling.
Every bit of pinch that we're
healing filling small businesses
are really, I, I think that
probably National Guard fits in
it, but I don't see how, not
that I don't want low income
employees to get it, but it
doesn't, shouldn't that come
from the general fund.
I mean I'm sure representative
Doo, we don't think so. We think
that that fund was designed to
make insurance more affordable
for New Mexicans and state
employees were actually left out
of that, um, if we don't this
year, uh, we are by setting the
premiums at an actuary sound
rate gonna increase premiums by
40% for state employees. That's
what it's gonna take to get
there. That's why this sort of
these additional forms of
assistance, the resetting of the
salary tier to the 80%, um,
using that affordability fund
for.
lowest income employees. That's
why we're really kind of
combining the strategies so that
they don't all experience a 40%
rate hike. Um, and so we do
think that the intention of the
fund was designed to make a
coverage more affordable for New
Mexicans and um we think of our
fellow state employees as New
Mexicans. I think um that's
really why we put this proposal
together. Thank you, Madam Chair
and thank you. I'm, I'm.
I'm, I almost don't even know
what to say.
Because we talk about the
benefits and how this is one of
the lowest, uh, I mean, they
have a high contribution and we
pay the lowest for state
employees, but we also have one
of the biggest retirement
programs. And there's a lot of
small businesses in my district
that have no retirement, only
the sale of their business is
what they'll live on. There's a
lot of small businesses that are
just barely scraping by to pay
their insurance, and when I hear
that we're gonna lower or
eliminate premiums for one group
on the promise of another group,
that is very hard for me when we
have some of the best.
retirement. So there's a give
and a take. And so when you're a
business owner, there's a risk
and a reward, but I heard the
promise from this body. And so
it's, I, I, I, I don't, it's,
it's just, it feels like, it
feels like we're going back in
our word.
Madam Chair.
Madam Chair and Representative
Doo, we're not reducing the uh
Premium assistance going to
small businesses in the state
nor the support on the
individual marketplace.
This is uh an additional
component.
Yeah, Madam chair and
represented from my perspective.
If we can reduce and eliminate
for state employees, we could be
reducing and eliminating from
the small businesses, and that's
what we said we'd do with the
tax.
Um,
thank you,
Madam Chair, and, and, uh,
Representative Doo, I think I
would absolutely share the
concern that, that you're
raising if we were, um,
Not providing more assistance
this year to small businesses as
we were talking about new uses
of this fund, I would be
concerned about that as well,
but because of the action that
was taken by the legislature
last year to actually expand the
amount of funding that is going
to the Affordability fund, we're
able to provide some additional
programs and it enables this.
And so, as I mentioned, this
past these past few years, the
10% decrease has been on those
uh state employee, I'm sorry, on
the
uh small business premiums. No
other state is doing a program
like that. This year, we're
providing even more funding or
you all are providing even more
funding to those small
businesses so that they can
continue offering, offering. Oh,
thank you, Madam Chair, and
since you, since you brought it
up, of the 50 states, which
states went ahead and taxed and
didn't pass those savings on in
the first place. So out of the
50 states when the federal
government repealed the um under
the Affordable Care Act, and
they repealed that tax, the
health insurance.
How many, how many passed a
local tax, just picked it back
up at the state level. Uh, Madam
Chair and Representative, I
believe, um, 5 or 6 states did a
similar thing with the concern
that um if, if the state didn't
step in, there would be no
guarantee that that, um, that
premium reduction would actually
reach the consumer, um, and I
think we're pretty proud of the
programs that have been put
together from that, we've seen
record enrollment in our
marketplace, our small
businesses are getting that
reduction, so.
I think overall it's been uh
worthwhile investment. Thank
you, Madam Chair. Thank you. I,
I believe every small business
would, would participate because
they're desperate for affordable
insurance for their themselves
and theirs. Thank you.
Thank you, Representative. Uh,
next we have Representative
Duncan.
Thank you, Madam Chair.
I guess I'm gonna say what
nobody, probably nobody else
will sit in this room. I come
from small business, and we
chatted a little bit earlier
today.
So
And I can't remember your name,
sir, but you said, uh, you're
opening this up and offering it
to more people.
Can you tell me why that wasn't
extended.
5 years ago.
Um
And go ahead and, and answer
that. I do want to make sure
that cause I, I think that's
moving a little bit off the
premise of this bill, uh, but go
ahead, let's
look at I'll bring it back,
thank you. Uh, Madam Chair and,
and Representative Duncan, um,
when that bill first passed, uh,
it was looking at some of the
affordability challenges that we
knew about in the small group
market, as well as the the
individual health insurance
market and um at that time, the
vast
majority of state employees were
in the tier, um, where 80% of
their premium was being uh
contributed by the state. And in
the years since then, there's
been a major shift of more and
more folks going into that
higher tier. And so this
affordability challenge that
specific to our state employees
has really grown over the last
few years. And so, in looking at
the uh revenue available to the
Affordability fund as well as
its acute challenge with our
state employees.
Uh, we thought that this would
be an appropriate use of the
fund and just provide a little
bit of context, the recurring
funding from the Affordability
fund here would be a little bit
over $10 million and it's
covering the net premium for
those lower income employees.
Our total premium that we're
charging is over 500 million.
And so it's a very small amount
to actually do quite a bit, uh,
for the state employees who are
on the lower income scale.
Madam Chair and Representative
or representative and an expert
witnesses. Um,
You're probably gonna have to
forgive me for saying this, but
um
We've got great retirement from
the state, 96% of the businesses
in the state don't even have a
retirement.
And you want me to feel sorry
for a group that is going to get
their insurance paid.
And yet, time after time after
time, this body.
Has done things to businesses
that no other state does the
businesses.
You continue to want to tax us
to death.
And then we use that money for
somebody else's benefit.
This is not
I'm sorry, madam chair, but I'm
done.
Thank you, uh, Representative
Pettigre, please.
Thank you, Madam Chair, um.
Thank you, Chairman. Thank you
Secretary. Thank you Colin for
being here and uh
I'm in much agreement with
Representative Dow and, and
Representative Duncan with
respect to this. We've
calling you and I had some
conversations earlier today with
respect to this, and I think we
need to take this a little bit
further and have this
conversation a little bit
deeper.
Because, and I truly appreciate
the comments from Representative
Do cause it took me back to
2021, and I remember the debate
we had, chairman, on the floor
regarding this. And um
This just doesn't deal with the
National Guard.
This doesn't just deal with
state employees on the lower
tier, doesn't just deal with a
small businesses.
It also includes, I remember
this debate well, um, are
undocumented immigrants as well.
So, Madam Chair,
Chairman, secretary, uh Cohen.
I understand what you're trying
to do.
I don't think this is the way to
get there.
Tonight, I'm not gonna be able
to support this, um, I look
forward to having conversations
before it gets to the floor.
Thank you.
Thank you, Representative.
Um, any other questions from
members? I, I have a few and
then we'll go to Representative
Sanchez.
Um, so just as a um
Reminder, can you, uh, what
funding is available in the
budget for this.
Uh, Madam Chair, um, there is
funding in House Bill 2, and I'm
not exactly sure. I haven't seen
the version of House Bill 2 just
yet. Um, there is, um, as Colin
mentioned about 10 million from
affordability fund to fund the
low income state employee share
and then the members of the
National Guard, the remainder of
the funding would be in the comp
package uh for state employees
just like the rest of the comp
package. I'm not sure. I haven't
seen uh seen that yet.
Um, but, um, again, we're
looking at about $68 million
need, um, compared to what we
are projecting in terms of a
shortfall of 87 million if that
is not funded and.
Thank you. Um, and, um, just to
sort of regroup about the uh
population, the universe that
we're talking about is, uh, what
it, what do we define as low
income for the state employees.
Uh, Madam Chair, I believe the
bill it is up to 250% of the
federal poverty level in the
bill.
Thank you, um, and then how many
um do we know about how many
National Guard members we have.
Ha
Uh, Madam Chair, um,
I believe, uh, in the survey
and, and I might, I might ask
our friends from the National
Guard. I know that they're a
little over 500 who would be
able to benefit who are
uninsured now, but.
And were you hoping for the
total number as well? Um,
actually, that is uh sort of
precisely, so 500 National Guard
members that currently are
uninsured, have no insurance.
OK, and so this would allow them
to uh to have access to health
insurance. OK, thank you. Um,
before, um, I go to the motion,
um, uh, Mr. Chair, did you want
to close? Uh, sure, thank you,
ma'am, Chair. Thank you,
members, uh, Madam Chair,
members for the last at least 3
years, we've covered shortfall.
and state benefits uh to the
tune of 100+ million dollars
from the general fund each year,
uh, but never catching up, Madam
Chair remembers what this bill
does is it gets us into a place
where we're gonna provide better
coverage, uh, for, um, state
employees clearly the coverage
for uh our National Guard's
people, and we will not, no
longer face that annual
80 to $120 million gap, uh, um,
so thank you and
That's it.
Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Madam, to pass.
Second, great, thank you. Um,
for the record, uh,
Representative Sanchez made the
motion, a second from uh
Representative Silva, um,
Their objection.
Um
OK. Thank you. If we could note,
um, Jackie for for uh in
opposition, uh.
OK.
But you're a yes. OK,
perfect. OK, let's, we'll do a,
we'll do a roll call. We'll just
make it easy then. Thank you,
Jackie.
Representative Baca. No.
Representative Brown.
Representative Chatfield.
Representative Doll.
No.
Representative Duncan.
Oh
Representative Garrett.
Representative Hernandez.
Yes.
Representative Herndon, yes.
Representative Herrera.
Representative Little, yes.
Representative Lujan.
Representative Pettigrew.
No.
Representative Sanchez.
Representativesavignano.
Representative Silva.
Representative Vincent.
Vice Chair Dixon, yes.
Cheers.
be at 10 in the affirmative, 4
in the negative.
Thank you and Representative
Chatfield.
So it's been mentioned where uh
the history of the affordability
fund. I remember the history of
this bill, and the history of
this bill started when I went
home and found out that my small
counties had been sent a bill
for hundreds of thousands of
dollars for their employees.
Those people were afraid. They
didn't know how they were going
to get insurance for their
families. They were not able to
come up with the money. Our
little counties have minimal,
minimal little bitty budget.
And the people that work for
them might make sometimes $800 a
month. You take their, their
Insurance away, and they have
nothing.
And I'm sorry that we're getting
the money from a
Maybe a, a different place.
Maybe we could do better about
where it comes from, but it's
important to me that we make
some changes that we provide. I
have 6 counties in my district.
The county employees get their
Insurance through the state.
I have an enormous amount of
other employees in my districts
and many of schools, uh, are
they included?
They get their
Uh, uh, Madam Chair,
if we're looking at that for
next year. So I, I know the
counties get them, get their
insurance from here. The, it was
a big deal and I'm not gonna sit
here and vote against the people
that work hard in my area, uh,
for the various institutions
that do get their money from
here. And uh, you know, when I
go home, if I did, it probably
wouldn't be very happy with me.
Thank you, Madam Chair.
Thank you. Thank you very much.
Uh, we are going to move on to.
Mm
I don't think today is the 12th.
House Bill 42. Sorry,
Representative Cates.
Excellent. Thank you,
Representative Kate. Please go
ahead, uh, with House Bill 42.
Uh, thank you, Mr. Chair and
thank you members. Um, I'm here
to present House Bill 42. It is
in the budget. It's a strict
appropriations bill, um, it's
making appropriations to uh to
the healthcare authority for
providing rate increases, the
service providers that receive
reimbursement from a certain
Medicaid waiver program. So
every 5 years, the Center for
Medicaid, Medicare uh systems
require.
requires the state to do uh rate
study, uh, these came out in
December of 2022, only some of
the categories got funded, so
this appropriations will make
sure that the other categories
are funded today I sit next to
my expert witness, Jim Copeland,
who is the ED for the uh Adca
and I'd like him to make a brief
statement. Thank you.
Good afternoon, madam. Mr. Chair
and members of the committee,
Jim Copeland, executive director
of the Association of
Developmental Disabilities,
Community Providers, and this
has been something that we've
been working on for quite a
while, uh, there were 6 services
that did not receive a rate
increase in the 2023 rate study
and this bill would fund the
rate increases for those sick
services at a 7.32% um rate
increase, uh, that was the
inflation factor that was
determined in the 2023 rate
study.
For calendar year 2025. So
that's all we're asking for the
average rate increase for the
other services was a little over
14% so these services are really
the important services it's the
residential supports, the most
labor intensive services in the
system 24 hour a day, group
homes as most people would refer
to them in our day services, uh,
where the services that this
money would go to fund.
Thank you, Mr. Chair, we stand
for questions. Great, thank you
very much Representative Kate.
Thank you, Mr. Copeland. Uh, is
there anybody who wishes to
speak again, this is straight
upropriation, we will be tuned,
but thank you for bringing the
effort, uh, and we did want to
talk about it. Anybody who would
like to speak on House Bill 42.
OK.
Um
We're gonna go to committee, go
over to Representative Duncan.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Um, did
you say representative that uh
we have funding in HB 2 in this,
is that correct? Yes, Mr. Terry,
yes, Representative, we do. OK.
Um,
So would HA have to request a
waiver from the federal
government if the Trump
administration decided not to
cover that.
I would
Thank you, Mr. Chair, and I'm so
sorry, Representative. Can you
repeat the question? I'm not
sure I understand it. Um, so I'm
wondering if the Trump
administration decided not to
cover this, it, I mean, is that
a possibility?
And thank you, Mr. Chair, and,
and thank you, Representative.
So for this appropriations, this
is this comes from our state
budget. It's not something from
our federal budget. This is a
Medicaid program, which is part
of the Federal world, but this
appropriations is our state
funding.
Thank you, Mr. Chair and
representative. That's what I
need to know if, if there was,
if we spent it and they paid us
back, that's all they needed to
know. Thank you.
Thank you representative uh
Duncan. We'll go to represent
Pettigrew, then represent Silva.
Thank you, Chairman and thank
you Representative.
And uh expert um.
My first question, chairman may
be directly for you.
Where would I find this in the
budget, the 6.3 million.
Uh, thank you, um, the there's
$10 million for provider rate
increases, um, and 5.8 million
for behavioral health provider
rate increases, that's where the
pool that this would help cover.
Uh, or, or that's sort of the
pool that will cover more than
cover the amount that's
requested in this.
Thank you, Chairman, for that.
Um, you know, um,
For the expert chairman, um, we
talked about 6 additional
services that we're adding this
year. Can you list those?
I thank you, Mr. Chair and thank
you, Representative. Just uh to
clarify, it's not 6 additional
services. The rate study covers
all the services that the state
has provided for years, they
just didn't fund 6 of those
services, and so we're trying to
fund those, but we've been
providing them for years. Um,
and I thank you, Representative
Peter, Mr. Chair, of, uh, Jim,
could you tell them the
services? I don't know them off
the top of my head. Yeah, Mr.
Chair, members of the committee.
The 6 services are the support,
there are 4 levels of supported
living services, uh, level 123,
and 4, Level 4 is the most
severe behavioral and medical
folks, so and, and I, I will,
let me back up a minute. The
supported living level 4 service
did get a 1% recommended rate
increase, uh, we don't think
that was really counted, so
we've we've included it in with
the others, but the four levels
of supported living and then our
customized community support
service and
customized in-home support
service, that's the day services
typically what, what used to be
called day services to take care
of folks during the day.
But those were the 6 services
that that this House Bill 42
would fund the rate increases
for.
Thank you for that, Chairman.
Thank you for that rep and
expert, um,
One final question. I, I know
the answer was this is state,
state-based funding. Is there
any federal match in this at
all?
I thank you, Mr. Chair, and
thank you, Representative. Yes,
all Medicaid, all state Medicaid
one, we do get a federal match,
absolutely. I'm sorry if I was
not clear on that, but the
funding that we're asking is the
state portion of the of the.
The chairman, I think, hopefully
this is the last follow up to
that. So that would be at a 3:1
ratio.
And thank you, Mr. Chair and
thank you, Representative.
Um, it depends on the service,
but it's a 3 to 4 time ratio.
Depending, no, am I wrong? You
tell me.
The, as I understand it, we've,
we've, I've heard this a lot, 30
1 ratio. The current federal
medical assistance percentage
for New Mexico I think is
71.69%.
That's down from 72.59% last
year.
But what that means is for every
dollar that the state pays in,
the feds give us the 71.69 cents
on that dollar.
So it's really not a 3 to 3 to 1
match. I, I think that's my
understanding. I think that's
correct.
Thank you. Um, thank you,
Chairman.
Guarantee and this is the last
one. So,
With respect to that, does that
require the state to follow
another waiver with the feds.
And thank you, Mr. Chair and
thank you, Representative.
That's a great question. And no,
it's not. It's still part of the
um of the waiver, we are coming
up, uh, we because we were
required to do this uh great
studies every 5 years, we are
coming up to doing the next rate
study, but, um, will there be a
CMS request for the change in
rate, but it's doesn't require a
new waiver.
Thank you very much. Thank you,
Chair.
Thank you. Uh, next, we'll go to
Representative Silver.
Thank you, Chair. Thank you,
Representative. Um, I just had a
quick question. Um, why not put
the waivers in and name them in
the bill, um.
And is there a way that, uh,
this body could follow up to
make sure that that money was
appropriated to those particular
waivers, representative and
chair.
Uh, thank you, Mr. Chair, and I
promise you I did not ask the
representative to ask me that
question, but thank you very
much for that question,
Representative. Um,
It is the, the language does
leave their uh their discretion
to the HCA, we are hoping
because we have a piece of
legislation, we have a line item
on a budget. We're going to have
a tabled here we're hoping. Um,
that we would be able to do
that, but yes, it, it is just
how it's been done in the past
and not always successful, so
there is risk to that, you're
absolutely right.
Mr. Chair.
Represented.
Thank you, um, sponsor and
chair, um, so I'm just gonna
make a little note of that and
make sure that it does go where
it needs to go, um, because the
waivers that that you name are
just really important,
especially as we look at the
future and, and how we intended
to appropriate these funds, so
thank you. Thank you, sir. Thank
you very much. Uh, next we have
Representative Herndon.
Thank you, Mr. Chair and thank
you presenters. So I'm, I'm
asking this question for
clarification. So earlier in
this legislative session, there
was a bill introduced to
increase the rate for home
health care workers. Uh, that do
provide services to those who
are receiving Medicaid. Does
this fund cover that and then
what is the rate?
So thank you very much, Mr.
Chair and thank you members. So
it's it's a very complex
question, representatives, so
let me try to answer it as
quickly as I can is I believe
and I don't know for sure, but I
believe the bill that you're
referring to are for direct care
providers who are working under
Medicaid programs for the
elderly, and it's home health.
So this bill is for individuals
with developmental disabilities
that are in honor of DD waiver,
which is a Medicaid.
program required by the federal
government that we provide for
those who are born with a
developmental disability.
So, Mr. T, um, Madam
Representative, what does it
raise the rate to?
Thank you so much, uh Mr.
Speaker and members, so the
rates are.
Boiled down to one entire page
because there are different
services depending on the
diagnosis and the level of care.
It's not just one rate. So
there's a whole
Slew of rates at your
residential program, if your
family home provider, if you
have high medical needs. If you
have a day program, if you have
job coach and you're you're
employed. So there's different
rates for different services.
This funds some of those
categories that didn't get
funded earlier.
So Mr. Chair, where do we see
the increase in the rates from
where they were to where they're
going, uh.
Yeah, we're, we're, we're gonna
ask the healthcare authority to
follow up. So based upon what
this committee and then what the
Senate will do in the Senate
will not decrease any of the
additional funding that we
added, we added 10, so we'll,
we'll distribute that to
members.
Uh, the, the increased, uh,
provider reimbursement rates
that are gonna come from the at
least 10 million recurring
dollars that we're investing.
But the, the representative is
bringing this I'll know that,
well, back to you San Fern and
I'll have a quick note at the
end.
Uh, thank you, Mr. Chair. That's
all. Great. Thank you. Hey, I
don't see any other questions,
uh, representative Kate, Mr.
Copeland, thank you, members, as
you'll know, um,
That there are the specific
waiver programs are not named in
the bill, uh, but there's been a
lot of good work to to to
increase the level of funding
and working with HCA to make
sure that we're gonna provide
higher uh levels of investment
across a wide range of areas,
including things like skilled
nursing for Medicaid for our
seniors. This is another area
where we're investing new
dollars, but I appreciate the
questions about
specific details and we'll ask
for that, uh, from the
healthcare authority and
distribute that to members. Uh,
we'll go to the vice chair for
the tabling motion, but Cates,
thank you very much for your
work and advocacy on this.
I moved to table House Bill.
42. Great. OK, there's a motion
to table House Bill 42. Is there
any opposition to that motion?
Seeing none
OK? And now we're gonna ask the
vice chair to go down for our
final bill of the evening, uh,
Senate Bill 169.
Right. OK, uh, representative,
uh, vice chair, go ahead,
please. Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Um, I'm presenting Senate bill
169 this evening, uh, which is a
bipartisan piece of legislation
that has been prepared in
coordination with the economic
development department and it
creates uh a site readiness act,
uh, the primary objective is to
enhance the state's economic
development, by identifying
Assessing and preparing
strategic sites for immediate
business development.
Uh, one of the things we
frequently hear from businesses
that are looking to move to New
Mexico is that it takes too long
to get the utilities and
infrastructure, um, set up. And
so we lose out on a very
promising opportunities, so this
um act will allow the economic
development department to do
site characterization studies,
um, it will provide for a site
advisory committee that will
review site characterization
studies, recommend site designs.
And advise on funding
allocations, um, this bill also
creates the site readiness fund,
uh, which, uh, I will note there
is 24 when we sent House Bill 2
over to the Senate included $24
million for this item, um, and
then the fourth thing that this
bill does is.
Um, designate strategic economic
development sites, um, and then
the economic development
department will solicit
proposals for pre-development
projects aimed at enhancing
these sites readiness for
immediate business use,
including infrastructure
improvements and environmental
remediation.
So with that, Mr. Chair, we will
stand for questions and my
expert is Isaac Romero from the
Economic Development department.
Great, thank you very much, Vice
Chair. Thank you, Deputy
Secretary Romero. Anybody here
who wants to speak on uh Senate
Bill 169.
Great, come on up.
Good evening, chair members of
the committee. My name is Alison
Riley, public policy director
for the New Mexico Chamber of
Commerce, standing in strong
support of Senate Bill 169, site
readiness is one of the biggest
factors attracting businesses,
investment and economic growth.
When businesses look to expand
or relocate, they need
shovel-ready sites with the
right infrastructure and
permitting in place. Without
that, they moved to states that
are better prepared.
This bill accelerates job
creation by reducing delays in
site development, allowing
businesses to start operations
faster and higher sooner. It
also leverages public-private
partnerships, ensuring that both
local communities and private
industry benefit from these
investments. Senate Bill 169 is
a smart, forward thinking policy
that will keep New Mexico open
for business, and we urge your
support. Thank you. Great. Thank
you very much. Thank you.
Uh, Mr. Chairman and members of
the committee, thank you very
much. My name is Kent Cravens, I
am a registered lobbyist with
the New Mexico Association
Realtors, and I want to thank
the sponsors and the secretary
and uh our deputy secretary, uh,
both for some really, really
hard work on this, I won't
belabor all the points that have
been spoken, uh, other than to
say this is exciting, this is
really exciting to finally see
something that kind of smells
like dynamic scoring that that
will get a payoff in the future,
uh, to come through.
his body and, and, uh, and do as
well as it's done, uh, so we're
very, very excited to, to
support this. Thank you. Great,
thank you very much.
Good evening, Mr. Chair and
members of the committee,
Sheriffor with P&M, uh, PNM is
in full support of SB 169. In
fact, we're very excited about
this bill. It helps expedite the
timeline processes for full
development of an economic
development project and in turn
attract business and industry to
New Mexico, and more
importantly, they'll keep more
of our own here at home in New
Mexico. Thank you.
Great. Thank you very much. OK,
is there anybody online? OK,
we've got a 4 folks, uh, we're
gonna go, we'll start with
Bernard, if you could be as
brief as possible, but go ahead,
Bernard.
Yes, sir. Mr. Chairman, can you
hear me? Yeah, we sure can. Yes,
Mister Chairman and members of
the committee, Bernard Treat, a
lobbyist for Xcel Energy for the
reasons you've heard, we stand
in full support of this bill.
We've worked with, um, the, the
bill sponsor and Secretary Black
since its beginning and and in
full support, and lastly, sir,
um, I know y'all have had a real
long day and we all appreciate
the service you provided in New
Mexico. Thank you. Thank you.
very much.
OK, we're gonna go next to Paul.
Paul, go ahead.
Hi, good evening, Chairman and
committee members. This is Paul
Loh. I am the uh founder of
Mercury Bio and President and I
totally support this bill. We
are a biotech company in New
Mexico. I'm also the chairman of
the board of New Mexico
Bioscience Authority, and this
is absolutely needed for our,
our, uh, industry. Thank you.
Great. Thank you very much.
Next we're gonna go to Marlahos.
Mr. Chairman, members of the
committee, Marla shows
registered lobbyist for NAO, the
association of Commercial Real
Estate Developers. We are in
support of this legislation for
reasons stated by the previous
presenters. This legislation has
taken much collaboration as a
state, we need to prioritize
certain sites and areas ahead of
time to be able to attract
economic development in real
time. We strongly support this
legislation. Thank you.
Great, thank you very much. Uh,
we're gonna go ahead and
conclude with Enrique now. Go
ahead, Enrique.
Thank you so much, Mr. Chair,
members of the committee, I'll
make this quick and drink it now
with the greater Albuquerque
Chamber of Commerce, um, we
don't want to risk asking the
next Netflix or Amazon when they
come to our economic developers
asking if we have a site. We
don't want to be in a position
where we have to tell them,
sure, if you can wait a few
years. Senate Bill 169
proactively allows New Mexico to
create an inventory of strategic
economic development sites
around the state that will make
New Mexico.
go more competitive with other
states and attract significant
capital investment, tax
revenues, and jobs. We urge you
to support Senate Bill 169.
Thank you. Thank you very much.
OK, uh, we're gonna go to the
committee. We'll first go to
Representative Duncan.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. I think
this is a great idea. Just one
question for you,
representative. Um, how will the
committee be formed and will
there be folks from all over the
state, rural.
Uh, thank you, Mr. Chair. Thank
you, Representative. That's a
great question. So I can answer
who will be on the um advisory
committee, because that is in
the, in the bill and that's in
statute. Um, and then I will um
pass it to uh Deputy Secretary
Romero to be able to talk about
how in practice this would
affect all of the different
parts of the state. So the um
the advisory board, um, is
primarily made up of uh folks
that intersect with economic
development, um,
The Secretary of Enerd
Environment, uh, a member of the
PRC, uh, Secretary of
Transportation and the CEO of
the New Mexico Finance
Authority, um, as well as the
director of the Economic
Development division, um, at EDD
and then there are 5 members,
uh, public members that are
appointed by the legislative
council, so, you know, that'll
be balanced out who have
experience in law architecture,
planning utilities,
transportation, or economic
development.
Um
So, you know, I will, I will
note that that doesn't
specifically guarantee that
folks are gonna be from
different parts of the state.
But what you are getting is
folks with all of the um
Different aspects of what goes
into making, you know, a site
attractive. And so I have uh
Deputy Secretary Romero address
that.
Mr. Chair Representative, uh, so
what we'll say about that is,
um, there's an amendment that
came out during the Senate
process where we made sure to
include local governments in the
process for technical
assistance, um, in any site. The
other thing that I'll say is we,
this, this summer went through a
pilot program, and this is the
report that we identified 28
sites throughout the state, and
received feedback from the, the
contractor and we had rural
urban, etc. uh, so we did cover
the.
You know, the wide range there.
Thank you, Mr. Chair and thank
you for that representative. And
obviously, the reason I'm asking
is because there's a whole lot
of this in the rural parts, and
I'd just like to have them have
a seat at the table because when
that application comes in, I I'd
like them to have a seat at the
table. Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Great. Thank you very much, uh,
Representative.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. So, um,
I'm glad to hear that there's uh
a nice uh a very good cross
section of individuals, um, um,
just want to say, uh, following
a long, um, up on the comment,
Mr. Chair, about uh being uh
pleased to see the local
government's rural areas and so
on. Um, it might be good. I
didn't see it specifically laid
out in here, but it might be
good to have consideration.
from tribal entities as well,
uh, infrastructure crosses the
tribal lines, uh, lands, there
are uh partnerships. I know that
they're exploring, um, so
without.
You know, specifically putting
it in there, I think that they
would be uh it would be good to,
um,
Include a voice in that.
Thank you Mr. Chair. Thank you,
Representative Little. Um, uh,
if you look at the amendments in
context or the amendments, um,
there is an addition, um, that,
um, in the public partners um
does include Indian nations,
tribes and pueblos.
So thank you for flagging that.
Oh, absolutely. Thank you, Mr.
Chair. I'm sorry, I guess I.
Didn't see that piece.
It was, uh, Mr. Chair
Representative Little, um, an
amendment in one of the Senate
committees, and so then I just
happened to have the copy of the
amendments in context. All
right, thank you so much. Thank
you, Mr. Chair. Great. Thank you
very much, Little. Uh, OK, I
don't see any other comment. Oh,
Brown, sorry, I, I got it.
Great, uh, go ahead,
representative Brown. Thank you,
Mr. Chairman Representative, um,
You know, it occurs to me that
our local departments of
development would be very
interested in being a part of
these discussions, um, looking
at the membership um proposed
for the committee, um,
I'm hoping these will be public
meetings where all comers can be
there and at least be heard.
Would that be the case, Mr.
Chair Representative.
representative, uh, absolutely,
these are certainly gonna be um
boosted by the Economic
Development department, um, but
we will ensure to include and
make them as public as possible.
And, um, Mr. Chair and
Representative, one thing to
know is that uh the creation of
this bill and this, this
program, uh was a result largely
of conversations with um the
local economic development
organizations.
Great. OK, uh, Representative
Mohanna, thank you, Mr. Chair.
Um, thank you for the bill too.
Yes, this has been
Several discussions that I've
had as well, but I just wanted
to, you know, get to the to the
FIR and some of the the the
questions that they're.
Um, raising in regards to just
being able to have a reporting
requirements and and gathering
that information. Is that good?
How are you going to?
And there was discussion even
during the interim about this,
and I just would like you to
really give that assurance of
how that's going to be done for,
you know, the, where are those,
how are industries can be
targeted? How are they going to
be reviewed and and and the
measureable objectives that that
would be um.
Recorded to the reporting, how
is that going to be done?
Because we all know through this
committee we're gonna ask for
all that, as we always do, we
always look at those measures,
um, so we're gonna look to LFC
to help us with that, but
please, Mister Chair, if you
could.
Mr. Chair, Representative, thank
you for the question. Uh, so,
yes, absolutely, you know, I
think one thing that economic
development department has done
in my and I've observed at least
in my 6 months there is the
amount of reporting that exists
and how much we try to share
information, um, and I do know
that you all have, there's a, a
bill coming coming that uh.
Will make um, you know, lead and
GTI requirements, um, statutory
to share information, um, and I
know that as EDD grows and gets
all of these additional
programs, those conversations
will continue to exist with the
Legislative Finance Committee
and develop, development of
performance measures and ensure
that we're reporting effectively
on the site readiness and, and
the other programs. Thank you,
Mr. Chair. I really appreciate
that because I know that we just
have a
a lot of focus on and how we're
going to do some of these things
and just like you said this this
bills that are that are coming
through. We need to get those
past everybody, but, um, and
would you, would this, uh,
through this legislation, would
you also be able to, um.
Look at this shovel readiness of
a projects and maybe look at
grant opportunities and things
like that, Mr. Chair.
Mr. Chair Representative, uh,
that's a really good question,
so one of the, the, there's a
criteria out there, um, a group
called the uh.
Uh, they're called the site
readiness guild, I believe. And
they have a criteria where that
they identify and our idea is or
the the process here is to
leverage their criteria for
characterizing sites, and then
putting them through that
process, um, so we can qualify
them. Um, so that's really what
we're looking at doing. Thank
you, Mr. Chair. Thank you so
much for that. So that, that's
really, I think those are all my
questions and and you know, I,
there's just so much value to
us, um, um fortifying this
legislation, thank.
Great. Thank you very much,
Mohan. OK, Representative, um,
thank you, Mr. Chair, and thank
you presenters. So in the, the
um documents that you showed us
where they have been 28 site
reading this uh projects or any
of those on native lands.
Mr. Chair Representative, I
would have to confirm, I believe
at least one was.
But I'll have to confirm and get
back to you. And so, uh, Mr.
Chair and presenter, so where
would we see the types of
organizations or entities that
were included as a part of this
28 that have been approved.
Mr. Chair Representative, I'm
happy to get you a PDF copy and
I have actually have a map that
I'm happy to show you also that
has the pinpoints of where,
where we used one of the uh
clarification, Mr. Chair and
presenters. So in the bill, it
talks about the businesses being
eligible for grants and other
funding. So is this considered a
grant to them for the, for the
time and money and effort that
we put in in making the site
ready.
Mr. Chair Representative, that's
correct.
And, and one final question, Mr.
Chair, what is the value of
these grants? What's the range
of them?
Mr. Chair Representative, uh, so
it'll, it'll, it'll depend on
what is required. So the first
part of the process is to
characterize the site, which is
essentially what is good about
the site, what needs to be
improved about the site?
Then we see what needs to be
improved, then there's a request
made of the fund.
To then make those improvements.
So it's really gonna vary s side
by side. And for final, final
question, Mr. Chair, what do we
expect for the businesses in
return for what we're giving
them for side readiness.
Mr. Chair Representative, uh, so
I think this goes along
Representative Luhan's question
on what is, what is the state's
ROI it's gonna be very similar
metrics that we look at with JTI
Lita, ensuring that there's
going to be some sort of capital
investment. The other thing to
consider with the site readiness
idea is there doesn't have to be
a specific business identified
at the moment of development. So
we're really trying to get the
sites ready and enticing, so
that way when we, we can take
them to market and say,
the next Facebook or the next AI
data center.
Please build here, we're ready
to go right now.
That's the idea, Mr. Chair, um,
Representative, I think what
you're gonna see is jobs.
You're gonna see um companies
that are able to move in because
New Mexico is more competitive,
uh, with our industrial sites.
Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Great. Uh thank you very much
for Fernan. OK, uh, committee
members, great questions. Thank
you, Vice chair. Uh, this is in
the budget. I want to confirm
it'll stay at that $24 million
level that we sent it over at,
uh, so we'll go for a motion of
approval. It's been moved by
Representative Duncan, seconded
by Representative Brown. Is
there any opposition to that
motion, seeing none?
We have unanimous two tests. OK,
members, that concludes us for
this evening. We'll be going
again tomorrow night. Thanks for
your time, uh, have, be safe and
talk to everybody soon. We're
