Here.
And here.
Thank you very much Mr Draghi's
chairman you also it's great to
see you here today we're gonna
go first to Senate bill one
forty four as a main as amended
please take us through the bill
and feel free to introduce your
thank you Mr chairman one regret
without Starnes congratulations
on house bill to the concurrence
and others will then issues but
I think that we were it's not
even an issue that we're talking
about what we're just wasting
our time up Mr Chairman house
bill or Senate I'm sorry she
gave me a love note looking
house bill three eighty eight
Senate bill one forty four.
is a transfer for the PRC to buy
that Mr these building which is
over on Dawn guess.
Which is
right next to Imerys in Santa
Fe.
And and quarter road the reason
we have to do the purchase is
because Mr beads a
constitutional of board and they
cannot trade assets they have to
the bond sold in so that's why
Senate bill one forty four
current DFA secretary who worked
at the PRC help me draft this
bill before he left the PRC to
go to DFA.
And so this is a place that he
thought and I think the PRC
still agrees that will fit well
with them it has enough room in
the parking lot they may have to
put cubicles up but it it does
fit their needs and so when we
do that we have to buy it from
the E. R. B. make the transfer
to the PRC because their
constitutional and we do have an
appraisal it's about fourteen
thousand square feet in the in
the total area in the total
square footage of the ground
level and lower level for and
the praise of.
Two point two million and this
was done by the E. R. B. and get
your copy The presentation
questions that will stand for
questions thank you very much Mr
chair thank you to your expert
anything to add.
Mr chair great thank you very
much okay is there anybody here
who wishes to speak on Senate
bill one forty four as amended.
Great we'll have are excellent
and come on up.
Good afternoon you chairman
members of the committee my key
Antonio with Xcel energy we are
regulated by the PRC we attend
meetings weekly there the
current building is school is
small relative to the what the
needs are they're very very
important meetings state lots of
stakeholders that are involved
in meetings there and that they
could really use the additional
room so we're supporting
supporting the set of bills
thank you thank you very much
stand.
Good afternoon Mister chairman
Rico Gonzales with el Paso
electric when I attend the
meetings at the building that
that the PRC is and now I feel
like I'm in the little chapel
that I grew up in when I was a
kid I mean it is really an
adequate for the commission and
to that end we also stand in
support of of this bill thank
you senator for bringing thank
you Mr rose addition it.
Hey we don't see anybody else
here in the room look online by
here tells me that there's
nobody there so we'll go to the
committee are there any
questions from the committee.
Yes briefly Representative
absolutely questions thank you
will first start with
Representative turned in and
then we'll go to Representative
Garrett Representative pernah
please.
Thank.
To get them extracted thank you
Mr speaker Mr.
The chair I just and could you
just help me to understand how
do we make this purchase does it
come out of PRC's budget or will
how is this
thank you.
Chairman representative we take
general fund money and we
appropriated towards a purchase
in the purchases done prior to
GST and then GST purchased it
from you are being able to come
the state assets the PRC than.
So thank you very much that this
Mr chair in presenter so we
don't have to already have this
in the budget it's coming out of
the budget for PRC it's not
anything we had to put in
special for the purchase is that
correct thank Representative
Hernandez I believe it is
included in the budget but as
the chairman when you just
talked about
because we're the asset is
coming from a constitutionally
created entity that's why we
need the legislation three thank
you I just didn't understand how
the purchase is being made
absolutely.
Cash if you have it thank you
very much thank you very much
Representative permanent
Representative Garrett next and
we'll go to Representative.
Thank you Mr chair thank you
senator my only question is
would
the PRC be the sole occupant or
would they be leasing out space
to others once they occupy the
building
Mr Chairman representative of
the PRC would be the only.
Currently they are downtown and
raining and I think fifty nine
dollars a square foot which
they're right is about.
Twenty five so this would
actually pay for the building
costs eight.
Thank you very much.
Thank you Representative Garrett
and I appreciate Mr the
correction Representative her
new going back to the previous
question that the purchase cost
is included in our capital build
out of the bill House Bill five
oh five.
Okay next we're gonna go to
Representative Pettigrew.
Thank you very much
Representative okay.
We'll go to Representative
Chatfield for the motion okay
most of from Representative
Chatfield seconded by
Representative Allison is there
let's go ahead and call the roll
briefly this project is.
Yes.
Yes.
This.
The
grant.
Yes.
Yes.
At the time yes.
A yes.
Yes.
Thank thank you very much Mr
goes thank you Mr chairman
that's go on to Senate bill one
forty five thank you Mr chairman
Senate bill one forty five fix a
problem that we didn't catch and
Senate bill seventy two.
The secretaries of state with me
may have the E. R. the P. R. A.
secretaries in the right behind
me.
In twenty in twenty thirteen we.
Did Senate bill seventy two and
officers hired after that get a
one point two fire toward their
retirement everybody higher
prior only gets a lot of one
percent of the work officers
that work before then then we
get one here.
Current law also specifies that
only certain officers get one
one one point two years of
enhancement patrolman so just
the tenants captained aircraft
pilots of the sleeves out the
ranks of such is exempt ranks G.
W. everything choose major
inspectors exit and others so
one Senate bill one forty five
equalizes what we didn't catch
twenty thirteen allows everybody
prior to twenty thirteen to get
one point two as long as they're
still working in and if you're
retired you will not get the one
point two miles.
Fifty Mr secretary says thank
you chairman no secretary boys
great to see you please
go ahead.
Mr members of the committee
thank you for selecting the
sponsor for bringing this this
fourth
you know one of things this is
when you start new an
organization has been there
about a year and a half now
secretary look for challenges
and problems to fix I became
aware of this issue with Karia
specifically to majors deputy
chief and cheese and I found it
very surprising that the exempt
ranks or command officers on the
scene the same benefit that the
the rank and file or other ranks
Recine and they're very humble
in this and the necessarily one
rings going for could this
concern forth as they have
command officer typically for
the troops and they don't have
the for themselves I feel that's
my responsibility to bring this
concern forth into address the
the severity issue for command
officers with the New Mexico
state police as they do work
very hard for the state of New
Mexico all stand for questions
but I would wrap up just by
saying briefly that house
memorial thirty five last year
was about was a house memorial
to identify the challenges than
law enforcement what we can do
to recruit and retain no
representative of her name is
part of that as well and out of
H. M. thirty five of this was
one of the recommendations of
theirs well with that I would
stand for questions Mr thank you
very much Mr secretary and
director please anything that
you like that will go to the
audience briefly Mr chairman
members only item I would point
out is these numbers pay the
exact same amount of
contributions that the other
members to so that there is no
additional cost to it thank you
very much thank you okay is
there anybody here who wishes to
speak on Senate bill one forty
five.
Okay we don't see anybody
online.
I don't see anybody there will
go to the committee will go
first to Representative Lujan.
Thank you to the sponsor for
bringing forward I just so to
make sure that the others the
other conflict dinner
duplicating types of those bills
out there.
Are not in conflict at this
time.
Mr chair Senator Senator I do
not know what Senate bill ninety
six one twenty four or one of
and I don't know what they do.
This Mr chair Representative
Lujan I'm not aware of any other
bill is in conflict with this
this is the only one that I'm
aware of the addresses the state
police enhancement issue okay we
just have here in our and our
FY are the conflict is the
Senate bill ninety six one
twenty four and one of six which
would increase the maximum
pension benefits members of the
state police in adult
correctional officer may receive
the radically incentivizing
members to work longer but I I
mean I I really.
Create this bill so I'm just
wondering that this is the bill
that's because this is to and
and Senator Mr chair
representative one of those
other bills that I think we
discussed in the tax dollars was
how do we retain officer for a
longer period of time okay so
that bill that I haven't maybe
one of those of them of the
number of companies give state
police a hundred percent of
their pension if they serve
thirty years the other one I do
not know of Representative L.
combs as everyone two hundred
percent and so I don't see a
conflict.
Thank you Mr chairman thank you
senator thank you for bringing.
Thank you very much
Representative Lujan I don't see
any other questions will go to
Representative turned and for
the motion and ranking member
Armstrong for the second this.
Mr Chairman would pass on this
bill of house bill Senate bill
one.
Forty five seconds okay it's
been moved and seconded this is
hello.
Representative Allison yes.
Yes.
Thank you for.
Yes.
Thank you yes.
Representative Lujan.
Representative.
Yeah.
Representative that yes.
Yes.
Two different yes.
Yes.
For.
Thank you very much to secretary
thank you very much correct you
okay add now will continue on to
Senate Bill
at the Senate finance committee
substitute for Senate bill five
to one as amended the
supplemental salary increase
thank you Mr chairman.
The legislative session there's
been talk about covering.
Of insurance pay and in talks
with the executive and how we
handle this in house bill two we
brought parity with the R. B.
with thirty two million to bring
those bottom bottom members up
to be equal of para in order to
not started conflict in the
future we have drafted Senate
bill five twenty one as a one
percent increase you could call
it salary you could call it a
health care costs increasing
cost we had additional one
percent and the thirty behind
that is we're gonna treat
everybody equally should treat
everybody equal that includes
ERP members period members and
everyone else.
Great thank you very much
chairman when Yost is there
anybody here who wishes to be
speak on committee substitute
great we'll have our excellent
attendance up we're we're.
The the go.
Yeah what was yes go ahead
please hi my name is Alan Tway I
am the executive secretary of
the communication workers of
America local seventy seventy
six
six percent is what this brings
us to this is not parity with
inflation or some of the other
in our competition let's put it
that way but our employees have
been battered by COVID for three
years and now they're being
battered by high vacancy rates.
And high inflation this is
absolutely the right direction
to be going I want to thank
senator Munoz and Senator
Stewart for sponsoring this bill
and we support it thank you very
much for.
Mr chair members of the
committee Josh us with us we
can.
Chairman pro tem for bringing
this forward but also want to
thank all of you you know when
we started this process we had
a.
Five percent LFC of course House
Bill to prove that.
One or folks appreciate that but
with the the the chairman in the
pro tempore in the sport
increased up to six percent
with.
Our workers and we urge your
support thank you very much Mr
Anderson.
Thank you Mr chair members the
committee John with youth with
The New Mexico federation of
labor on behalf of all of our
you members private sector
public sector you very much
thank the sponsors for bringing
this bill up you know it's been
a rough few years with inflation
rising in and the the reason is
that our public employees have
gotten has been good and I'm not
quite to inflation but this
certainly give us a little bit
so we heard your support for
this measure thank you thank you
very much some of.
Yes good afternoon Mister
chairman members committee marks
about with the New Mexico
council university presidents we
send support this legislation we
really appreciate this bill also
came coming up the session
recognizing the support the.
Information on top of the five
percent which gets us the six
percent I'm also take this time
to pick to thank the committee
the sponsor Senate finance and
and again for your support of
this motion along with this
increase helps our students and
our faculty and staff thank you
Mr chairman thank you Mr Sanchez
Senator Stewart the committee
should all your all your help
thank you thank you very much Mr
speaker.
Okay will look online don't see
anybody there we'll go to the
committee for any question
raking around from please.
Thank you Mr chairman thank you
senator chairman Andrew yes
Is the language contained in
house bill two that does this as
well.
I will just need language in
house bill two it's an
appropriation just be added to
the additional five percent of
pay increase.
Additional spending is in house
bill two for additional language
is not necessary but but but
there's so there's no language
in house bill two for this no.
Thank you
Mr chair ranking member
Armstrong the funding as we
discussed just briefly on the
floor there's been a decrease in
the public education department
budget a subsequent increase for
that is accounted for in H. B.
two for the pay increase.
Okay.
Thank you Mr chairman thank you
thank you very much thank you
member Armstrong any other
questions.
I will go to representative
Herndon Mr chair just for
clarification when it's is all
public school personnel we are
talking about cafeteria workers
janitors and.
The system is that correct Mr
Chairman representative that is
correct thank you Mr chair thank
you very much thank you very
much for supper okay I don't see
any other questions we'll go to
by shared for the motion and
Representative a cruise for the
second.
Thank you Mr chair I move to do
faster Committee substitute for
Senate bill five twenty one as
amended second okay it's been
moved and seconded let's go
ahead and call the roll.
Yes.
Representative profit yes.
Representative.
Yes.
Yes.
Representative Lujan yes.
Yes.
Great thank you very much Mr
Jia's finally we're going to go
to Senate bill three eighty two
as amended thank you Mr chairman
Senator Hickey handle that I did
leave in.
Hello I by.
They want to see you later.
Okay we we may ask we we may
place the to that facility
maintenance.
K. as Senator Hickey it is great
to see it here if you can take
us through Senate bill three
eighty two please.
Thank you Mr chair I'll tell you
what the note says later and
representatives presenting
bioscience Fund reversion and
investment accent bills three
eighty two at in twenty
seventeen the bioscience
Authority was started in New
Mexico works out of the
university of New Mexico and it
why bio science because it's
basically double the growth of
any of the private health sector
all together
the at it in terms of comparison
the percentage growth at what
this bill will do will put take
twenty five million dollars
which I believe is in the house
bill two it give it to the
authority and then they will
look for partners in bio science
and bio science close everything
from medications there's
actually a a pilot project going
on that can take juniper
allergens out of the air would
we all like that right now
the a different approach to
Alice Hymers disease being
developed at Los Alamos just a
whole number of things in this
state is a great state with all
the Ph.D isn't collaboration
that we have and so this bill
authorizes that if the state in
a partnership private public
partnership puts up a hundred
thousand and they partner must
invest two hundred thousand and
essentially then that the
company is started it grows and
eventually to get to a point
where it could be sold than the
state essentially has equity in
the company just like in stock
and the company resolved it
could be that keep the stock or
sell the stock if it sells the
stock that money goes back into
building the funds and gets it
even bigger so that we can do in
much more there's a whole number
of things here but does the note
that to my mentor Senator said
don't talk to the law so if you
I can go on with.
Some other details but thank you
for the introduction please feel
free to introduce your experts
will go to the audience
it so is there anybody here who
wishes to speak on Senate bill
three eight two.
Okay we don't see anybody look
online.
Does anybody there we're gonna
go to the committee first to
Representative Chatfield.
Thank you Mr chair Mr chair
given you already Senator done a
little bit of what my question
was about and and that was could
you give us a couple of examples
of what's happening in that in
that bioscience industry today.
Of course would you like would
you like more examples of what's
going on just a couple don't
take too much time it's very
interesting and I just wonder
what's happening notice I'll
have my experts briefly go into
a couple thank you very much
Senator Hickey please introduce
yourself and go ahead Mr chair
and representative my name is
Paul lore on the president and
CEO of Mercuri bio we have a
laboratory at the Santa Fe
business incubator with five
microbiologists working on
Perfecting a drug delivery
system that can be used for
small molecules to treat cancer
or RNase like the mRNA vaccine
for COVID nineteen so that's one
example another example is and
the we did a project in the oil
field with a company called
Eldorado biofuels that I started
some years ago to grow algae in
treated produced water we use
that that LG then to make
biofuels and also to take carbon
dioxide out of the atmosphere
and create new jobs in the oil
field especially if we're
talking about diversifying away
from oil and gas those people
need jobs so this is a perfect
place to do that we demonstrated
it works economically the
resort.
Chair thank you very much
Representative Chatfield okay I
don't see any other questions oh
sorry with the we have a couple
more I apologize we'll go first
Representative Lujan and then to
Representative care thank you Mr
chair thank you sponsored he
said it was there's a twenty
five million dollars
appropriation.
Yes it is thank you
Representative Lujan in sections
that are actually think there's
a special this is what I know
and I'm just reading information
says fifty so I'm just I just
got in section five it's a
twenty five million thank you
and then I'm just looking at the
the buses Development fund that
that lives at economic
development department chair.
Mr chair and representative it
actually stays in the treasury
and it collects interest while
it's there and we have to find
the two to one match with
venture capital or New Mexico
angels so that and then the
amount of the they bring that
they do the vetting they bring
that to the table we we vote on
it it also has to be signed off
by the treasury secretary and
economic development department
secretary and but otherwise it's
just they're just and it's
important that it stays are
because a lot of these projects
take three years two or three
years to to identify the
companies there is another
requirement that the company
stay in New Mexico for at least
five years thank you at Mr chair
also need to say that because
it's a private.
Public partnership as well is
that correct Mr chan it is as
Representative said and these
are non referring funds Mr chair
of.
Excuse me yes Representative yes
Sir but and they're not reverted
thank you thank you thank you
thank you thank you
Representative Lujan
Representative Garrett them some
brown thank you Mr chairman Mr
course great to see you you've
been an inspiration for me
because of the public private
partnership and so this is an
example of where public private
partnerships have been extremely
successful in the bioscience
development field correct.
That is correct Representative
in Mr chair.
And Mr chairman I would just
encourage Senator Hickey to
encourage Senator serve on case
to bring the public private
partnership act House Bill to
win thirteen to the Senate
Judiciary Committee which
Representative Brown and B. R.
Sanchez of thank you.
Thank you Mr Chairman
representative and I think
you're gonna have a chance to
himself very well well done
Representative.
those followed by Representative
Brown.
Mister chairman Senator I think
Representative Garrett Meyer
twenty in today because I was
going to say the exact same
thing thank you all right thank
you very much Representative
Brown we'll go to I don't see
other questions we'll go to
Representative Garrett for the
motion and Representative brown
for the second.
Mr chair I move it to pass for
Senate bill three eighty two is
amended.
Great there's a motion second
please call.
Yes.
Yes.
Yes.
Yes.
Yes.
Yes
Representative.
Yes.
Yes.
One.
Thank you very much mystery is
thank you please to close by
first we're going to go to
Senator by the for Senate bill
two ten as amended.
And we're being passed out an
amendment.
Senator please go ahead and
explain the bill and make the
function of the center has a
copy of the amount.
Thank you Mr chairman Senator
Michael Padilla I do believe I
meant everybody here I know
there are some.
One thing that any new members I
don't know thank you very much
for allowing me to be here I'm
here with the operator general
Miguel he lied the extension of
the New Mexico National Guard
and breeder General Jamison had
a and and I'm gonna introduce
the adjutant general of here in
New Mexico and I am here before
you with the
legislation that the creates the
National Guard death benefit
fund with a two million dollar
non reverting appropriation and
sensible were tempting to do
here Mr chairman and members of
the committee and I have not
seen this all have where spring
is something to understand it
here a little bit but hopefully
so essentially bring parity to
other first responders here in
the state and and what it does
is it the as an additional five
hundred thousand dollars in the
unfortunate event of a someone
perishing have had that happened
recently with this group so
thank thankfully thank the lord
we did have a couple things
happen the legislation along the
way we further clarified in the
Senate health and public
relations public affairs
Committee that we wanted to have
the department establish a of
form with which the member could
define who their beneficiaries
are going to be without
percentages and things of that
nature so that that's ultra
super clear in writing there's
no confusion there and then we
did at an emergency clause along
the way and I'm gonna ask
General provided few words and
general had a thank you very
much Senator targets after
members of the committee thank
you for hearing this this bill
so so this bill creates a
benefit for regards with the
currently does not exist and so
I think there's some other bills
were we've women in law
enforcement Oct this year they
will look at the firefighter
bill to bring up to million
dollars.
Right now the national guardsmen
on state active duty we're
flying Commission or responding
to a flood or fire and they were
to die in the line of duty there
would be no benefit to them
other than the five hundred
thousand dollar yes your life
insurance policy that all
service members have at the
state for many years now has
been providing the premium for
so we would greatly appreciate
of that this bill yes thank you
very much general again thank
you.
A good afternoon a journal of
supporting representatives have
nothing that and thank you for
your support thank you very much
thank you Sir nope nope thank
you as senator for the it so now
we'll explain the amendment.
Here on Senate bill so are
amendment this the house
appropriations and finance
committee amendment number one
chairman Senator we're gonna
strike making an appropriation
on page thirteen on page one
line thirteen
and then on page three Mr.
Senator where we would strike
the section for in its entirety
the appropriation the the
funding use that Senate finance
committee it this is included in
H. B. two we'll keep the
entirety of your legislation so
that it guides how the dollars
are spent this this it would
ensure that that it's that we
don't spend that money twice
basically thank you Mr chairman
understood and it is I serve on
this committee on the other in
the other chamber so I'm very
comfortable with that which is
to you know need that help with
concurrence if at all possible
but will I'm sure we'll be fine
so absolutely and it's all see
it as friendly thank you great
thank you very much centers all
move that amendment is our
second.
Kate is there any opposition to
adopting house appropriation of
finance.
See in line we with up to that
amendment now is there anybody
who wishes to speak on Senate
bill two ten is twice amended.
Saying none let's go to.
At.
Okay as go a little too fast
there's and I apologize we're
gonna go to center
Representative Cruz and
representative Garcia for
questions from Santa Cruz
please.
Thank you Mr chairman.
Support the center by the I
can't imagine a more worthy
effort that to try to take care
of our own in a wide array of
potential difficulties and so I
have no doubt that this will
pass thank you Mr thank you very
thank you very much for Padilla
Cruz representative Garcia
please thank you Mr chairman
Senator generals of committee
members in all of the military.
And you know one of the person
put on a uniform it's not just a
pretty would make show you know
the people can be deployed at
any time.
And you know if we can support
their cause for what they're
doing we should be here doing
this stuff and all you know
because of you know I had a lot
of my friends die in Vietnam and
you know it's pretty and you
know all of it doesn't happen to
anybody but the possibility is
there.
Police officers with uniformed
everyday he's in jeopardy of of
Business live gentleman and you
know I would.
This is station should have been
a long time.
Not not today so that in a long
time and I'm glad it's here and
I'm glad I'm supporting it and I
don't see anybody in this.
Thank you very much
Representative Garcia we're
gonna go to Representative
Garrett Representative Sierra
and the representative thank you
Mr chair I just have a language
question so today's National
Guard men and women often are
overseas so line seventeen page
two when it says kids well on
state active duty state active
duty does mean there state
activated where ever they are
within the state or the world is
that correct Mr chair Mr
Chairman representative that
that is correct in the in the
General would actually make that
determination but Alaskan CBS's
so Mister chair and
representative so the the intent
of this bill was not to cover
them while they're deployed
under federal service so there
is there is there is a desperate
to this rate up when you're
activated on Federal service
overseas or even even if you
look at part of country what's
up with this helps do is when we
have a state emergency we bring
someone state active duty
they're they're not covered at
all and so if someone were to
were to die in the overseas
there are other benefits at the
family or qualified for
educational benefits that things
that help the children that they
would not be if they were in the
state active duty and so this
this brings up a good amount of
that allows the family to be
able to make up for some of
those things that the service
member of marijuana no longer
bureau for Mr Chairman
representative online seventeen
on page two that's what we
thought was critical to include
state active duty called out
specifically there okay thank
you so Mister chair people who
are out of state or overseas get
at least this much if not more
if they were killed in the line
of duty Mr chair representative
of there is a number that gets
to two million so you get the
five hundred thousand dollar
SQLite is a hundred thousand
dollar defer to the and then
there are other benefits through
the VA in in other other groups.
that are not profits that that I
hope the family really
throughout the entirety of their
lives in so you I don't know if
you can put the same number to
it but there are definitely
benefits that they get that that
would you know help the family
for many many years after we
don't have a way to do that and
in the state of the state active
duty so this amount of money
would would be provided to the
family be able to take care of
the family later on especially
education for children those
things thank you very much the
reserve your process.
Thanks for bringing this bill
Senator and that my dad was in
the NASCAR for thirty eight
years so I always appreciated in
the things you've done just just
lately between COVID and keeping
us safe during generously X.
time we were in the capitol
after that and teaching and
wildfires and floods you guys
have really kept the sick the
state safe and you're very much.
Thank you Mr Chairman
representative and I did fail to
mention that thank you
Representative Sarinana if you
just look at the last year and a
half they've stepped in with
fires floods of the substitute
teachers I mean I'm number of
things they've been asked to do
they have jumped right on it so
thank you thank you
Representative setting up for
several.
Thank you chairman.
Senator thank you and generals
always is good to see you I have
a.
Question we we passed house bill
one sixteen L..
And.
Then I got stuck in Senate.
Health and public for.
I am curious with help bill one
sixteen then we take care some
of those parity with the state
active duty.
Mr chairman and Representative
I'm not familiar with house bill
one one sixteen percent or one
sixty.
And budget this is a completely
separate piece of legislation
and gentleman well that and
that's to my point was Mr
chairman Senator with house bill
one sixteen
they they become open to all of
the state budget while they're
on state that.
Chairman representative asked
the general response Mr chair
Representative yes and no so how
schools one sixteen allows for
for us to employee guards then
to go on on state active duty in
in preparation for emergencies
that's that's got a limit to
what's in the general fund
appropriation this year the
seven hundred fifty thousand
dollars definitely not enough to
handle all emergencies and so if
there were a large fire like
last year the governor would
declared emergency and then
there would be additional
funding available an additional
full spin off brought on state
active duty on it so they will
all be covered in the in in so.
The the two don't necessarily
conflict with each other and in
the they're not.
House bill one sixteen would not
cover death benefit
if somewhere down staff to the
weather they were full time
employees you'll under hospital
what sixteen or whether they
were brought on under a
declaration emergency that the
governor has the authority to do
it has had for many many years.
Thank you general thank you
chairman.
Thank you very much
Representative Pettigrew we're
gonna go now to represent her to
please thank you thank you Mr
chair and senators and panelists
I'm going back to page two of
the bill that I'm looking at
lines two thousand twenty two
through twenty five if they are
no surviving children our
spouses that goes to the
surviving the benefits will be
paid to the surviving parents of
the National Guard member it
says or the member of the state
defense force division what does
that mean who is that last
person.
Mr chairman and Representative
so Mr Chairman representative so
so the amendment of that we have
done in previous committee up
really takes that language out
and in prescribes the form that
a service member would fill out
that would indicate who the
beneficiary was
of the the state defense force
in which your reference is is
under under the part of military
affairs we have volunteers that
gives sign up for the state
defense force they too can be
called on the state active duty
to serve and and if they were
they would also be covered under
this budget if if there was a
death they too would fill out
the form on before they come on
state active duty so we know who
the beneficiary would be of
thank you Mr chair thank you for
that clarification that they can
determine meaning the National
Guard members remember that
other person to be I did meant
Mr chairman and Representative
so I did mention that in my
introduction but I've got the
details here if you like me to
read through it specifically but
it's it's covered thank you note
thank you Mr chair I now
understand thank you very much
for percent permanent thank you
senator thank you general's
thanks especially to the
veterans on this committee we're
gonna go first we're going to go
to representative Garcia for the
motion Representative said
Indiana for the second.
Thank you Mr chairman I want to
make a motion on some is long
overdue.
Wait best would you Mr chairman
and was Senate bill two ten.
Okay it's been moved and
seconded Senate bill took to
tennis twice amended agency for
this can you please call the
roll.
Yes.
On yes.
Representative yes.
Yes.
I mean yes.
Yes.
Yes.
I.
Thank you very much thank you
senator thank you Mr chairman of
the committee and I just want to
thank my system legislative
assistant we this is not afford
very hard of this legislation as
well as on your from the
department thank you very much
thank you all and and also thank
you Representative Billa Cruz
two degree to carry this on the
fourth.
Thank.
Okay that members we're gonna
note now go to back to Senator
Hickey.
We're here on Committee
substitute for Senate bill two
seventy three as amended.
Thank you Mr chair
representative I'm presenting
committee substitute Senate bill
two seventy three health
insurance mental health coverage
act otherwise known as mental
health parity mental health
parity was a concept that to
rejuvenated with senator
Domenici in the U. S. Congress
Senate and two thousand eight a
bill was passed at that time
that said that a insurance
company can have no greater
prohibitions have access to care
in mental health and they put on
medical surgical sounds kind of
backwards but in other words
prior authorization what have
you what this bill does is
consolidated about five
additional bills sent sent in
the federal law and it puts it
in statute in New Mexico and it
it extends a little bit more to
have clarity around two
particular areas one is that an
individual who is in need of a
mental health particularly in a
crisis situation or in the
substance use where they're
ready to actually access that
that they can go directly to
those services and don't have to
go through an eight hundred
number or a number of people
within a health plan and often
times it can take a day or two
in the opportunity to go into
the substance use disorder
treatment is gone and the
individuals back where they were
so this provides direct access
the other key thing this bill
does is to raise the
compensation Russian state
compensation but raise the
payments for behavioral health
professionals licensed in the
state to be there to to be
essentially have to be
comparative the surrounding
states and New Mexico is about
thirty to forty percent of below
surrounding states with its
Medicaid or private this pop
does apply just to commercial
but the federal law
By to Medicaid and Medicaid will
essentially take the components
of this on use it in their
contracts with the NCOs this
also applies to self insured
programs the other thing that
they have to do is to show that
they are creating payments based
on the same scale as they are
Messrs so with that those are
the key components of the bill
and I'm happy to answer any
questions thank you very much
Senator Hickey is there anybody
who wishes to speak on Senate
tax and business and
transportation committee
substitute for Senate bill two
seventy three.
Please come on up and we'll have
arts and to.
Thank you Mr chairman members of
the committee Ellen pods with
the disability coalition we
support the bill.
Access to behavioral health
services by removing some of the
barriers that keep people from
getting the services they need
so we urge our support thank you
thank you very much.
Mr chair members of the
committee Jim Jackson for
disability rights New Mexico the
there are some estimates that up
to twenty percent of us at some
point in our lives will
experience of behavioral health
issue and need assistance in
dealing with this and as a
senator is said Senate bill two
seventy three is going to
increase access to those
behavioral health services and
streamline some of the processes
like prior authorization that
have sometimes been a barrier to
accessing those services and
with the appropriate kind of of
behavioral health services that
would be provided under this
bill people can recover where
they can continue to manage
their health care a
recommendation and either become
or continue to be productive
members of our society and we
appreciate the Senator bringing
this to your attention and
hopeful supported thank you
thank you very much Mr Jackson
okay would there is one person
online we're gonna go to Dianne
**** for one minute Diane
whenever you're ready.
The good afternoon
Chair thank the representative
of the
military family caucus or San
thank you Senator Hickey for
bringing the total up we
strongly support this at all.
Other I strongly personally
support it I've gone through
this issue with my son the prior
authorization we have access to
care providers
so and I just personally want to
pay for the bill and our caucus
supports it thank you thank you
very much Mexico okay we don't
see anybody else online we have
a few members were going for
service and Cruz and
Representative Chatfield the
representative Garcia said that
crews please thank you Mr
chairman thank you Senator
Hickey for bringing this bill
forward I I think it's sunny
that's in.
Entire need you know yours is
the part and and some of my
colleagues have heard me say
this before.
There is hardly anybody
anybody's family that is not
impacted with mental health on
some level and the spectrum of
behavioral health needs is wide
you know we often think of
behavioural health is like black
and white but it's not it's
spectrum and I appreciate this
because we need to find ways to
increase mental health service
axis I clearly see that this
will do that and Mr chairman one
of the things that I will be
introducing zoom is a memorial
that hopes to be adopted and
then to have a study done in the
interim one of the things to the
state of New Mexicos credit Mr
Chairman is that the state
spends.
Well incredible amount of
dollars towards behavioural
health to its credit.
But at the same time.
For at least myself having
worked a little bit on behavior
health in the past there's also
a lot of question marks as to
exactly where goes the total
amount whether there's a fact
one of the targets what are the
effects how do we gauge whether
we have success or not and so
that's what I hope to do with
that memorial but none the less
this is incredibly needed thank
you Mr chairman thank you
Senator Hickey.
Representative Mr thank you very
much Representative Cruz
Representative Chatfield please.
Thank you Mr
Senator what is the fiscal
impact of this bill.
Mr up chair and representative
the fiscal impact is a million
dollars it that is in house bill
two to staff up the office of
the superintendent of insurance
this I didn't go into the detail
but insurance companies have to
write.
Hundreds and hundreds of
policies demonstrating in
behavioral health how they are.
Not having any greater barriers
and they also have to lay out
all their strategies to get the
payments up so that we can
recruited and retained so there
about six FTEs and in the first
year we're gonna need some
consultants those individuals
will also for the first year
work with the health plans
hopefully bring them together
and I will assess on how to
write the policies so that they
don't all have to do it
themselves and we have a general
policy here in New Mexico so
that's what the appropriations
for and then the year after that
we will start examining the
health plans in terms of their
compliance with the components
of the bill and certainly as
some people get denied insurance
this year we'll just talk to the
help and say you know let's work
on this let's do it together
thank you Mr thank you very much
Representative Chatfield ranking
member Armstrong and rip some
hot.
Thank you Mr chairman and I I I
I did underline the self insured
but so Mr chairman Senator so
that that's the cost to the
state is what you're referring
to what's the cost.
It to the insurance companies.
Thank you then Representative
than Mr chair for that very
important question at first you
would say well they're gonna
have to staff up and and they're
going to be more people using
services because we're creating
the access what the actuarial
literature is profoundly stating
is that if behavioral health in
particular issues are dealt with
the co morbid chronic diseases
who then get into exacerbations
emergency room visits and the
costs are three to four times
higher than if they didn't have
that
mental health or substance use
disorder or if it gets
stabilized so it actually and
and through personal experience
in true health New Mexico health
connections it became our
business model because we were
eliminating so many emergency
room and hospital visits that we
were able to sell less than our
competitors thank you Mr
chairman thank you senator for
that so
Do you think this is going to
affect insurance to go up for
people that are actually
purchasing insurance.
Do you think insurance companies
a pass this cost along.
I can't tell you madam
Representative them Mr chair
every insurance company is
different in California where
they pass this bill a couple of
years ago they did not see that
impact they're starting to see
the impact of the COVID disease
decrease in costs but I can tell
you that having been in the
insurance business and work for
for profit and not for profit as
well as running hospitals and
medical groups how they do their
pricing they base some time say
all because of this but in fact
they've got pricing models that
are built on actuarial
experience and they'll they'll
go off of that and again they're
going to get more experience
because they really haven't done
very well in allowing access to
behavior health services and
they will learn in time my bill
three seventeen that did that
moratorium and costsharing I I
just had five years because that
they're going to figure it out
and figure that's a better way
to go thank you Mr chairman
thank you senator and so you
know I tried to run a bill to
where I would raise the
reimbursement rate for community
based pharmacy providers for
their Medicaid
reimbursement.
They tell me I couldn't do that
I couldn't tell Medicaid that
they're going to have to raise
the rate so this bill is telling
Medicaid it's it's not it is
telling of the gonna thank you
for asking that questions
Representative Armstrong and Mr
chair on the federal regulations
and bills apply to medicate
medicate
itself has to write into the
contracts with the NCOs that
they have to follow these rules
and then Medicaid does the
enforcement now we do have I I
have worked a lot with also self
insured that's the department of
labor because it covers a result
self insured plans as well and
we do have communication
channels with HHS CMS and also
the department of labor so
therefore finding that Medicaid
patients for self insured are
being denied the care we will
refer that to those departments
nationally they're required by
federal law with that referral
to act upon.
Thank you Mr chairman thank you
senator and so do you know what
percentage of New Mexicans pay
for their insurance health
insurance.
The percent of New Mexicans who
pay for their health insurance
do that again if you go into the
if you're including commercial
health insurance which is
probably the biggest members the
I. back certainly the labs large
businesses what have you you
start to get to a figure of
about seven or eight hundred
thousand.
And the rest is Medicare
uninsured and Medicaid.
Thank you Mr chairman thank you
senator thank you very much for
your Armstrong we Representative
Lujan had to step out for
another bill we'll go next to
Representative Pettigrew and
then I heard.
Thank you chairman thank you
senator
Going through.
All these locally Brooks well if
you put together force tells me
that.
It to me oversight is not ready
for this.
you're asking for enough money
for chairman and then Senator
for another six FTEs when
they're behind almost seventeen
RD.
that's just the funded peace not
the unfunded piece that's almost
ten percent behind.
With respect to that
Yes there are there is money in
there but it's appropriated
through other state funds and so
I'm looking at this thank you.
That there's a bunch that OSI
needs to get their hands wrapped
around before the trade trying
take on something else thank you
chairman thank you so.
Thank you very much
Representative Pettigrew
graduated its employees.
And thank you Mr chair Senator
my correct in thinking that
there is a house bill more for
this.
Yes thank you and
I believe that house bill two
sixty did passed
through this committee I'm I'm
is that correct.
Yes it did okay chair vice chair
yes thank you it is sorry it is
on the floor as I couldn't quite
remember okay thank you Mr chair
Senator thank you very much
pressure Dixon Senator Hickey I
just want to thank you for for
your work in this area I think
it's really think of a good
example of bringing sort of
expertise from a wide variety of
sources and engaging across a
number of different areas in the
state and so just a big thank
you for that with that we'll go
to vice chair Dixon for a
motion.
Thank you Mr chair I would move
a do pass on committee
substitute for Senate bill two
seventy three as amended second
K. to move by by today since I'm
by Representative de la Cruz
this budget is can you please
call the roll.
As yes.
Yes I'd like to spend my vote.
Yes.
Representative.
Yes.
No.
Yes.
Yes.
Yes.
Okay thank you and
Representative Baca them some
brown to explain votes thank you
Mr chairman thank you senator
you know I I too had some of the
little concerns with kind of
what this is undertaking but as
I understand our job
appropriation if it's in the
budget that point it's been
vetted other committees I have
to just a recommendation.
And I that's why I voted yes.
Thank you Mr Mr chair and and
Senator Hickey I.
I I'm a big proponent of mental
health treatment
I think it is correct and you
said Senator Mr chair that this
will help in the long run to
keep costs down and I hope
that's true and Mr chair I did
not receive any feedback from
insurance companies or
businesses about this however it
might affect them in terms of
their costs so bring that
information I'm willing to go I
was going to what vote yes on
this.
We have a big problem with
mental health needs in our state
and I really hope this is part
of the solution to thank you Mr
chair thank you very much
Representative Brown thank you
Senator Hickey do pass thank
you.
Okay members I've been informed
by the Senate bill three
fourteen the house more bill I
believe that's House Bill five
twenty six
State and corrected by Mr
Russell from New Mexico finance
authority House Bill five twenty
five has passed the Senate
that's mayor bill it means we
don't have to take up Senate
bill three fourteen
we are now going to go to our
own Representative Baca for
Senate bill four fifty as
amended.
Thank you Mr chairman thank you
committee I'm actually
substituting print taking care
of our senator Morris which is
not a typical have been doing it
since college so.
I'm introduced first my of my
expert witness Jason Thompson
who represents the high school
the parameters and so
he will stand here for the
technical questions of it.
I'm very this bill is very
straightforward as we know
of recent tragedies that have
happened with the song how men
within a field game
we're having more more injuries.
This is like a state because we
have an athletic trainer at the
event
that we're quick to respond and
provide that care we know that
when we have a situation as far
as cardiac arrest minutes and
seconds count.
Unfortunate is always parameters
in our practices there's not
always parameters that are on
those long trips to over you
know as far as to contest and
otherwise many times the first
person to render Care is coaches
so what Mr chairman committee
house bill four fifty would make
it a requirement that all
coaches would be trained in CPR
and the use of a a E. D. a
device to help again with about
our kids and if we can't really
run our kids and find their
safety as we have you know.
Tens of thousands of high school
athletes are involved in other
activities where there may be
risk of injury and or
As far as need for CPR and
automatic
The storm devices so I do I I
stand for questions
and anything protective wall
defer to my expert witness thank
you very much Representative
Baca great teams Thompson is
there anybody who would like to
comment on Senate bill four
fifty as an and.
Okay we don't see anybody there
are there no there is not that
we we do okay I.
Great we do have Mike McMillan
on
online Mr McMillan for one
minute whenever you're ready
please.
Members of the committee live in
on the internet yes Sir.
Good afternoon.
I'm not a member of the New
Mexico administrators
association currently PED has
really levels of because right
here and only one level requires
the we are certification.
Support of this bill requiring
all who need CPR certified
ideally every high school and
athletic trainer staff
the ability to me even if I have
an athletic trainers that they
may not be immediately available
for emergencies the require CPR
eighty three eighty.
Therefore and coaches who are in
every practices at.
Please CPR in eighty certified
to train we are really important
state internet health and safety
of student athletes throughout
New Mexico I support and ask you
to support and it will force you
to speak thank you.
Thank you very much.
Okay I don't see any questions
we'll go to Representative
Trujillo.
Thank you Mr chairman thank you
Representative for bringing this
bill
price I saw that elementary
schools won't have this
training.
Thank you Mr chairman thank you
Representative Trujillo thank I
think this weird as we expand
and the need for this and we
Representative you know I would
like to see more staff to be
trained is not only custodial
staff classroom teacher's
assistants and otherwise but for
the purpose of this bill is very
limited this is for high school
coaches you could also expand to
as I said before the somehow
sees your freshman year J. B.
coaches and otherwise to find
that first level of care because
as we said before high school
like lossless high school in the
current schools and of once you
I school we may have five or six
different context one contest
going on at the time we have a
traitor there but they can't be
everywhere once and so with this
bill it basically is going to be
a requirement to have our
coaches to train to give the
that immediate first care
because as we said before you
know as the clock ticks the and
time lapses the chances for
survival decrease I believe it
within the first minute there's
a certain percentage after ten
minutes it's very the this very
small chance of a survival
that's why this bill is I do
agree of Mr chairman and
representative that we probably
need to expand more as far as
with our staff and that maybe it
future future legislation Mr
chairman Mr chair this is a good
start and I.
Thank you very much
Representative Trujillo let's go
to representative from.
Thank you very much
Representative Barker just a
couple of questions our license
coaches required to have first
aid.
Certifications at this time Mr
chair.
Thank you Mr chairman thank you
Representative Brown I'm
actually gonna defer to my
experts because I I believe that
currently.
It's a district to district as
far as the first.
So I'll I'll defer to my experts
which is.
Can you hear me Mr Chairman
representative thank you for the
question I'm to my knowledge of
for PED licensure they require
that first aid for the licenses
of level one two three but as it
current long Kerr rule here the
level three coaches which are
the most are highly trained and
educated those are the only ones
that are allowed to required to
have the CPR in eighty training
the level ones and twos to have
the the training that you
mentioned and and that that's
across all three licensure is
just the the third top tier
that's required to have the CPR
training thank you Mr chairman.
Senator of
If coaches take the training on
this with this count towards
professional development hours
Mr chairman.
Thank you thank you Mr chairman
and thank you Representative
around I believe that what is
we're talking about the hours as
far as for professional
development as many of these
many times these hours be
outside of the regular work day
so I I do believe that through
the expanded and the local
decision making I do believe
that a district or otherwise can
count this as professional
development.
Mr chairman and Representative
so the training would be
required CPR I think we all know
what that is but the December
waiters are those pieces of
equipment always present and if
athletic contests are practices
Mr chair representative so the
question I'm getting out there
maybe training but what if
there's not to quit.
Thank you Mr chairman thank you
Representative Brown always your
insightful and I think that is
we are these things are very
costly and I I do believe that
It as you have seen the we have
there's a number of these
district has different resources
okay some of our schools they
may have one as far as in the
gyms or and the stadiums others
may not so Mr chairman and
Representative brown I think
it's by district but I do think
if we're going to be to fully
support this this is the start I
think that we would have to
invest more in a EDD's thank you
building your cafeterias where
they can be in other places as
far as your boss's otherwise
because as I said before in the
event of those long bus rides as
you travel from Silvercity to
our teacher otherwise there
may be out of it and so I think
at some point this is not part
of this bill but I do think in
future legislation we will have
to have more widespread purchase
of medical devices for for
students and staff.
Mr chairman and Representative
this could perhaps be sent.
That to happen so anyway thank
you Mr chair thank you very much
for Representative Brown them
Representative Chatfield and
then remember option.
Thank you Mr Mr chair
don't let this pass without
telling a little story when I
was on the school board I was an
EMT and I brought that training
to to our school the people that
train me and they train the
teachers later they started to
training the high school kids
also in CPR yeah hi I'm let me
move over my youngest son saved
his mother's life.
with the time that the new over
she she choked on a vitamin
early one morning need a savior
live he went to college and he
saved one of the his college
one of the college kids life by
CPR guide Drug email
Ground and and did CPR until the
ambulance and the police got
there so it is very where the.
Thank you very much
Representative Chatfield ranking
of Armstrong.
Thank you Mr chairman and and
thank you for bringing this
legislation is this money in the
budget.
Thank you Mr chairman and and
Representative Armstrong
I do believe and I I did get a
notice farce
of Bill on us I don't know as
far as if this was added on the
Senate side I do not believe
that it was in house bill two is
we sent over.
But Mr chairman and
Representative I do not know or
would need clarification if it
is was added for on the Senate
side Mr Chairman representative
I may the original bill had the
appropriation in it but we were
unable as of the current to get
that appropriation put in the
house bill two so it was it was
stricken and Senate finance and
as of the current version of HB
do with that money is terms of
any type of special
appropriation amendment wasn't
able and in able to be put in
house bill two the reason I ask
is I I personally think that
that PED could possibly.
You know what this money or
whatever popped.
That being said Mr chairman and
and Representative.
How many schools are there in
the state of New Mexico that
this would apply.
thank you Mr chairman thank you
Representative I would believe
that it would be any school that
is provide you know
participating in extracurricular
activities athletics and or
clubs
As far as wrote he wrote your
that there was a so I don't know
the number of school districts
that have activities like this
for have sports how many more
charter schools do not some do
but I do believe that we're
looking at through the NMAA
which does a coaching licenses
that school district and school
would have to you know be
certified and have teams
participating in the.
And so summit Mr chairman of of
Representative.
How do you get this training and
what does it cost to get the
training where you have to go to
get the training.
Mr Chairman representative thank
you for the question according
to our research and doing this
there is an expansion in the
Emily ASEAN Alice's one
particular organizational action
CPR's what does a lot of the
certification I think through
and M. A. eight and usually the
cost is anywhere from forty to
fifty to Animax maybe sixty
dollars or calculations as
previously more than a hundred
ninety five thousand dollar
appropriation came from was at a
at a minimal cost of forty to
sixty dollars that could have
covered anywhere from thirty
five hundred to about for over
four thousand coaches so it's
usually at a rate between forty
at a minimum I think sixty
dollars to maximum for the
training thank you Mr chairman
thank you for that answer and so
do does that company go to you
or do you go to the company.
Thank you Mr chairman thank you
representative Armstrong it
varies in my district we have
staff that does all of our in
house CPR in eighty training we
have nursing staff we have
athletic staff that provides
this training within districts
so we do not have to outsource
to an outside agency
our school district and many
others have made the investment
in having a nursing staff at all
all of our schools athletic stop
your service in our high schools
and so it's my understanding
that in their their current
license
and through other sources like
our local fire departments have
also offered our school district
this training free of charge
for the CPR in eighty again so
thank you very thank you Mr
chairman thank you for that
answer I I'm just concerned
about my rural New Mexico
schools.
Where they might not have this
training and and and Mr chairman
and and Representative a lot of
our schools my daughter.
Is the the.
Track coach.
Four thousand dollar stipend.
He has to get fingerprinted at
her own expense she has to do
traveling she has to do and she
does it out of the goodness of
her heart she doesn't even take
the stipend but so it's it's big
schools are a little different
than little schools we don't
have year round coaches for a
lot of these things we don't
have you know usually it's a
parent stepping up to take the
training to take everything and
so I'm I'm concerned that the
the small schools.
This will be a burden on them
and I don't know I I just have
questions about it and then.
How it's hard to say because I
like your bill.
We can't be in the we cannot get
in the habit of passing
legislation with an
appropriation where there's no
funding in the budget.
And so with that Mr chairman
I'd.
I I mean I hate to say that Bob
we've got to be the we are the
Appropriations Committee thank
you Mr chairman thank you very
much ranking member Armstrong
we'll go to Representative
turned in the house.
Thank you Mr chair and of
Representative and and.
So expert what I just wanted a
clarification on the you
indicated that we were going to
make that we the training a
requirement and it might be
outside of the regular school
day so when those situations
what I don't know about Mr chair
and representative is then are
we required to compensate the
Clintons with additional funding
because they are required to
attend the courts outside of the
regular school day.
thank you Mr chairman thank you
Representative turned into it
depends by school district and
our school district we have
hours of professional
development for staff has the
options for this so I would
foresee that it would not
necessarily be outside of the
day many coaches have extended
contracts they have time we for
students as far as head coaches
or otherwise so with our school
district if it's anything
outside what would be the
contract day there would be
competition but I with the
compensation but I would say
they would vary by school and so
the collective bargaining unit
as we know drives away that
employees and Administration
kind of interact and what would
be paid what would not be paid
in our school district that has
and professional development
time built into our schedule
with students not present I
think this could be
accomplished.
In the school day more than the
work for contract time.
Mr chair and representative does
this training have to be in
person.
When I heard the representative
indicating.
Rules.
Mr Chairman representative
from my knowledge and research
from my folks that I represent
they can either come to them or
or vice versa in terms of into
depending on where the location
is obviously I think in in into
urban setting it's it's easier
for them to be able to come to
them in a in a rural setting
depending on the location and
the availability the whether
it's of the action C. P. our
organization I mentioned are
also it's either hospitals or
fire departments red cross
organizations also offer the
same type of training where they
could come to school.
Thank you Mr chair
Representative an expert just
one last question according to
the documentation that we have
there five thousand seven
hundred and twenty
certifications that would need
to be done and Mr chair
representative and expert was a
foundation that PED would take
care of this cost this would
address Representative brown's
question about a burden on rural
schools.
Thank you Mr chairman thank you
Representative
Again because for school
districts and I and working with
local
With your local municipalities
local districts the training
maybe for your car as I said
before the district like ours we
have probably twenty first eight
eighty parameters so there would
be no cost because these are
already on staff I do not know
as far as with a local fire
department or someone else that
could provide this training
I mean I think that's where
depends because each take over
communities is different I would
imagine are larger schools we
have certified trainers on staff
that we would not have to bring
in an outside
Company for the so please
understand that is really it's
not it's not about the money as
much as it is about
Just like before we have have
had can cut or concussion
protocols right where we have to
have training mandatory training
to recognize the signs and
symptoms of concussion so I I
think this would be along with
this
as far as the the money that was
in the budget
I don't know as far as.
What the cost would be to to an
individual districts for many
districts there would be no cost
because we have parameters
inside our district and I think
that has to be done so this
isn't the someone else coming in
here I know what what because I
said about you guys say Hey this
is an unfunded mandate right
that we're doing a requirement
here I think that the that is
true that as far as a
requirement as far as training
many of these trains and again
it depends as far as the hours
and through your community what
resources you have because as
we're sitting here there may be
out there saying Hey there's
local fire departments there be
me local medical personnel that
would say.
For these coaches in a small
district you're talking about
eight to ten probably head
coaches could they be doing
training afternoon I don't know
I don't answer that but I would
assume that the cost would not
be
significant to any one
particular district.
Thank you Mr thank you very much
for percent permanent we're
gonna go to representative
Allison Representative Brown
briefly for a second time and
representative Garcia
Representative Allison please
thank you Mr chair.
Coming from the money industry I
always like when I hear the
phrase safety first I think what
you're tried to stab is here
Representative is safety for
since the school districts the
money that I came from all money
employees were taught first aid
and the use of eighties and the.
The mind some minds go as far as
important in their own mine
rescue teams and the money that
I came from the mine rescue team
was so good that of they
competed against other mines and
of the western minds and they
were always in the top two and
most of the time it was in first
place and the.
Sometimes when some of the
parents or of.
The miners were in attendance at
ball games football games
baseball games or other athletic
events and if there's an
incident that required for state
they were always the first on
the floor.
Administering their for state
and they were.
Change the money rescue team
from the Navajo mine were so
well trained that there was a
rescue team from the San Juan
county that was trying to rescue
a man that has climbed to
Shiprock pinnacle and they got
stuck so the Navajo mine rescue
team rescued the San Juan rescue
team that's how much it's how
adequate their training was and
I like I like the idea of
training of the coach's where
there are public places and
public gathering so on on that
Mr chair I would support this
bill thank you Mr chair thank
you very much Representative
Allison Representative Brown
second time and then
representative Garcia yes of the
requester chairman thank you
yes Representative workers who
is the certifying authority or
agency CPR certification who who
actually requests that
certificate Mr chair.
Mr chairman Representative Brown
I believe it's by their license
okay so a registered nurse
through their license and that
they've gone through their
training or otherwise that they
are certify their that the the
nurse or health care
professional
our athletic trainers they have
many different certifications
and or trainees so you do have a
special license in order to be a
first aid and safety trainer or
CPR trainer
I would say most of our our
health professionals can do that
our nurses or otherwise but I
don't know there particularly
since but I do know that they
have had to be certified as a
train the trainer kind of model
and that you know it would
depend who we did we never know
as far as who is those who could
be a trainer for the CPR and
ADD.
Was it I Mr Chairman
representative thank you for the
question I believe one
organization was the action see
Pat I mentioned previously and
also to organizations are the
American red cross and American
heart association's are kind of
the top two that that actually
can issue those licenses and we
kind of the authority on issuing
those Mr Chairman.
I guess one of the complex in
having over the bill in my own
mind is all right I believe the
CPR part is the easy part and
that's a shelf in this bill and
it should be should be current
certifications that the part
that I'm struggling over is the
different leaders and it's
training it shall be training
but if there's not the
equipment.
I mean it's a good idea to have
training but if there's not the
equipment I if I were a coach Mr
chair I would probably shy away
from using a piece of equipment
that I'm trained in but not
certified in and so if if that
part of the bill where there it
probably have an easier time I'm
not sure how to vote on this one
yet though Mr chair thank you
very much Representative Brown
representative Garcia please
thank you Mr chairman
representative of Michael Turner
of a long the lines of
Representative Brown just asked
and Representative Armstrong
under language the state the
shelves.
No we're we're mandating
somebody to move my correct.
Mr Chairman representative
Garcia we're asking for is for
coaches to be as for the other
licenses because again with the
coaching license we had of a
requirement to have the
concussion as far as recognition
there are certain trainings that
we have through the NMAA that
when I had my coach less was
coach and I had to have and so
this would be in addition to the
trainings that they've had you
would be asking for all coaches
of all sports high school level
to have a certificate or
training and certification thank
you Mr chairman in other words
what we're at eighteen these
coaches to do this they have to
do with my correct that's what
the bill says Mr Chairman
representative Garcia yes I need
all of my concerns are you know
smaller districts are gonna have
a problem this and you know when
you're ready it fifty seven may
be maybe they have to do with
your mandating unfunded.
You know we're we're gonna force
and to do this and I don't think
that the right deal with the
right way to go you know I I
like the bill and I'm like what
it does because we do need of
people know what they're doing
with our kids you know I have
grandkids school and one of my
grandkids is done but full of
times and given that the coaches
their new what they were doing
so she's all right but to
mandate the smaller schools it
might be a problem let me thank
you thank you very much
Representative Garcia we'll go
to Representative Pettigrew than
Representative care these.
Thank you chairman
Appreciate the bill.
I honestly was surprised to
learn that our coaches don't
already have this and
You know if if I'm teaching
chairman and representative from
teaching had a hundred how to
recognize a concussion I had two
hours to it and I get a CPR
certification is not that big of
a deal.
Chairman representative we just
added sixty our stores to our
of training.
And so there there's money in
there for the training there's
money in there for everything
that can easily fall within the
coach's sixty hours that they're
gonna have.
Trillion unfunded mandate with
respect to that
are there some equipment out
there yes yeah and we can get to
that point but
Chairman and Representative I
think it's a great idea thank
you very much Representative
Pettigrew representative please.
Thank you Mr chair and
Representative it seems like
this is needed because it saves
lives we've all read stories of
football players in high school
who died or who were saved like
this and then it seems to me
that through our regional
education cooperatives the
military I got my trainer CPR.
At the sole army base we have
people and basically we have
nurses it seems to me there's a
way to get it done because it
has to be done in a rural area
that person becomes a resource
as Representative Chatfield said
the person becomes a resource
not only for the athletic team
and just my final question is
that most of major high school
competitions my observations and
there's usually an ambulance
there is that truth around the
state.
Thank you
Mr chairman and thank you
Representative care it depends
on the as far as your you have
to sign an MOU okay
In my district I'm in charge of
athletics so all of the.
From middle school to high
school
we have to make of local and
will use based upon their
availability whether we have an
ambulance there I can tell you
that most high school athletic
football events there's an
influencer but you don't have
that always time for GB or four
freshmen or anything else which
is part of the reason why I also
know that the funding has come
up several times and as we've
seen legislation passed through
here both house bill one thirty
which talks about the
professional development House
Bill wanting that one ninety
nine that I carried that was the
at risk index that would infuse
monies for types of
interventions social emotional
health I think that does money
is we made invest we heard today
through our different committees
and otherwise about the
investment made in public
schools if we're talking about
even if it's you know
for for coaches we have coaches
if sixty dollars at the high in
which again for me it's free you
talk about ten coaches in a
small district with that and use
of money if you can't find six
hundred dollars for so I think
it worth so I think that's
really what it is now I will say
this because I currently have
you will get re certified to do
CPR and they do.
That doesn't mean I have to have
an AD that just means that at
the time of the only training
when I was certain certain a CPR
certified they had an eighty
there that we could practice and
we did this and so you guys saw
like every they're they're not
loans there's an eighty there
and god forbid something
happened even though I haven't
how the day we could have the
training so eighty is not a
separate training from CPR it's
actually part of the new
requirement the American heart
association and other training
just as far from Millard cause
are pretty much automated they
really talk use force what to do
for these things so I understand
about the appropriation
but is you know there's of said
the cost to the school districts
and with the monies that have
been done I don't know two
hundred fifty million her three
hundred million that's new
money's going to schools.
I think it's you know it's it's
for the kids but I definitely
understand the concern if I
aimed at review it very very
clear I think we can close and
then we'll go to Representative
dela Cruz.
Thank you Mr chairman and your
concern and all things are
really appreciate everybody's
questions and concerns around
the mandate I appreciate your
concern your questions Mr
Representative Garcia
at the end of the original
intent here was to be able to
have this funded and since we
were unable and successful to
get the funding and the House
Bill to we believe that if this
were to be pass and be signed
if a fraction of those four five
thousand coaches are able to get
some of this training whether it
was done out of pocket for them
or where they're able to get it
paid for by their individual
districts for PD was able to
from some of this for them it's
it's a starting point and if
that causes an event to happen
we're somebody's here that has
is training and has that
equipment there and somebody is
able to be saved because of that
and we felt it was worth it to
still bring in funny today okay
thank thank you very much we'll
go to Representative Cruz.
Thank you Mr chair.
Representative I want to support
this but I think I'm going to
need a little direction here
Sherman because of the funding
issues thank you great thank you
very much Representative Cruz
Representative Bach I I think
you've talked about the
eligibility in a number of
different areas and committee
members Representative Pettigrew
and others have talked about
eligibility in other areas Mr
or representative Representative
delight Cruz I think I I I think
we should feel comfortable
moving this forward
with the understanding that that
there is expansive funding for
professional development of
which this will fall under
appreciate very much I think
that clarification or that
contribution from committee
members and Representative Baca.
I think this committee is also
very.
Ratio of and very attuned to
the I the reality and the
potential for mandates to be
passed by the legislature
without funding or in some cases
clear funding and things may be
eligible may fall through the
cracks so I think those are well
taken but
In addition to sort of those
points Representative Baca and
we've heard some of the personal
stories from different members I
I distinctly recall at the end
of monsoon season a very bad
storm coming through Los crucis
and sure enough folks there were
a couple middle school kids and
their on the field
figures like track practice
where where they were struck or
at least and thank god that they
they did not perish they were
brought back I don't know all
the specifics but I think that.
That danger is been talked about
is there but thank you for the
clarification sorry for the long
winded response.
There you go okay
Let's go to and thank you for
Santa Cruz okay let's go to vai
vice chair Dixon for the motion
and Representative Baca will go
to you for the second please.
Thank you Mr chair I would move
it to pass on Senate bill four
fifty as amended.
Second thank you all and thank
you committee for very very good
discussion let's go to Mr Wynn's
Rigas for the book please.
Yes.
I'm.
Pass.
Representative up yes.
Yes with.
Yes.
Representative have you yes.
Yes with an explanation.
Yes okay we're gonna go to first
representative Garcia then
ranking member Armstrong for
explanation.
Thank you Mr chairman
Representative you know I kind
of contradicted myself on the
question in my vote you know I
voted yes but you know I hate
unfunded then.
Yes because it involves kids
involved safety of our kids you
know and like I said I have
granddaughters are on screen
right now in sports and for that
reason I will yes but not happy
with no fundamental thank you Mr
thank you representative Garcia
recommend Armstrong please thank
you Mr chairman it the the
explanation that there was some
money in there for training that
that eases my mind but I have to
let everyone know that the
Senate's fine Senate finance
committee passes out with no
funding.
And so we can not get in the
habit of passing things when it
is not in the budget.
And and that's it where they
Appropriations Committee we
can't keep doing this and so of
course everybody wants to pull
at your heartstrings.
And we want to we want to do
good things but we have to have
money in the budget we have to
stop doing this.
Thank you Mr chair thank you
very much for a ranking member
Armstrong okay with that you
have a do pass thank you very
much Representative Baca Mr.
Many members that does it for
today we do have a few more
bills that will have to get
through I just want to say a big
thank you again to the committee
and to our staff.
We'll have a brief agendas at
least one more day but we will
be free thank you very much.
Yes.
Yeah so.
