Representative Sanchez.
Representative Sanchez.
Representative Sariana.
Representative Silva
Representative Silva.
Representative Vincent.
Yeah. Vice Chair Dixon.
Ches small. We have a quorum.
Great, OK, uh, thanks. We have a
quorum. We're gonna go ahead,
uh, Chairman McQueen, come on
up.
We're gonna start with
Um,
we substitute for Senate Bill
23, Senate Finance Committee
substitute for Senate Bill 23.
Mr. Terry, are you ready? We
are.
Mr. Chair, members of the
committee, uh, Senate Bill 23 is
oil and gas royalty rate
changes. I'm joined today by
Sinley Stewart, Deputy
Commissioner of Operations at
the state Land Office.
uh, Mr. Cha, members of the
committee, uh send Bill 23 would
raise the maximum rate uh for
state royalties in a portion of
the state, uh, to 25%, which we
believe reflects a fair market
value,
um, Mr. Chair, members of the
committee.
or these royalties.
They're not a tax.
They're not a fee and they're
not a regulation.
This is money we receive for
selling something we own.
And beyond that, we not only,
not only are these owned by the
city of New Mexico, they
actually held in trust by the
state of New Mexico for the
beneficiaries of the land grant
permanent fund, which are our
schools, our universities, our
hospitals.
Um, and this is just an
appropriate measure to make us
competitive with neighboring
states.
And with that, we'll stay for
questions.
Great. Thank you very much. Uh,
first, is there anybody who
wishes to speak uh in opposition
to 23.
Mr. Wisner, please come on up.
Uh, good afternoon, Madam Chair,
Mr. Chair, rather, members of
the committee, Jim Winchester
with the Independent Petroleum
Association of New Mexico, um,
just a quick comment on this
Bill, um, oil was selling at $80
per barrel at the beginning of
this session. It's now down to
66 $67 per barrel, which as it
stands is $650 million hitch in
the state budget. Industry is
reacting and preparing for even
lower prices with the corporate
belt tightening and layoffs, but
here in Santa Fe, legislators
are
pushing for a massive industry
only tax hike and this royalty
rate increase.
Increasing royalties now in a
declining market will
disincentivize bidding at a time
when less bidders will come
forward with dropping oil
prices.
We urge this committee to do the
right thing. Be fiscally
responsible and reject this
royalty increase because it
comes at the absolute worst
time. Thanks.
OK. Um, OK, now we'll go, uh,
online, those who wish to speak
in opposition, go ahead, uh,
Miss Sontag.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman, members
of the committee. I'm Carlos
Santag, president and CEO of the
New Mexico Business Coalition.
We are in opposition to this
bill because it will increase
production costs, reduce
operator profit margins and
discourage further investment in
this industry.
We have a very heavily regulated
oil and gas industry.
And you know, it's not just this
bill. If this were the only
thing that this legislature were
looking at this year, that would
be one story, but when I go
through the bills we have.
Over 20 really bad bills aimed
at discouraging overtaxing and
over regulating this industry. I
think this is just too much
right now, and I would encourage
you to reject it. Thank you.
Thank you very much. OK, uh, now
we're gonna go, uh, those, if
anybody's here who wishes to
speak in support of Senate Bill
23. Come on up.
Try to read this without my
glasses. Uh, good afternoon,
committee chair and committee
members. My name is Bernadette
Hardy. I'm here with NMA to
vote. We're here to speak in
support of SB 23. This bill will
only apply to new leases on the
most productive oil and gas
parcels. The value of our public
oil and gas resources are worth
many billions of dollars and we
have been subsidizing oil and
gas companies for far too long
at
the cost of our frontline
communities. please, these are
our public lands and it's time
oil and gas pay the going rate
and or the market rate for what
is essentially the sale of our
public resources,
please do pass for SP 23.
Thank you. Next.
Uh, hello, Mr. Chair. Uh, hello,
members of the committee. My
name is John Martinez. I'm here
representing Conservation Voters
New Mexico. Uh, we are, uh, in
firm support of this bill. Uh,
it is very common sense, very
fair, very measured, and it's a
great investment in our
children's education. So we urge
you to pass it, please.
Thank you.
Good afternoon, Mr. Chair,
members of the committee. I'm
here on behalf of the Sierra Clu
Rio Grande chapter and our
35,000 members and supporters.
My name is Melissa Bernardine.
Leasing rates on New Mexico
state lands haven't been
increased since the 1960s. The
increase to 25 to 30% royalty
rates on new leases in
high-producing lots is on par
with Texas and Colorado.
Oil and gas extracted from state
lands belongs to the people of
our state. These are publicly
held resources extracted off
public lands for private profit
and New Mexicans and land office
beneficiaries should be fairly
compensated for this resource.
The only factors that indicate
where extraction will occur is
the quality of the oil, the ease
of access to it and the price on
the global market, please
support this bill. Thank you.
Thank you.
Chairing committee members, I'm
Osa Chavez from NM Native Vote.
We really need to allow the
state land office to increase
the royalty rate to 25% for
extraction on the highest
producing lands, these resources
often come from state lands that
hold our tribal cultures and
traditions. These resources
belong to all of us, and we
deserve a fair price. Many
tribal members and communities
are beneficiaries of the state
land permanent fund, Natural
Resources extracted off our.
public lands for private profit
are also expressly for the
profit of her children and
communities. This resource is
owned by all New Mexicans, it
benefits our hospitals and
schools. We urge you to support
this bill. Thank you.
OK, we're gonna go online, uh
for uh one person in support,
uh, and, uh, will go to you, uh,
Richard Mason, in support of
Senate Bill 23.
Yes, uh Chairman Small, members
of the committee, my name is
Dick Mason. I'm a board member
and a registered lobbyist for
the League of Women Voters in
Mexico, and we stand in strong
support of SB 423. The league
believes it's the state's
obligation to collect revenues
to fund services that are
generally a state responsibility
and adequate to finance the
essentials of government. SB 23
does that, and specifically we
have a position at the state
legislature should ensure that
the state land
Commissioner
Has the support needed to
maximize profits and and
minimize the administrative
costs while protecting the
environment and preserving the
long-term value of the land. I
want to thank the sponsors for
bringing legislation forward and
urge the committee to give it a
due pass. Thank you.
Great. Thank you very much, Mr.
Mason. OK, that'll conclude
public comment. We'll first go,
uh, so next we'll go to the,
actually before we go to the
committee, uh, chair, uh,
expert, anything that you'd like
to add?
Uh, Mr. Chair, thank you. Uh, I
just want to note that the
comments in opposition, both
referred to this as a tax, and
it's not.
Got it. OK, Mr. Stewart.
Mr. Chair, members of the
committee, I just want to hit on
a couple of very quick points.
One, the mission of a state land
office is to generate revenue.
That's why we were given these
lands. So when we think about
the land office, it's important
to think of us as a private
sector or, you know, enterprise
agency because that's, that's
what we are. Um, some of our
biggest beneficiaries are the
public schools, uh, uh, New
Mexico Military Institute, uh,
School for Bo, School for the
Deaf. So the money that we
generate directly goes to
support.
Uh, public services. And lastly,
just thinking about what a
royalty is. So, and what this
bill is proposing to do.
Under current law, when we take
a public resource, the oil and
gas out of the ground and a
company develops that resource
on state lands, the company gets
in the best of the best of the
area, they get 80% of the value
in the state gets 20% of the
value. What we're proposing is
that in these most lucrative
areas, and this bill has been
pared down compared to last
year's legislation. Um,
The state would get 25% and the
companies would get 75% of the
value. So it, it's still, uh,
the, the incentive is still
there for development, lots of
profit, lots of value, and we
really appreciate your time.
Thank you very much. OK, first
we'll go to ranking member
Chatfield.
Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Welcome, guys.
Uh,
So, there's a couple of things
that happen whenever a company
drills and they extract oil, one
of them is.
is a severance tax. The other
one is a royalty. Now, we all
know that the severance tax, uh,
we know about severance tax
bonds. We know about sever sex
distribution to many, many
areas. Do the royalties all go
to the permanent fund or are
they similarly, similarly
distributed to a variety of
areas, or do they just go to the
what, 23 entities or whatever in
the permanent one.
Mr. Chairman Representative,
thank you for that question. So
all of our lands are assigned a
specific beneficiary like New
Mexico Military Institute,
they've got a lot in Eddy and
Lee County, for example, um, any
money generated off of that land
goes to support that
beneficiary. It's transferred,
these are royalties, they go to
the land grant permanent fund.
Uh, they are invested by the
land grant permanent fund, and
they are, uh, distributed. So,
uh, the fiscal impact of this
bill is that
over by 2050, we're looking at,
um, up to 1.3 billion in
additional distributions across
the board, but it is tied to
those uh uh 21 different
beneficiaries. So Mr. Chair, all
Royalties go into the permanent
fund.
Mr. Chairman Representative,
that's correct.
Thank you. Um,
So
How much
As the what was the price of oil
in 1960. I just heard someone
say, we've not had a raise since
1960.
But this is not a price. This is
a percentage. So how much was
the price of a barrel of oil in
1960.
Mr. Chairman Representative, I,
I, I've got no idea. I mean,
back uh in the 90s, uh when we
started um uh tracking and on
guard, you know, oil was
actually like more of a
byproduct, and it was gas that
had true value at that point.
Um, I, I'm not sure what those
prices were, but I would note
that even in today's
environment, it's, it's a
revenue share. So if, if the
company does well, uh, we do
well.
So, Mr. Chairman, my point
exactly. We have gotten a raise.
I, I suspect in the 60s.
price of gallon of gas was 25,
35 cents.
Is that true?
I believe it is. Uh, so, so the,
we have gotten an enormous
raise, uh, because I, I also
don't know the price of a barrel
of oil, but I assure you that it
has
Right, uh
There you go.
Um
101 in in the 70s or uh
yeah, there you go. That's more
what I would think. Thank you,
Mr. Chair. So $10 oil in the
70s. Um
So, it was '88 when we came in
session at 66 now. Uh, I think
we got a pretty good raise since
the 60s, which it was probably
lower than that $10 a barrel,
which it was in the 70s, so it's
not like we have not had a
raise, um.
Tell me about.
Premium restricted lands.
Mr. Chair Representative, so the
way that our leasing works is um
we have what are called
restricted areas. It's a really
bad name. Um, it's essentially
where there's oil and gas,
historical oil and gas
production. I think the premium
basin and I think San Juan are
are restricted areas. Within
those areas, we uh have a
certain rankings to determine,
uh, the lease rate when we put
our leases out for public
auction, what they would be.
Uh, premium are the ones that
are going to score in this
ranking system, which is under
existing state law at over 90
points. So, um, what this bill
does is it basically carves out
a geographic area within the,
the, it's mostly Lee and Eddie
and then a little bit of
Roosevelt and Chavez, where
there would be a new uh leasing
range between 20 and 25%, uh,
for premium leases. Um, there's
not a mandate that it would be.
5%, it would still be a ranged
within there. Uh, but those are
the, the premium leases which
Would, uh, utilize development
leases.
So is all of Eddie and Lee
County premium restricted lands.
Mr. Chairman, Representative,
yes, it is the best play in the
Premium Basin. Lee and Eddie,
uh, County lead, uh, you look at
all the counties in Texas and
all the growth, 30% of the
premium growth in in oil
production is coming from the uh
Eddie. So that's one of the
things, you know, it's, it's not
a coincidence that, that we
focus on those counties. New
Mexico is blessed with the best
rock in the world, right? And,
and the best of the Permian
Basin. Texas charges
25%. We've got better rock than
they do.
So,
Mr. Chair, uh, when you add up
all the taxes and all the
royalties and, and all of those
things. Now, I've been told that
we come out about the same as
Texas when you include the
various taxes and royalties and,
and the severance taxes and all
that, Mr. Chair, is that true?
Um, Mr. Chairman,
Representative, that's correct.
So the, the numbers we utilize
are from the LFC report, and
they looked at, uh, uh, oil and
gas, the effective rate of oil
and gas production taxes,
severance, etc. And then also
including, uh, um,
Well, on, on just, uh, on the
tax side. And my recollection is
that, that New Mexico came out
at 8.5% when you add it all up,
uh, and Texas was at 8.3% when
you add it up. So, Mr. Chair, if
we go to 25%, we're gonna be a
little higher in Texas.
Uh, Mr. Chairman Representative,
uh, in terms of cost, um, you
know, on the royalty side, not
on the tax side, it would be
additional cost, you know, we're
not arguing that um there
wouldn't be. Now that cost is
borne by non-New Mexico
companies and the large
companies out of $2.3 billion in
royalties that we had last year.
Uh, we have 15 million paid by
New Mexico companies and state
trust lands overall, and
These leases only apply to new
uh leases moving forward. So,
um, you know, really the people
that would be the companies that
would be bidding on it are not
these small independent
companies. Uh, it is going to be
the, the bigger, larger
companies that, that pay most of
the royalties to state land
office.
So,
Have we let a lot of leases in
these, uh, best of the best, uh,
premium lands.
Uh, in the last year, are we,
are we at least quite a bit of
those or not?
Mr. Chairman, Representative,
the commissioner put a pause on
uh the best of the best being
put up for, for lease, uh,
because we wanted to wait to, to
see if this body would, uh, pass
a higher royalty rate because
the way oil and gas leases work
as they are in effect as long as
they are producing, uh, which
can be many, many decades. So,
you know, if this bill were to,
to pass, uh, it, it was worth
the wait for us to, to hold off
on putting those up to auction.
It is our intent that if this
bill passes, we would love to
get those leases out to bid as
soon as possible, get them into
production and start making
money for the school kids. So
Mr. Chair, gentlemen, uh, do we
feel like we've lost since we
started in '88 dollars a barrel
and now we're at 66.
How much money did we lose by
but we're gonna sell our oil
cheaper than, than what we did
going in. I mean, maybe it'll, I
hope it comes back up, but I
like, I like old money, Mr.
Chairman Representative, I, I
don't think we've lost anything.
The amount of money that we
would get, uh, the commissioner
has said in the past, she would
trade billions for millions,
and, you know, the amount of
money that we're making over the
long run is uh vastly outweighs
kind of the short-term revenue
that we'd be getting. So
speaking of the long run,
How much oil do we think is in
the Delaware Basin?
Uh,
Mr. Chairman Representative, I
don't, I don't have a, a great
answer for that. What I can say
is that the studies out of the,
the EIA, the Federal Energy
Information Agency have
continuously shown that actually
the reserves are uh more, more
proven. The the proven reserves
are increasing. Um, we have
tremendous value, tremendous
capacity, uh, in terms of future
development there. Well, Mr.
Chair, gentlemen, I, I have
heard that it was greater than.
the all of, all of Saudi Arabia,
probably 100 years at worth of
oil at the current rate.
Mr. Chairman Representative, I,
I, I wouldn't refute that. I
mean, you know, if, if you think
about just New Mexico right now
where we are without even
tapping those remainders. New
Mexico's production is now on
par with Norway, on par with
Mexico.
We are competing at an
international level. We should
not think of ourselves as
somebody who can't afford to get
fair market value we can afford.
We've got great resources in New
Mexico.
So
What is the
Royalty costs on federal land.
Mr. Chairman Representative, so
they increased it, then kind of
decreased it a little bit, um,
uh, now it's at 16.
Uh, 5, I believe, or 667, 16 and
change. I'm sorry if I, if I got
that wrong. uh, but it's, it's
uh a little bit lower than what
we have. So, Mr. Chair,
gentlemen, are there federal
lands in the Delaware Basin. Uh,
Mr. Chairman Representative,
yeah, we have federal lands in
the Permium overall.
So my fear, Mr. Chair,
gentlemen, is that if I have a
choice to drill on federal land
at 16% or state land at 25%.
You know, um, might be a little
slow, but I'm gonna drill for on
the land that's 16%. And uh
Secondly,
You know, when you go back east
and you look at their, at their
Colleges and institutions made
out of brick and you come to New
Mexico and a lot of ours are are
wood framed and, and uh
plastered that, you know, I feel
like they have colonized us long
enough. I want, I want us to get
the same amount of drilling on
us, that's what they get on
them. I don't wanna.
The oil is under New Mexico.
And as you well know,
Even on our private land,
enormous amount of our private
lands, the federal government
did not give us the mineral
rights. When they, when uh the
homesteaders came in, the very
first homesteads got the mineral
rights.
All of the latter homesteads,
the federal government held the
mineral rights, and uh a lot of
the rest, anything that was left
over, they required us to cede
to the federal government as a
You know, as a, uh,
Condition of statehood. So I'm a
little protective about, about
keeping that money and that
drilling in New Mexico. What
does it cost to drill in a, an
oil well in that area in the
Delaware Basin. I mean, usually
these basins are
Similar depths down to the, to
the good rock. What, what does
it cost for an oil well that
area, Mr. Chairman
Representative, I think it could
be all over the place. I mean,
you know, we used to have
laterals at a mile, now they're
up to almost 4 miles. Um, you
can go in different directions,
you know, one difference between
Texas and New Mexico is their
lease, uh, they charge at all
the different depths. We don't
do that in New Mexico, so you
can hit different plays and
under the same lease, and, and
so our lease is actually a lot
more favorable.
Um, then Texas, frankly, um, uh,
we allow deductions on gas and,
you know, in terms of net where
Texas is gross. Uh, but I don't,
I don't have a, uh, per well
cost, um, uh, the only thing I
would say there is, once again,
the energy and information
agency has, has had a couple of
studies about the productivity
out of the premium basin, which
is getting more productive and
more productive. They're getting
more, uh, oil out of the ground
and, and that increases profits
and
The cost overall, I mean, they
can make money at 30, 40 a
barrel.
Um, and, uh, still makes
significant profits.
Mr. Chair, I, I hope that we can
use some of that for before,
while we, what we need it, you
know, I, I hope we, we keep on
using some of it the next
question is a little bit about
unitization.
Uh, if there's federal lands
there and there's state lands
there, I'm, I'm, I live on top
of a unit called the Bravo Dome,
and it's unitized for CO2.
And I assume that there's a unit
down there or a pooling of some
sort. How do you sort that out
about the?
If you got the federal
government, they're gonna get uh
16% and we get
20 or 25 depending on
Um, when it is, uh, how's that
work?
Mr. Chairman, uh,
Representative, so, you know, we
enter into agreements,
communitization agreements, and
um uh unionization agreements,
and that is all divvied up
between landowners based on, you
know, what, what is owed to them
under the, the leases and, uh,
what percentage that they own of
the different land, different
mineral rights. So, um, you
know, this is a, that's actually
an area that this body has
invested over the last couple of
years. We've hired more
petroleum engineers.
staff to work on uh units and
comms, and, you know, we now
have turnaround times that are
incredibly quick and hashing out
these agreements, BLM takes
years, but, um, uh,
You know, that's it's hashed out
in those agreements. So let's
just move up to the northwest
corner of the state for a
minute.
I, I would think that in the
northwest corner of the state,
there would be much more federal
land.
Then state land, uh, how does
that, how does that work in the
area? And I'm not familiar with
where you're drilling up there.
Is there a lot of building on
federal land or a lot of
drilling on state land in the
Northwest. Mr. Chairman
Representative will first to be
clear in terms of this
legislation. It doesn't apply to
the Northwest, um, you know, uh,
Northwest is, is a gas plate,
primarily, uh, and we're talking
about getting higher value on
the oil and gas, uh, I'm sorry,
on the primarily it's an oil
play and the
Delaware, for example. Um, so
little apples and oranges, but
uh up there, we have a lot less
land in the in the northwest,
it's a lot of tribal, um, and,
you know, we have the good
fortune in New Mexico. We got a
lot of consolidated parcels in
the premium.
So Mr. Chair, the reason for
that question, I'm just gonna go
right on straight to my, to my
thought process, and that is, I
fear that if we raise
Our royalty rates.
That given those choices, we're
going to see oil companies
choose Texas over New Mexico.
Uh, that they're gonna choose
federal land over state land.
And that the actual result will
not be more.
Royalties for us, but actually
less royalties for us.
And possibly that it makes it
more
Uh, lucrative to, to drill on
the federal land and, and less
on the state.
And uh
You know, I don't know what it
costs to drill an oil well, but,
uh, we need to make sure that
it's worth, worthwhile for them
that they're gonna make a profit
when they do it. I, I like to.
42% of our budget comes from oil
and gas and, and I would like to
keep uh receiving the the
funding that we get from them. I
appreciate it and, and Mr.
Chair, that's it.
Thank you very much, ranking
member Chatfield. We're gonna go
next to Wuhan and represent
Pettigrew.
And keep going from there. Thank
you, Mr. Chair, a lot, a lot of
my questions recovered, but I, I
still have a few. I just wanna,
you know, say I, I do support
this legislation and um for many
reasons, I mean, we've been,
we've been discussing this
quite, um, a lot over the.
Last couple of years or if not
longer, um, um.
I guess what I'll just say by
asking in those, in the, in the
Permian Basin where she had a
lot of discussion about what is
the uh what are the number of
Of drilling sites that are on
federal land versus state land,
I guess.
Mr. Chair,
Mr. Chairman Representative, I
don't have an exact uh number in
terms of, you know, cause you've
got land ownership, then you've
got land leased and then you
have number of actual wells, um,
but, but we actually have um a,
a very good representation in
terms of the permium, and
there's a lot of uh um state
land and a lot of private.
There's definitely BLM land, but
it's a little bit less. Thank
you, Mr. Speaker. I mean, Mr.
Chair, so, so the uh
What I'm getting at is the
potential and really the access
and and the um.
The revenues, the potential,
the, the revenues that would be
generated by us doing this, um,
so what, what?
Where on those the state owned
um.
Areas, why is it a better? Why
is there, what is the potential,
I guess, Mr. Speaker, Mr. Chair.
Mr. Chairman Representative, um,
we have amazing potential. I
mean, we, like I said before, we
have some of the best rock in
the world and um we've got the
best area of the Permian Basin,
uh, compared to Texas. Um, you
know, they're not going to Texas
and running away because the
resource is where it is and be
charge is 25.
Thank, thank you, Mr. Mr. Chair.
Thank you, um, for that answer.
Um, I just don't see that there
would be a uh an issue with with
um having more wells or or
generation on our public on our
state lands and I, I just think
that this would just generate
more revenues for the state, and
I think that, you know, this is,
this is a
This is probably the prime time
to do it, quite frankly, um, I
mean, I, I think I'm hearing
that there might be some fear or
some risk rather, um, as we talk
in terms of finances, but I
don't think we have that risk. I
think what we have here is a
potential, Mr. Chair, and I
think that that is, that is why
this is an important bill when
we have.
When we talk about our reliance
on oil and gas. I mean, I come
from the the vein of wanting to
diversify myself quite honestly
and frankly, but when we know
that this is a potential and
this is what is a revenue uh
generator for our state and all
the things that we have to um
potentially fund because of our
dependency on it, I think that
this is quite frankly, the um
investment period, investment
time, and I think that this is
This is where we need to um take
advantage of that time and and
that resource that we're still
using, Mr. uh Mr. Chair, um,
I'm so I'm going through my
notes, Mr. Chair, really quickly
because I like I said, some of
those questions were were asked,
um.
And I guess you said in regards
to a balance when the proposed
question came about.
That we'd rather be making
billions rather than millions.
What is, what does that look
like?
Mr. Mr. Chair.
Mr. Chair Representative, so,
you know, according to the
fiscal impact analysis, um, you
know, because we put in, well,
you know, estimated around 74
million additional every year
going into the permanent fund
and then that's invested, it
grows, uh, the additional
distributions would be between
750 million to 1.3 billion. And
those are distributions from the
land grant permanent fund, which
ultimately is money that
taxpayers don't need to come up
with.
To fund services, so, uh, this
is very much a long-term play
for the future, um, this body
has been doing a lot of
different funds and endowments
for uh future uh uses
recognizing that oil and gas is
eventually going to go away. Um,
you know, simply we're saying
that a 75, 25 split for the best
of the best resources is fair.
They're still going to make a
lot of profit.
And so did the school kids and
um uh but this money is gonna
really help taxpayers in the
long run.
Mr. Speaker Jim, um.
Sponsors, uh, thank you, that
that's exactly where I'm going
with this, I think we, we as a
body need to acknowledge those
um choices we've made through
the laws that we have passed,
um, regarding our tax packages
and this this this um.
This initiatives that we've
we've decided to, um.
Legislate and that this is
another way to supplement the
that we have other things that
we need to pay for, so to speak,
um, and I, I think this is
smart. I think this is a sound
investment and as appropriation
of finance committee that these
are, this is really where we
should be looking at how we make
those uh those uh decisions for
investment and quite honestly,
I, I don't think the question's
been asked, but because we, we
haven't done this, and I think
this has been proposed. I don't
know how many years.
We have, if we really looked at
that measure of what we, the
potential of what we've lost,
especially in these last few
years.
Um
We could have, we come up, we
could come up with a number. I
don't know if you've done that,
but over the last years when
we've had these in in these
increases with our revenues um
from what else have, is there an
estimate of what we could have
potentially made if we'd hadn't
acted this.
Years ago, Mr. Chair, Mr.
Chairman Representative, we
don't have an estimate on that,
but, uh, it would be, you know,
tens of millions of dollars.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. I think
that's all I have and I just.
say thank you again.
OK, we're gonna go next to
Pettigrew, then represent
Sanchez.
Thank you, Chairman.
Thank you, Chairman, and uh.
I'm sorry. Your, your name
again.
So I don't have to, it's, it's a
weird one, soon or late Stewart.
Who de la
Sonalena if you're kind of
channeling a yodel. It's kind of
got that, uh, and then Stewart,
which, um,
Pretty easy.
Thank you very much.
Mr. Chairman, my first question
is,
How would you define fair market
value.
Uh,
Mr. Chairman, uh, Rosette
Pettigrew, uh, fair market value
would be the value that
Uh, uh, company would willingly
pay on an open market.
Mr. Chairman and and Chairman,
um.
Would you
Say that maybe that would be
taxes plus royalties.
Because that's ultimately what
the company ends up paying,
right?
I mean that there's an
investment for the return for
what they anticipate to, to get
out of that. But
You take your investment.
Then you take your, your costs
right off the top with your
taxes and the royalties.
Which gives you the fair market
rate. Would you agree with that
statement, Mr. Chairman
Representative Pere, you know, I
think uh uh business would
incorporate all their costs of
doing business in in evaluating
a project, um, I would reiterate
that we're not talking about um
fungible pieces of property.
We're talking about the best of
the best, which are not only the
best uh in the Permian, but, you
know, potentially some of the
best in the world. And this is
the 2nd year I've been working
on this bill, and it has never
once been suggested that these
parcels would not uh find uh
willing bidders.
Mr. Chairman and Chairman, we'll
come back to that part here in a
little bit.
But, um,
If you had
Two equal pieces of land that
had uh below it.
Equal return on investment on
oil.
Expenses to roll.
All those, everything's the
same.
This one has one set of fees.
Royalty plus taxes, and this one
has one set of these royalty
plus tax taxes, and this one's
less, which one do you pick?
Monsieur Speaker Pettigrew, I
mean, I don't disagree, but the
pre your premise is not
reflective of the reality we
have.
They're, they're not equal
pieces of life.
They're just not. I, Mr. Chair
and chair, I asked you a very
simple question.
I give you an answer.
Sort of I'll agree, um, and so
when we
When we look at this.
The reality is we, we compare,
it's funny, we compare ourselves
to Texas when it's convenient
for us, and we don't compare
ourselves to Texas when Texas
outshines the state legislative
body.
I find it humorous, I watch it,
I've watched it for 5 years,
and, uh, and I finally got tired
of tracking how many times we
don't compare ourselves and how
many times we do.
But Mr. Chair and Chairman be
brutally honest when you put the
numbers together.
This 5% increase.
Puts us at a higher rate than
Texas, point blank. The math is
there.
already we're at a.
20.7% tax burden.
We're the highest state.
A 5%.
Additional royalty.
Puts us that much higher.
In, in Texas.
If you want to question that,
you're welcome to go to the tax
research institute and pull
those numbers yourself.
But my job was to do my research
for tonight.
The reality is,
We're already overburdening.
compared to our neighbor.
Now, when we look at this, I
will agree.
This is the best area there.
It's, it's interesting we talked
and or y'all talked in your
opening.
And the first set of questions
about
Um
The premium leases being in the
San Juan and in the Permian, and
then we, when uh our uh ranking
member on the minority side, um.
Ask the question, we
We clarified that we're just
looking strictly at the oil
side.
Um, so that does drill right
into the Permian Basin.
Mr. Chair and chairman.
And uh
Witness with respect to this.
We have 23 bills. I think this
was brought up early, 16 on the
house side.
7 on the Senate side.
They all have a negative impact.
We'll only guess, production in
the state of New Mexico,
increasing costs.
Right now, Mr. Chair and
Chairman.
We're in deep debate.
Over the tax.
A piece of this, which is
another increase.
We typically don't increase
taxes on people when the market
shows to slow.
It's not typically how
Irregardless of how the debate
went on the floor today. That's
not typically how economics
works.
And personally, Mr. Chair and
Chairman.
I'd rather get 20% off of it,
off of $66.
A barrel oil.
Then 25% off for $40.
The barrel.
price.
Because we're still putting more
money into
This, so.
Mr. Chair, Chairman.
It's not rocket science to be
able to go look this stuff up.
Within the last year, we've had
6 auctions.
Outside of the square.
With no beds because
Oil and gas companies know.
The attempt is, and they're not
willing to pay that.
With with respect to that, I
haven't asked the question yet,
so don't bother. Um,
When we
We start looking at this.
What I feel, chairman, and feel
free to respond to this one.
And and Chairman.
The state land Offices chose to
pick winners and losers.
In their own testimony today, it
was very clear that we know.
And you're confident.
That the majors are gonna come
in and be willing to pay that
25%.
So, what you're saying is, is we
don't want the independence.
That's not what we want. We, we
want to work to destroy one of
the major contributors.
In the state of New Mexico gross
receipts.
One of our oil and gas
companies, one of our major
independents that would go after
this work.
Knowing that that
Um
There was a, we were gonna be
consistent at the 20% royalty
rate.
You price them out of the
market.
The chairs and Peer, I think you
invited a response to that. Is
that correct? Yeah.
So, Mr. Chair, and Pedro, the
legal duty, the legal mission.
Of the state land Office is to
maximize the return on these
assets.
So it would be legally
Questionable
For them to charge a lower rate.
The favor one company over
another.
So when they put these out to
bid, if it, if it goes to uh
25% and if some companies bid,
and some companies don't.
That's them, you know,
performing their legal duty.
Mr. Speaker, and Chairman, I'm
speaker, Chairman, Chairman.
We legislate.
They do what we say to do.
That's the way it works. I've
watched that for 4 years, he
said, Yeah, and I know this is
an issue of deep importance to a
lot of folks. I want to allow a
lot of deference for questions.
I think we'll try to do the
question going back to the
questions in terms of sort of
the constitutional mandate. I
think, um, you know, and, and
Deputy Commissioner Stewart is
fair to expound upon that, but
there is a constitutional
mandate that the state land
office obviously holds.
Uh, back to you.
Chairman, I appreciate that they
have a constitutional duty.
So we legislate the limits of
that.
If we say the royalty rate is
20%. That's what they get to
charge.
Would you agree with that,
chairman?
We're not, please continue
asking questions to the
witnesses that, that is accurate
though.
So, at, at the end of the day,
we have that choice.
We have the ability to sit here
and say, you know what, we want
to keep our independent
businesses going just as much as
we want to keep our majors in
play as well.
You can sit here and say this
makes us equal to Texas. That's
not factual.
The numbers are not factual with
that statement.
You add 5% royalty on top of
this.
We are no longer equal.
Texas.
We're charging more, yes.
And, and we have a heck of a
play there.
At the current rate of
production, if we kept it up.
We have 200 years supply.
Down there. We have, we have
shelves, we have, we have rock
layers down there that we just
haven't gotten to yet or the
technology is not there to get
there.
And be productive, be
cost-effective to do it.
We also produce some of the
cleanest, if not the cleanest
oil.
Coming out of the hole.
From any other country.
We are the, we do have that
play. We do have that ability
and we can continue to make tons
of money.
From the oil and gas industry.
This last year we miss us, we
mysteriously in August, lost
$3.6 billion that showed up in
section 5, section 6, Section 9,
10, and 11 $3.6 billion that was
extra. There would have been
more had it not been for House
Bill 2, Senate Bill 26, and
Senate Bill 378 from a couple of
years back.
The excess, what we're getting
from oil and gas.
Um, the significant already.
Does it all go into the land
grant permanent fund or is it
going to severance tax, where
does it go? Heck we move that
every year with a new bill.
The amount of return that we
get.
is still
Astounding.
Into
Sit there and and make
statements like what was made
today with respect to, we're
just trying to get a fair market
value to our neighbors. No,
you're trying to get more.
I just rather you say it that
way.
Cause it's true. We're trying to
get more. We have better oil. We
want more.
And I'd just rather be honest.
With the public.
Not, not be.
um we'll try, please try to get
to some questions. I know
there's a number of other
members. This is an important
issue I want to deference
and I represent the area that
this money comes from.
And
What happened last year when we
did not get the royalty rate
increase that the state land Off
wanted.
The commissioner turned around
and blocked the cell.
She was a 2 year old, she went
home.
ride and then so we're gonna
represent a Pettigrew.
I want to go back to you to ask
questions. I respect that's an
important issue. We're in
neither way, never should the
witnesses disparage a committee
member, never should a committee
member disparage either a
witness or that please go, I
wanna go back to you for
questions.
But please ask some questions or
make concise points.
I mean, I'm gonna ask for, uh,
ability to come back at the end.
No, give up my time right now.
Right, OK, we're gonna go next
to represent down.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Thank you,
Representative. Um, I, I was,
I'm, this is not an area of
expertise for me. I just, I just
know that oil and gas represents
41% of our.
State budget that
Right? Oil, should we focus on
oil?
Mr. Chair and Representative,
you keep, I, I'm excited to hear
you talking about future
development, and would you agree
that we have, I heard you say
decades I heard represented
Pettigrew, say 200 years. What
is the estimated lifespan, like,
what are we thinking? How long
do we have in the Permian?
Delaware Basin.
Mr. Chairman, Representative, I
don't know that, but I don't
dispute the 200. I mean, I think
every uh every time I see a
report come out, it indicates
that New Mexico has, has more
potential. Thank you, Mr. Chair,
and maybe this is more for the
representative, um, what
What is the percentage that
we're supposed to transition
away from oil and gas in the ETA
Act by 2030. I'm, I'm trying to
figure out if there's 200 years
left.
And but yet we're supposed to
wean off of oil. What, how do we
do both?
Um, ma'am, uh represent that, I
believe the ETA talks about net.
0. So the doesn't.
Uh, assume, uh,
The cessation of oil and gas
development, uh, it, I think
looks for other carbon offsets.
Thank you. Thank you, Mr. Chair
and thank you, Representative.
So in the carbon.
Offsets, you mean like the
buyback, the new program that we
set up where people can produce
and then pay for the impact of
their production,
is that Mrs. I'm not an expert
on the ETA, and this is not the
ETA.
So, so we, we expect to produce
more wells on public land and to
do that for generations to come.
Uh, mister, um,
Mr. chairs and now, uh.
The leasable land that the land
office has left is relatively
small.
Uh, I think it's about 1 to 2%
of their holdings. Um, these are
nevertheless premium tracks. Uh,
it's also important to
understand that these tracks are
held by production. So as long
as they're production, um, the,
the least goes on. Uh, I was
shown at least, uh, that was
over um 100 years old, and it
had, it wasn't a small lease, it
was multiple sections of land. I
believe the, the lease rate was
the the royalty rate was 12.5.
%
Still in effect. So our
opportunity to raise this rate
is now, it's not in the future.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Thank you,
Representative. Um, so if
Are we allowed by law?
You're saying if someone comes
in at 12%, it's kind of like if
you buy a home or buy a car or
whatever that financing is,
whatever that, it's not an
interest rate, but it's a
royalty rate. It's, is it
constitutional that it stay the
same or I mean, or we've just
made that commitment. Um,
uh, chair out
You're saying if someone comes
in at 12%, it's kind of like if
you buy a home or buy a car or
whatever that financing is,
whatever that, it's not an
interest rate, but it's a
royalty rate. It's, is it
constitutional that it stay the
same or I mean, or we've just
made that commitment. Um,
uh, chair,
the statutes have they actually
set out the form of the lease in
the statute, which is a little
unusual, uh, but that helped by
production uh provision has been
around for a long time.
Thank you, Mr. Chair and thank
you, Representative, and these
are the highest producing lands.
Uh,
Mr. Chairs represent the same
land office, of course, has uh
many leases all over the state,
um, what we're focused on in
this bill, uh, is the Permian
Basin, uh, which are, uh, the
highest producing lands. Thank
you. Thank you, Mr. uh Mr.
Chairman. Thank you,
Representative. When
The drilling we stopped the
drilling and put it on pause.
For this purpose.
We're, you know, when people
are, were drilling around the
perimeter at a lower rate, is
that?
Does that deplete this area or
it's just not depletable?
Uh, Mr. Chair, Representative
Doo, uh, no drilling was
stopped, uh, the land
commissioner, uh, selects which
parcels for the release on
monthly basis and they uh
decided to hold back the best
parcels, uh, so they continued
to lease other parcels and of
course existing leases, uh,
continued to drill. So, OK.
Thank you. Thank you, Mr. Chair
and thank you, Representative.
So, but when they, OK.
I want to ask about.
It was said that 25% goes to
royalty and 75% goes to the
company for profit, but that's
not profit because did I hear, I
thought I heard 20% tax as well.
Mr. Chairman Representative, um,
I, I'm not sure where that 20%
comes from, uh, you, you're
right that when you, when I said
to share, uh.
Currently, the company gets 80%
of the value we are proposing
that for the best of the best,
they would still get 75% of
that, that value. And, you know,
What their profit looks like on
their back end in terms of
expenses. I'm not sure what that
is for each individual company.
Thank you. Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Thank you. Um, on that, uh,
we'll go on the 2575. So after
the, the 75, the fixed cost that
we've put on them for the state.
Can you explain this to me, so
there's a tax there is it it's,
is it GRT or is it a is it
severance tax, is it a different
type of tax?
After royalty from their gross
income, what's next? What, what
do we propose?
Mr. Chairman Representative, I,
I think, you know, taxes and
royalties are completely apples
and oranges, um, the similarity
is that they uh do impose an
additional cost on, on the
company, that's, that's true,
um, but, you know, royalties can
be a tax deduction for
companies. So I, I think this,
this tendency to try to stack.
All right, here we've got
severance taxes, we've got the
production taxes, these over
here and then you add on the
royalty, um, that's, that's
probably not
they're a little bit apples and
oranges. Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Tell me a little bit more about,
you said royalties can be a tax
deduction, are they or aren't
they?
I'm sorry, Mr. Chairman
Representative, I missed that
last part.
Mr. Chair, you representative,
you had said that royalties can
be a tax deduction. Are they tax
deductible or not?
Mr. Chairman Representative, if
a company takes it.
I mean, if there are tax
deductible from the severance
tax is the amount that they pay
actually, yeah, it's one of the
things royalties that a company
can um
Include, but, you know, I don't
know what they do or don't do.
and Madam chairs in town, so
it's, it's not tax deductible in
the sense that you file your
taxes in, and have this credit
or something or the royalties,
the calculation of some of the
taxes like the severance tax,
uh, has built into it.
Its attacks on the production
and you, you, you net out the
royalties at that stage. So that
those are other statutes where
it's uh it is deducted. OK.
Thank, thank you, Mr. Chair and
thank you, Representative.
Um
So I, I, I, I was gonna ask
questions about majors because I
also heard you say that the
majors won't, I, I noticed that
there's only I see um the
independent petroleum producers
are here, but I don't see any of
the majors, so you're probably
not wrong. So I, I was gonna ask
about our local owned and
operated oil and gas producers,
but I think what you said is it
doesn't really matter if they go
out of business because this
purpose is to produce the most
amount of money,
that's not what we said. Oh, OK,
explain to me what you said and
no point.
Did anyone up here say it does
not matter if they go out of
business. OK, I'm sorry, it it
it didn't matter if they can't
afford the leases or pay the
royalties,
Mr. Chair, it is the land
office's constitutional duty to
maximize the return on trust
assets.
They don't pick and choose who
bids on them. They put them out
for bid, and then they evaluate
the bits. But, but we are
recognizing based on that
constitutional obligation that
by choosing to raise the
royalties that we may
Block out or or dis, it may not
be something that the miners can
afford to do and it maybe.
The majors will be most likely
to do it. I am I I did I
misunderstand it? So Mr. Chair,
now,
um, Mr. Stewart can elaborate on
this, but that's already the
case. These these parcels are
being leased to major oil
companies, not smaller oil
companies.
And then I, and thank you, Mr.
Chair. Thank you,
Representative. I don't, I don't
know. I don't know a lot about
this, so it, it is. I know that
I have a, I have a
brother-in-law that does, he's a
small producer and he left the
state several years ago because
he's didn't want to deal with
the difficulty of it, but, um,
and he sold his rigs and I do
believe he sold them to other um
smaller producers, but
That's, I'm, I'm just trying to
process this. Um,
O
So in the, in the last 5-10
years, has there been a shift
from state land to federal land
leases.
Uh, Mr. Chairman,
Representative, um, we've seen
an increase of 38% from 2020
until 2024 and oil production on
state trust loans, we've seen an
increase of 10 108% in terms of
gas production on state trust
land, um, so we don't see any
evidence that uh anybody's
moving off of state land.
Thank you. Thank you, Mr. Chair
and thank you Representative. I,
I was, I wasn't really
interested. That's it, that's a
good point. I, I'm, I appreciate
the information and you're
talking about the increase on
public lands. I was more
interested in like who's
getting, who's bidding on new
leases. Uh, is there a deduction
in state land versus federal
land, um, not production.
Mr. Chairman, uh,
Representative, we have seen
very healthy interest in the
lands that we put up at the race
we rate we put up, I think the
last couple of years we had 96
of the leases that we put out to
bid were uh uh were bid on and,
and um by the highest bidder,
they were rewarded. Um, there
were a couple that companies
nominated, but they forgot that
they nominated him and I didn't
bid on it, so that was a handful
of them too, uh, but if
We put a lease out at a level
that companies don't bid on.
It's no loss. Next month we put
it on at a, at a lower rate if
nobody bids on it. Um, so that's
generally how it works. Thank
you, Mr. Chair. So the, the
lease, so, so those 4, was it 4
that didn't get bit on? You just
went out again the next month
and now they've been bid on.
Mr. Chairman Representative,
there, there were about 4 where
they weren't bid on and then the
company has forgot they hadn't
that they had nominated it and
then came back and then they
were eventually put on, but very
few I mean we were talking out
of
230 or so leases that we put out
to bid, so very small amount.
OK. Um, thank you, Mr. Chair.
Uh, I saw an article that
Chevron is reducing their
workforce in New Mexico. What do
you guys look at contraction of
industry as in the indicator.
What, what does that indicate to
you when there's a contraction
of industry.
Mr. Chairman Representative, you
know, we assess the value of
each individual parcel and look
at, um, you know, nearby, uh,
sales and and um uh you know,
the potential of the resource,
we do that evaluation and then
we put it up. Uh, it's a public
auction. People can bid or they
You know, may not bid. Um,
But we're, we're not really, you
know, making leasing decisions
based on the uh the movement of
the industry overall in terms
of.
particular companies. OK. All
right. Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Thank you very much,
Representative Doo. Uh, next,
we're gonna go to represent
Baca, please.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman and
thank you, Representative for
bringing this forward. Um, I'm
not an oil guy, so please excuse
me for my lack of expertise in
this area.
Mr. Chairman, I do have a couple
of very direct.
questions. So,
Uh, Mr. Chairman and
Representative and Mr. Stewart.
We talked about the oil
companies, oil producers in New
Mexico. What is the number of
like what we consider the majors
the general number number of
major oil producers and number
of independent oil producers.
Mr. Chair.
Mr. Chairman Representative, you
know, I only have kind of
looking at state trust land, so
it is a portion. I think there's
uh about 152, uh, that we look
at as kind of independent
companies in terms of state
trust land, uh, you know, the,
the bulk of almost all of our
royalties are paid by, you know,
10 companies.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman and
thank you uh for your answer. Do
we know how many people are
employed on these state trust
lands.
Mr. Chairman Representative, I
do.
Um, Mr. Chairman and
Representative and Mr. Stewart,
for me, I, when it looks like
it's, I look at people, right,
when we look at this, and we
look at an industry.
I look at
The potential for loss.
Of good revenue or good paying
jobs.
Mr. Chairman and representative
and Mr. Stewart.
We also look about these folks
that are working in the oil
fields, these communities that
border these.
They're, they're, they're
spending money in our
communities, GRT.
They're, they're, they're making
contributions. These are the
folks, Mr. Chairman.
Representatives that are
supporting our small programs,
our athletic teams, our, our
schools, and so, uh, Mr.
Chairman, uh, Representative,
and Mr. Stewart.
You, you, we talked about Lisa
earlier. Have we to see a
decline in the number of leases.
That have been acquired.
Since 2000, let's say, since
before the pandemic, Mr.
Chairman, Mr. Chairman, uh,
Representative, um, not in terms
of state trust land. I mean,
we're, we're still leasing, um,
when we put the pause, it was
just on the best of the best
and, you know, we moved ahead
and continued to lease this bill
is just such a narrow part of
the state, you know, there was,
there's a lot else going on.
Mr. Chairman, and, and
Representative and Mr. Stewart.
I've had the pleasure to sit on
this committee for 4 years. Um,
I've seen hundreds of revenue
projections, uh, the comments
that from this committee.
We're talking about economic
development. So Mr. Chairman,
one of, one of my big.
Concerns, really.
Is the message that we're
sending, if one bill in and of
itself.
You know, you kind of take that
out of context, but when we see
a number of bills, my fear, Mr.
Chairman and Representative Mr.
Stewart, is that we're saying is
that
This isn't friendly for this
type of industry.
And I, and I think that
The impact of how it's going to
impact or or or or a little bit
concerned and so I'm not gonna
get very, you know, this is
most, there's no, I wish there
was over Valencia County. I, I
might be, but
I just have to say is we're
talking about being economically
friendly to economic
development.
And, and, and this, Mr.
Chairman, is just one.
Oh
It's sending out messages that
we may see even more.
Of these businesses closed that
will impact more New Mexicans
and our communities.
In these areas that, you know,
um.
It's hard to find and support,
especially the small business.
So, Mr. Chairman, that's, those
are my comments. You can
respond, but
Um, or not respond, but I think
those are my questions, and I
appreciate it for your time.
Thank you, Represent Baca. Next
we have Representative Garrett,
then represent Vincent. Thank
you, Mr. Chair. Thank you for
the presentation.
Um, couple of questions. First
of all, I like the fact that
it's limited geographically.
Thank you for uh amending the
past presentation of the bill in
that way. Um, Mr. Chair, and
this only applies to new leases.
My first question is,
Mr. Chair and Representative,
what's the private market rate
in the best areas. We've talked
about, you know, Texas rate,
we've talked about where the
20%, but what about the private
market rate? What is that?
Mr. Chairman Representative in
this area, it's 25%, 25% is what
companies charge each other.
So, Mr. Chair, there's already
being charged by people within
New Mexico.
The private market, Mr. Chairman
Representative in the best area,
absolutely, and it's um, uh, you
know, when companies are doing
this on their private side that
don't involve public land, uh,
25%.
Thank you. So these companies
Do that, actually.
OK. Thank you. Um, what about
these, you mentioned the 10
largest companies, and what
states are they registered?
Besides the ones that are in New
Mexico. What are the major
states where the large companies
are registered. Mr. Chairman
Representative, um,
The vast majority of the
companies that remit royalties
are registered in Texas,
Oklahoma, and Colorado, um,
Uh, I feel like I'm forgetting,
I think.
I think those are.
That's fine. So, Mr. Chair and
um our expert and our
representative, so these
companies are also um drilling
in Texas with the 25% rate as
well. Would you say that's
accurate?
Mr. Chairman Representative, uh,
mostly so.
Thank you.
Um, those are my questions. I'm
happy to see the bill actually
to see the amendments and the
forward thinking. Thank you.
Thank you very much for
representing Garrett. Uh, next,
we're gonna go to Representative
Vincent and represent Brown.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Thank you,
Chairman McQueen and Mr.
Stewart.
I guess I'm gonna just try to
ask my questions as direct as I
can.
I'm not an old man, but I am a
businessman.
And
Whenever I see an industry.
Like this one.
It almost makes me feel like.
Every time we talk about it, we,
we talk about.
Taxes
And fees.
And
Regulations.
And, you know, the economic
impact that it makes on our
state.
And
Looking into it, it, it almost
seems punitive to me.
And, and I'm like that's just my
opinion. I'm not saying we're
punitive, but
As much money as oil and gas
brings in.
And
I as well, this is my first year
on appropriations. So I got to
see where all the money went.
And I mean all of it down to the
last dime.
And there's never enough to go
around.
And
It almost seems like I asked one
of the analysts.
How many bills are affecting oil
and gas.
And it's gonna be 23 bills is
what an analyst told me.
And I guess it would be 22 with
this one, but 23 total. And by
the time you add in royalties.
And taxes and regulations.
You know, it's not just about
the royalties.
As a business person, as for me
looking in and I say, OK, here's
what I'm doing for New Mexico.
And there's 23 bills that's
wanting a piece of me.
They want, they want another
portion of money.
It just seems like to me that
we're not, we're not treating
oil and gas like we should be
trading oil and gas.
And Mr. Chairman and rep and uh
Chairman McQueen.
I don't know how much
legislation I've seen this year.
And how much I've voted for.
The underserved.
Mr. Chair and Chairman, would
you say that majors
Do pretty good in the minors
could be in the category of
underserved.
Uh,
Mr. Chair Represent Vincent, um,
we've heard a lot, uh, in
particular today, but in the
last couple of days about the 23
bills that impact the oil and
gas.
And I would, first off, I would
encourage you to separate out
this bill.
Because this bill is different.
This bill is us charging um a
fair market rate.
On a trust asset, and the asset
we hold in trust.
I mean, legally, literally a
legal obligation to do that.
So, like, I, I think that's a
fair.
Commentary, I think that's a
fair discussion, and I think you
know, we, we have had that
discussion in the context of
other bills. Uh, I expect us to
continue to do so.
But, but this bill is not a tax.
As not it's not regulation. It's
none of those things.
So it's different, and
especially to your question, do
I think the uh smaller producers
or underserved.
Mr. Chair, Vincent, I'd be hard
pressed to describe an oil and
gas company as underserved.
I would
Thank you, Mr. Chair and thank
you, Chairman.
I know some independence.
And they can't
They can't measure up to the, to
the majors.
And, you know, if, if we pass a
bill like this.
And it causes 10 of our
small independence to go out of
business.
That's not what I want, and Mr.
Chair and Chairman,
I keep going back to the
The underserved, which filled
like they just haven't been able
to really get a, a step up.
And we, and we give out, we, we
help them out a lot.
Here in the state, there's a lot
of social programs.
And sitting on this committee,
I've seen those social programs.
I know how much money is going
out, and I just think that
we're, you know, here we are
just adding and adding in, and
I'm, I know when you said it's
not a tax, but it's still the
bottom line. If I'm making this
much money.
And the state's gonna up my
taxes this much. Bottom line,
I'm not making as much money as
I was.
And
What I, what I keep thinking is,
What is going to keep our oil
and gas industry here.
And I, I know that I heard that
we have the best rock in the
world. I get it.
But what holds those independent
oil companies and those big
major oil companies, what holds
them here if they, if I felt
like.
I wasn't getting a fair shake.
Why wouldn't I want to go
somewhere else where it would be
a little bit cheaper. Um, Mr.
Chair, Vincent, uh, first to, to
be clear,
These best of the best parcels,
if they're put up for lease at
20%.
The major oil companies will bid
on and win those leases.
And if they're put up for lease
at 25%.
The major oil companies will bid
on and win those leases at 25%.
That won't change. The small oil
companies aren't bidding on
these parcels.
First off,
Secondly, um, is in terms of
what keeps companies here?
Um
I, I think you alluded to first
and foremost that
We have some of the best.
Plays in the world.
And so your expenses might be a
little higher.
So are your profits.
And that keeps companies here.
I would also say there are other
factors. And so there's, there's
been the comment of, oh, well,
the feds, um, they, their rate
is lower.
Well, we also have a state land
office.
That is a partner in these
projects, that is responsive,
uh, that is, um,
You know, forthright, that, you
know, works with these companies
in a way that the feds, uh,
either can't or don't.
And, you know, so we have a
strong partner in our state land
office, and I think that also
helps keep companies in this
state. Thank you, Mr. Chair and
thank you, Chairman, for those
answers.
I don't know why like.
Debating with you, I just do
keep going.
Mhm
Mr. Chair, and, and Chairman,
why do the independents not bid
on these leases. Why are they
not bidding on it?
Mr. Chairman Representative, I
think this is a really important
point because there's been a lot
of comments about um, you know,
independence being pushed out,
you know, IPNM at the last
committee hearing, stood up and
said, you know, the reality is
that 20%, we really can't get
it. That way that our auctions
work is we put up a lease.
For public auction, and it has a
lease term in it, you know,
whether it's 20, whether it's
going to be 25%. But then it's a
competitive open bidding
process. And the reason why it's
a competitive open bidding
process is because, as has been
discussed, we were given these
lands by the federal government,
uh, when we became a state and
some actually as a territory,
with the specific legal mandate
that we generate money for the
school kids. If the
Department of Transportation
comes to us and says, we want a
right of way for a public road.
We say, how much?
We legally have to charge other
state agencies for the use of
state trust land.
So in the auction setting, the
reason why the big guys get it
is they've got deep pockets,
right? And there's billions of
dollars to be made in the
premium. So, you know, nobody's
preventing any of these
companies from bidding, but
ultimately regardless of what
that lease rate is, if you have
a company that is a multibillion
dollar company. Guess what?
They'll probably give us 4
million for that parcel, where a
small independent company, you
know, maybe could afford
800,000.
And, and that's just a reality,
that's free market. And to your
question, I just want to hit on
this very briefly about, you
know, taxes and, and a piece of
meat.
I, I think as you described it,
You know, I'm gonna take the
groundbreaking, you know,
statement that like, I don't
like taxes either. Nobody likes
taxes. But taxes are something
that we apply, uh, on an
activity across the board
regardless of whether, you know,
the public owns something. A
royalty is something the public
owns. If you sell your house, if
you put it up for market,
something you own and you're
asking for a share of that, uh,
and, and so it's not just taking
off the top.
Because it's a tax, you know,
the government skimming.
This is the sale.
Of a public resource. And that's
why the commissioner
You'd mentioned, you know,
you're a businessman, and, and
you look through that lens, she
has to look through the lens of
she's a businesswoman. And, and
that's the legal obligation that
she has been charged with when
she did her oath and became land
commissioner. So this is not
anti-oil and gas, um,
This industry contributes.
A tremendous amount.
And we appreciate that. The
school kids benefit.
But it is our job to ensure that
we're getting that market rate.
But it's, it's not anti-oil and
gas in any way.
Thank you, Mr. Chair, and, and
thank you Mr. Stewart for that.
It just for me, it just has that
feel. It just feels like it.
And that's the only thing I
can't substantiate that, it just
feels like it. And, you know,
All the, all the
If you were in that business.
And you knew that there was 23
bills that would impact your
business, you would have one
would just have to think, man,
this don't seem very friendly.
Don't seem like a very friendly
state.
Because the bottom line is I'm
not gonna make the money that I
was making yesterday because
they passed legislation and it
is going to get into my pockets
more and more.
So
Mr. Chair and, and
Chairman
And Mr. Stewart, this is
actually directed towards you. I
hired quite a few questions
asked towards you, where, where
you didn't have the data, like
how many people, how many
whales.
And I know we do a lot of
studies.
Have we done a study on this? Do
we know what the impacts are? I
thought I heard you say you
didn't know what the impact was
going to be, but do we know what
the impact's going to be.
So Mr. Chairman Representative,
yes, I mean, we do have a clear
idea in terms of impact moving
forward, we have a clear idea
and we've got 6000 leases in
terms of state trust land. I
know what's happening on state
Trust land, um, the, the comment
in terms of not uh having a
specific figure was in response
to the question of if this
legislature had uh uh passed the
law, you know, 6 years ago, when
we had first put it, put it
forward, how
how much money would we have
made since then, and I, I don't
know that. I mean, it's tens of
millions, but I, I don't know
that. Uh, but, uh, there is a
fiscal analysis and we have, you
know, different assumptions in
here in terms of the outlook and
um, you know, will we
You know, is it always gonna be
100% precise. No, but it's, it's
based on, uh, you know,
Also LFC, SIC, they've also
weighed in here in terms of the
fiscal analysis.
think Mister Chair and thank
you.
Mr. Stewart, what about job
losses?
Can they predict that? Could
they give us an idea of what it
was gonna, what it would be.
Is that even feasible? Can, can
you run a study like that?
Mr. Tribson and Vincent.
If you're asking about job
losses from their, from this
bill, there's no indication that
there would be job losses.
But you, one might think that it
could happen. We just don't know
what that impact would be, and
we don't know how to really go
after that, Mr. Chair of Saint
Vincent, I, I would not think
that would happen. I think the
job losses in the industry has
largely come from the industry,
um, figuring out how to do
things without humans, you know,
so they're employing fewer
people. I think that accelerated
during the pandemic, uh, I think
you can see that in almost any
industry, you know, you know,
these are premium tracks if
these get
out, um, there will be drilling
activity, not a loss of jobs.
Thank you, Mr. Chair, and, and
thank you, Chairman. Another
question I had was the
royalties.
And I'm not an old guy, but I
just picked this up.
Exploratory, is there royalties
that get charged to exploratory
stuff, and on the exploratory
versus producing is that the
same royalty, Mr. Chairman
Representative, thank you for
the opportunity to, to kind of
clarify that a little bit. So
all that we're talking about
here are called development
leases where you have proven
areas, you know, uh, we know
there's uh production and, and
the current range is between
1875% and 20%. Um, we do have
other leases and exploratory
lease, for example, and that
royalty rate is 12.5%. So, um,
you know, we wouldn't be using
this lease, uh, which we're
discussing today in a situation
where somebody was just
exploring for oil and gas, and
it wasn't proven that there was
a value there.
Thank you, Mr. Chair, and I'm
wrapping up, Mr. Chair.
I guess my final, my final
question is gonna be,
And Mr. Chair, you can tell me
if I'm out of line. I just feel
is this what is built like this,
is it phasing out oil and gas?
Just yes or no.
It's got to know that for
myself, Mr. Chair.
Mr. Chair, represent Vincent,
no.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Thank you
presenters.
Thank you very much,
Representative Vincent. Uh,
next, we're gonna go to
Representative Brown, please,
then you, Mr. Chairman and thank
you, um, representative and Mr.
Stewart.
I'm gonna ask a few questions
and I'm gonna make a few
observations. So, Mr. Chairman,
I, I've heard it said a few
times that the state land office
has an obligation to maximize
return, uh, Mr. Speaker,
gentlemen, uh, Mister, Mr.
Speaker, um, Mr. Chairman, Mr.
Mr. Chair. It's getting late in
the session. Uh, is that
accurate?
Um, uh, Mr. Jason Brown, yes,
it's uh in the enabling
legislation.
Well, very good. Uh,
Since that's the case, Mr.
Chairman, and, um, Mr. Chairman,
why are we not looking at a
Uh royalty cap of 30% or 40%.
Mr. Chairs Brown, uh, during the
floor debate last year on this
bill, um, Leader Lane suggested
removing the cap altogether and
offered to take him up on that.
Uh, and you could charge a fair
market rate, and that would be
appropriate.
Mr. Mr. Chairman, he's no longer
here, so I'll, I'll let that one
pass. Um, I think it was
probably to make a point, which
is what I'm trying to do here as
well, Mr. Chairman. Um, I think
we do have to look at what our
uh neighboring oil producing
states are doing, and uh not be
uh more onerous than what they
are, so, um, Mister, Mr.
Chairman and um Mr. Chairman.
Um, I'm gonna ask.
A little bit about the selection
of which properties to focus on,
uh, of course, these are, um,
this is the Permian.
And um we're looking at counties
that I represent at Inley
Counties.
Um
is a royalty rate currently is
the current royalty rate.
Being assessed statewide, Mr.
Chair.
Um, Mr. Cheubson Brown, uh, no,
uh, there are a variety of
royalty rates as we were
discussing, there's uh different
uh royalty rates for different
resources and for uh better uh
developed proven fields uh in in
uh different areas. They, um, so
there is, there is some market
pressure below the cap.
But then, then you get up to
this cap currently set at 20%
and it, it limits it.
Um, so, in, in
Mr. Chair, Ros Brown, you know,
to your question of, of why not
set at 30 or 40 or not have a a
a cap.
We picked 25 because
Um, the, the structure in the
past has been to have a cap. And
so we're sort of honoring that
past practice. And we think 25
is reflective of the market,
because we know that's what's
being charged in Texas, and we
know that's what's being charged
on private lands. So it just
seemed like the right number,
but, you know, to your point of
why have a capital? I mean,
that, that, that was the answer.
Um, we're just, we're keeping in
that consistent with that
practice, but we think 25 is, is
the
right number at the time.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and uh
representative. So, um, the bill
actually has a fill in the
blank, uh, oil and gas lease
form, it's called a development
form and
It's um where you, you actually
put in the the dollar figure of
the royalty, um.
And I heard you say, Mr. Chair,
Mr. Chair, that uh it might vary
depending on uh where in the
state and and what what is it,
what is there?
I'm just wondering if this bill
because it clearly targets, and
we look at these leaps and downs
description or whatever you want
to call them, it targets the
Permian, and these are
considered premium.
How is that not unconstitutional
special legislation.
Mr. Chair.
Mr. Chairman Representative, so,
you know, in I think you're
referring to the Constitutional
provision that prohibits, you
know, us to just apply something
to one county, uh, pass a
special law. So, you know, this
is something that we looked at,
um, in the, in the drafting of
the bill. Um, a couple of things
that I would point to. The way
that we draw these blocks, um,
is something that we've been
doing since the 30s, um,
actually the 1920s, the first
restricted zone.
Where we drew that and sometimes
it follows county lines and
sometimes it doesn't. But the
reason why those two counties
are included in, as well as a
sliver of Roosevelt and a sliver
of Chavez.
You know, it's where the basin
is, and it's where the resources
and as you can see, you know, in
your maps, in the, in the FIR,
um, you know, it's
That's where it is. Um, and
that's where the resource is, so
that's where the geographic
boundaries were were drawn. Um,
so we don't have any concerns at
all in terms of
constitutionality.
Mr. Chairman and Mr. Chairman, I
guess I do have some concerns.
Um,
I think, uh, apparently there's
a lot of complexity to what you
do and what you factor, but I
think if you just um
Uh, let it be the way it is now,
you've got a, you know, you're
trying to raise the cap. I
understand that, but um I still
think it targets
Whether you intended or not, and
I, I guess you do intend it to
um to actually have an effect,
uh, Eddie Lee County in the
main.
Um, Mr. Speaker and gentlemen, I
want to focus now on the
beneficiaries. OK.
Um
We know that oil and gas keeps
the state afloat.
Um
I believe the figure I heard
recently is that we recently
received in the last fiscal year
$13 billion from the industry to
the benefit of the state
coffers.
And that's about uh it ended up
being about 49%.
Of the state budget, and I
believe just a few years ago I
heard the the figure 53%.
So Mr. Speaker and gentlemen,
we, we do have, I'd say several
categories of beneficiaries.
Not just the obvious ones of the
state higher ed institutions,
the school of the blind all
those that benefit out of um
severance tax proceeds.
But we also have um
People in general, all of us,
consumers who um
Uh
Need oil and gas for our modern
lives, most, I mean, everything
we buy practically is somewhat
dependent on on that.
Um, so I think there's a nexus
between an increased cost of
doing business.
And the cost of living.
And what I see this doing, if
this passes, Mr. Chair, it would
put pressure.
I mean, that cost is at some
point going to get passed on to
the consumer, and I think we've
done enough of that during this
session of increasing the cost
of living in New Mexico, but
that's my opinion, um.
Mr. Chairman, also we have a
category of people employed by
the industry whose livelihoods
depend on it.
And what I see happening there
is, Mr. Chair, there are some
companies, whether they're
majors or mini majors or
independents, they may just say
this is not a good state to do
business anymore. We'll move our
operations to another state, oil
and gas producing state, and
that can happen. I believe it
will happen to some extent. So
it's not, you know, it's not so
cut and dry as the way I see it.
Mr. Chairman, um,
And Mr. Chairman, Mr. Stewart,
Um, it's been said a couple of
times that royalties are not
taxes.
I don't really care what we call
it. The point is it's a payment
that has to be made.
Whether you're, whatever label
you give it, it's still a cost
to somebody, and that's the
people doing the production
work.
Mr. Chairman, it looks like if
I'm looking at the um most
current fiscal impact report.
If this passes,
And goes into law and fiscal
year 2028, it might produce for
the state up to $50 million of
extra revenue. And then in the
fiscal year after that, FY 29,
it may go up to 75 million. When
Mr. Chair and panel, I would
wonder if we wouldn't lose.
That kind of value if people
move their operations out of New
Mexico, we lose residents of New
Mexico. We lose their
contributions to our communities
and so I wonder if that's really
enough of uh our justification
for this bill.
And then finally, I'll just say,
Mr. Chairman, um, that
I think we're so often working
at cross purposes.
We know we depend on oil and gas
to fund our state services.
Our agencies and so forth.
But since I've been here and
it's now I'm in my um
starting my 15th year, I
believe.
I've seen so many anti-oil and
gas bills. I probably couldn't
even count them.
And
So where it cross purposes,
there are some people who are
always pressing to shutter the
oil and gas industry, and yet we
know we depend on it.
So heavily
So I just think this is bad
policy anytime we do things to
Retard business and um.
You know, end up with losing
jobs in our state. I just think
that is not good policy, and so,
obviously, um, for the sake of
my constituents and I believe
the whole state, I will not be
supporting the bill.
Mr. Chairman, thank you. Thank
you, Representative Brown. Uh,
next we're gonna go to
representative Duncan, please.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Um, Mr.
Chair, Mr. Chair, I'm like my
friend over there, I don't like
to debate you, so I'm gonna
debate Mr. Stewart.
Um.
So just this morning in tax,
we've passed a massive tax on
oil and gas.
If you had a chance to think
about that.
And um Stewart, Miss Jeremy
Stewart, and tell us, tell me
what that's gonna do to the.
The overall tax to the oil and
gas.
Mr. Chairman, Representative,
no, it's not something that I
was following this morning.
Thank you, uh, Mr. Chair and Ms.
Stewart.
Um
I would think that that would
interest you.
Because of the money, you have
constitutional duty to make sure
that you're taking care of our
kids.
And I would think that you would
think about that.
When those bills are coming
through, all 23 of them, Mr.
Chair and Mister Stewart.
Mr. Chairman Representative, we
try to follow as many bills at
one time as we can, but as you
know,
There's a lot happening in the
building, and we can't follow it
in every single committee, um,
uh, we definitely pay attention
to things that impact our office
and, you know, follow the
industry and I don't doubt
that's a consequential
consequential piece of
legislation, but it's, it's not
something that I watched the
debate on this morning.
Thank you, Mr. Chair, and, and
Miss Stewart, can you tell me,
um,
Have you ever looked at the New
Mexico Tax Research Institute
studies.
Mr. Chairman Representative in
the past, uh, uh, it's been
referred to and I, I did look at
it, um, uh, not, not recently.
Um, and it's been referred to
and it kind of commingles
royalties and taxes together and
and that's been something that's
been discussed as part of the
hearings.
Thank you, Mr. Chair and Mr.
Stewart. Um,
In a tax or in that New Mexico
tax research institute study
that was done.
Um, and the last one that I'm
aware of, Texas is at a 14.8,
and we're at a 20.7 already.
So that's why I was wondering if
you had looked at that recently
or?
Seeing that Miss chair and Miss
Stewart, Mr. Chairman
Representative, you know, the
numbers that we've been going
off of are the LFC numbers,
which have the effective tax
rates comparing to Texas and um,
you know, we've talked a little
bit about this, but it can be
apples and oranges and um
So
Miss Chair, Miss, I, I actually
believe you on that. I think it
could be apples and oranges.
Um, with that, um, but I think
it might be reversed.
Between Texas and New Mexico. So
with that in mind, um, realizing
that it's your constitutional
duty to make sure you um,
You make as much money as you
can for the kids in the state.
Can you tell me what you charged
for.
Wind and solar.
Mr. Chairman Representative, it
depends on each individual
project. So we have probably
about 7 different ways that we
would charge, um, you've got,
uh, on one hand per acre, uh,
charges, then you have
installation fees that you put
in a new turbine, um, and then
we've got calculations where for
each megawatt they produce, we
would get a share of that
revenue as well. Um, so it, it
gets a little bit
You know, it's complicated,
depends on each one, but, um,
uh, we try to, you know, in that
context, unlike the oil and gas
context, where the lease is
actually in statute and has been
in statute since the 1970s. Um,
In that context, we can
negotiate the deal with the
company and we're able to try to
get as much as we possibly can
that the market will bear.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman Stewart.
Can you tell me what, let's just
say 1 acre solar farm on an acre
of property.
Mr. Chairman Representative, so
it, I wish I could, but so if
you've got a 25,000 acre
project, you're going to have a
smaller per acre charge than if
you have a uh 150 acre project.
It's going to be a higher, we
have a variety of charges as
they go through, so they
initially have a due diligence
charge, and it might be a couple
bucks per acre, and then it
ramps up and uh once they become
operational, it's a higher
charge, um.
But, you know, you look at the
per acre charge for an oil and
gas lease, which is also in
statute, and, you know, we can't
charge more than $1 per acre, so
we, we've definitely charged
more than that.
Thank you, Mr. Chair and Mr.
Stewart, can you give me a, just
give me a broad range.
Just ballpark, Mr. Chairman
Representative, I think probably
the due diligence in the $2 and
then maybe going up to, you
know, uh, 10 or 12 an acre, but,
but that's not really where you
get the value, you get the
value, uh, when, uh, they put in
a turban, and then you have the
megawatt and you know,
production, but, um, let me give
you a concrete example. Um, so,
uh, the pattern wind project is
a big one, for, for New Mexico,
it's the largest wind farm in.
in the northern hemisphere, this
is Sunzia feeds into it. We made
50 million off of the Sunzia
line, uh, and the project, uh,
the pattern project is expected
to bring in around $300 million
in terms of revenue over the
life of the project. So it's,
it's real money.
That we're trying to negotiate
and get from the companies.
OK.
Um, I was at the project that
Mr. Cher may throw a pencil at
me. Is that the project we just
gave away money on?
Mr. Chairman, I'm not sure what
that's referring to.
I'll, I'll withdraw my question.
I think that's a legal term
there, uh Mr. Chairman. Um,
And, and I guess what I'm trying
to, trying to say here is this,
um, we don't have any problem
going after the oil and gas
industry, but I've never seen us
go after a solar farm and say
you need to start paying up,
because if we're going to get
rid of oil, and I don't think we
can, I think we got 200 year
supply, and we better because
our kids need it because we're
50th.
And I'm hoping in the next 50
years, we can get out of that
hole and, and become better.
So we need that oil and gas. We
need that production. Um, and I
don't think anybody in this room
would say that they're not
willing to pay their pay their
fair shares.
And I think what they're saying
and what they've said is after
23 bills, $150 million worth of
new taxes this year is that
fair?
And I think that's what we need
to ask ourselves. You're not
just in the business of making
the most you can for your kids,
I believe you're in the business
of making the most you can for
your kids, but not at a cost of
destroying a community.
And that's the problem I have
with this.
You're going after communities.
And that's where the rubber
meets the road is communities.
So Mr. Chair.
I don't like this one bit. I
don't think we're talking apples
to apples.
I don't think a study's been
done.
I think that needs to be done
during the interim, and let's
then let's look at it
realistically. Apples to apples,
and, and then we, I think we can
get a better idea of exactly
what's taking place, but right
now it's very unfair to an
industry that provides so much.
Not only the communities, but to
the state.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Thank you.
Uh, next, we're going to go to.
Um, Representative Silva and
then represented.
Thank you, Chair. Thank you,
Representative, um, an expert,
um, I was also in Texan Rev this
morning, so this has been on my
mind all day, um, I am
wondering, uh, one, do you know?
Um, how much profit oil and gas
wells generated since 2021 in
the lower 48.
Mr. Chair, presenters, Mr.
Chairman Representative many
billions, but I don't have.
That exact number.
On this
Community and industry generated
about 485 billion since 2021 in
the lower 48. Um, and so, again,
just reminding um us and those
watching this is not a mom and
pop industry and um that
The payment made for the
privilege of taking a resource
from New Mexico is, um, are
these rates?
And so, um, so I appreciate the
pill and um I know I've heard
others say that there were about
23 bills, uh, introduced
regarding oil and gas in this
legislative session, is that, is
that correct? something like
that,
Mr. Chair, Mr. Chair and so the,
uh, that number has been
repeated multiple times. I, I
have not done the account.
Thank you, Mr. Chair and
Representative, um, I'm also
wondering, do you know how many
bills were introduced in Texas,
uh, regarding, uh, oil or gas.
Mr. Chair, presenters
so I did not.
277. So, and I think Texas is
seen as very friendly to oil and
gas, and so, um, I think to
compare the amount of
legislation introduced just
indicates an interest, desire,
and, and need to have good
relationships and, um, and, and
good guardrails in place for an
industry like this, um, that
matters so much to the state. So
thank you for the bill, um, and
I'll yield. Thank you, Mr.
Chair. Thank you. OK, we're
gonna go to.
We'll go back, uh,
representative Pettigrew, and
then we'll go to the vice chair
and I might have a question.
Thank you, Mr. Chair, thank you,
gentlemen, um, as I understand
it, we're just these are just a
few tracks in the in the Permian
Basin that are the best of the
best and, and companies will
compete, uh, on a competitive
market, uh for the for the right
to uh drill it. Is that correct?
Mr. Terrebs and Pereira, yes.
Um
You know, I too am not an expert
in in oil, but I did learn a
Water and as everybody on this
committee knows, I, I'm, I'm
poor produced water, I think we
need every drop of water we can
get, but I, I asked the same
question because we're talking a
lot here about the, um, you
know, the independence that
seems to be a big matter of
concern and, and that was my
question when I was talking
about produced water and I, I
asked an executive from Chevron.
I said, well, you know, how
does, how will this affect, you
know, at the time we were doing
a, we were.
doing a fee and a tax on them.
And I said, well, how will this
affect the independence. They
said, well, really Susan, the
big companies go in and they
kinda, they drill and they take
kind of the best of the best and
when those that
And that oil production gets
limited, then they kind of sell
the rights to the independents,
and they come in and that's a
market niche in in the oil
business as I understand it, and
the independents come in and
then they start drilling, they
don't get as as uh as big a
volume, but they know what the
expenses are, and they're
willing to take that risk. Mr.
Stewart is, is that your
understanding of how it works?
Mr. Chairman representative, I
think that's the correct
characterization. Thank you.
uh, Mr. Chair, um, so what I'm
saying,
So what I'm saying is, um.
It, it's, it's kind of like the
food business, you know, you can
buy McDonald's franchise and do
all the rules and get them or
you could have a food truck,
right? There are different
niches in a in a business
climate and, and I don't think
you should compare what the
independs do to what the, you
know, top 10 desk because it's a
totally different market. It
would you agree with that, Mr.
Stewart and Mr. Chair.
Mr. Chairman, Representative,
yes. So I also want to say when
you say there's 20.
3 bills in this house, Mr. Chair
and gentlemen, um,
You know, it's not like uh it's
rare that you have the Sierra
Club in the top 10 oil companies
in alignment on uh produced
water, but they were, and we
pulled that out. So even though,
even though we had a bill, I'm
just saying oil and gas one on
that one. So I just want to
point that out because it's like
they're losing everything, and
I, I don't know what the 23
bills are, and I haven't gone
and watched it, but I certainly
know oil and gas got their way
on my bill, so.
I, I just want to state that for
the record. Thank you. And, and
to just say that really I would
have to see the 23 bills and see
what the amendments are and see
what really passed and see what
really moved forward in the
house and we're, we'll really
eventually go forward and be
signed by the governor into law.
That's really the question here,
and we won't know that until
this session is over, but I, I
would just like for the record
to show Mr. Chair and gentlemen,
that, you know, oil and gas has
a
A pretty strong voice in this
house, and, and, uh, and we do
listen to them. We do try to
take care of them, but I support
this bill because I think, I
think we've really, really need
this, and I, and I think we are
gonna need it for the future and
with that, I'll rest, Mister
Chair. Great, thank you very
much, Representative Vedetta.
OK, uh, we're gonna go
backresentative Pettigrew, did
you have some questions?
Thank you, Chairman and thank
you for a second time around.
Um
I think my uh colleagues have
asked the questions that I need
to ask.
So you back. OK, thank you very
much. uh, Vice Chair Dixon.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Um, thank
you. Um,
Jeremy Queen and Mr. Stewart,
um, a number of my questions
have also been answered, um, so
I can scratch those off my list.
Um, quickly, can the state land
office, Mr. Chair, uh, Mr.
Stewart, reduced the royalty
rate that you charged, and I
think you've answered this, but
I just want to confirm. If you
put a, a bid or, you know, open
up the auction for ract of land
and you start at 25% and it
doesn't sell, you can reduce
that.
Uh, rate, is that correct? Mr.
Chairman Representative, that's
correct. If it doesn't sell, we
could put it up at the next uh.
Sae at a lower rate.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Thank you,
Mr. Stewart. So that's free
market.
Working, is that correct? Mr.
Chairman Representative, that's
correct.
Thank you. Uh, Mr. Chair, Mr.
Stewart, how much, what's the
average, um, bid on.
A high quality track.
Mr. Chairman Representative, so
it depends a lot on, are we
putting up, uh, an 80 or 80 acre
parcel, is it a 320 acre parcel.
So there's a lot of different
factors, uh, but we might make
$6 million off of, and that's
the bonus bid just for the right
to get the lease or it might be
1.5 million. I mean, it can
range, um,
Depending on the specifics. Mr.
Chair, Mr. Stewart, so just to
follow, so when there's a tract
of land that comes up, um, and a
company bids and wins. Um, there
could be the one time payment
called a bonus.
Bit right, and that could be,
you know, 1 million to 6
million, something like that.
And then, um,
Mr. Chair, Mr. Stewart, I am
trying to to learn a bit more
about exactly how um oil and gas
operations, uh, function and so
uh Mr. Chair, Mr. Stewart, if I
may, I'd like to walk through a
little bit of the mass problems
that I've done.
Um, and you can tell me if I'm
Off track.
Uh, Mr. Chair, Mr. Stewart, uh,
my information says based on the
EIA that uh a well in the
Permian um could produce on
average, 1300 barrels per day.
Mr. Chairman Representative,
that sounds about right.
Thank you.
Mr. Chair, Mr. Stewart, I know
that oil and gas prices are
falling.
Um, they were much higher at the
beginning of the session, but.
Mr. Chair, Mr. Stewart, I used a
$70.
Uh, price point.
So
Mr. Chair, Mr. Stewart, one day
of operation, one day, uh, would
result in $97,000 based on that
1300 per day and a $70 price,
OK?
And then, uh, Mr. Chair, Mr.
Stewart, if you multiply that by
30 for 30 days in a month. Um,
that's $2.9 million. Um, Mr.
Chair, Mr. Stewart, I, when I
was looking, I came across a
figure and I think probably
there are folks in the audience
that would have much more exact.
Figures, but um an approximate
monthly operating cost of around
$30,000 for a well in the
Permian.
Mr. Chairman Representative, I
think it depends on the
You know, the specific well
large, but.
I, I, I have no reason to doubt
that. Thank you. I, you know, it
did, it did show me a, a range
and I went on the higher end, to
be fair. Um, so if you take the
monthly, uh, monetary value,
less the operating costs. That's
2.8, almost $2.9 million still
and then here's my question.
The royalty rate, and if we're
just looking at a monthly thing.
Um,
The royalty, if it was at 25%.
That comes off the 2.8 million.
Mr. Chairman Representative, the
royalty rate is
They would remit to us, and we
would get a percentage of
basically what the price and the
production is in the field.
OK. So, Mr. Chair, and I
appreciate the latitude here
because this is very helpful for
me to understand how all of this
works.
So, um, if we were to take 25%
of that $2.9 million that would
be a royalty rate, or, you know,
remittance of $720,000 and
that's for that month. Um, and
so then, uh, Mr. Chair, uh, Mr.
Stewart, that would leave the
company before taxes with $2.1
million and then Mr. Chair, um,
Mr. Stewart, I went with the
average of 20% taxes.
Although I, I do think that's
might be a little high, but it's
definitely a number we've all
talked about. So with that,
that's $432,000 that the company
would still be paying in taxes.
Um, but
Mr. Chair, Mr. Stewart.
If you looked at that for the
entire year, and so then my next
page of notes is multiplying
that by 12. I come up with
$8.6 million in royalties, $25.9
million in profit, um, of that
$6.5 million would go to taxes
and then
On that one well.
It would be a net of $19.5
million.
Just am I, I, I realized that
there is a lot more that goes
into the calculations, but am I
following in a 30,000 ft.
Yeah.
Yeah, Mr. Chairman,
Representative, yes. Thank you.
Um,
That was the one thing, because
I, for me, it was important to
understand what the
How the actual royalty effects
profit and how taxes affect
profit, so um that was very
helpful. Um, Mr. Chair, uh, and
I think this is for for Chair
McQueen, you might have a better
idea. We've talked a lot about
the number of bills um that have
That are potentially punitive
toward the oil and gas industry.
I was wondering um if you have a
count of how many of those have
passed the house floor.
Um, Mr. Chair, Representative
Dixon, I think that's a great
question. I mean, we typically
introduce over 1000 bills far
fewer of those get passed, I
think, um.
Only a small handful of bills
had passed both chambers, uh, so
there may be a lot of bills out
there, but I, I think the, the
point you're getting at is very
few actually get enacted.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Um, thank
you, Mr. Chair.
Um
Sorry, I have 2 pages of
questions, but I'm skipping
some. Um, Mr. Chair, Mr.
Stewart, um, of the, um,
Royalties that are paid to the
state. Um, you have a nice
little pie chart, and if I'm not
mistaken, um, there was a very
tiny amount of royalties that
are being paid from New
Mexico-based companies, is that
correct?
Mr. Chairman Representative,
that's correct, about 1%. About
1%, so 99% are outside of New
Mexico. Mr. Chairman
Representative, that's correct.
Mr. Chair, Mr. Stewart, where
are
Most, where are those companies
located for the most part? Mr.
Chairman, uh, uh, we've got a
representative, we've got Texas,
Oklahoma and Colorado, I think
are the big ones. OK. Mr. Chair,
um, and Mr. Stewart, and I
recognize that there's a whole
variety of types of companies
that would be paying these
royalties, right? We're gonna
have some companies like
Chevron, ConocoPhillips, Exxon,
and then we're gonna have some
privately owned companies, um,
and then probably some smaller
ones if we look at
ra do the ones from Colorado,
right?
Um
Mr. Chair, Mr. Stewart, what a
couple of years ago.
If I'm not mistaken, oil and gas
companies, um, sort of
calibrated and redirected what
they were doing with their
profits. Um, am I correct that
um instead of reinvesting as
much. There was movement at the
national level for oil and gas
companies to return money to
shareholders.
Mr. Chairman Representative, I
think that happened with quite a
few of the large companies.
Um
Mr. uh, Chair, Mr. Stewart, um,
I don't suppose there's any way
to know if those shareholders
live in New Mexico.
Mr. Chairman Representative, I
do not know.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Thank you,
uh, Mr. Stewart. Probably some
do and probably some of our
pension funds and things like
that, um, are also receiving the
benefit of that. Um,
Last question, um, before I make
a final comment. Uh, when we
talk about best of the best,
what does that mean? Is that the
quality of the oil itself and
how it's gonna, um, sort of get
Parsed out or is it based on the
potential production amount that
you're gonna get, Mr. Chairman
Representative, I think that's a
really good question because I
think there's some concern that
I've heard in the past that the
land office would just be
picking parcels that really
aren't valuable and calling him
the best and the best. So
separate from this bill, there's
an existing law in 19103, um,
that sets out the statutory
provisions that determine how
are classified.
Petroleum engineers at the land
office value different parcels
to be able to put them up and
determine whether they are a
premium, whether 25% if just
passed, or 20% rate, and you
have a variety of factors. Um,
there's 5 of them. Some of them,
uh, uh relate to the the
resource in the ground, uh, and
then others, uh, are gonna
relate to, you know, nearby
sales, and they, oh, well, this
parcel right next door went for
something really high. Uh, but
it
that statute is what guides the
land office.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Thank you,
Mr. Stewart. So, um, I just want
to close with, with a couple
thoughts here. Number one, I
really hope that uh when our
chair is chair of LFC, um, this
next summer, we can, um, take
some time to visit. I'd really
like to visit a small
independent producer, um, and
learn more about how they
operate and uh things like that
as compared to a large operator,
um, I, I think that would be a
great experience for a number of
us to really see because I do,
there is a huge.
difference. Um, and our
independence, I believe, are
very important to this state.
Um, that being said, I also
think regulatory certainty is
important, and I recognize that
our legislature, uh, when we're
in session, we, uh, provide a
lot of uncertainty, but I think
some of the certainty comes at
the end of the session when we
know what has passed and what
hasn't. Um,
And finally, um, in terms of
The money now.
Versus later, these funds will
go into our permanent funds and
we'll have a benefit down the
road. Is that correct, Mr.
Chairman Representative, that's
correct, because royalty is um
go to the permanent fund and
then you've got a, you know, 7%
target return, you've got
interest, you've got compounding
interest, um, that's where you
make money on the money, and,
you know, you get a 5 to 1
return on every $1 we put in in
terms of the money that comes
out of the permanent fund.
And money coming out of the
permanent fund is all money that
you all don't need to come up
with in terms of general funds,
and it's all money that the
taxpayers in New Mexico and the
working families don't need to
come up with.
Thank you. Um, Mr. Chair, I
think most folks know that I
really believe that we need to
diversify our economy, and so I
appreciate the, you know, that
we have appropriated
funds to do that.
Sorry, um, and, you know, I did
support this legislation last
year. This is a different year.
Um, that being said, um, at this
point,
I'm, I plan to support it
because I think that this is a
different aspect that we are
discussing, as opposed to um
The tax package that passed this
morning, for instance. So thank
you, Mr. Chair.
Great. Thank you very much,
Representative Dixon. Uh, I
just, uh, great discussion.
Thank you committee. Um, I want
to note the inclusion here of um
a sort of a clear legal
provision about not
cancellation, not canceling
leases.
Uh, I want to thank the land
office for including that in um
the
the ability to diversify,
including in things like water
and others that Sara and others
have talked about is very
important, um, as well to throw
that out there. OK, with that,
we're gonna go, we'll ask the
vice chair for a motion, um, and
then we'll go to a roll call.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. I move
that um.
Committee substitute for Senate
Bill 23.
You know, uh, we pass, pass. OK,
uh, with a motion and a 2nd for
passage of Senate Finance
Committee substitute for Senate
Bill 23. Can we go ahead and
have the roll call, please?
Representative Baca.
Representative Brown, no.
Representative Chatfield.
Mhm
Representative Doll.
No.
Representative Duncan.
Surprised, but no.
Representative Garrett
Representative Hernandez,
Representative Herndon, yes.
Representative Pereira, yes.
Representative Little. Yes.
Representative Lujan.
Yes.
Representative Pettigrew.
Representative Sanchez.
No.
Representative Sariana.
Representative Silva.
Yes. Representative Vincent.
Vice Chair Dixon.
Yes
Chas small.
OK, we have
8 in the negative and 9 in the
affirmative.
Great. OK, thank you very much.
Thank you, members. Thank you,
chair. Thank you Mr. Chair.
OK, uh, members, we're gonna
sort of reduce our agenda, but
we are gonna go to uh House Bill
493 represent Borego. Thank you.
Ask you to come on up.
Mr. Chair, can we take stretch
breaks.
Uh, uh, we're, we're, I imagine
the committee I'm just kidding
hearing some murmurings from the
committee, uh, but we would
invite you to, I know you've
worked with our staff, uh, so
invite you to be very brief,
excited to have you here tonight
and go ahead, please.
We will be very brief, Mister
Chair. I know everyone's tired,
um.
Mr. Chair and and uh
representatives, uh, tonight you
have House Bill 493. Um, I just
also wanted to introduce my
co-sponsor, um, Senator Peter
Wirth, who also had Senate bill,
355.
And uh we actually have combined
our bills, so I think it's
really a good thing when we when
we're able to do that.
Um, so the bill before you, I'm
just gonna quickly tell you what
it is. Our goal in this bill is
it seeks to codify guidelines
for DFA and state agencies to
safeguard and manage fund
disbursements to local entities
of capital outlay and other
special appropriations as the
late legislature intended, it
seeks to provide.
Support to local entities to use
the funds while providing
guardrails for grant management
and audit requirements. It also
includes force Maure um
provision which allows for the
waiver of the strict compliance
of this act for emergency or
life threatening occurrences in
the state in in summary, it
enables a grantee to work with
the state agency grantor to
resolve audit deficiencies, it
contains fiscal agent.
requirements, non-audit
guarantee requirements.
Uh, forced measure, uh,
provisions, as I already
mentioned, and an appeal
process. And um I also would
like to introduce
Uh, my expert witness.
Sister.
He, um, Madam Vice Chair.
I know where the chair went, um,
Ricky Bajarna.
Bejarano.
OK.
The
deputy state auditor and also
Dave Pena, who's the policy
director.
For the uh state auditor.
Um, thank you. uh,
Representative, are we, uh,
working off of the um.
committee substitute, is that
correct, Madam, uh, Chair, yes,
in fact, we are working out of
out of committee substitute and
the the reference number is
0.231860.3.
Great. Um.
Could I have a motion to.
Second,
OK, great. Um, Jackie, I don't
know if you caught that. Let's
see, so moved was.
Uh, Representative Chatfield,
2nd Representative Luhan.
Um.
Do we, so I guess, uh, anything
substantially different in the
substitute, or shall we go to
public comment?
Madam Chair, the primary
difference is of
course measure section and uh
additional relief valves.
To get uh especially small local
public bodies in compliance and
allowing them assistance.
Thank you. um.
Why don't we we adopt.
The move to adopt the
substitute. OK, all right, we
have a motion to adopt the
committee substitute.
But
And a second from uh
Representative Sanchez. OK, so
we've got the committee
substitute that we're all
working off of, um, is there
anyone in attendance who would
like to make public comment on
house Bill.
9 493.
Sorry, was there any objection
to adopting adoption.
Adopting the committee
substitute. No. No. OK. Thank
you. All right, and I didn't see
anyone in person. Was there
anyone online? If so, raise your
hand.
I wanted to speak on 493.
Nope. All right, wonderful. Uh,
I think we're ready for
committee questions. Um, we
have, uh, Representative Duncan,
Representative Chatfield, and
Herrera.
Thank you Madam Chair. Um, I, I
just was wondering how this
bill, um,
And I'm a little fuzzy on this,
but I thought we passed the bill
last session to help out.
Um, and stuff like that, how
does this mess with that bill we
passed last year.
Mr. Chairman, uh, Representative
Duncan, the bill that you're
referring to was to provide
assistance to small local public
bodies.
This bill actually uh.
Executive Order 2013-006 has
been in place for approximately
12 years.
And it, uh,
Essentially states various
requirements for a local public
bodies that the uh procedures
and policies that they have to
have in place and procedures
that they have to follow in
order to receive their grant
money, primarily.
What affects the state auditor's
office the most is that the
audits have to be up to date.
What is missing from that
particular executive order is
some type of relief valve or
local public bodies to be able
to receive their capital outlay
and special appropriations, even
when they're behind.
There can be anything, it offers
an opportunity for them to have
fiscal agents.
Or uh certain other requirements
that they can meet and overcome
the fact that they will not
sacrificing the compliance.
Thank you, Mr. Chair, on that.
I'm not sure.
I'm not sure I understand how it
meshes, but that'll that'll be
great. Thank you. I'll listen.
Great. Thank you very much for
Duncan ranking member Chatfield
and represent that.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Now, and
we kind of got there and waited
around a little bit of what I
was gonna talk about. Governor's
executive Order 2016-600 maybe.
Uh,
Mr. Chairman Representative
Chatfield. It's 2013-006-006.
I've got it backwards.
That 006.
OK. Uh,
And and it requires an audit
before one of these small
agencies like the soil and water
conservation District or
Uh, many of the smaller
subdivision of government.
have, uh, are able to uh
Get any kind of funding they,
they have to have their their
audits straight, and I think
that's a good deal. And my
understanding is that this
codifies what has so far just
been a, an executive orders, is
that correct, Mister Chairman
Representative Chatfield, that's
correct. And did you say
something about uh relief valve
in case uh they were working
through. I know in the, even
under the executive order, if
you had not received any funding
in the past, and yet
years of uh financing records,
good book, straight books
approved.
Uh, the, that you could
Get a pass and and.
To you
Uh, got some money in, in, in.
And uh got your audit, but does
it, you tell me about the resi
relief valve portion of this
bill.
Mr. Chairman and Representative
Chatfield, the relief bell is uh
one of the largest is that if
the uh entity is behind on
audits. They can
Why a fiscal agent.
And work through that fiscal
agent and in order to ensure
that the public money is spent
the money that you've
appropriated is spent in the
correct manner and that there
are internal controls over that
money. If the entity disagrees,
then the entity may appeal to
the CFO of the granting agency,
typically it's DFA, but it could
also be state engineer and we.
A number of other entities and
have a, what we would refer to
as some type of fair hearing and
a place to go and plead their
case. New Mexico Finance
Authority, there's a, there's a
bunch of them out there that
they, they work under. So, so I
think this is a good bill.
I will vote for your bill.
And I appreciate you bringing
it.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Representative Chapkin.
Thank you remember Chatfield
next is Herera, then rips it
down.
Thank you, Mr. Chair, and uh
thank you for bringing this
forward. I'm a little worried
about this spill, let, let me
tell you why.
Um
We're assuming here that
everything works right and it
doesn't. I mean, I, you have a
lot of small
Uh, independent agency, well,
uh, you know, government funded
agencies like mutual Domestics
or a soil and water conservation
districts, and I've known DFA to
take 2 years before they even
get the grant money out. No
fault of this little agency, but
to tell you the truth, we can't
find auditors with the state
auditor doesn't have enough
auditors. And, and the myth is
that, you know, if you live in
uh Savoya.
You know, you're gonna get an
auditor to come out there and do
an audit and they don't want to
do that because frankly, they
get paid a lot of money to do an
audit for like the Lau
Foundation and maybe they'll get
like 50 or 10,000 to do an audit
for a small agency, so
I, I just don't think this works
very well at all. It certainly
doesn't work in my district, and
I have most of my problems with
um funding are around audits
and, and the backlog of atics
and the backlog at DFA. So, so
the myth that DFA just gets all
of these, I, I remember one year
I gave 100,000 to a local group,
uh, um, um, and a nonprofit.
And by the time they got the
grant, it was in July and it was
to hire an assistant, and they
had 3 months. I mean, I think
they got it in September, so
they ended up not hiring anybody
because they had 3 months left
in the year, in the fiscal year,
and they couldn't hire anybody
for 3 months, so, so I'm just
saying that if DFA would hire
more people or if we had more
auditors, maybe it would work,
but, but those are my concerns.
I'd, I'd love to have you
respond to that.
Mr. Chairman, uh, Representative
Pereira.
I guess the beginning of my
response would be from your
mouth to God's ears with a, with
regard to personnel, additional
personnel that's needed, that's
been a problem now that's been
building up for years.
But what I can't speak to is
that the auditor is very
concerned about small local
public bodies. He's worked very
hard.
We currently have a program
specifically geared at small
local public bodies, being a se
mutual domestics ditch
Associations, etc.
And it the effort has been in
place for approximately 1 year
and a half, and it's released by
approximately $5.2 million in
funding that was held back.
Uh, through efforts with our
office. We are working with IPAs
with independent public
accountants were working with
local firms.
Uh, we had an RFP put out, uh,
with funding that the
legislature granted us.
And it's been very successful so
far, it is very new. But as I
mentioned, it's already released
$5.2 million in funding that was
held back.
Um, we are also working at
Uh, recruiting.
Uh, accountants, recruiting
students to go into accountancy.
And this is a national problem,
and it's a little bit
Off the beam from this
particular bill, but they're all
interrelated and I just want to
stress that the state auditor is
very concerned about small local
public bodies and the funding
that has been withheld.
Um, Mr. Chair, I, you know, I, I
know I've known Joseph for, you
know, for years, uh, the
auditor, he was mayor of
Espignola. He's a good friend of
mine. We worked together over
the years and you know, I, he's
saying he can't get auditors. He
and he can't get enough auditors
to go out, uh, and do the work.
So, so when I see a bill like
this, you know, and, and you're
right, DFA doesn't have enough
personnel to do the job and and
how much are we backlogged in
capital outlay these days, it's
over how many billion?
They keep talking about that and
and this is part of the problem.
And it's not always the small
governmental entities that are
at fault, and we have done a
lot, I think in the legislature,
we hired cogs. We, we got money
for the cogs so they could do
the grant writers and they can
also serve as a fiscal agent, so
we've been doing a lot of that,
and they charge you a very
minimal price, so I'm just
saying I don't think we have the
auditors and and you can, you
know, it's, it would be a good
idea if it worked, but it
doesn't work. That's all I have.
I, if you would like to respond
more to that, I realized I'm
just repeating myself, but it's
a common problem. I get a call
every single week about this.
Mr. Chair and um representative,
uh, Herrera, I empathize with
what you're saying. I, and I
hear that, I heard that at the
city of Albuquerque as well. um,
and I was on the AAA board, you
You know that?
We had to do our audits
regardless every year, um, and,
you know, any agency that does
receive state money does is
required to do that, and, and I
understand, I've talked to the
auditor about, you know, the
lack of auditors, um, and how we
can work with the universities
to see how we can encourage
that, uh, profession. I think
that happens with engineers. I
mean, there's a lot of
professions right now, nurses
and doctors.
We're we're struggling as a
state, and I think these are
some issues that we definitely
need to address, um, and so I
hear you. In my uh experience as
a um public servant and, you
know, working for the city of
Albuquerque.
There were times when audits
were done late. I mean, it just
happened that way, um, but I
will say that some of those
audits, especially in the
division which I managed, um,
those audits were very helpful
because I, it identified um
problem issues with regard to
needing more staff, and, and so
I hear you loud and clear. Thank
you.
Um
I'm just gonna say, Mr. Chair,
and, and you know, it's not
personal. I just, I just, this
is gonna go into effect on July
1st, and you're not gonna solve
these huge problems by July 1st.
For that reason, I can't support
this legislation because I know
the problems that are involved
in
I just, I just think putting
more of a burden, I mean, if
this legislation were to really
help people, I'd be for it, but
you, you, you don't have the
personnel to put this into
effect.
Right, OK, thank you very much.
Uh, next we have Representative
Dow.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Thank you,
Representative. I, so you're
saying everything, nothing
changes as far as the practice
and the process that was put in
place by the executive order.
All of that is exactly the same.
So basically what this bill does
is create a fund.
Um, Mr. Chair and Representative
Doo, there's no uh fund created
by this.
That was uh just a real quick,
that was stricken in the
committee substitute removes the
OK, it's just still in. Thank
you, Mr. Chair. Thank you,
Representative. So this puts
into statute the exact practice
that's already in place.
Mr. Chairman, Representative
Doo, it puts into practice what
is in uh executive order
2013-006, but it also adds some
type of relief valve, a place
for these entities to be able to
go, for example, in the appeal
process, and health from our
office.
And uh
Other
It allows the granting agencies
to develop some type of other
requirements if they're behind
on their audit.
Uh, to be able to overcome.
Not receiving the funding. Thank
you, Mr. Chair and thank you,
Representative. So if a small,
uh,
Village in my community.
Uh, doesn't pass their audit
because their treasurer stole
their money and left with the
funds, then they would, they
could have an appeal process and
support from you that would now
allow them to continue to be
eligible for capital outlay,
moving forward while
simultaneously they're improving
their processes, Mr. Chairman
Representative Doub, that is
correct. The first step would be
to find them a fiscal agent.
To manage the money for them for
this specific funding.
Thank, thank you, Mr. Chair and
Representative, and I've seen
these fiscal agents charge 4%, I
see them charge 14%.
Will you be helping them find a
price that's affordable, cause
is it automatically going to be
the cog, Mr. Chairman
Representative, that would be
market driven.
Thank you. Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Great questions. Thank you,
Representative Dao, um.
Next is Representative Brown and
represent Sanches
representative, um.
I have some pros and cons with
this bill. Um, it's my
understanding that we have about
Correct me if I'm wrong, about
$5 billion in capital outlay
funds that are just parked.
And my question is, Mr. Chair
Representative, how much of this
5 billion, assuming that's a
good number, is due to these
smaller uh groups not having a
compliant audit or have
addressed any material findings.
Mr. Chairman, Representative
Brown.
I couldn't give you that number.
However,
As far as non-compliance, it
would probably be a fraction of
that, that number. Most of the
delays from what I understand
and from what I've gathered and
then discussing.
These situations with other
finance experts in the state.
It lack of uh
Construction
Or
Um, it's, it has to do with
obtaining construction
materials.
Uh, contract
Uh, various other reasons for
it, so it's, it's a combination.
Thank you. Yeah, I imagine that
would be uh a special project
just to get to that number, but
Um, I, I guess I'm concerned in
the sense that um it says here
that DFA would need to hire an
additional 13 FTEs, so that
would cost about 2 million and
then would need 2 FTEs in the
financial control division, and
so I'm
I'm concerned, Mr. Chair, I, I
don't remember there being any
anything in house bill to to
cover this, could you give us an
idea of where we are with that,
please.
Mr. Chairman Representative
Brown, uh, that I'd have to
defer to DFA in response to
that.
Um, however,
One thing I can say is that
uh executive order 2013-006 has
been in place for approximately
12 years.
And, and and Brown, if I might,
just for the whole committee,
um, we, and this is from our
budget director, uh, DFA is
already doing this, they're
supportive. We increased
staffing in both DFA and Office
of the State Auditor, uh, this
year, which is why we felt
comfortable.
And Mr. Chair, if I may ask, um,
so they were asking for 15 FTEs.
How, how close did we get? Do
you know?
Uh, thank you, uh,
representative, um, committee,
uh, not the 15 employees they're
asking for. There's $40,012,000
recurring with flexibility. So,
um, but not the full 15.
And Mr. Chair and and
Representative Brown, they would
have been here tonight except
they're testifying on another
bill right now.
So
Thank you very much, Mr. Chair,
I think I was here when Governor
Martinez said this executive
order requiring these recipients
to have, um, you know, have
clean audits and
Uh, there was concern that some
needed to address some uh
material efficiencies.
But there's also a comment here,
Mr. Chair, from the Office of
the State Auditor, that's
probably a good idea to codify.
Uh, so we have it, uh,
In the statutes directly, so I
think there's um some good, good
thought there as well.
I think that's it, Mr. Chair.
Thank you. Great. Thank you very
much, Representative Brown. Uh,
next, Representative Sanchez.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. I just
wanna commend the representative
for her uh.
Expert witness, for those of you
that don't know Ricky Bejarano,
he's
We seemed like the lifetime
achievement award for New Mexico
for being a CPA. He's the former
state controller.
Former deputy state treasurer
and now he's the deputy state
auditor. He's done an amazing
job, uh, administering the $1
million you've given the last
two years to help Paerias and
all other political subdivisions
doing their audience. I think
it's been like 85% or more. So I
have full uh confidence that
he's gonna get this done. So,
uh, I look forward to supporting
this. Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Thank you very much,
Representative Sanchez, and
thank you for the uh the
recognition.
Uh, to for Mr. Bahadan. Uh, OK,
next is Representative Bohan.
Thank you. um, Mr. Chair, thank
you, sponsors, uh.
Bringing this forward, um, I've
been pretty verbal or vocal,
excuse me, uh, rather, uh, on
this issue, um, having
Many, many discussions. I know
this, this piece of legislation
came through last year. I know
that this is a new iteration of
this, this legislation, but I
still think there are, there are
gaps and holes, um, much to what
representativeerrera was talking
about and during the interim,
Mr. Chair.
Um, I did, we had extensive
conversations with DFA over
this, and when I asked if there
would be unintentional
consequences. They said yes.
Meaning that these local
governments and, and, you know,
the compliance to that they're
faced with that they could have
and have had.
Shortfalls, um, so in your bill
now, because now it's it's all
mixed, um, I want to do my due
diligence and asking some
questions. Does it now, um,
Amend in any way that if
If, um, the audits aren't.
clean audits for our local
governments, specifically, would
they?
Still lose bonding capacity for
the Capital projects, Mr. Chair.
Mr. Chairman, Representative
Wuhan, as far as bonding
capacity, that's always a
possibility if you're physically
behind.
It doesn't, it's not necessarily
impacted.
By the withholding of capital
outlay or whatever that's
impacted by the results of their
audits and the fact that they
might be behind, but
I guess the best way I could put
it is we can.
Do nothing.
What, what this allows is is a
relief valve for them to be able
to somehow
Get themselves in a position to
receive the money regardless.
And, and a lot of projects to
move forward.
Mr. Mr. Chair, and, and, um,
representative so that release
valve from what I've heard
through the discussion is that
they can then have a physical
agent. Is that correct, Mr.
Chair?
Mr. Chairman Rehan, that is one
of the relief valves. Mr. Chair,
what are the others?
uh
and uh basically
Demonstrating that they don't
need a fiscal agent. There's
enough time has passed that they
have internal controls in place
that the audit has just not
caught up with what's in place
currently.
Mr. Speaker, uh, Mr. Chair, uh
so that I think that would be
the Santa Fe model,
um, obesity model, um.
Yeah, yeah, Mr, Mr. Speaker, I
think there's still some
unintentional consequences and
and I'm not just speaking on
behalf of what has happened here
in the city of Santa Fe and
really making sure that our my
constituents and in my city are
are are not um.
halted because of those audits,
um, that their needs are, are,
are continue to be met. I know
that we're looking for different
remedies and doing that, and
I've been very close at hand,
um, with um.
Looking at new processes, but at
the end of the day.
We still, there's still the
appeals process. There's still
um
The risk that they may not
receive or or receive their
capital outlay and funding, um,
due to the, the, the bonding
process we have in statute.
Um, but through, I mean, I'm
not.
I'm not uh, I think that there's
still risk here, Mister Chair,
and I don't think that we've
that we fully addressed that
risk.
And especially our smaller
communities, I'm gonna be quite
honest with our smaller rural
communities, and I wanna um echo
to what Representative.
Sanchez said, and you have been
diligent.
And and this, um.
Agency in helping our rural
communities and those with their
audits and getting those
through.
But we're also having the
problem not having enough
auditors. We're also having, you
know, all these other, these
other issues that I don't think
we're fulfilling those, uh, our
obligation in taking care of
those things before moving, you
know, towards this, I'd rather
see that we are uh creating
these
Uh, valves, release valves, as
you've mentioned first, and then
codifying into law this
executive order because it's,
it's um.
It's been proven through
testimony, Mr. Chair, that there
are unintentional consequences.
I don't see the relief in that,
um, completely.
Um, Mr. Chair, so I do still
have concerns, um, one of the
measures that this agency uh
recommended was a pre audit.
And the pre-audits that are
necessary in finding their Mr.
Chair.
I think that that is money well
spent. I think those are the
those are the places and those
are actually those really,
really.
A really valves that we need to
fully fund, Mr. Chair.
Mr. Chairman, Representative
Luhan, if I may, we do have an
effort going now for pre-audit.
And we are, uh, out of the
funding that we received last
year and potentially this year,
we are contracting with uh
there's a certain level of IPA
out there that actually wants to
do nothing but pre-auit work.
Thank you, Mr. Chair, um, uh,
Mr. Mijarano, I, I, I do, I
totally believe in that, but I
think it's a work caught up
there and we're really
addressing those issues and, and
really fulfilling our obligation
and making sure that we're
taking care of our local
governments in this way that
this could have some intention
continue to have unintentional
consequences, um.
I look to to listen to the rest
of this conversation, but.
I still see that there's some
problems and gaps, Mr. Chair.
Thank you. Great. Thank you very
much. OK, uh, I don't have any
other questions.
Uh, sure, Brown. Thank you, Mr.
Chairman. Um, thank you.
Representative Barrigo, I guess
I would feel more supportive of
this bill that they had a sunset
clause in it, like for 5 years.
We would offer these types of
services. I just wondered if you
thought about that, Mr. Chair,
Mr. Chair and Representative
Brown, I think that uh we would
be open to that.
If you wanted to make an
amendment.
Mr. uh, in the interest of time
I won't make the amendment now,
but if this gets to the floor,
that might be a good place to do
it, and I'd be happy to propose
it there. Thank you. Great. OK,
uh, Representative Sanchez, Mr.
Chao Duas.
OK, we have a do not pass on
house on House Bill 493, a due
pass on house appropriations and
finance committee substitute for
House Bill 493, uh, moved by
Sanchez, by Reiki Champfield.
Uh, please raise your hand if
you're in opposition to that.
Um,
OK, please showerrera,
representative Silva, and
representative Vincent.
Great.
OK, thanks very much. Thank you,
Mr. Chair, members, we'll try to
speed through this. I know folks
are waiting, um.
Representative Doo, can you do,
uh, House Bill 576 quickly and
then uh Miss Russell, thank you.
We'll get, we'll go right. Thank
you, Mr. Chair and thank you
members of the committee. Um,
this bill adds adopted children
to the list of folks who have
free admission to state-owned
museums and state parks, and I
will just, if you look on page
2, it's children under the age
of 18 who were adopted when the
person was in the custody of the
department.
Or a person certified licensed
or otherwise specially empowered
by law to place a child in a
home or do this in any other
state for the purpose of
adoption.
Uh, thank you. Uh, anybody here
who wishes to comment on House
Bill 576.
Anybody online?
I don't see anyone, uh, we'll go
to the ranking member for a
question.
Thank you Mr. Chair.
Uh, how do you, how, how do you
get take advantage of this, do
you say, you're adopted you know
I think some of my older
children used to tell my
youngest son that whenever they
were being mean to they never he
would never believe him. He
didn't like, no. Mr. Chair
Representative, I suppose in the
same day, same way that they
would for the other existing it
there must be some sort of
process because it in this
section, it's the foster parents
and children in custody of.
fo ster parents and young adults
enrolled in the fostering
Connections program are already
eligible, so I, I, I guess
there's a way they know.
I'm not a co-sponsor on the
bill. I support your bill. I, I
just wondered about that.
Great.
Uh, OK, uh, I don't see any
other questions. We'll go to
Representative Duncan for the
motion.
Monie moved to pass.
OK, it's been moved by
Richardson Duncan, signed by
rank member Chatfield and
Representative Brown in the
opposition to that motion,
seeing none?
Thank you.
Uh, we'll ask Representative
Garrett to go up.
I see representatives that oh
wait, senators.
But we're, we're gonna go to you
right after we're gonna do uh
here, I wanna thank you for
staying. We're excited to, um,
To get to that.
And also welcome you back to the
The side of the building. OK,
uh, Representative Garrett, Ms.
Russell.
Uh, thank you so much, Chairman
and committee, we're here to
present Senate Bill 115. It is
the Senate Finance Committee sub
for Senate Bill 115, we do have
an amendment.
Can you read that, please? Yes,
it's 231-934.1.
OK, we've got that here. um I
think.
I think it's in the notebook.
231-934.1.
Yes. Great. OK. Can we have a
motion a second for discussion.
OK, it's been moved by by Dixon,
seconded by Representative
Duncan.
Uh, Ms. Russell, can you explain
just the amendment, please?
Certainly, Mr. Chairman. So the
bill authorizes 199 projects to
potentially apply for funding,
the amendment adds one more
project, and that's for the New
Mexico State University, Almo
Gordo branch. They brought us an
application this month and they
don't have authorization. So if
we don't get them added, we will
not be able to finance their $15
million project, and that's what
that at. Excellent. Thank you
for that explanation. Any
questions?
on the amendment?
Any opposition? Can I have a
motion to adopt the amendment?
OK, it's been moved by uh ring
member Chatfieldang by
Representativereta. Any
oppositioningan, we've adopted
the amendment. Um, OK. Is there
anybody who wishes to comment on
um Senate Bill 115 is amended.
I don't see anyone.
Any questions from the
committee?
We'll go for the motion. OK,
it's been moved by
Representative Duncan who pass
for Senate Bill 115 as amended,
second by uh ranking member
Chatfield, any opposition to
that, seeing none.
Thank you. Thank you. And
impressive Ms. Russell to see
sort of the responsiveness as
other communities come forward,
that's great. And thank you for
sharing.
OK, uh, Senator, invite you.
And
Your expert come on up.
Mr. Chairman, thank you all very
much for taking the time to hear
this very important bill up on
Zoom I have Colonel David West,
he will be my expert witness on
this, and Mister Chairman, this
bill won't take more than 5
minutes, OK? You can put the
timer on me if you want. It's
good to see a lot of friendly
faces up here.
Oh, here we go if y'all are
ready, Mister Chairman.
OK, is uh Colonel West on there?
OK, thank you very much.
Oh
Where do I start? I've lost my
papers.
Here we go.
Senate Bill 280 amends the
definition of constitutional
special schools and public
school capital outlay Act to
include the New Mexico Military
Institute, making it eligible
for funding for public school
outlay funding.
Mr. Chairman, the reason we are
doing this right now, it will
allow the institute, uh, access
to state funded capital projects
would allow up NMMI to upgrade
classrooms, dormitories, and
other facilities without capital
stoutly state capital funding,
the Mexicoil Institute must self
fund to improvements,
potentially passing costs on to
students via the higher fees, it
would also help reduce.
financial strains on families,
on those students that do not
receive the no scholarship, and
I know that each one of you know
what that's about, Mister
Chairman, this is a star.
In the states
Scoops. Whenever the student
finishes classes there, they can
name just about everywhere they
want to go, and they will be
accepted there. What we are
running into because they do not
have a ways to bond, they do not
uh cannot make application to to
any other funds that are out
there.
Right now they are designated.
In some, I, I did find this in
some language where they are
constitutional school.
But what they are.
Getting confused with is because
they're also
Uh
Tied in with higher ed.
And there seems to be a
differentiation there.
The Institute this past 2 years
ago, they did start start a prep
school there in Rossell, which
does now include 6, 7th, and
this coming year will be 8th
grade, getting them ready to
start New Mexico military
institute in the 9th grade
through high school, and Mister
Chairman, that's what we're
asking for, 49% of the students
that do go there are New Mexico
students, and so Mr. Chairman at
this time, if it would please
the committee, I would like to
have Colonel West say a few
words. Uh, Colonel, go ahead,
please briefly and then we'll go
for public comment.
Yes, Mr. Chairman, can you hear
me? We can.
All right, thank you very much
for hearing us this evening.
Thank all of you for your great
work there and in my course is a
senator has said.
A star in our state, a school
that belongs to all of us.
It is a special school and some
call it a special special school
because we do have a PED
element, if you will, for
students uh from 6th grade
through 12th, and we have a
junior college as well. We
support those who are have a
mind for the military and those
who don't, about 20% of the
student body ever go into the
military. But this bill offers
us is an opportunity to simply
put a tool in the toolbox. Helps
us leverage the opportunity, as
you all know, MMI is not a
taxing
40. So we don't have any ability
to tax the the local populace.
That's the same with the other
special schools as well.
So it just provides us the
opportunity when we're talking
about renovating facilities,
adding facilities, it provides
us the opportunity to leverage
every dollar that we spend and
currently we're in about 51% of
our spend even though those
funds come through HED through
geo bond severance tax bond, and
through the generous
appropriation for the
legislature from time to time as
well. With that, sir, I'll just
stand for questions. Thank you.
Thank you very much, Colonel.
OK, uh, is there anybody here
who would like to make comment
on
Centerville 280.
And, OK, uh, online, obviously
the kernel, uh, we're gonna go
to Rakeem River Chatfield.
Like
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Uh, Mr.
Chair, this school is special to
us. What it does is if, if
you're in a small rural school
and there's 2 people in your
class and you're about Victorian
and you apply to go to
Georgetown University, you might
not make it.
Uh, but if you are top of your
class at uh NMMI and you apply
to a big major university.
Uh, you got a pretty good chance
of making it. Our son did. So
it's a good springboard for many
of our New Mexico schools,
especially our rural schools,
smaller rural schools for kids
that go there that, that really
are, are gonna be top of the
line, uh, it is uh one of our
New Mexico special schools, and
it's treated much the same as
other New Mexico schools, a
special schools, except I
believe it's the only one in the
state currently that is not
eligible for public school
capital outlay.
So what this bill does is they
just ask that we allow them to
to be the same as other special
schools in the state that we be
eligible to receive uh public
school capital outlay.
So
Uh, I urge the, the committee to
vote for this bill. It's a good
bill. We saw it in education, we
hammered it out pretty good and
it's a good bill. Thank you.
Great. Thank you very much
member Chatfield. I don't see
any other questions. We'll go
ranking member for the motion.
OK, it's been moved by ranking
member Chatfield, seconded by
Representative Brown, uh, to
pass on Senate Bill 280, any
opposition to that motion,
seeing none.
Mr. Chairman, members, thank you
very much and from the future
leaders of our nation, they
thank you too. I appreciate
y'all very much very much. Have
a great evening. OK, 7.5 more
days. That's right.
Be nice to us when we go over
there. We're nice to you when
you come over here
Thank you Mr. Chair. OK,
remember it's great evening.
Thank you all so much for your
work. Uh, we are not going to
have committee tomorrow, um, so
