Here.
Here.
Here.
Additive Garrett here.
Representative Herndon
president.
Present different Toya here.
Here here.
Okay. We do have a foreign
members. Thank you very much.
Well, Secretary, Alan, Great to
see you here today. Kelly will
go to you first. And, of course,
Secretary When we get to you
please feel free to introduce
Good morning, Mr Chair Members
Committee Kelly Clint
Legislative Finance Committee
were on agency code 665
Department of Health that will
be under Tab six. And your
binders with me today is
Secretary Alan and my D s a
counterpart Mary Beth Densmore.
With that. I'm gonna do that
real nice.
Oh,
Okay, We're gonna start with the
high level in your presentation,
which is on page one and Page
two, so I'll give the committee
a moment to get to the right
page so that we can
I'll be on the same page.
Okay. I think we're all getting
there.
Alright. So for the Department
of Health General Fund, there's
not that big of a difference
When it comes to General Fund.
It's about $3.5 million
difference between the LFC and
the executive Now how we spread
That General fund is the main
difference. So I'll start this
presentation by bringing us back
to the fall hearing.
When we talked about the D O, a
request they had asked for a
pretty significant
reorganization, which would have
collapsed public health.
Epidemiology and response and
state laboratory into a single
program under public Health
Department Public health
program.
So that was not included in the
LFC recommendation, but
partially recommended in the
executive recommendations. So a
lot of the differences have to
do with that partial
reorganization between the two
recommendations, so that's the
first thing to note when you're
looking at the public health
program, which is rows one
through 27.
Excuse me and rose 28 through
37 on your high level. So the
FAA did a reorganization of
about $4 Million from General
fund plus federal revenues,
which is not on the sheet into
public health. Lfc did not. That
doesn't mean that we didn't both
have that General fund. They're
just in different divisions.
Mhm, so you'll notice that those
are the main differences in
revenue. Um, the both lfc and
the executive did some funding
for Disease control prevention.
Um, for rates for some
marketing, um, and for public
health office operations, while
the executive recommendation had
additional funding for that
reorganization, um, prescription
drug program and, uh, a mobile
public health services program.
And your oldest knows. Excuse
me.
Hmm.
Little froggy from my coffee
this morning, and they also did
a public health expansion, um,
in the public health program,
and then the next program,
you'll see an epidemiology
response again. There's that
small, um, technical difference
between the reorganization where
they executive recommendation
takes out $4 million on row 29
while the LFC left it in the
Epidemiology response program.
Pretty small differences on
there.
Um on sheet two. You'll see the
differences between the
facilities management program.
There was a lot of funding in
both recommendations. Um and
that's going to have to do with
probably broader conversation
We're going to need to have
about facilities funding when it
comes to do a. That's a pretty
significant issue. It has been
all fall. There is a deficiency
request for a facilities
management program, which is our
state hospitals. There's also
some supplemental requests.
Regarding their operations, so
you'll see both the LFC and
executive recommendation. Uh,
increase the that program
significantly due to the
financial conditions, which have
to do with census billing. Um
and just general operation costs
there.
You'll notice that the
developmental disability
supports and the health
certification programs are
Minus out there the that's
because they're transferring to
the healthcare Authority
program, so all that funding has
been transferred over to that
new department.
We organized department.
And then you'll see program
support as your last program on
Page two, and the differences
there.
So with that I will turn it over
to Mary Beth to go over the
first page on your different
sheets.
Okay. Thank you, Kelly. Um
Mr Chair. Members of the
committee. Good morning, Mary
Beth Dunsmore, the DFA analyst
for the Department of Health.
So I'll just As Kelly said, Go
over the overview. It's
It's pretty brief as Kelly said
the executive is about 3.5
million above the LFC
recommendation.
And to get into slight specifics
in the base. The executive for
Personnel was 4.9 million above
the LFC. The majority of this
differences in facilities
management program in the public
health program.
The LFC recommendation for
contractual services was 1.5
million above the executive, and
this is mostly in the
epidemiology, Epidemiology and
response program for the Public
Health hotline.
Executive. Other costs
recommendation was just 214,000
above the LFC. That's just for
miscellaneous operating costs.
Um, that's actually very close.
which is great. Um and as for
performance measures they have
been reconciled. And on our on
the summary for you, Thank you,
Mr Chair will turn it back to
Kelly for the next program.
Thank you, Mary Beth. So the
next program is on Page five. It
should be titled Administration.
We call that program support in
our high level.
So, um, the Executive General
fund revenues recommendation
included slightly more than the
LFC about $1 million Executive
recommendation for personnel was
majority of that at 96.4 96
964.6000.
Um, and those are mostly for
salary increases and to reduce
the vacancy rate.
The executive recommendation
included 70.8000 more than they
have seen other costs, and
that's mostly for travel and
other miscellaneous operation
costs. With that, we'll turn it
back to Mary. Beth. Thanks
again. Kelly. Mr Chair. Um, the
next program is public health.
Um, And so there were some
differences in this program. Um,
overall, the executive was 13.7
million above the lfc and public
health.
And that's total. So that
includes 5.8 million from the
General fund. So a significant
portion of these differences in
revenues were a result of the
executive recommendation to
partially reorganized the public
health and epidemiology and
response programs of the total
4.1 million general fund
revenues and 7 million federal
revenues.
Was transferred from
epidemiology into public health.
Um, and this is just a bureau in
epidemiology.
That I always forget the name of
the
By injury and injury and
behavioral health epidemiology.
Thank you, Secretary. I BB? Yes,
Um
So in the base the uh oh, Wait.
I've read that sorry. Other
differences result from the
executive recommendation,
including additional personnel
for mobile health services and
public health office personnel.
The executive recommendation for
contractual services was 6.4
million above the LFC and a
significant portion of this
again is related to that bureau.
that's moving, um from
epidemiology to public health in
the Executive recommendation
executive recommendation for
other pots was 329,000 above the
LFC.
That's for operating costs. Um
and I just wanted to point a
point of clarification. Um
I believe that one of the
requests of the agency had in
here, um public health was not
for prescription drug program. I
believe it was what they call
the prescription Food Rx.
Program. Um and it's it's
designed to assisting in
increasing access to food. Um,
for people in, um
Uh, in need. So, um, I just
wanted to point that out real
quick. As for language, the lfc
recommendation includes language
transferring 5 Million from
Tobacco settlement Program for
smoking cessation and prevention
programs.
Let's see. Recommendation also
includes language directing the
department that 1.5 Million
General Fund revenues is for
services to address alcohol,
misuse and again. Performance
measure target differences were
reconciled. Um, I'll turn it
back over to Kelly, Mr. Chair.
Thank you, Mr Chair just to
cover one additional point in
that program, So the LFC
recommendation put about a
million dollars in General fund.
To cover declining tobacco
revenue in the department. And
that was not necessarily asked
for by the executive, so the
executive wasn't able to
Funny because they didn't ask
for it. The LFC did put that
money and we've been looking at
tobacco revenue. It's been
declining, so we wanted to cover
that. So that says cease tobacco
cessation programs continue a
little bit more seamlessly. Most
of you may have gotten some
calls through constituencies
that tobacco revenue wasn't
coming in as we expected last
fiscal year, And so some of
those programs for the last few
months
Did not receive any distribution
of revenue because of the timing
of that, And so those programs
ceased for a few months at the
end of the fiscal year, Um,
which is not great, so they'll
see. Replace that revenue with
Million Dollar General fund so
it would be a little bit more
stable, and we put a little less
pressure on that revenue source.
So just a
Thought on that. The next
program is the FBN Response
program, which is page 90 year
packet.
Again a majority of the
differences you're going to see
in. This is due to that partial
reorganization so you'll see
that lfc is $4 million higher
here, and that's mostly because
the executive moved that $4
million into the other program.
And that the LFC is also 7
million in federal revenues
above the executive because the
executive moved those fundings
into the public health program.
So that's a big difference on
the revenue sources. Not
necessarily
That they're not. They're
they're just in different
pockets.
A majority of the differences.
Um
For personnel was both
recommendations included funding
to reduce the vacancy rate.
However, the executive included
$500,000 above the LFC.
Um The LFC recommendation
included 1 million for the
public health hotline not
included by the executive.
And with that alternate back to
Mary Beth
Okay. Thank you again. Kelly.
Mr. Chair. We are now on the
facilities management program.
Oh, did I? I'm sorry. Excuse me.
the laboratory Services program.
I turned the page to quickly, um
So for this program, the
executive General fund Revenue
recommendation was just 310
point.
6000 above the lfc.
The executive executive
recommendation for other costs,
is where that 310.6 is. It's for
miscellaneous operating costs
and increased costs. You
business
Um, those are the only
differences in that program so
alternative Kelly for
facilities. Thank you.
Thank you. We're on page 12
Facilities management program,
you'll notice that there is a $1
million difference between the
LFC and the executive in General
fund revenues. The other
revenues are the same.
Um, this is probably one of the
programs that the committee has
is going to have the most
discussion on and we have a lot
of thought going into what's
going on financially within the
facilities management program.
Um, both recommendations
increase this program
significantly. Uh, I believe the
executive was close to 8% while
the LFC was close to 7% of both
of those are above the average
that you guys are saying just
because this is a priority
financially to kind of get these
facilities financially in the
black.
Um, the major differences Well,
both recommendations increased
General fund significantly,
executive included 1 million
above the LFC for personnel.
Um The loc recommendation
included 167,000 above the
executive or facility operating
costs.
Um, And with that, I will turn
it back to Mary Beth.
Thanks again. Kelly, Mr Chair,
so the next program is the
developmental Disabilities
support program. This is not
have funding at the Department
of Health and Physical your 25
programs being transferred to
the healthcare authority in its
entirety, so there's nothing
more to discuss their alternate
back to Kelly or cool.
Thank you, Mr Chair.
The last two programs. There's
not a lot of differences. So
Page 14 is health certification
program that also transferred
for the healthcare Security or
Health Care Authority
Department.
And then the medical cannabis
program. There's no difference
in revenues. The only difference
is in how we split 50. It's the
same number just lfc put, um the
positions in perms and the
executive put them into two in
terms, So it's that's kind of,
you know, not a big difference.
61 hand half dozen in the other
spending the committee's
preference.
With that I will turn you to the
specials and supplementals
deficiencies. Page was son Page
23 of your packet.
Give you a minute.
So page 23. You'll notice that
there This is quite a long list.
Um a lot of them had to do with
deficiencies for the facilities
program or supplementals for the
facilities program to address,
uh, projected shortfalls.
Um, lfc recommendations included
funding to correct some of the
deficiencies while the executive
recommendation included some of
deficiencies, plus the, um
supplementals for the current
fiscal year.
And with that all make sure to
turn it over to Mary Beth. Thank
you. She has any comment on this
as well?
Mr Chair. Thanks, Kelly. I don't
have any comments on that, Um,
at present great with that we'll
turn it over to the secretary
for his presentation. Thanks.
Chair. Small members of the
committee. Patrick Allen,
secretary of the Department of
Health. I don't have a formal
presentation to go through the I
do have a couple of handouts
that I'll be referring to, and I
think I think we'll have those
up on the screen as well. Just
first quickly. I've been joined
by by the leadership team today
won't introduce absolutely every
person who's here. But if if
they could, if the ones that I
do want to make sure you
associated face with the name of
The good kind of wave their
hands joined by Don Sanchez, Our
deputy secretary and chief
operating officer.
By Dominic's Irlo, who's the
acting administrative services
director, George MORE gun, the
acting facilities director Jeff
Laura, who runs the public
health Division, Dr Laura, Pa.
To Hong who is that epidemiology
and response, director and state
epidemiologist.
Dr Miranda Durham, who's our
chief medical officer? Pardon
me. I cut Kelly's frog. I guess
Janet Johnson are traveling is
on Dr Jose Costa, who is the
director of the developmental
Disability supports division,
Um and then our finance team.
Marlene Velasquez, whose our
finance director, Heather Toya.
Budget director and a
literature. Sarah, who's our
chief financial officer, They
will be the ones entering any
hard questions you have after I
take the after I take the easy
ones.
So just quickly in terms of of
overview. I think it's no
surprise to most of you that the
department has been pretty
challenged financially when I
got to the agency about a year
ago, there was a lot of work to
do just organizationally and
structurally around how we
manage our finances. That's
meant that there have been, you
know, simple questions that
we've had a hard time answering
data that that we've not been
able to provide in the way that
we should to D f A and lfc.
Um and and simple things like
getting contracts out the door
And I'm sure almost all of you.
If not all of you have gotten
calls from one constituent or
another who's been struggling to
do work based on our financial
struggles, and we're that's a
lot of what I've spent The last
year working on is trying to get
us out of that hole and get us
back to a place where we can do
that. Do that work effectively.
Um, as as you've heard the
differences between the two
budgets are not significant in
into dollar total, really
grateful for that, Um, the
differences, however,
individually have some
meaningful impact for sure. I
want to talk quickly about is
our facilities and, um if you
could return to the handout that
you see up on the screen, um,
one of the things that I heard
when I got to the agency as well
Facilities would be fine if only
their beds were full.
And as we began to dig into
things like the deficiency in
23, and where we are in 24, I
really began to question Was
that true? And so I asked our
folks to do a pro formal for me,
kind of a basic projection of if
we have 90% of our beds full
And if we're collecting all the
revenue from those beds on an
ordinary distribution of people
who are paid for by Medicaid by
Medicare by the Veterans
Administration, If that's the
case, we're collecting all that
revenue. And if our positions
are staffed at the level they
need to be staffed to have that
many beds occupied and they're
staffed by and large by state
employees, not by temporary
agency contractors.
Other than some places where you
would typically do that physical
therapist through those kinds of
things in the main by state
employees. Where would we be?
And so that's the assumptions
that you see here if we could go
to the next the next page,
please.
In the bottom line is based on
all of those assumptions. We
would be about $12 million short
of being able to being able to
cover the cost of operating the
operating the facilities. And so
there's that sort of, I think
have received wisdom that all we
need to do is fill the beds and
we're fine. That really is not
actually true. Now there's
there's a lot that goes into
this in terms of you know. Are
we today at a cost structure
that looks like that No.
Um, out of from a revenue
standpoint, we're having
conversations that lfc
suggestion with the healthcare
authority to see if we can
increase Medicaid rates as a as
a way of help closing that gap.
But when we get to discussing
things like deficiencies in the
supplementals, this really is
the reality that the facilities
face compounded by the fact that
that you know, we've been in a
world where it's hard to fill
vacancies. That means it's
Hard to maximize our occupancy.
It's hard to sell vacancies with
state employees that throws our
costs out of line and those
kinds of things. And so if we
could flip over to the other
To the other hand out. You've
got a 2nd 2nd document. I think
in front of you that looks
something like this. That
basically is a facility by
facility now the performer that
you see up on the screen is kind
of a what if what if everything
were operating the way that
optimizing the way that it needs
to in each category?
This next document is Where are
we today In terms of fiscal 24
and what you'll see is a rundown
for each facility in terms of
what do we think is going to
happen in fiscal 20 for the
simplest one to describe as the
second one on the handout, which
is the Behavioral Health
Institute in Las Vegas, and
basically as we're operating
today, taking the patients that
were legally required to take
filling the beds that were able
to fill with staffing at at at
the Meadows unit, those kinds of
things
We would end up about $6.5
million short.
Um, I proposed supplemental
that's not currently in the
recommendation is more or less
for that same amount. If that's
supplementals approved, would be
$65,000 to the good or, you
know, more or less more or less
even and so it goes through each
of the facilities and you'll
find that what we have our
shortfalls in the facilities
Now, if the if your ultimate
decision is to deny the
supplementals for those
facilities were kind of in a
spot
Because we either have to keep
treating the patients and
serving the needs of the
residents that we have in those
facilities, meaning we're going
to end up at a place where you
and I don't want to be, which is
a deficiency again or our
expenses are overwhelmingly
people, and that means we have
to reduce our workforce and if
we reduce our workforce that
means we need to reduce the
census in our facilities and
There are places where we can't
like our forensics unit at B H.
I. And there are places like the
vet somewhere. I don't think you
want us to
And so that's really kind of the
conundrum. We're all in. In
terms of of those those
deficiencies.
Let me talk, then briefly about
a couple of other other
differences that are here. Um,
one of the proposals that we
have that is in the
recommendation has to do with
moving us to into providing
primary care through public
health offices. This really gets
at the issue of what is the
mission of public health offices
in the in the world that we that
we live in today. That's in the
Recommendation.
Um and it worked well, we'll
move off of that handouts. Now,
um, what you have not done is
recommend our request to staff
one of the mobile one of the
mobile units last session, You
approved the purchase of five
mobile units. We're doing that
and we've got the mobile units
coming. We don't have any people
to run them. And what we'd like
to do is have the have a mobile
unit work in partnership with a
public health office, delivering
primary care and figure out how
we can be an extender of that
work out into the community and
improve
Access to care that
That in parts of the state, even
with the web of everything else
we have with with Medicaid
expansion with federally
qualified health centers, all
that we've still got areas that
are, um the you heard a little
bit about fruit and vegetable
prescriptions as a
recommendation that has been
denied. Um, we we talk a lot and
and you all are really
interested in evidence based
Investments and this agony. This
one of those titles that you
hear it, and it sounds kind of
funny fruit and vegetable
prescriptions. But actually,
there's excellent evidence that
a health care provider giving
you a prescription for more
fruits and vegetables has a
meaningful impact on or behavior
even more than than your dog's
saying, You know, you really
ought to eat better, who hasn't
heard that most recently in
August of this year?
The American Heart Association
Journal published a study
showing that the use of fruit
and vegetable prescriptions lead
to meaningful improvements in a
one C blood pressure body mass
Index. And so this is an
evidence based practice that
that, um if I would encourage
you to consider, um couple then
issues related
Pardon me.
That are kind of closely related
to supplementals at the
Behavioral Health Institute and
at the state lab, having to do
with kind of the corresponding
keeping up with staff in staff
costs and costs of doing
business found coming to the
agency. Is that historically and
you know, Not surprisingly, the
agency has brought you kind of
Sexy new things to do that you
can get behind that look
interesting and that that we all
want to go do and you've
provided us to to do resources
to do that.
I think to an extent that's come
at the expense of really keeping
up with the cost of doing
business in, uh, in the various
functions in the agency, and so
that's shown up in terms of
being able to appropriately
piece appropriately placed
people within their bounds at
the lab. It shows up in terms of
the increased cost of really
simple, not very sexy, but
necessary things like lab,
chemicals and the electric bill
and the gas bill.
And those kinds of things and so
you see that show up in the
recommendations that show up
here as well, Um, I think
really, that's everything that I
wanted to touch on in terms of
some of the key differences. Be
happy to answer any questions
that you might have.
Thank you very much. Mr.
Secretary. Thanks for your team.
Being here today will go
straight to questions first with
ranking member
Thank you, Mr Chairman and thank
you for your presentation. Um, I
wanted to. I think Kelly Mr
Chairman's hit on it a little
bit, but on the funding for the
school based health centers have
has that money gotten out the
door to those entities. Yes, Mr.
Chair, Representative Armstrong.
That was one of the areas that I
talked about where we've been
struggling. Mightily. Um All of
those contracts are out there
being paid against. That's not
to say there are a couple where
the contract is with the vendor,
and there
You know, signing or asking
questions or those kinds of
things, but that's all out the
door now. Okay, thank you for
that. And then, um, on your, um
I was just looking at your
diversions.
Um
Can you talk a little bit about
that? It's it's quite high.
Sure. So, um, Mr Chair
Representative Armstrong are
versions total. I think about
$55 Million about most of that
comes in a planned reversion
having to do with the
developmental disability
supports division during the
pandemic. The federal Medical
Assistance Program, match rates
were increased on a temporary
basis.
And I I wasn't here. But I think
what you all decided to do was
fully fund the budget, assuming
that wasn't there knowing it
would go away eventually, so you
have visibility into the total
cost of the program What that's
meant. As each fiscal year
there's been a reversion that
that enhanced depth map is now
stepping down. I think we're
actually to the end of it now.
And so this is the last of those
reversion you should see, but
that represents a significant
portion of that reversion. The
rest ends up being as a
percentage of our overall
general fund. Pretty small.
Alright, often it has to do with
challenges around filling
vacancies and some of those
kinds of things, particularly at
facilities in in remote rural
areas. Um, those those kinds of
challenges you know, and the
trick always as you like us to
come in at exactly zero on our
budget. Um
I'd rather have not quite spent
all of it, then spend more of
it. Um And so it's we're always
going to be challenged to
committed exactly zero, but I
think we came in pretty close
when you factor out the DDS D
versions that you expected and
budgeted for
Thank you for that, Mr Chairman,
and and thank you, Mr Secretary
on our books, it says 77
million.
And so that's quite a
difference even between 55 and
77. So just so, you know, you
know, so you can just keep track
of it. I appreciate you not
spending it would rather you
revert it than spend it.
In a way that's not
Responsible, so I appreciate
that the other part that I
wanted to ask you a little bit
about Mr Chairman is the FY 23
total transfers.
And what? Where did that come
from? And, uh can you explain
some of that? Yes. So they were
to translate you're talking
about about? Um, uh, bars within
the
Uh, Mr Chairman and Mr
Secretary. It's the transfers
out of the personnel and
employee benefits category. So,
Mr Chair Representative
Armstrong, number two
in fiscal 23 Public health
division had about a $2.1
million transfer from the two
hundreds to the three hundreds.
That was basically to do work
around our health equity
initiatives.
And it was moving from from paid
staff, which we were struggling
to be able to fill at that point
to contractors who were able to
do the work, so we're able to do
the work and we're moving
forward with those initiatives.
That's what that one was The
other
Um was in was about $400,000 in
the state lab. Um, and it was
transfers out of the two
hundreds into the 304 hundreds,
and it goes back to the cost of
doing business issue. I was
talking about it needing to buy
chemicals to be able to process
you know, process we're able to
do some contracting work those
kinds of things. Those were the
two that we have. Thank you. So
much for those answers. And Mr
Chairman, you know, I'm back
over in, uh,
Volume.
Uh one and just looking at the
report cards. Mhm. There's
there's a lot of green.
But there's a lot of red and and
I just, you know, we put these
these measurements in place, Mr
Chairman so that we can see
You know? Are we doing a good
job in the areas and if and if
we're not, then we if it's set,
we need to be measuring
something else. Then we need to
know that so that we can make
those changes.
But you know some of the things
that that are red.
Our our little disturbing to me.
And so I would appreciate you,
Uh, all taking a look at you
know, maybe we need to change
some of those, uh, in the
percentages or we need to change
some of what we're measuring.
Thank you, Mr Chairman. Thanks,
Mr Sheriff. I could just respond
to that quickly. Thanks for
that. For that comment,
representative. We are at the
same time that we're trying to
do the structural and
operational work we need to do
in the agency were also really
focusing on who are we? What are
we doing? Why are we here? What
are we trying to achieve, which
has really directly to those?
Those performance measures we've
identified a long term
strategical. We're calling it
our North star of New Mexico
becoming the healthiest state.
In the country by 2040, which
really gets out a lot of those
population, health kinds of
metrics, and we're backing up
from that of what are what are
the areas that we need to be
able to make a do
accomplishments in that's
internal structural kinds of
things, and that's external
population kinds of things. Um,
and so part of that work is
coming back to you, potentially
with some suggestions exactly
along the lines.
Of what you're saying of what
should targets be. Are there
additional or alternative
measures we should consider, And
so we're in the midst of that
work right now.
Thank you, Ray. Remember
Armstrong. We're going to go
next to represent Alison.
Thank you, Mr Chair.
Thank you for the presentation,
Mr Secretary.
Um
I've got legislation pending on
the county and tribal health
councils. AM seeking your risk
I've got legislation pending on
the county and tribal health
councils. AM seeking your rest
your recommendations on how to
make it successful this time.
Because we have tried in the
past and, um, the first year
that I introduced it in 2019. It
was successful and we got
funding for it. We are on the
roads of running out of that
allocation from back then.
As you know, the health councils
were the primary first line
defense during the covid
endemic, so it is something that
is very, very necessary. It
addresses the public health
issues, especially in the rural
rural areas, and you know most
of our Indian country is very,
very rural.
At the present time. There are
ninth Web blows and one
Neverhood community that really
benefit from these health
councils, and I found out that
there are other satellite
communities that resort to the
health councils as well
statewide and most of the
The problem is that they are
addressing or
Not predominantly, but they
address behavioral health and
mental health. I believe that
Some of the things that were
combat and the problems of New
Mexico.
If we get down to the root,
cause it's gonna be behavioral
or mental health, So we need to
really believe that we really
need to address. Uh,
Reestablishing and refinancing
the county and tribal health
councils and, uh
Just yesterday, I was approached
Mr Chair and Mr Secretary. Just
yesterday I was approached by
many individuals that say that
they are midwives and I believe
they said Doula. I don't know if
I'm saying it right? But anyway,
they want to be a part of our
health councils where they can
be recognized their services can
be recognized.
And whatever so I would
I would welcome any
recommendations that you would
offer to me to make.
Or legislation successful.
Thank you, Mr Chair.
Thank you, Mr Chair,
Representative Allyson, as you
know the supplemental money for
the health councils beyond
what's already in the base
budget is not in either the
executive budget nor the
legislative budget. We have been
having conversations with the
chair and others working with
Taloqan from the association on
On what some metrics or
sideboards or guidance.
Might look like we're there to
be agreement that there would be
more funding and happy to happy
to continue.
Okay. Thank you for that.
Mr Secretary and Mr Tear.
You know, with as much revenue
as we're getting today.
It is a shame that we do not
Uh, fund something like the
county and tribal health
councils.
Were a lot of people in there
are very rural of areas is going
to suffer. So that's my closing
comment. Thank you, Mr Chair.
And Mr Secretary. Thank you very
much represented Alison and
thank you for your continued
work in that area. Next, we're
gonna go to representative Luhan
and then representative Garcia.
Great. Thank you.
Thank you, Mr Chair. Thank you,
Secretary. Thank you to our L C
D. F a
Um analysts and there's a lot of
work in such a big agency.
And, you know, getting a whole
grasp of everything that this
agency does is really, really
A lot of work. And so you can
imagine this putting this all
together in our minds and time.
We have to compare things. Um,
but we've been doing the work
during the, um
During the year in the past
year, But you know when we get
this, the the flat budgets of
everybody and or recommended
budgets Excuse me from executive
agency and
Lfc and putting this all
together and trying to
To be as healthy as we can
unintended regarding for mental
health. Um and what we're doing,
Mr Chair. I, um
I've worked. I've worked in
policy recommendations and
getting some policy passed for
for this agency. And so when I'm
looking at a performance nation
and how we are
Being effective. One of the
things I'm focused on two is
harm reduction.
Program that we have through the
WH and I see some measures that
are really good. But I also see
some I don't have some
information on with the
outcomes, and I'm just
questioning that in one of those
things I'm looking at is a
percent of retail pharmacies
that dispense naloxone, so I
know we work in tandem with each
other with the program, and I'm
wondering Is that something that
Did the Department of Health can
do Or is that something
budgetary or why are we not
getting pharmacies?
To have naloxone available. Mr.
Chair. Thank you, Mr Chair,
Representative Luhan. I don't
think that I can speak today
Definitively In terms of that, I
think as we're going through
this work as an agency aiming at
our North star becoming the
healthiest state. We're trying
to filter that down into work
like harm reduction throughout
our performance measures. I
think we've got a challenge. Not
only of are we hitting measures,
but are we accurately collecting
data on those measures?
And then do we have work tied to
those measures to make sure that
it's not just sitting out there,
you know, floating by itself,
but that there you can go from
that measure to work. I think
this is an area where we're not
really connected Those dots yet,
and that's that's the work. As
once we get through session and
get our financial house in order
that were immediately moving to
want to commend you. Awesome
chair on
The number of successful
overdose reversals in the harm
reduction program. I want to say
I know the work and everything
you're doing there, so I'm
seeing these statistics and
these information, So thank you.
It looks like you were doing
healthy work there.
Um
And working and understanding of
the issues that we have around
harm reduction.
The the outcomes we've had. I
want to just commend you in the
work that you've done and
Following us and helping us
understand the policy that we
need.
Um, And with that, Mr Chair, I'm
looking at our facilities,
budget information and going
into Mexico Behavioral Health
Institute. Some of the things
that you covered
Um, I'm concerned about
Us not having enough funding and
some of these facilities,
particularly particularly
Um, the new Mexico behavior
Health Institute. Um
I visited the facility twice
this past year. I know that
there was a lot of vacancies,
and there's a lot of issues. My
question to you is. How do we
get
To the capacity or build that
capacity that we need to and
looking at the other statistics
to somewhere at full capacity.
Some are not, but I'm really
focused on on some more than
others because of the
The constitutional or not the
constant statutes we have in
place to provide funding for
these institutes and the other,
I will say is the Sequoia
Adolescent Center because I know
we need more behavioral health.
Um
Care for adolescents and our
youth, and that's that's a big
concern for me. So what do we
need to do? How How are we not
meeting the need? Because the
demand is there.
So what do we need to be doing
there? Mr Chair?
Mr. Chair, Representative.
Luhan. Um, you've kind of opened
up a whole hearings worth of can
of worms in in terms of answers
to those to those questions, I
think first, the base increase
and and supplemental request we
have for Behavioral Health
Institute, our first step of
making sure we're able to
adequately staffed that facility
second, you know, I think I
think facility of that size in a
community of that size will
always be something of a
challenge.
Around trying to trying to
attract workforce. Um, working,
working with the state personnel
office and others on really what
are appropriate compensation
levels is critical. You very
generously provided staff salary
increases in the last session.
You've got a proposal this
session. My understanding is
that got our kind of entry level
mental health technicians.
On a par with WalMart.
Um And you know the reality is
we probably need to be better
than Walmart if we want to be
able to to to attract the
workforce, I think also, we need
to be able to maximize the use
of other facilities that we
operate in New Mexico. I'm
thinking of the New Mexico
Rehabilitation Center in
Roswell as well as turquoise
large hospital in, UM in
Albuquerque.
To be able to make sure that
we're not just saying well.
Vegas is where we send everybody
who needs something from us. And
then And then, finally, you
know, we really I don't think
it's a surprise to anybody. We
need more of everything in New
Mexico, right and we're faced
with this overwhelming workforce
challenge, not just in
healthcare but across all the
caregiving industries, and it's
a matter of how can we try to,
you know, really do all of the
things we need to do at the same
time to get more of everything,
and that that then is deeply
intertwined with what's our role
for operating facilities and
what's the role of the
Healthcare Authority as it
purchases healthcare and as it
guides behavioral strategy from
a more global sense. Thank you,
Mr Chair. I really do appreciate
those answers, and I think it's
something we've all been
working, working towards and
understanding our workforce. But
I also think there are some
other
Um, places in our other agencies
and other things that are
another factors. If you will
that are going on there that
could add to some of these
answers. And I think that's
something that we really zeroing
in on, and I hope you will see
other policies moving down to
help us with that, But these are
concerning numbers to me. This
is a concern for me. Just
By what we what we need to do.
Um, so I just wanted to point
that out and asked these
questions and offline. We'll
talk some more. Thank you, Mr
Chair. Thank you very much, Sam.
Luhan. Next we're gonna
representative Garcia.
Thank you, Mr Chairman. Thank
you, Mr Secretary. I want to go
right to the Veterans Home and
TRC, New Mexico.
You have a shortfall, Community
and $66,000, can you briefly?
Let me know what effect is going
to have a veterans here at home.
Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Representative Garcia. Thank you
for your continued support of
veterans and particularly of the
of the veterans home, um, couple
of couple of different dynamics,
Um, in terms of deficiency at
the veteran's home, That's
really the mix of state employed
staff and contract staff. And as
we've made sure that we have
enough staff
To assure quality care for
veterans. We need to have people
there, whether we're able to
fill a vacancy or not, And so
we've had more contract staff
than we would ideally like to
have going back to that
performance that I showed you
earlier when we're not using
contract staff at all. We'd like
to get to know contract staff or
very little contracts if we're
not there yet, and so that we
are number one job is to make
sure we have enough people.
To provide quality care to
veterans. And if we need to use
contract staff, we do that,
because we can't we can't. Um um
short that
Um, I am pleased with the fact
that there was a report recently
looking at the new, uh, centers
for Medicare and Medicaid
services standards for how much
staff you need to have, Um, for
each resident in long term care
facilities, Uh, and our two
facilities that care for
veterans, the veterans home and
and Ford Baird were the only two
facilities in New Mexico of any
kind that met that standard.
Um, And so I'm really proud of
the fact that we're doing
everything that we need to do.
Um, uh, to care for our veterans
that we have a special that is
in the recommendation that helps
us with the startup costs of the
new homes, which the governor
just did a ribbon cutting for in
in December.
Projecting our operating
performance for the rest of 24
and 25. I do want to let you
know is a little bit tricky,
because if you've ever built a
house or been involved in a
construction project
Things happen indeed, change and
you know, we just learned about
an issue here within the last
couple of weeks. Um, that's you
know, another. Something needs
to be done to get us ready to
open. And so it's a little bit
of a moving target of exactly
when we're going to be able to
open that facility, and that
makes projecting our operating
costs really hard, So it's gonna
be a little
What's the right budget term?
Funky? Um, for a little bit? Um,
what we try to get there, but
between the special that is in
the recommendation, and then you
know, approving the deficiency.
I'm confident that we're
providing extremely high quality
care at that facility.
Thank you, Mr Secretary. And Mr
Chairman, You know it's very
important because you know,
ladies and gentlemen, you know
we spent with the state spent
over $60 million in that
hospital.
Get him a new hospital because
the old hospital that was their
veterans have been in there for
over 50 years. I think
You know, and during Covic, we
lost a lot of veterans there.
And that that was the main
spearhead to improve the quality
of living for these veterans,
and we did do that. And, you
know, we really need to look at
funding these that is
particularly after fertility
because I am a Vietnam veteran.
You know, our veterans deserve
the best they really do. You
know, everybody understanding
Mexico deserves good.
But we really need to look at
our veterans.
It could do me that's important
to a lot of people. And so with
that being said, Mr Chairman,
Thank you very much, and we
really need to look and see how
we can fully fund these
facilities. Thank you. Thank you
very much for seven. Garcia.
Next. We're gonna go to
representative Herndon, please.
Thank you, Mr Chair and Mr Chair
and Mr Secretary at this like to
direct your attention to the new
Behavioral Health Institute that
you described
In the facilities budget, mint
budget information, So what's
unclear to me is that we had the
healthcare authority. Also
presenting before this body, and
they talked about behavioral
healthcare. You talked about
them, providing behavioral
healthcare on a global basis.
and then we have this institute
that's mentioned.
It's hard to understand what
this difference is. Could you
please explain that? Thank you.
Chair small representative
Herndon. I think that's sort of
the very simplest level. The
model that that you've
authorized in that is being put
in place is the healthcare
authority is really the central
hub for health in the states
where healthcare is purchased.
It's where healthcare is
regulated.
It's where health healthcare
policy is made in. So when you
think, for instance, about
behavioral health strategy, it's
really the healthcare authority
that that primarily drives and
owns that four state government.
The Department of Health
primarily is the population
health entity. How do we provide
that? The healthcare you don't
need which is you know, nobody
wants to go to the doctor,
right? Um in and so how do we
How do we help invest in that
and we're the ones who operate
the facilities that the state
has chosen to invest in and make
sure that we've got that
capacity and that we effectively
deliver it.
Um and so and so we're a
participant in a part of that
that network of systems and
services that provide behavioral
health, But it's It's really not
our job fundamentally to say,
what should we be doing? What
should we be investing in his
estate? Those kinds of things
Our job is to run the facilities
that we have when we need as we
do in the case of the Behavioral
Health Institute, and with
respect to the to the forensic
facility.
Make new investments to provide
quality facilities or the
veterans home that we just
talked about. Our job is to be
able to articulate that. And I
guess just as an aside in terms
of the the the new Behavioral
Health Institute facilities, I
came from a state that had a 10
year old as state psychiatric
hospital 600 beds.
Um and I I guess I will just
candidly tell you the first time
I went to the forensic unit
would be H I I was, I was
stunned and shocked and dismayed
at the physical quality of that
facility. Our staff do do great
work working in an environment
that is appalling, and that
that's simply has to be simply
has to be to add that to my
answer.
Thank you, Mr Cherry. Thank you,
Mr Secretary, and if we go back
to the facility that is at Las
Vegas. It's my understanding
that the people who are referred
to that of that facility are
those who are in the criminal
justice system primarily when
they can't withstand for trial
because there's some mental or
behavioral aspect of their life.
That is influencing are
interfering with your being able
to be able to stand trial and be
a part of the judicial system.
Is that correct? Mr Secretary,
Mr. Chair, Representative
Herndon. That's partially
correct. There are really four
Lines of business or types of
individuals that we that we
serve at the payroll evidence.
You just talked about the
forensic unit and that is a
large portion of the of the
census of behavioral health. The
relevance to do we also have an
adult psychiatric unit that
treats individuals who have
been, um been committed through
the court process to treatment.
We have a small unit for
adolescents who are who are
being treated for sexual
offenses, and then we have a
large long term care facility.
that really other than being in
Las Vegas and organizationally,
Being part of the Behavioral
Health Institute is not a
behavioral health facility, and
so it's a long term care
facility.
Um, much like Ford Baird or or
other facilities. So those are
the four lines of business that
we have there. Thank you. And Mr
Terry, Mr Secretary for purposes
of defining long term care. What
does that mean? How long is that
long term care. Also, so long
term care would be, uh, an
individual who typically is a
senior citizen, Um, who's no
longer able to live
independently.
Who moves to a facility that
there are sort of levels of care
and long term care, starting at
the top at skilled nursing
facilities down through secure
memory care facilities and then
assisted living, And so
basically, it's for our seniors
who are not able to live
independently any longer. Thank
you. And Mr Chair, Mr.
Secretary. What I didn't hear is
the behavioral health care
program related to substance
abuse or to addictive behavior?
How does that fit into your
program that you are
administering?
Part in the alternative. Would
you also bring in whether or not
the health authorities is taking
over that?
Got it. Thank you, Mr. Chair,
Representative Herndon. That is
part of what the Department of
Health does. It's not part of
what the Behavioral Health
Institute does. We have, um
alcohol and drug rehabilitation
facilities At at Roswell, ther
NMR C and in turquoise through I
mean, in Albuquerque through
turquoise Lodge. There are lots
of proposals out there to to
potentially do
Do additional things. The
healthcare authority doesn't
operate any facilities, but it
pays for facilities through
Medicaid or through, um, through
other federal grants that
purchase services, so they
purchased some of our facilities
were a Medicaid provider. Um,
uh, is like any other Medicaid
provider? Um uh,
So that's you know, we we
operate facilities they fund
facilities, including ours, but
including many others.
Thank you, Mr Chair and Mr
Secretary of you say that
Medicaid is involved in a lot of
the support for these. And if
someone is on addictive is a has
substance abuse are addictive
behavior. How long will Medicaid
cover their state? What is
considered long term for them?
Ah, Mr Representative Herndon.
Um, uh, so the long term care
phrase really is unique to
caring for seniors and is really
a very is not at all related to,
um, uh, to to
Behavioral health kinds of
services. I think I'll need to
respond to you more formally in
terms of what are the treatment
limits for individual instances
of addiction, But I think one of
the important things to that we
all need to begin to get our
brains around. Is that we? I
think we often think of of
addiction as an acute illness
and you get cured and then it's
kind of on you if if if you fall
back into addiction.
As opposed to thinking of it as
a chronic illness that has that
has remission and and has active
phases and needs needs lifelong
treatment. There are limits
specific to Medicaid in terms of
how long an individual instance
of care can occur and will
provide those to the committee.
So, Mr Chair and Mr Secretary,
That is my concern. So we have
individuals who do need long
term care. And I'm defining that
it is something 18 months
perhaps. And, uh, I am also
concerned about the fact that I
don't see that long term care
facility addressing addictive
behavior or substance abuse
within our state. And so what's
most important to me? Is that
how do we go about making sure
that that's addressed?
And it seems to be Mr Secretary.
I mean, Mr Chair and Mr
Secretary that that needs to be
some sort of coordination
between our state counties and
our cities. One of the things Mr
Chair and Mr Secretary that I do
like that, I think would be a
part of this coordinated care.
is this mobile unit that you're
describing and how that mobile
unit could be involved in maybe
a shorter term care?
One of the things that I would
like to bring to your attention
is house built 3036 and that I'm
sorry House built 34, which is a
study of how the state the
county and the cities will work
together with behavioral, health
care and substance abuse, as
well as with addictive behavior
and any type of mental behavior.
So I I hope that you'll be able
to look at that a lot closer and
determine how that might fit
into the bigger picture of the
work that you provide in terms
of behavioral health care, Mr.
Chair in Mr Secretary. That
would be incredibly important.
And then it's in addition with
respect to beds and making beds
available, I draw your attention
specifically the House Bill 36
That house Bill looks at a at a
piece of, uh of real estate
that's located in northeast
Alberta, Northwest Albuquerque
that was formerly known as
Desert Heels, for example, where
there could be more beds that
would be made available for
these types of situations.
I think it would fit in quite
well with everything that you've
described today. And then one
other thing, Mr Chair and Mr
Secretary that I would like to
bring to your attention is that
I'm most concerned about
individuals who are on substance
abuse or addictive behavior, who
may have a single Maybe a single
parent that need to take a child
with him Right now. I can find
no facility in the state of New
Mexico. If your child is over 10
years old that you can take them
with you. I'm most concerned
about that. I will stop when I
have one more item to make a
It's important to bring out
Is with respect to the
healthcare councils that were
brought up by representative
Allyson one of the things that
is important to bring forth is
how these, um these midwives and
doulas do take care of
individuals and how they are not
being compensated at the level
of them, which they should be
and what type of great chair
that they provide. So it's
unfortunate that they're not.
They're not in both the
executive or the LFC budget, but
I'm suggesting to this body that
we think about that Mr Chair. I
don't have my comments.
And that's where I'll stop.
Thank you. We're gonna go next
to represent Sanchez. Well, I
think we have We're We're one
hearing in over an hour in with
seven more to go.
Representative Sanchez. We will
allow closing comments for sure
represents centuries. Thank you,
Mr Charles. Be brief. I just
wanted to talk about the
federally qualified health
centers. I didn't hear much
about that. I know. Last year I
really advocated to put money in
for that. There's a large
federal match.
A lot of these facilities. I
think every member in here has
these facilities in their
district. There's
Seven alone in Espanola.
They provide are low income
families, medical services, So
I'd like to ask you. What do you
guys asking for in this year's
budget? Uh, how does it compare
to last year? And what is the
match? I I think it was 3 to 1
or something. Federally.
Mr. Chair, Representative
Sanchez, we we We proposed no
change in the budget, so
continuing the support that you
have that you have previously
provided matching federal
grants. I'm gonna look over my
shoulder and see if anybody
knows that match rate off the
top and can come jump up. If you
don't see anybody moving back
there. That means that we'll be
providing an answer to the
committee on that match, right,
And it's a little bit
complicated because there's a
federal grant dollars that we're
able to access and then they're
eligible for Medicaid and most
of the
Patients that they serve are on
Medicaid. And so there's a
different federal match for
that.
Mr Chair. I think last year it
might have been a special and I
pushed to add that in Ah
So if it's matching last year's
did you guys request a special
for that? I believe they were
included in our base budget. I'm
looking
We'll get back to the committee
on that definitively. Mr. Carol,
I'll get back with them. I don't
want to hold this up, but I want
to make sure we put adequate
funding for that, because that's
very important for our
communities throughout the state
for low income people. Thank
you. Thank you very much
represents Sanchez. Next, we're
gonna go to vice chair.
Adams.
Course.
Thank you, Mr Chair. Um
Two questions, Actually, Yeah,
um
The medic medically assisted
treatment services. Um, could we
get a quick progress report? Um,
I was reading on page 345 of
volume two that it looks like
that will be implemented, uh, in
2024, so I just wanted to check
on that.
Yes, Thank you. Cheers. Small
Representative Dixon. We just
expanded those services to an
additional round of of public
health offices. That landscape
has changed even since that that
bill was, uh, was better. That
appropriation was passed. Um and
we're able to, I think expand
even more quickly through the
use of telehealth and and and
those kinds of services were
also working in partnership.
With Department of Corrections
as they initiate treatment and
be able to have a handoff to
treatment in the community Upon
release, we do continue to
expect to have services in all
of our public health offices,
understanding that some of our
public health offices or a place
where someone goes once in a
while, they're not a full blown
office. But all of our regularly
staffed offices by the end of
this year.
Great. Thank you. Um and then,
uh, regarding the veterans
Hospital, Um, when it was first
funded and proposed, I believe
that we were expecting federal
reimbursement. Where are we with
that?
Thank you, Mr Chair
Representative in last year's
round of federal funding. We
were just below the cut line for
projects that were that were
authorized. Um, what we've been
told is that we continue to be
on the list. We would expect an
announcement about their federal
funding about the same time it
was last year about may for
funding that would begin with
the new federal fiscal year.
Um, we are reaching out to kind
of get a little bit of a read on
what does we're still on the
list mean exactly, um so that we
can get a little better sense of
certainty then then we maybe
have right now, but that's what
our expectations will learn in
May.
Thank you, Mr Chair Secretary.
So still on the list. Are there
things that we are not doing
that we need to be doing Not
that we're aware of
representatives.
Thank you, Mr Chair. Thank you,
Secretary. And really quickly,
uh, midwives and doulas. The
issue for that is Medicaid
reimbursement. Is that correct?
Correct? Yes. Then it was That
was what I was going to jump in
On the on the other issue.
Community health workers,
midwives, doulas. It's around.
What are the eligible for
Medicaid reimbursement. What are
the reimbursement rates? Are
they Are they sufficient, and
that's a separate issue, then
the Health Council issue
Um Kelly, or Mr Chair Members of
Committee. The LFC
recommendation includes money
from the early childhood
education and care Department to
transfer to HST to, um, have
jewelers covered in Medicaid
rates for the first time in the
next coming fiscal year and
lactation support, so those are
just a different budget.
Um uh, Thank you, Mr Chair.
Thank you, Kelly, but not
midwives. No, Mr Chairman. I
believe midwives are already
licensed through the medical
board are not necessarily
licensed there through the state
at this point, and so best
practices would be once we get
them, Um, reimbursement rates
through Medicaid to either have
d O H or the medical ward or
healthcare authority to start
doing lesson. Sure registration
so that we can show consistent
educational and skill levels.
Thank you, Mr Chair. Thank you.
Kelly. I'd like to ask that we
really look at the reimbursement
rates for midwives. Um I think
midwives doulas. Lactation
consultants are all
extraordinarily important when
we're looking at, um, child,
Well being, um and healthcare.
Uh,
So thank you. Thank you, Mr
Chair.
Thank you, Vice chair, Dixon.
And thanks for the great
questions and represent Hernan,
starting that conversation. Um
Mr Secretary. I want to go
briefly with, um
Ask Kelly first sort of a brief
summary of why our LFC
recommendations sort of
Doesn't There's a partial
recommendation from the
executive on reorganization
proposals from the department.
One is sort of bring that out.
Just briefly. First with you,
Kelly from the LSC perspective.
Thank you, Mr Chair, so the
reorganization initially was a
very large reorganization. We
did meet with the F A, A and D O
h in advance and let them know
that the LFC was not going to be
supporting that before you. The
full recommendations were
published to the public. Um, and
that we were amenable to a small
reorg. However, the LFC didn't
receive the information timely
enough to put it in our
recommendation of that small
reorganization piece, so it just
didn't make it in the
recommendation at that time.
Fair. Thank you for that. And,
um, anything to add Mr Ainsworth
from the executive perspective.
Mr Chair? No, I think that that
was probably likely. The the
reason it's not in the LFC
recommendation, but
Executive does support it.
Understood. Okay. Thank you very
much moving briefly than Mr
Secretary into sort of the on
the treatment side. The
addiction side. We're
Far above the national rate of
overdose deaths per per sort of
pro rata population per 1000
population.
The sort of trying to pull it up
here, But we've there's an
alcohol. Uh um, Treatment office
that you all are working on.
There's also funding on the
medication assisted treatment.
Can you give us specific sort of
high level?
Yes. Thank you, Mr Chair. I
think I think the in terms of
medication assisted treatment.
We just that was the end of the
exchange with representative
Dixon on rolling that out
through all of our offices
through the end of 24, which we
expect to be on target with
Um, uh, in terms of the the
alcohol office, we are filling
the positions in those office.
Um, very disappointingly. We We
had an individual who was had
actually become the head of that
office who ended up accepting a
position elsewhere. And so we've
had to fall back to re recruit
that position. That's slower
than we'd like. It's wrapped up
in all the other challenges,
leading positions and those
Kinds of things we do expect to
have that, um, finished shortly,
but that offices I would say
running somewhat behind.
Okay. Thank you very much for
that, Mr. Secretary. Um, I don't
see any other questions. There's
clearly continued work that's
necessary here, particularly
just around the facilities piece
to make sure
You know, we have some offline
I'd ask the analyst in We'll
have a health workgroup as well,
Um, to work to make sure that
we're not going into any
deficiencies for the upcoming
year to implement as many
suggestions as possible.
Ah, that are part of what
Secretary you mentioned sort of
part of the in
You know, there's probably
others, especially in the that
we're going to go. We'll ask for
the L C. Recommend members.
Thank you, Mr Chair. I moved the
committee adopts the LFC
recommendation.
It's been moved, saying by
Robson Garcia. Is there any
opposition to adopting that
recommendation for right now?
I don't see any. Thank you very
much, Mr Secretary.
Yeah.
Okay, We're
Was
Our state engineer to come on
up. We see Mr Sanchez there.
Okay, Okay, okay.
Okay, uh,
Mr Engineer. It's great to see
you and your teammates razor
white. Mr. Sanchez, if you can
kick us off from the, uh lfc
Good morning, Mr Chair. My name
is Scott Sanchez. I'm the Alex
analyst for natural Resources.
We'll be reviewing the request
for the office of the State
Engineer agency. 550, which you
can find behind have five
You can find more information on
the LFC recommendation in volume
one, starting on Page 154 in
Volume two starting on page 253.
Finally, there are supplemental
charts showing the agency's fund
balance and water rights
adjudication, Progress on pages,
62 and 63 of Volume three.
Here with me today. Mike
Hammond, the state engineer,
Hannah righteously White.
Um and Monica from D F a
Uh, the only real differences
between the FY 25 budget
recommendations or the Executive
increases General fund revenue
by approximately 2.8 million, or
9%.
Over FY 24.
Whereas the LFC recommendation
increases General fund revenue
by approximately 2.2 million, or
7.2%.
The executive recommendation
includes expansions of 34 ft
across the agency, whereas the
LFC recommendation includes
expansions of 27 FTE, supported
by an increase of about 2.2
million from the General fund.
The difference of roughly
553,000 is due to slight
differences in the number of FTE
funded for water settlement
negotiation implementation in
climate change resilience
programs between both
recommendation.
The LSC funds fewer positions in
the water resource allocation
program, where largely because
of current personnel surpluses
in that program. UNDATED In
allows the agency to fully fund
all new positions through the
use of recommended general fund
increases and vacancy savings.
Finally, the LFC recommendation
funds one ft more than the
executive in the litigation
Adjudication program.
And with that all handed to my
counter perfectly. FAA, Monica
Tapia.
Good morning, madam chair and
members of the committee.
Executive recommendation
includes an overall expansion of
34 F to eat within the expansion
is 14 FTE from term to
permanent and a seven FTE count
correction. These changes do not
impact the budget as the funds
are currently built in
The 2,000,769 0.6, or 9% General
Fund increase will fund the true
expansion of 13 ft.
Providing the agency and overall
funded vacancy rate of 94.8%.
The additional positions are
essential to the agency to carry
out the mission and purpose of
the organization, which the
state engineer will provide more
information on I will now pass
it over to state engineer's
state engineer, Mr Mike Hamed.
Members of the committee.
Uh, first wanted to, you know,
introduce myself. I was my
webcam in the state engineer and
with me co presenting is an
Aracely. Wait, Who's the
director of the Interstate
Stream Commission and also with
us here today is my general
counsel met Chris
Um and also the head of our
water resource allocation
program, which is our biggest
program in the state Engineer's
office, Mr John Romero.
With him is is the head of our
district six office water rights
office. Uh,
Um ah.
Mr Martinez And then uh, Also,
Javier Rodriguez is is their
financial analyst.
We also have Mr Jeff prim. Who
is the director of our program
Support group.
And Myron Armijo governor Myron
Armijo.
Ah, serving as our tribal
liaison.
Thank you. We have a brief
presentation here this morning.
Um, relative to our
Accomplishments and challenges
of just go through those briefly
and an update on a couple of
really key.
Provision in the Texas V New
Mexico litigation. Uh, we have
the the on the three state
consent decree. All states have,
um, breathe fully briefed this
for the Supreme Court. We have
also received
Amici briefs from 23 States and
10, prominent law professors.
Uh, that have weighed in in
favor of the three state.
Consent decree relative to the
position the United States
takes to, um, actually take this
to trial and and Lou of
accepting the consent decree.
We're also integrating, uh, are
lower real ground in middle rear
grand.
Uh, programs associated with the
funding that we received last
session.
Um uh, that is allowing us to
make substantial
Progress in working with our
local governments are too big
irrigation districts had an M R
G c D.
And and NGOs that are supporting
the work that we're trying to
accomplish with advancing.
Uh, these settlement for Texas,
New Mexico as well as addressing
our compact, um, delivery
obligations.
Um we also have several water
settlements and implementation.
Process going forward,
negotiated for
Specific Indian water rights
settlements.
Two are going through Congress.
And two more on the on the
precipice of going forward
through Congress as well.
Um And then Hannah Risley. Wait.
We'll discuss in a little more
detail, but one of our big
objectives that we received on
the next slide is the Water
Security Planning act that was
passed last session and we're
ramping up significantly there
to implement that.
And then I just wanted to
briefly mention our funds that
we've developed that were
appropriated to us that for 40.3
million
Uh, dollars. All of that was to
address
Mitigating drought and several
of our communities and preparing
Places like Gallup and Clovis
for the new water supply
projects are being built The
surface water projects that are
being built with significant
federal resources coming into
the state for those and are poor
city of Las Vegas who got their
watershed hammered by by the
catastrophic fires, and they
need an emergency water supply.
This funding will help support
Um
So moving on to our litigation.
Adjudication program as I
mentioned
Earlier. Um, water rights. Uh,
Water resource allocation
program.
Uh, our largest program that
that deal with all of our water
rights.
Uh huh.
Permitting. We've had nearly
90,000 permitting, um
Process this this fiscal year.
We've done a number of Cannabis
Act.
Um, validity, Uh, requests to
allow for cannabis production
with water in our state.
Going through an extensive
rulemaking process on the water
Leasing act.
Um, We also wanted to point out
on this slide that we've updated
our dam safety.
Bureau that identifies roughly
138 million.
Uh, in our highest priority dam
safety projects of need.
Ah, across our state.
In our little and a adjudication
program as I mentioned
We have successfully negotiated
and and actually signed at the
executive level for tribal
water right settlements to are
going through.
Congress as we speak. Um they're
they're going to be coupled with
other
Settlements of interest across
the state, uh, across the
western United States. That
includes an important one.
Um, in California and Montana
and other places. This is a
bipartisan issue in Congress,
and we expect them to try to
address the settlements in short
order.
Um we also are in the process of
beginning negotiations with the
six middle Rio Grande pueblos
for settlement in the middle
rear ground.
Um
Hmm.
In our
Program Support group. We've
addressed the number of staffing
challenges and we've had a
number of accomplishments. We've
driven our vacancy rate down
below 16%.
Uh, many of our recruitments are
for professional staff, roughly
two thirds of our our staff
requires professional degrees
and licensure.
Um and we have a number of
recruitments in process right
now, and we've also done a
number of in pay.
In pay, bond increases and
reclassifications to hold on to
the highly trained staff that we
have within our agency.
Um, we're making it a heck of a
fun place to work as well.
Um, I just wanted to also note
that historically we had 287 FTS
filled
Ah versus 312 back in January of
2008.
On the next slide. It just
breaks. We have a breakdown in
our different programs of our
staffing.
And relative vacancy rates.
At the bottom of that slide,
you'll notice that reversion in
our general fund operating
budget and FY 23 was only 26.
1007 $121 With that alternate
over to Hannah rise the way to
quickly go to, uh, accomplished
mission challenges within the
Interstate Street Commissioner.
Thank you, Mr Chair and members
of the committee and state
engineer Hammond again. My name
is Hannah Rise. Lee White. I'm
the director of the New Mexico
Interstate Stream Commission.
And I want to start by really
thanking you all for both the
funding that we received in last
year's legislative session. It
really enabled us to get a jump
start on a number of important
initiatives that will provide
some updates on here.
Um, and also thank you for
passage of the Water Security
Planning Act, which our agency
is gearing up for some really
robust public engagement in 2024
to shape the rules and
guidelines called for by the
act, and those have the
potential essentially to support
new Mexicans. Um
And preparing for the impacts of
increasing water scarcity.
The thing that's in front of you
this session that really is most
important for us as the
expansion requests related to
two state agency capacity and
our FTS having the additional
staff provided for in both
recommendations, but in
particular in the exact track
really enables us to support new
Mexicans and getting ahead of
the challenges that we're
facing.
Um, I think as you all know in
2022, the New Mexico Bureau of
Geology and Mineral Resources
published a really important
report titled Climate Change in
New Mexico over the next 50
years, impacts to water
resources.
That report is also called the
Leap ahead is the shorthand and
I'm sure you've probably heard
us say this before, but
basically what it said was that
we should anticipate 25% less
water in our streams and
recharge to our aquifer is by
2070.
This is why it's super critical
for us to get out in front of
those challenges that we're
facing and be proactive now, um
and so having the additional
staff capacity, that's part of
these budget recommendations.
This session is a critical
component of that, Um, in terms
of the updates I'd like to share
with you all. You could go back
to the previous slide. Sorry.
Um in the Rio Grande Basin most
significantly, and state
engineer him and just commented
on the work in the lower Rio
Grande. The funding we received
last session really enabled us
to. As I said, Kick start the
work down there. Um, we in the
fall organized groundwater
conservation program. It was
very well received. We received
62 applications.
For around 3800 acres to be not
irrigated for the next two
years. We also had a lot of
listening sessions in that sort
of part of the state and really
responded to the concerns that
we heard about the implications
of weed control and dust
control. And so we're building
into that program, the ability
for those lands to be, uh, you
put into a cover crop so that
the soil is protected.
Um, also, we are using the
funding. We got last session to
leverage federal funding. We've
received two federal grants so
far for 1.3 million to support
the work and that part of the
basin. Um, and as far as the
middle Rio Grande goes, we're
really looking at managing this
entire system. Holistically, um,
looking at how we can improve
channel conveyance, but also
habitat.
I personally think we can do
both better. Um, you can't get
perfect everything everywhere,
but we need to be really looking
at this system as a whole and
being thoughtful about how we're
managing it and working to
leverage additional federal
funding, particularly to work on
some reaches of the middle Rio
Grande, and we're actively
pursuing that, Um
I should also say we have
challenges ahead. It looks like
in 2023, or compact debit will
have increased. Um And so that's
why this funding and then the
staff capacity to really get the
funding on the ground That's
asked for this session is so
critical in the year ahead in
the Colorado River Basin, big
negotiations are underway
currently amongst the seven
Basin states.
That will determine the future
of the basin. Essentially, how
likes power and need or operated
The funding we received last
session is supporting that as
well, but we also need
additional staffing to engage
fully in that process. Um, it
was also very exciting. Last
year, we implemented our
strategic Water Reserve lease
with the Hickory Apache nation
That water 20,000 acre feet was
delivered to the San Juan. I got
to go out and see it in person
That was pretty thrilling. Um,
and that was partially funded by
funding.
Not for the strategic waters or
Last legislative session, Um as
far as the remaining updates on
this side, I just like to know
we're actively working on
improvements that you'd
reservoir to support connection
of the eastern New Mexico
Pipeline Interstate Stream
Commission actually owns that
dam and reservoir and there's
work needed there that we got
funding for to enable those
improvements so that we can
really support connection of
that pipeline, which will
provide vital water supplies.
Two communities in eastern New
Mexico. Next slide, Please, um
In terms of our work with us,
say Kia's, um, we have
Really benefited from additional
funding, also to increase our
staffing capacity. That program
for many years was two people,
um moving over $20 million in
capital and $2.5 million a year
in our second community Ditch
Infrastructure fund. We've now
built that program out into a
full bureau with five FTE s one
of those is vacant. Currently
we're working to fill it, but
that's made a huge difference.
The need is just increasing in
that realm, particularly as we
respond to the catastrophic
forest fires and post fire
flooding that we've seen
throughout the state, and it's
been good to have funding and
more staffing to support that
effort. So again, Thank you for
that, and then again back to the
planning piece were really
excited about what's coming with
regards to the Water Security
Planning Act. We will be hoping
to engage with all of you and
your constituencies in the year
ahead to help develop that
program.
We really want to see it Link
better to implementation of
planning so funding to actually
implement the recommendations
coming out of those regions. Um
and I think Let's see with that.
I'll wrap it up. Thank you so
much for your attention.
And under next slide, Mr Mr
Chair.
We just wanted to, um, discuss
the major budget considerations
Our agency has gone through two.
Uh, to support our requests for
this year and going forward.
We've got
Uh, you know about preparing
order state for persistent
drought and climate change
impacts is is a critical
component of our mission.
A growing component of our
mission.
And, as Hannah said, We're
focused heavily on trying to
build our internal capacity.
Ah to work closely with all of
our local governments and our
fellow agencies to leverage each
other's resources as well as the
extensive federal resources that
we have available to us, and
we're working very closely with
the Federal Bureau of
Reclamation.
The Corps of Engineers and the,
uh, Department of AG to really
take full advantage of all of
those opportunities. So that's
been the premise of our budget
request. It's It's a five year
planning horizon that we look at
so that we're preparing
ourselves to take on these
additional roles and
responsibilities that we were
receiving through, you know,
litigation settlement and moving
forward with
Troubled water rights.
Ah settlement implement
implementation
And also to increase our, um,
performance on enforcement.
We're behind the curve on
enforcement. There's a lot of
folks that are concerned about
water use across our state. We
want to make sure that we're in
good.
Ah, positions in each of our
district offices to be able to
have enforcement officers
assuring that folks are
following the rules of the road
in water use in our state.
Um, with that, I had, uh, we
have some budget sheets that we
could go through and discuss
with you or just answer
questions at this point in time.
Uh, thank you, Mr Engineer. I
think we have a number of
questions. So let's go through
those. If things aren't
addressed in questions,
Certainly we'll go back to the
sheets.
Okay, we're gonna start off with
represents Sanchez, please.
Thank you, Mr Chair. Um, I know
In a previous meeting, Lfc had
mentioned that there was no
federal approval for the tribal
water right settlements.
Ah, Mr State Engineer. When do
you anticipate, uh, that would
approval happening?
Thank you, Mr. Chair,
Representative Sanchez.
Uh, they are going through
Congress. Two of the settlements
are going through Congress right
now.
That's the real San Jose and the
Rio Hemas, which involves four
For Pablo's number of
communities and a number of
executives that are associated
with those two river systems.
There's two more that are poised
the Zuni settlement.
Um, and the real trauma portion
of the
Of the okay. Wingate Preval
settlement.
Uh, we had all four of the
leadership testifying before
natural resources.
Interim committee, urging,
urging support for funding at
the state level to demonstrate
to Congress that New Mexico is
serious about these settlements.
We've signed them.
We want to support them with,
uh, show of funding.
For even early use of those
funds that I can talk about that
in more detail.
But
It's it's
My my knowledge of what's going
on in Congress right now is that
this is a bipartisan issue.
Particularly in the western
United States. There's a number
of other settlements in
California and Montana and other
parts of the West that are in
line for settlement, and we
believe that there will be a
package of settlements going
through Congress, Uh, on this
next cycle, so that's what we
believe is moving forward.
Thank you, Mr Chair. I just want
to make the point. I think when
Lfc made the $5 million
recommendation out of the total
settlement of 35 million that
It was anticipated that the
I know this affects
Representative Garcia and
probably other people just
wanted to make that point. Thank
you, Mr Chair. Thank you very
much represents Sanchez. Next,
we're going to represent packet.
Thank you, Mr Chairman, and
thank you. State engineer
Hammond. First off. I want to
thank you for the work that you
guys did with highway. 60, New
Mexico. Six. We did have a road
collapse. Uh,
And so the engineer and many
other departments came in and
not only kept the road open, but
we're able to address that. So,
uh, Mr Chairman and, uh, state
engineer
I represent District Gate, which
is right in the heart of the
middle real ground district.
Last year, I had the opportunity
to go and see and tour
The potential flooding with the
levees that we had. It was, I
think identified that we had
somewhere in the neighborhood of
180 areas along the communities
of a slaughter.
Or Albuquerque, A slider lost
soon as in Berlin, Mr Chairman
with this record snow that we're
getting with a good it's good
for skiers.
But last year we saw record
level water flows and we saw
flooding and seepage and in
those communities, so, Mr
Chairman, could you understate
injured? Can you briefly?
Talk about those levees in the
irrigation systems and also the
flooding.
That we anticipated will likely
see this spring.
Thank you, Mr Chair,
Representative Buck. Uh, this
topic is near and dear to my
heart because I used to be the
CEO of the Middle Rio Grande
Conservancy district and in
Uh, 2017 and 2019 that that
entity was engaged in serious
flood Flighting levee protection
and fled fighting. Um, spending
millions of dollars doing that?
Um, and also the State
Interstate Stream Commission
brought funds to the table as
well. In the in a another
another a number of instances to
shore up those levees.
Their support their old spoiled
levees, but there's an
authorized core of engineers.
Uh, flood lovey building project
for the called the Burner Leo to
Berlin Levee System. 42 miles of
levees has been
Authorized through the word of
2020 bill that requires 25% cost
share from the state and local
entity. MRG CD will be the
operating and maintenance entity
for that.
But, um uh and we've received
funding from the state last year
through our special requests and
our capital.
Uh, to have funding on hand to
begin that crusher work with the
Corps of Engineers we expect
within the next 8 to 12 years
significant construction will
begin to begin to address that
with an engineered levee along
that 42 mile stretch.
Thank you, Mr Chairman. My my
point is really is the cost here
because for many of these small
communities
The 25%. Caution is not. It's
it's unattainable. It's it's a
burden. And so I just need to,
you know, bring that I wanted to
highlight, bringing to a point.
That when we're looking at these
small communities, you know,
we've got to make sure we've got
to figure out a way how we can
reduce the burden are smaller,
um, roll camera communities. So
thank you, Mr Chairman.
Thank you very much. For
example, bucket Next we're gonna
go to represent Garcia, please.
Thank you, Mr Chairman. Thank
you, Secretary. Uh, along the
lines just rips into Sanchez
mentioned a little while ago on
the Indian What Indian rice
Water settlement.
You know what? At the beginning
of this conversation months
back, it was 100 wanted 100 was
$100 million.
Then they went down to $50
million, and now we're down to
$35 million, and now we're down
to $5 million.
And we really need to address
that problem because you've
heard us saying, uh,
Water is life. You know, in this
this small communities are
dependent on the funds for the
and dams.
They do not have the funding.
And, uh you know, you mentioned
earlier on your conversation
that we were going to start
paying him out in increments and
my concerns are
We have the funding today.
You know we're we're next is
over $3 billion in funding in
the student in Mexico what
happens next year if that
funding is not there?
That's a mink insurance, because
if the fund is not there, we're
gonna have the same conversation
while we don't have the funding
to do it now.
And we really need to address
that, and I want a little bit of
feedback on you. One wise woman
change.
From when it started to her
right now, you know, even now
from $5,000,035 million, that's
a lot of difference. That's a
lot of money Can you touch on
That will be briefly? Certainly
thank you, Chairman,
Representative Garcia. Um, yes,
we, uh
When when we submitted our
budget request to the executive,
we did have $100 million.
The number of could put. Uh
There we go. Thank you.
Yeah, and and and And then we
discussed it and and we
determined that, um, exactly the
level that $35 million request
was adequate to send the right
message to Congress and and and
and develop at least some early
monies that we could work with
the real trauma area.
As well as some changes that are
we expect to occur on the towel
settlement that is already a
settlement and already has of
funding available through the
tribal water rights settlement.
Fund that is within the
Interstate Stream Commission. So
that was the executive request
that that could be supported. Um
and then the you know, the LFC
opted to drop that down to 5
Million. So there's a $30
million difference between the
executive and the lfc, and we
would advocate that, um
We can utilize that funding for
early purposes as well as, uh,
they would. It's a good number
to send to Congress that shows
new Mexico's, um
Um, dedication.
And and commitment to Indian
water rights settlements that
are before Congress right now.
I think he was secretary of Mr
Chairman, You know, you know, I
recommend that we really take a
hard look at what we need to do,
because the funding is there,
you know, and the people who
need this money out there to do
their their dams Intrasection
house to keep on surviving.
It doesn't matter of life and
death, but it's survival to
them.
And it's very, very important
Small, especially in the smaller
communities, you know this is
affecting grants and blue water
and and all of my district is
affected with this settlement,
and you know, we really need to
look at. If we can't fully
funded. It did bring it up to
what's
Should be right. Thank you, Mr
Chairman. Thank you, Mr
Secretary.
Thank you very much Represent
Garcia. We're gonna go next to a
representative.
Good morning to the both of you
Apologize for missing a
beginning of it.
I had a meeting where they
didn't just invite me to come,
They said I better be there. Uh,
So
Five or six years ago.
The state engineer's office took
control of everything below 3000
FT, which they had already had
control of everything above 3000
ft.
And so we're talking about our
Our saline water down deep.
Ah!
Not long ago, I was able to tour
the Kay Bailey Hutchinson
desalinization plant down in El
Paso produces 27.5 million
gallons per day.
In the cost of that water is
about $2 per 1000 gallons.
We need more water in New
Mexico.
Ah, well, I know one of the
places we're going to need more
water is down at Senator Resa
got some big manufacturing
plants already down there. We
want to put some more in
Uh, to grow New Mexico has to
have more water.
And and so now we're looking.
We're looking a little deeper
because the surface water uh, is
probably it's over appropriate.
Let's just be honest. It's over.
Appropriated in a lot of this,
the
The
If there were a call on the
system, which we know there
hasn't ever been a lot of your
junior rights are going to be
the cities and of course, the
votes are in the city, so it's
not gonna be pretty. We all know
that. That's why there hadn't
been a call.
But I think one of our best
sources for new water is down
deep.
Have you all been in the loop?
On the push to for I see some
money in the governor's budget
for the south plants. Have you
all been in the loop?
Where do you stand on that? And
what can we look forward to in
the future?
Uh, Mr Terror Representative
Chatfield. First of all in the
sanitary Syria. We do We do have
a grant.
With the federal government
Bureau of Reclamation to
actually do a pilot project with
some of the funds that were
allocated to the lower grant.
Work that we're doing down there
to actually take a look at the
opportunities in the cemeteries
area.
For for brackish water use and
desalination.
Um, but on the on the global or
global scale that you ask in
terms of where we stand on on
this source of water, we see it
as a critical piece to our
future, particularly for
industrial energy. New new
renewable energy development as
the next source of supply if you
will to meet those kinds of
demands across our state, so and
we do support
Ah, what the governor's
proposing, um for the strategic
water supply concept. Um, and
it's a concept at this point in
time, but I know they're going
to be developing the the details
of that through, um, request for
information documents from
possible producers that they can
partner with the state on
Um and and we also have been
talking with other folks, uh, in
the industry that would be
interested in developing
supplies. Uh,
For portable use non possible
use as well as maybe using some
of those minerals for, uh, for
sale, You know, fertilizer and
other things Lithium, etcetera.
So so there's a lot of
opportunity there and and we
have been in the loop on it, and
we do support it.
So much Chairman is the rule on
this water going to be
beneficial Use? Uh
Important diversion beneficial
use.
Was it ruled by the same, uh,
Same law as surface water.
Or
Well, water, Mr. Chair
Representative Chatfield, the
only role that the state
engineer's office will be taking
on permitting the development of
deep brackish.
Water would be the well
construction the permitting of
the world to make sure that
they're well constructed to
protect the overlying aquifers
that are fresh water so that
they don't you know, contaminate
those much like they have to do
in the oil and gas operations
when they're drilling wells for
that purpose, So that's that
will be our role. There will be
no permitting associated with
brackish water development.
Um, at least at this point in
time down the road it could. It
could become an issue. But for
now, there is not a permitting
requirement.
Thank you for that answer, and
do you have any? I mean,
I know what the cost is for the
Cape Bailey Hutchinson plant to
clean up
1000 gallons of water. Do you
have any
Outside, just 50,000 football
Park thought about what the cost
of a plant to do to do that
process costs per gallon or per
1000 gallons per million gallons
or whatever.
Thank you, Mr Chair,
Representative Chatfield.
Um, it's really
Aquifer specific. You gotta do
characterization. You gotta
understand the chemical
composition of that aquifer
before you design your treatment
system, And based on that data
and the amount that you want to
produce and the location your at
and the transport to get the
water where you need it, all of
those factors will will be
analyzed through this.
R R R F I process that that
Secretary Kinney, Um will be,
uh, managing to kind of gauge
industry, uh, ability to engage,
Uh, on that with estimates like
you suggest
So right now, it's so specific
to you know the location that
type of volume. You want to
produce the depth of the wells
all of that, and it's quite
expensive. Just I'm not gonna
sugarcoat it. It's going to be
an that next increment of water,
No matter where it comes from,
is going to be more expensive
than what we have in our water
water used today.
So, Mr Chairman, Mexico Tech has
some students working in the K
eight Kay Bailey Hutchinson
plants, So we're bringing some
of that knowledge back to the
state. Thank you.
Thank you very much represented
Chatfield. Next, we're going to
go to prison, Garrett.
Thanks, Mr Chair and thank
representative Chatfield because
the brackish water issue
Um
Do you?
How do you view you need to
increase increase like a
division within
The state engineer's office, or
do you see it going to the all
of a sudden there's tons of
brackish water in my district,
honey.
And so there's areas where we
haven't been so involved
necessarily with the state
engineer that it seems all over
the state. Uh, thank you, Mr Mr
Chair, Representative Garrett.
Uh, I think you know as time
goes on, Um, initially, it's
it's it's placed in the
Environment Department for the
evaluation.
Of this new sorts of supply the
partnership with the private
sector, etcetera that's squarely
in the environment departments.
Uh, mission at this point. Um
and we, uh, will be supporting
them in any way that we can in
that regard for the with the
permitting as well as I
mentioned earlier, but as this
grows
Bigger. Um, I see a role for the
state engineer's office. Working
with New Mexico Tech with their
aquifer characterization work
that they're proposing funding
for
Um and getting of how much
broader understanding and
knowledge and this will become a
factor in our regional water
planning as well for the
region's themselves to determine
how to best utilize their
brackish resources for their
specific needs in the region, So
we see it all tying together as
a as a primary. Uh,
multipronged resource.
Ah, when you look at everything
we need to do we need to. We
need to protect and preserve our
freshwater resources to the
maximum.
Uh, capacity and then take a
look at our new development.
Of for incremental supply, but
I'll just say brackish aquifers
are old aquifers and and it's
not a renewable resource that
they they will be drawing down
just like a lot of our
freshwater aquifers over time as
well. So so we'll be involved in
that kind of work.
Thank you.
That you represent Garrett. Next
we have represent Delacruz.
Thank you, Mr Speaker.
Thank you, Mr Chairman. I just
promoted you.
Oh, don't want responsibility
Neither do I. Um, Mr. During
Secretary.
The use of Mexico is woven
deeply into the fabric of New
Mexico.
Um, first by the native peoples
later by the arrival of the
Spanish to this day.
It's near and dear to new
Mexicans that use them
appreciate them for a number of
reasons, not just for water
delivery. Obviously, they
service trails and on and on.
But that being said, I suspect
that the use of probably not the
most efficient way to deliver
water.
And and long, long distances,
obviously, by Nate, virtue of
the fact that you have water
dissipation by wind and sun, and
on and on.
Um what are other countries
doing to
Mitigate the loss of water by
natural causes.
And do you know that if there's
if it's being done elsewhere?
Thank you, Mr Chair.
Representative dela Cruz.
Um
Most of our seculars are in in
the upper watersheds. Um and
they're they're his
Historic systems that they
designed are actually relatively
efficient for
You know that situation of
delivering water to the farms
and the upper watersheds.
Um, there are mechanisms to
improve that. Um, uh, it's it's
an investment and, you know,
drip systems in pressurized.
You know areas. I know some some
of the folks that received a
secular water. Do try to
pressurize it and use it as a as
a drip system in greenhouses and
and
And a number of things like
that.
Um and and those things will
will need to develop over time,
particularly as our surface
water begins to wane.
Um, as Hannah mentioned earlier
about the estimate of our of our
water supplies from snowmelt
runoff is going to diminish over
time, so people are going to
have to shift and adjust and and
in that process, I think there's
going to be some efficiency
development and and it's it's
been proven throughout many
places that that you can
Uh, efficiently used water. The
thing is a plant.
Always uses the same amount of
water where the efficiency is,
is the delivery to the plant.
And then that lost due to
Infiltration. And so there's
impacts on an agricultural
context about how you manage
that from from a crop production
perspective, but
So it's scientifically capable.
Uh, tense is there to do highly
efficient Use of water. It's
just takes a lot of investment
and probably pressurizing
systems and things of that
nature to actually make
agriculture more efficient, but
it's already happening.
The investments are already
coming because surface water is
not as reliable as it once was.
People are doing a combination
of groundwater use and surface
water to optimize their farms.
Um so it will evolve and we need
to invest in it. There's no
doubt about it.
Thank you, Mr German. And
lastly, uh, are you exploring
new ways of storing water?
Via injection into subsurface.
Thank you, Mr Chair,
representative Dela Cruz,
working closely with the New
Mexico Environment Department.
We're looking at recharging
aquifers.
That's one of the other, uh,
points on the spear if you will
of of of of everything we need
to do is to capture stormwater
effectively and recharge it into
the aquifer. Um, right now
there's limitations on that from
a from a policy perspective, but
we want to look carefully at
that, particularly in the lower
Rio Grande.
Um, now that this settlement is
coming through, uh, New Mexico
does not get any credit when it
passes the border above with
1000 CFS at the Technical Texas
New Mexico border, So we want to
capture that.
Storm runoff and infiltrated
into the into the aquifer for
reuse and recharging those
aquifers, and I think that's a
really good thing to do with
stormwater. Thank you, Mr German
Wilson, with climate change
happening in the loss of of our
Natural systems as they've
occurred. Historically, I think
it's critical that we do that.
Thank you, Mr
Thank you, Representative. Um I
have some questions, and then we
have a number of other
representatives on the list as
well. Luhan, Um, hours and Brown
and Armstrong.
Um and that's you know, before
we get to the chair as well, so
I would like I have two areas of
questioning, and I'm hoping that
we can just have short and
sweet.
Interactions.
Um, the first is
I want to understand who is
involved in the negotiations for
the water, right settlement.
What? What federal and state
entities participate.
Thank you, madam Chair.
At the state level. We have the
the Our office has a Indian
water rights settlement
negotiating team headed by Matt
Shea Chris through through our
general counsel's office.
We have a specific bureau for
that.
Um and and then we work with the
the Attorney General office
because they also sign off on
the settlement and the governor
signs off based on our
recommendations to her general
counsel as well. On the federal
side, they usually put together
uh, negotiating team from the
Department of Interior through
the Indian water rights
settlement.
Indian water rights office. Um,
and they also have the
Department of Justice,
individual involved as well and
that negotiations Um so, uh and
then the agency to your
reclamation also contributes to
technical information for the
Thank you. Um, Mr Engineer. And
if you want your general counsel
to come up as well, Um my
apologies, Madam Chair. Um I
would just want to add it is our
policy now to also include all
affected non pueblo and local
entities in the outside of the
negotiation processes. So as
representative Garcia,
representative Sanchez indicated
You see
is in the affected areas in
irrigation districts are also
part of the negotiations.
Thank you, Um and in those
negotiations, um am I correct in
understanding that the federal
counterparts
Look at the amount of funding
that the state has provided.
Um
Madam Chair? Yes.
And
Did the last year did the state
include any funding in the
budget for the settlement?
Madam chair. No, we do not.
And so am I.
Thinking correctly, that if, um
we have a lower amount this
year.
On top of not in including
funding last year. It's not a
particularly strong or, um,
demonstrative signal.
To the federal counterparts,
Madam Chair That's correct and
Along those lines when the state
does provide money.
For the settlement. Is there a
federal match component as well?
Madam Chair. Yes, And it's it's
normally like 10 to 1. It's a
big federal match 10 to 1 and so
the economic impact of that also
comes back to the state.
That's correct. Yes, it does.
Okay. Thank you. And what
happens, um, at the federal
level in the negotiations around
the country or particularly in
the West when there are other
tribes that are also engaged in
these settlements, Does
everybody get an equal amount of
the pie? Or does it depend on
how much you bring to the table?
Madam chair.
It can depend on how much you
bring to the table. The Bureau
of Reclamation has certain
amount of discretionary funds.
They can move here and there and
if, if one places moving faster,
they'll get the money faster.
Thank you. I appreciate that, Um
The other line of questioning
that I had was around the
navigable waters for the
interstate stream. Um and I was
just wondering, Um, if I
understand the attorney general
is involved in resolving some of
the disputes where we have
landowners that are, um
Putting up fencing, and I just
wanted to ask if there was an
update on that if we're making
progress.
Thank you.
Mr Chairman. Uh,
Representative Dixon, the
The litigation on that front is
really, uh
You know appointed
By the attorney general's office
were not involved in that.
Uh, you know, we have provided
some advice, but we typically
Uh, run into problems ourselves
in the field, sometimes for not
being able to access certain
points because of land order
behavior and in monitoring water
rights.
Cutting us off from, you know,
head gates and meters and things
like that, so we run into it in
the field ourselves and deal
with it on a case by case basis,
but were not involved in the in
the in the litigation side of
it. Thank you very much. And
thank you, Mr Chair. We have
gone through all my questions.
Excellent. Thank you very much.
We're going to go next to
represent the honey.
Thank you, Mr Chair.
Thank you, Mr State Engineer.
Thank you, Scott and all the
team here. Everybody here that's
working on these things is as a
member of water natural
resources during the interim, uh
Committee. I want to thank you
for the, um all the information
regarding the settlements and
where we are with that and just
All the eloquent questions from
our vice chair. Those are the
things that we had when you
answered and understanding that
process.
Um
With a litigation with with the
settlements in at hand.
How much faster do you think?
Because we were more. We were
prepared with those that we had.
We got the
The allocations and the
resources back to the state.
As opposed to not having them in
place right now. What would
that? What would that timeline
look like? If we don't fund
this, Mr Chair?
Um, Mr Chair, representative
Wuhan.
It's a you know, kind of a
chicken or the egg kind of, you
know, argument about that, Um
You know, we've identified about
120 Million of state met
requirements of the existing
settlements that we know are
going through Congress.
Um you know, if we if we delay
we will face that eventually to
be coming back to request.
Um you know a match if you will
of the federal investment to
implement that settlement.
Um, I think there's benefit to
to working with some funds.
On the early side of these
settlements because we can do
some early work with the real
trauma, secular groups on
planning and development. Uh do
you understand how they can best
utilize those those, uh, future
funds, and we can also fund the
house area? Uh, quicker if you
will, if we have a reserve.
Thank you, Mr Chair. Appreciate
the answer. I also wanted to
just
Go back to the budget in and
looking at if we if we do change
some of that funding, how this
and this will we go back to lfc
and looking at, um
P. 551 p 552, and just those
agency requests in the LFC
recommendations are because
there are discrepancies there,
uh, regarding or related to
water settlements negotiated
implementation with those then
have to be changed as well. Mr
Chair.
If we add more would we have to
add more to those line items, Mr
Chair?
Madam Chair, representative
Luhan. That would be something
we would need to discuss with
the agency to figure out if, um
You know an additional increase
in the special appropriation for
Indian water rights settlements
would require it. My assumption
is that
The budget request. You know
which the executive
recommendation funded part of,
you know, had a pretty
comprehensive plan for what they
think overall is going to be
needed in the next few years.
And so we want to look at some
of those numbers and some of the
FTE requests. Um, but again, you
know our our consideration at
Lfc. I'm sorry the committee's
consideration through lfc.
I was looking at vacancy rates
and you know how quickly some of
these positions they've already
got her being filled, and that's
part of how that decision was
made. Um, understandably, Mr
Chair. Thank you. Thank you for
the answer. I'm just looking at
this The whole and
Putting all these pieces
together in our budget. I want
to thank you.
Um, I think that that kind of
summarizes what I have on
questioning their the other The
other part. I wanted to ask Mr
Errors are climate change. Was
it silly Insee, Um, budget. Um,
we have some
Uh, discrepancy and the request
from the agency and from LFC as
well and I just want to ask the
agency the engineer what That
means when we're putting
together projects and looking at
those
Uh, the studies. If you will, It
goes back to much. I think about
what? Representative art to
look Cruz is talking about in
the
The science of what we're
dealing with under climate
change and how we have these
programs.
And if we're adequately making
AH, the budget available to
what? What we need to do their
Mr Chair.
Thank you, Mr Chair
Representative. We made a, um
very, uh
Focused.
And, um
Strategic
Oh, plan when we were developing
our budget request for the
executive and we came up with
what we formally believe is our
need of 31 FTS to be filled
either now or next year or the
year after that.
But that that that's our
identified need for internal
capacity development. And and so
the executive understood that
they came back with essentially
27 F D, uh, 9% increase, which
is great.
Ah, lfc support recognizes it.
They came back with roughly
about 20 ft increase with the
2.2 budget increase.
We if we if we got it this year,
we won't we wouldn't be
necessarily trying to come back
to you with expansion next year
because we would have achieved
our goal of getting the FTS that
we requested. But if you know
we'll continue to develop.
Our program with whatever the
Legislature and the executive
provide us. And, uh, but it's
still falls short of what we
believe we need for the
You know, for this development
period of of new workers that
we've, you know, achieved so
Absolutely. Thank you. Mr. I
think it's just really essential
that we live in an arid climate.
We have to really, really focus
on the water. Um, usage in the
science of what? How we're
losing our water. There's
There's there's a There's not
been enough work done. And so
we're suffering from not having
enough data and enough
information. And I think that
this is where this
Leads to in the budget. Um so I
just want to be very, very
careful how we're doing that,
and we don't have water. We
don't have anything. I mean,
essentially so and that's in the
under the scope of climate
change and heating.
Of our globe or
Climate, So I just want to
follow up with you on that a
little bit. And so you make sure
that we're meeting the demand
there and probably have some
other questions. But we are low
on time, and we're trying to get
through things and that would be
to the seculars and the $1
Million request you had in our
specials. And I, um I'm looking
at what do you have to
recommended? So I think I'm okay
there, but that was a question
that came up. I wanted to bring
to
The attention of this committee,
but I feel like the climate
change issue in the study and
the science and everything that
The attention of this committee,
But I feel like the climate
change issue in the study and
the science and everything the
data and the information we need
to make better decisions is
going to is one of the most
important things we need to do
and understanding where we're
going and how we're going to be
able to grow.
Economically and how we're gonna
be able to maintain and sustain.
Um everybody that lives here.
Thank you, Mr Chair. Thank you
very much. Resemble Han. Next we
have represent Alice. Thank you,
Mr Chair. Uh, Mr State Engineer.
A couple of days ago, we had a
meeting with the speaker and
tribal leaders.
And most of the tribal leaders
expressed concern with what's
happening with Indian water
rights settlement.
They say that some of the press
projects are on the verge of
getting approved in Congress.
And past experience that some of
them have expressed was that
Whenever we get approved, we
didn't have money on the state
side to complete or start those
projects. And that was a major
concern, especially with, uh,
difference in recommendation
between the FAA and LFC.
A difference of 30 million, so
they expressed sincere concern
to us as legislators and the
speaker.
Um
And my observation from the
discussions. Mr Speaker and Mr
Engineer is that
Sometimes we fail to recognize
some facilities that are a major
part of the backbone of that
agency. So just a statement
there
Thank you, Mr Chair. Thank you,
Mr Engineer.
Thank you very much. And Alison
represent Brown, please. Thank
you, Mr Chairman.
Mr Hammond. I have a question
about a non recurring request
Appropriation requests that you
made. It's for the Irrigation
Works Construction fund.
You've asked for $5 million, the
executive agreed to that some
and lfc said zero
So, Mr Chairman, Mr. Hammond,
could you please tell us First
of all what is the balance of
the Mr Chair Mr. Chair
referred to
Another. You have the document.
Um, Mr Chair, Representative
Brown. If you look in your lfc
volume of three, I believe it's
page 62 shows. Um the most
recent balance and projection as
if I think December 1
Um for both Irrigation Works
Construction fund and the
improvement of the Rio Grande
Income Fund.
And Mr Chair, Mr Hammond and
Scotland. What? I'm sorry. What
is that number?
Ready than I don't want to spend
time in my apologies. I do not
have that in front of 19.2
million
Would you repeat, 19.2? Okay,
Thank you.
Mr Chairman and Mr Hammond. Um,
so this is again a proposal to
replenish that fund is that does
not happen.
What projects are we not doing?
Mr Chair.
Um, Mr Chair, Representative
Brown. It's a bit of a
complicated situation, because,
uh, because of budget woes and
Uh um.
Matters of the in the past
associated with our General fund
operating budget. Um, the
agencies were tapping those
funds for operating expenses and
we've been working closely with
the LFC and and the Legislature
and the executive to to wean
ourselves.
Off of
Uh, the, uh
Irrigation Works Construction
Fund and the Rio Grande Fund for
operating budget purposes. Um,
and when you look at our overall
budget
Um, our general fund.
Um, appropriations for this
year.
Um
Is, um let's see. Where do we
have that?
About 35,000.
And, um
3.6 million
in General fund, and then the
balance is funded.
Yeah, about 12 million through
trust funds, so
Um
The the the integrity of the
fund as well. We are concerned
about over the long term, so
that's why we thought this would
be a good year Two plus that up
with the five and one and two in
the other.
In order for us to have the
longevity of the fund, um in
place and then parallel to that
that we would eventually shift
the majority of our operating
budget into the general fund
category.
Thank you for that.
I know we have an issue on the
Pecos River. I believe I
understand that the gates at
Fort Sumner need to be replaced.
And that's a very big dollar
item. Uh, I believe there's
something
But Mr Chair, Mr Hammond, could
some of the money from the
construct the Irrigation works
Construction fund be used for
that is working on are working
on a replacement.
Oh, Mr Chair, Representative
Brown? No, they that that That
fund is set aside for a
different purpose on on the
gates at Sumner. Damn, um in
particular, And then there's
also
Issues with MacMillan Dam as
well.
Um, that's that's a matter
between the Bureau of
Reclamation and and the
irrigation districts. The ID to
sort out and my understanding is
the Bureau of Reclamation is
going to be making some funds
available to them to actually
try to address that matter.
Okay, Thank you. That's that's
good news. I think Mr Chairman,
I
I have another question that
this can be a brief answer.
Mr Hammond, Mr. Chair regarding
Texas versus New Mexico.
Uh, we're seeing here that 23
States and 10 prominent law
professors have provided briefs.
To the U. S. Supreme Court. They
support the states and I mean
the multiple states position.
However, the U. S Department of
Justice opposes the street, the
three state consent decree, Mr.
Chair, Mr Hammond. Just give us
the highlights. If you would.
Why is the DOJ of opposing sent
decree?
Thank you, Mr Chair
representative around there.
They're really
Took the position that the the
Rio Grande compact was
Uh, put in place to protect
If federal project
Um and it and and and they are
also arguing that
That we're requiring them to do
things that the federal
government is not a party to an
agreement.
Um, is there to primary
arguments?
Uh huh. And and we disagree that
they are actually, not even
following recognition law that
requires that the state water
law is primacy.
Uh huh, and must be adhered to
indirect and a reclamation
project, so they're making the
reverse argument And that's why
23 states have weighed in.
Uh, against that essentially
federal overreach associated
with state water law and
management of our resources.
Thank you for that. And then
finally, Mr Chairman, Mr
Hammond. I haven't heard the
name Otero Mesa, and it's been
actually quite public discussion
about that.
I'm just curious to know. Um
What kind of water supply is
there? How much is there and
kind of what is the status of
That source of water.
Mr Mr Chair, Representative
Brown. I have not been involved
in any discussions with Jeremy,
So water development. Um in my
tenure that over the last two
years, but I imagine we have
staff that have been and that we
can. I can research that for you
and get that back to you.
Thank you, Mr Chair, Mr Hammond.
So I think it's something we
need to. We talked about water
scarcity, and it's my
understanding. There's a whole
lot of water down there.
And that could be put to
beneficial use. And I know there
Yes, modalities and all that
ourselves of that. So thank you,
Mr. Chair. Thank you Represent
Brown ranking member Armstrong.
Thank you, Mr Chairman. And and
I apologize. I've been popping
in and out. Uh, everybody wants
something. So, um
Quick question on your funded
vacancy rates. I'm not sure if
that was talked about already,
But once I went through your
packet, I kind of understand
where that is. So thank you so
much for putting that in there.
um and what you need it for, so
I appreciate that. My second
question is, um, and whether
it's true or not, I just want
you to be the bearer of the news
is when water rights are being
transferred, Um
Is the is the OSC, keeping some
of those water rights or as like
a charge or if I buy water
rights somewhere, Am I going to
be able to keep all of those
water rights?
Hmm. Hmm. Mr. Chair,
Representative Armstrong that
there is no
Reserve of what our rights
associated with
Quote the OSC or the state like
a percentage of a transfer
Anything like that. What you
might be hearing out there is
they call it a haircut
associated with the transfer on
a groundwater permit, and it
happens in the Roswell Basin
quite a bit because of the
distance and the impact to the
river will do will do a what
they call up, you know,
hydrologic analysis of a
transfer.
If it's away from the river,
there's an impact that's higher
closer to the river. It's less
and and and and they refer to it
as a as a haircut where we
reduce that transferred amount,
and it's just strictly I
hydrologic impact associated
with that particular transfer.
And that's maybe what you've
heard before.
Thank you, Mr Chairman. I That's
exactly what I'm talking about.
I just didn't know what was
called the haircut. And so if
any of those been anywhere other
than the the Roswell area
It's it's It's possible. Yeah,
in some of the other aquifers,
Mr Chair that we do have a
similar analysis that we do on
the specific impacts of each of
those transfers.
And we do it on surface water as
well, Just to make sure that
Um, the transfer does not
negatively impact other water
users.
Thank you for that answer. Mr
Chairman, and I was curious. So
how does that impact impact the
consumer Who's purchasing the
water rights if their purchasing
10 acre feet, but they only get
Eight acre feet after the whole
transfer has done. How are they
compensated for the purchasing
of the 10 acre feet?
Or is does it work differently?
Mr. Chair Representative Strong
It really is kind of a case by
case basis associated with
whatever their contract
negotiations is with the water
rights owner and how much
they're trying to get.
Are we are we do is analyze what
the effect is of that particular
transfer, and we share that
information with with the
parties and then they have to
decide how they're going to
handle it financially. Thank you
so much for that answer that
that clears up a lot. Thank you,
Mr Chairman. Thank you. Ranking
member, Armstrong. Uh, Mr
Engineer and team. I think that
brings us to the end of our
questions. A couple of quick
things first.
Uh, engineer him and we're very
well served by your leadership.
Since you've been here. I think
we've grown this budget over
44%.
Uh, on a recurring basis, and
his ranking member, Armstrong
just pointed to you and your
team have delivered really
strong results in the vacancy
rates have really gone down the
one piece and interstate stream
compliance But members, this is
a place where we can look on the
P S and D V side and see really
strong improvement and
Sort of bearing fruit on the
investment that has been asked
for and has been made.
So thank you, Uh, Mr Mr Engineer
briefly on
Can you provide us with sort of
a up to date summary and a look
ahead on the federal water
investments that we've been
receiving over the past couple
of years and what we're looking
forward to.
Certainly Okay, then. I know I'm
particularly interested on the
lower Rio Grande side where I
think there may be some sizable
investments. Hopefully that are
soon to come. And, uh so that
would be helpful. Um, the also
asked for for consideration
around
There's been very large going
back a couple of years. Non
recurring investments and we
don't have time to go into them.
Now. I think we may need to look
at language there to sort of
make sure we're up to date on
the language governing those
investments. Is that Does that
sound okay to you? Thank you, Mr
Kerry, As we have identified
some
Language only changes to extend
the period of time to utilize
those funds. So appreciate that
consideration. Great. Thank
thank you, Mr Engineer and sort
of connecting the language, time
and sort of federal picture is
super helpful. Um,
Yeah, with that. I think we're
going to ask for the LFC
recommendation, noting it's a
strong recommendation. There is
a few places one place where the
LFC is a little higher on an F T
think there's a we need to look
closely at the recurring FTE
side and understand if they're
sort of dedicated in the right
places.
Here again, based upon the
committee's feedback, perhaps,
um
Look very closely. This is still
a sizable general fund increase
proposed by the LFC, but we want
to be meeting the needs and
meeting what has been generally
successful implementation. And
then finally, I think we hear
from the committee a lot of
focus on Indian water rights
settlement. Uh and we would ask
on the LFC and also from the
executive.
To interface with our federal
partners.
Uh, ask about sort of the
proposed 35 million and, um,
sort of
Try to see if we increase our
investment. What That means that
the federal level here in the
committee's sort of support and
commitment there.
I know that's a mouthful will go
to the vice chair.
Thank you. Mr Chair. I moved the
committee adopts the LFC
recommendation.
Okay, It's been moved by Vice
chair Dixon saying my
representative that Indiana is
there any opposition to that
motion?
Okay? I don't see any. Thank you
very much. Thank you. Okay,
Members were gonna ask. We see
our Supreme Air, esteemed
Supreme Court justices here.
Very pleased to have them here.
Let's go straight into the
Supreme Court hearing. Um, we
there will be a lunch break
Alright. I think we're getting
settled.
So, uh, please kick this off
yesterday was saying will go
great to see you, Mr Still
ahead. Good afternoon, Mr Chair.
members of the committee. My
name is Austin Davidson and the
judiciary analysts for the LFC
today. Well, beginning with the
Supreme Court. Joining me today
is the honorable justice, Bacon
and also my idea fit
counterpart, Mario smugly to
If you would turn to tab Mister
David, if you could turn it off
and then pull it close to you
Quite sensitive. And, Madam,
just, Hmm.
Is that better? Mr Chair?
Yes, directly into it, And
that's perfect. Thanks so much.
Mr Chairman of the committee
would turn to a tab to for the
agency number 216 Supreme Court.
The executive recommends 1
million more than the General
fund and the LFC s
recommendation. The L C
recommendation is 193,000 higher
in the personnel category and
the executives recommendation.
This difference is due to the
LFC s recommendation funding
Three of the agency's requested
expansions in the base budget
while the executive funds them
as expansions.
The executive recommendation is
354,000 higher in the contracts
and 100 and 84,000 higher in the
other category than the LFC
recommendation.
The L C recommendation keeps
both the contracts and the other
category flat with the previous
year's operating budget on that
turn over to Mario anything
Mr Chair Committee members.
We've got nothing to add from
the executive side. We've
reached consensus and all
performance measures all handed
off to the esteemed great Chief
Justice Shannon Bacon.
Ah, thank you, Mr Chair, the as
you can imagine looking at the
difference between the EFTA and
the LFC wreck that we would urge
the body to adopt the D F a
recommendation.
The significant differences from
the perspective of the court,
and this applies both to the
Supreme Court in the Court of
Appeals.
Um, the things that are
noticeably absent from the LFC
recommendation.
Are
Any money for security for the
appellate courts at all.
The Court of Appeals has no
security None.
The Supreme Court has skeletal
security.
And we asked for we at the
outset of our budget process.
The Court of Appeals had asked
for independent money for
security and we decided to
collapse the two together so
that the two courts can work
together and share resources and
make the hit on the budget a
smaller by having one manager.
Type person FTE that would
manage all of the security and
then funding for contract
security for both the building
in Santa Fe and Albuquerque.
Um, the LFC wreck provides
funding for a manager, but
nobody to manage.
Um, And one person certainly
isn't enough in the past year in
the Supreme Court and the Court
of Appeals. We have had threats
of violence against the judges.
We've had bomb threats in
evacuations I've had to close
The Supreme Court because we've
had no security and I cannot
subject my employees to a
building that does not have any
security. We've had break ins in
the New Mexico Supreme Court
because there's nobody to staff
the doors.
And judges nationally are being
murdered in their homes on the
street. People were taken
hostage in the Colorado Supreme
Court three weeks ago.
This is
Hmm. This society that we live
in and judges are the target of
violence and the judges are the
ones being murdered in our
government system.
For decisions that they have to
make that are very, very
difficult but aren't always
popular.
Um, the idea that the courts and
we're the only two quarts in the
state, you know, the district
court covered district courts or
provided security by the
counties.
The appellate courts are not
I want to point out and this is
something that Mr Chairman
raised with me is that can't you
work with a P D Santa Fe police
state police. We have reached
out to every law enforcement
agency. We can think of and
asked. Is there a way for you to
provide security for us, and the
answer is universally no,
because they don't have
The band width for it, either
State police Captain Waller
Lovely gentleman was like we
would love to be able to provide
the security to you.
But I don't have that the person
power in my ranks to do it. So
security is one of the items of
difference here. That's very,
very important to both of the
appellate courts.
The other item that is important
to both appellate courts is
neither the Court of Appeals or
the Supreme Court had
independent fiscal oversight.
Every other court in the state
has
People that work within their
organizations that address the
school responsibility.
We don't have that.
Um and the recommended the LFC
recommendation provides no
fiscal oversight for either of
those courts, and that's
particularly challenging.
Um, when you're relying on you
know your administrative
assistance or a paralegal, or
whoever it is, who has a little
bit of bandwidth to be your
fiscal agent, and they're not
trained to be our fiscal agents.
So that's just basic.
Oversight and good use of
government money. You want that
to be done in an appropriate
way, and we had signals from our
auditors that that will start to
be an audit finding for both of
the court's not having any
fiscal, um, fiscal oversight in
terms of trained people whose
sole job is that fiscal
oversight.
The only other thing that I
would also highlight is while
the LFC and we're very
appreciative of getting a new
attorney
Um, we would very much like to
have two attorneys at the
Supreme Court new attorneys at
the Supreme Court.
The press of the work of the
court has expanded
exponentially in recent times. I
think you can see evidence of
that if you just watch the news.
Um, and how often we are in
court on emergency Ritz and
matters of great public
importance and having staff
attorneys to assist with that,
Adding to the staff attorneys
that we have is critically
important to the work of the
Supreme Court and the Court of
Appeals.
I'm gonna stop there because I
will be back here for the AOC
budget, and that's where there's
much bigger ground to make up,
But I'm happy to answer any
questions. You all have
specifically about the Supreme
Court's budget. The Court of
Appeals is here as well to do a
brief presentation on their
budget, but but many of the
things overlap for the two
courts, so I'm happy to answer
any questions that you have.
My chief clerk is here as well
and can get into the weeds on
almost any number that you might
have a question about. Thank
you, Mr Chairman. Thank you very
much. Just speaking. Okay? We're
going to go straight to
questions. We're going to start
with representatives.
Thank you, Mr Chair. Uh, which
chair I have
In my life experience had to go
serve on the board. Uh,
Many times.
Where
Someone had threatened my life
for a decision I made and I was
not allowed to, uh
Have any way to defend myself at
that point place where I was
meeting and it's it's not
A lot of fun, And I think, uh,
You know, it's important that we
preserve the life of our public
servants. I don't I don't take
it lightly. That
That, uh, the type of crimes
that are being committed against
our judges.
And a lot of other pervert.
Public servants and including us
You all saw the not violence,
but just demonstrations at the
in the round house the other day
when the
Governor.
I was trying to speak I You know
whether I agree with someone or
disagree with them.
I try to respect that off hold.
I think it's
Important that we provide you a
security.
What does it take?
The security peace. Mr Chairman
representative. I appreciate the
question. Um, we asked for
$90,000 for the security manager
who would be an employee of the
court working for both the Court
of Appeal Supreme Court in the
Court of Appeals and $460,000
for contract services. We have
to go out for contract because
law enforcement can't double
dip.
To use the shorthand. Um and so
we would engage with contract
services for the day to day
staffing at the doors and the
magnetometers and things like
that.
More or less a half a million.
Yes, sir.
Mr Chair. You know, the Supreme
Court is makes some pretty
Serious decisions. Thank you
very much represented. Chatfield
represent Brown, then rips it.
Dale Cruise.
Thank you, Mr Chairman. Um
And thank you So much for the
information. Um
I just have a general comment.
Mr Chair, I I really think
We must do it.
It is a co equal branch of
government.
It provides a vital service to
our state.
And I just am so disappointed
Every time we hear, um
The judiciary come and just keep
asking for more when we should
already they shouldn't have to
ask this much in this often.
And it looks like Mr Chair that
this is a better
Million dollar difference
between the LFC and the
executive recommendations, and I
just think we ought to know what
they need everything I see here
in terms of expansion, very
reasonable.
And I agree with what's been
stated Mr Chair about the need
for security for our Supreme
Court members.
Um
To me, that is more than
reasonable. And so I just want
to
Express my my support for giving
Thank you Represent Brown. We're
gonna go to represent dela Cruz
then represent Garcia and
ranking member Armstrong. Thank
you, Mr Chairman. I echo the
sentiments of representative
Brown. These requests and what
the
The Supreme Court justice just
highlighted or in today's
society, particularly
And also it seems to me that
when you have a budget that's a
significant as as this budget
that there would be someone that
would say it's a deficit in
their operations. Thank you very
much for
thank you, Mr Chairman, your
honor.
You know?
These people out here? Uh, Mr
Chairman make decisions to make
some people happy. And so we
need to worry about the people
that are unhappy. You know, I I
knew I did. He was a former
district judge that he got shot
on the bench.
Because the lack of security
You know, and it's very
important that we protect people
that are trying to protect
US.
And you know
You heard it through all the
committee right now that they
really need to get funded for
these are
It should be an It shouldn't be
a It's a basic necessity. That's
what it should be.
It's not our you have to have it
because you no matter what court
you go into an district courts,
they have security. But these
people don't have it in this
stuff. Just the government. Mr.
Chairman. Thank you. Thank you,
Representative Garcia. Thank
you, madam. Chief Justice. I
know So what I want to do
because we have a number of
general fund issues that also go
into, as you noted.
Uh, with the administrative
office of the courts, we're
gonna stick with the LFC
recommendation. We're gonna We
clearly need to
For the committee to Invest
General New General fund
recurring dollars in core areas
like us to do that sort of, um,
offline and comprehensively
We're going to hear everyone
today. Um, and look for the best
ways to do things so just to
sort of put it out there.
Madam Chief justice and justices
and the partners.
Um, we know that these we hear
the committee that these
investments are needed. We
wanted to do them
comprehensively. We want to be
partners with our colleagues in
the Senate, but we clearly see
Okay with that I would ask
advice here just for right now
to move the lfc recommendation.
Um and we'll go from there.
Thank you, Mr Chair for just
right now. I'd like to move the
LFC recommendation.
Okay, has been moved cited by
representing Garcia knowing that
we're gonna work across the
justice system. Is there any
opposition to that motion? Okay,
please. Okay. Understood Well,
so representative Brown and
represented Sanjana in
opposition.
Kate.
And we're gonna go straight
into the court of Appeals back.
Ah!
Thank you, Mr Chair. Mr.
Davidson. Would you like to
begin?
Oh, Mr Smee glia.
Madam Chair, Mr. Chair. My
name's Marisa Miglia DFA, budget
analyst for the judiciary. Um,
we are presenting in the Court
of Appeals often can tell you
where that is in your documents.
So sorry, Madam Chair is gonna
be under tab to agency number
215.
I didn't think about that part.
The Court of Appeals made up of
10 judges presiding that sit in
panels of three and the court
has offices in Santa Fe and
Albuquerque. They have mandatory
jurisdiction in civil non
capital criminal juvenile cases,
discretionary jurisdiction in
interlocutory decision cases and
administrative agency appeals.
Now the executive recommendation
is 647.3000 higher than the LFC
recommendation.
The executive recommendation is
432.1000 higher and the
personnel category and 39,000
higher in the other category.
The LSC recommendation funds,
one of the agencies to requested
expansions in the base budget
and also funds to of the
agency's requested after
Both recommendations fully.
Find the agency's flat budget
request for the contract
category.
And the executive recommendation
funds the agencies to extension
requests. The third was just an
FTE edition. So what's written
in your sheets? Not right. I
didn't catch that. My bad, but
we supported to, uh after years,
the funding and then 1.5 ft in
the expansion.
And the LFC funds, the
administrative assistant
expansion for the court repealed
in their base budget.
And does not recommend the other
expansions will pass it on to Mr
Davidson.
108
I don't have anything to add.
Madam chair. I apologize just as
a reminder.
After you're done speaking. Turn
off the mic. Don't move it with
the mic on and try not to have
to on at the same time. Thanks.
Alright, madam Chair members of
the committee again. My name is
Jennifer at trip. I'm the chief
judge at the Court of Appeals.
Um, I'm going to keep my remarks
brief. They're going to sound a
lot like Archie budgets have a
lot in common and the
recommendations are a lot in
common. I do just want to take
this opportunity to thank you
all on behalf of for your
support last year.
Uh, our budget last year really
short up our operational costs.
Uh, And with those additional
monies, we've been able to make
progress in our court. We've
been able to take care of our
building in Albuquerque. So I
really thank you for that, and
I'm really proud of the progress
that the court has made over the
last year and five years.
But we have more work to do. And
and so I just want to touch on a
couple of the differences
between LFC recommendation and
the I want to just echo the
chief justice's statements about
the critical need for both of
our courts to have
And each of our courts again.
The lfc lfc rock much needed CFO
and feels, uh, and the Supreme
Court and then for the Court of
Appeals that excludes funding
for an HR administrator.
Fiscal HR. They are the
backbones of any entity of any
governmental entity and
currently the Court of Appeals
has not staff and judges in two
locations. We rely exclusively
on AOC, the administrative
office of Of course, their
fiscal and HR staff.
They've done a fantastic job,
but the arrangement we have is
just it's just not sustainable.
L. C is not going to be able to
continue as our acting CFO in
the upcoming fiscal year, Um and
despite their best efforts,
they're not able to provide the
day to day instead these day to
day fiscal reports this is
um putting together POS getting
approval, pain and voices and
the light.
That's falling on our staff who
are not trained to do so. And
our, uh this lack of in house
fiscal and HR is just it's put
the court in an untenable
situation.
As of 5 P.m. today our chief
clerk who acts he's he's leaving
for another job, and I wish him
luck. Unfortunately, the court
does not. We have not selected a
replacement for him.
And so the duties that are chief
clerk had already taken over
because we don't have in house
fiscal folks we don't have those
are being shifted to me.
Or other judges and our staff.
It's just not a sustainable
model or judges are attorneys
are staff should be
Focused on doing the work of the
court on resolving appeals.
Timely, So I urge you
Adopting the executive
recommendation. I also just want
to touch briefly, um, a key
initiative, of course at the
Court of Appeals is the timely
disposition of appeals.
Our request site, three attorney
positions and DFA is
recommending all three. LFC is
recommending two of the three
and I would just echo the chief
justice's request to please
consider funding that additional
attorney for the Court of
Appeals. Finally, I'm going to
close, which is speaking in
support of the Supreme Court's
security request.
Um, as a chief justice,
explained our court on the, UM,
campus in Albuquerque has no
security personnel.
Oh, and this has never been a
good situation. Our courts of
approximately 15 years old, but
particularly in our current
climate, uh, and with increasing
security interests in our
courthouse, it's just, um it's
something we can't tolerate. I
hope it's something that you all
will not tolerate.
Ah, just two weeks ago, we had a
security threat at our building
because we have no personnel.
There was no way for us to
ensure that our staff our judges
have been evacuated from the
building instead. We we we
waited for law enforcement. I
was on it, but it's just, uh
Not a situation that madam chair
members of the committee.
Ah, I'll end by drawing your
attention to the one page flyer
that provides a little more
detail in terms of, um drying
the differences between LFC and
DFS recommendations, and, uh,
I'll end by respectfully urging
this committee to adopt the
executive recommendation for the
Court of Appeals.
Thank you so much for your time
for your consideration, and I'm
happy to answer any questions
you might have. Thank you so
much. We do have questions from
the committee. We're going to
start with representative Luhan
and then go to representative
Garrett.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Thank
you, Um
Judge I. It's good to see you
Good to see you often anymore.
Um, I just want to say
And ask a question about and
maybe I'm off on this, but we
passed it a lot. We passed
statue in the consolidation some
of our courts and
administration efforts with AOC
is that correct?
Madam chair for the question,
and I apologize if I'm not
Quite understanding there. There
certainly was consolidation
with the magistrate courts under
our district courts in terms of
consolidation with our appellate
courts or the like. I'm not
aware of it. That's what I want
to know what we did. You know,
there was some consult, so I
guess it just brings to mind
that there's probably some
interest in in some of these
other efforts. So
To walk me through it. What is
AOC responsible for you
administratively?
Madam chair, So currently AOC
provides full human resources
support for the court of it.
Resources administrator at the
court and then they also are
acting chief financial officers,
so they provide in that regard
because of their limited
resources, their limited staff
they really are not in a
position to provide data.
Perfect. Thank you. I think that
you know, this just goes to
what's been asked of us for a
few years now and getting the
support places and as as an
experienced human resource
director, I think that it can't
speak enough about the
importance of having that that
person.
Or that position in place. Um, I
think that that's something we
need to look at. And we should.
Maybe do something across all of
our agencies and courts and see
where we are with our HR.
Performance and administration
because this is coming out and
too many ways that are affecting
affecting our workforce
affecting how we're getting
things done with pay with our
pay bands and information, and I
think that
And I'd like to say again under
the previous administration.
There was a there was discord
around this issue with our HR
professionals. So I hear you. I
sympathize with you on that, but
I think we I think that's a
bigger problem, and I'm glad
you're drawing it to our
attention under, um your office.
So thank you for that. And thank
you for all your work that you
do. I am concerned about the
safety madam chair.
Um, We're hearing that from a
different, um, courts and I
think that that is something
that is
Very necessary for us to be
focused on. Um and you mentioned
in this climate and that would
that means is we are and I would
drop to the attention of
everyone listening into the our
membership here that we're
moving into an election cycle.
We are moving into a place where
There is discord there is there
is a
There are things that are
happening to elected officials
that should not be happening.
and if we don't have things in
place to protect them, that's
includes all of our elected
officials. We are we are not
doing this service that we need
to do to make sure that the
safety is, um Thank you,
representative. We're going to
go to representative Garrett and
then representative Syriana.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Thank
you very much. Judge.
Um, I have one question and then
another on page nine of book two
It, says the court reports high
turnover rate of judges over the
past four years has contributed
to a significant backlog and
increase in average time to
deposition. Can you just comment
on that?
And if that's been addressed
Thank you, Madam Chair,
Representative Garrett. Thank
you for that question. Ah, so
the Court of Appeals has
experienced significant judicial
turnover beginning in about
2015.
I joined the court in 2018 and
all of my colleagues, except one
have turned over twice. Uh so
we've had a lot of judges
retire. A lot of judges be
promoted to our Supreme Court.
Uh And so that's the judicial
turnover whenever we have
judicial turnover, because our
budget up until about last year
was a very flat budget we really
relied on
So when a judge left that
position was not necessarily
feel filled right away, so we
only had a complement of maybe
eight judges. Seven judges
decide Workload was the same. So
with those judges leaving our
backlog of cases and so the
high, uh, in terms of our case
backlog those cases waiting for
our judges to decide them.
I was in May of 2018, and I
believe it was personally.
Uh, the court has been
singularly focused on reducing
the court and today as of the
end of last month in December,
our case backlog was 215 cases.
So we've decided, you know an
additional press 160 cases over
the cases that are coming into
in the door. I'm very proud of
that. But we have more work to
do. We need to reduce that
backlog more and we need to
Ah, reduce the time it takes for
us to decide all of the appeals
and so, um, our our budget
request this year is really
about a couple of things right?
so ensuring that we have support
for our judges and for our
attorneys so they can focus on
the courts work so they can
focus on deciding those appeals
And then also, uh
Getting additional attorney
support so that we have thank
you, Madam Chair and thank you,
judge because you really
Explain. I mean, security is
kind of obvious Frontline thing,
but the people that are doing
all the paperwork the H R. All
of us have staff person right
now, But 330 days we don't and I
don't know about anybody else.
but having someone that can do
all the stuff.
Allows us to focus so it really
is, as the Supreme Court judge
said already, um, all those
Quote unquote minor positions
are vital. So thank you for
thank you, representative,
representative Sarah Nana and
then representative Brown.
Chair. Thank you, Madam Chair
and thank you for your
presentation. You know, I have
sat in this chair for this. I've
been in this body for eight
years and we have never funded
you at the level you needed to,
and I believe it is time or we
need to go to give you a good
explanation on why we're not
doing it because you're one of
the most important branches.
You're the third branch of
government. We need to fund you
and
It's just I just found it my
first year so sad to listen to
you guys in and understand if
everybody knew what we don't
know how we don't fund you, You
know they wouldn't understand
why, and I don't understand why,
but I totally support you. I
understand what you need, like
representative, Garrett said.
It's about safety for everyone,
and you do a huge job and a
great job for a state. So I am
hoping
Everyone is listening, and we do
find you at the level you need
to be. So thank you for what you
do. Thank you.
Thank you, Representative Brown
and then representative Garcia.
Thank you, Madam Chair, so I'm
going to be a little bit
repetitive. I think on this, um
In my opinion, madam chair and
members of the committee. These
are all very reasonable requests
for the Court of Appeals.
And we all know that staffing
really does matter. In fact,
this committee could level we
need to without our staff. And
so we just need to keep that in
mind. And then, um, Madam chair
I
I believe that if we
Gives the Court of Appeals the
executive request. We grant that
that maybe the next time we meet
will be asked for a flat budget.
Rather than an increase. So
maybe we pay now.
And actually pay less later.
Just get it done.
Thank you, representative
Representative Garcia and then
Figueroa. Thank you, Madam
Chair, your honor.
You know, I've been listening to
all the conversation.
And you know, staffing is
important.
But on the second hand
If you're foolish staffed and
they're not safe for the working
out.
They don't work. As you know,
You're not as proficient on what
you're trying to do. If you're
not If you're not securing your
job, If you're afraid I was
going to happen. You know
they're not coming back to
security.
You know, and, uh
Everything is important, but if
you're not securing your
position, then it doesn't matter
matter what you're doing. You
know, we really need to look at
Mary at all I've heard is
security security security?
And that is very important, You
know stuff is important, but
security is more important for
the people we have there. Just a
common Madam chair and
Ragnar. Thank you for being here
today.
Thank you, representative
Figueroa. Thank you, Madam Chair
and thank you for the
presentation.
My comments stem from a little
bit page 10 the purpose of our
Court of Appeals program is to
provide access to justice.
And to resolve disputes justly
and timely and these are
critical elements. Pillars of
public safety across the board.
We have to
Fund these as needed my question
for the judges around fiscal
responsibility of fiscal agent
Because we demand fiscal
responsibility and
accountability of all our
agencies and all branches of
government. Um, how are you
handling it right now? You
mentioned briefly.
Madam vice chair that it just
falls to other staff.
Um, And is it a question of
training?
Can we fund training for staff
to handle this?
Differentiate, please the need
for a staff person dedicated to
this versus perhaps just
training currents Death.
Thank you, madam Chair, so
currently we have, uh and
employer legal who is doing her
principal duties?
As a paralegal, and then she's
adding on top of that fiscal
duties. She's an exceptional
person.
Ah, however person and so
It's not. I don't think, uh,
madam Chair representative, a
matter of additional training
for this individual, It's really
that we need a dedicated chief
financial officer. We need the
checks and balances in terms of
the compliant with the
procurement code to have an
additional financial
specialists. We need folks who
are specifically trained, that
is their profession.
Thank you, Madam Vice chair and
judge. I absolutely agree. These
are complex issues. HR and
financial are complex issues
that are areas of specialty that
should not be slowing down our
court system because we aren't
funding them, So I appreciate
the fact that we are going to
revisit this.
And look at
Clearly and obviously security
but also the financial officers
and age.
Thank you. Um, I do not see any
other members on the list.
Um, I do think that we're
noticing a trend, so if I could
entertain an emotion, uh, in the
same vein as the previous
motion, you don't have to
restate it all but taking the
LFC recommendation for the time
being, as we work on
Further step. Yes.
Temperature.
I moved the LFC.
Recommendation.
Wonderful. Um, so we have a
motion made by representatives
Chatfield with his second from
representative Armstrong. Any
opposition? Yes, uh, okay to to
members in opposition, Jackie
you've got representative Brown
and Sarah Nana, Uh, and
opposition just for now.
Thank you so much. Madam Chair.
Yes. So they're just for now.
Klaus, do we have a wind close?
Do we have a win? Win win when
we're going to follow up? Yes.
Um yes, we will.
I believe that our chief of
staff will be talking to all of
us later today. Yeah.
Um so we're going to move on to
the administrative office of the
courts, and so for members, um,
it is agency to 18 so also
behind Tab to, um and Mr
Davidson, you want to kick us
off?
Yes, Madam Chair.
Madam chair, beginning with the
overview of the administrative
Office of the courts.
Which will be on Page four.
The executive recommendation is
5.6 million higher than the LFC
s recommendation.
Differences exist and all of the
budget categories and each of
the agency's divisions.
Regarding the base. The LFC
recommendation is 5.1 million
higher than the executive
recommendation in the agency's
overall personnel category. The
executive recommendation is
898,000 higher contracts.
Then in the L. C recommendation
at 6.5 million higher
And the others category than the
LFC recommendation. Now I'll
turn it over to Mario. He's
going to be discussing the
administrative support program
of the AOC.
Madam Madam Chair Committee
members, P Code P 559
administrative support for AOC
in revenue. The exactly
recommendation for General fund
is 1 million higher than the LFC
s. Both recommendations fulfill
the agency's request to transfer
funds from administrative
support to specialty courts for
the pretrial services program.
Recommendations will fill the
agency's request to accept moved
funds for the jury and witness
program within administrative
support.
The Alessi recommendation for
the fund balance category takes
into account historic funding
levels.
And the base lfc recommendation
is 1.9 million higher than the
executive recommendation. The
personnel category the
executives reduction in this
personal category is spread out
through other budgetary
categories.
And, um
Performance in this, uh, P code.
We reached consensus and the LSC
funds to of the agency's five
requested expansions. Executive
recommendation does not fund any
of the agency's expansions
before we move on to the next P
code. I just want to stress that
the Big General Fund increased
that the executive supported for
administrative office of the
courts.
Has to do with the HB 139 the
funding that was voted by you
guys and signed by my guys, um,
to remove the post adjudication
fees from, uh
Our courts and transport in the
general fund, so the executive
viewed it essential to fund
this primarily as we were
considering this request. So for
the next P code, I'll pass it on
to Mr Davidson. Thank you, madam
Chairman now turning to P code
560. This is for the statewide
judiciary Executive
recommendation for the General
fund is 1.9 million higher.
Than the LLCs recommendation.
This difference is due to the
executive recommendation using
1.9 million in general funds to
cover the offset of the lost
court fees.
The LFC is recommend instead of
the General fund.
Both recommendations fulfill the
agents revenues this being due
to the loss of the court fees,
the record fund balance by this
1.9 million.
The LFC recommendation is 3.8
million higher than the
executive recommendation in the
personnel category.
The LFC recommendation keeps
personnel flat, with all the
executive reduces personnel by
3.8 million.
The executive recommendation is
650,000 higher than the LFC s
recommendation and contracts
category and 3.1 million higher
than the LCS recommendations
increases to contracts and other
by the erected by the executive
or
Are covered by the reduction.
I'll turn it back over to Mario
to discuss with Madam chair.
Thank you, Austin, uh P code 610
Magistrate, Court or court
operations as AOC calls it and I
will try to get changed and bfm
one day. Um, revenue, the
executive recommendation for the
General fund is $2.7 million
higher.
Then the LFC recommendation.
Both Rex fulfill the agency's
projected decrease in other
revenues reduction is due to the
loss of court fee revenues.
In the basic Executive
recommendation is 574,000 higher
than the LFC recommendation in
the personnel category and 1.5
million higher in the other.
Both recommendations fulfilled
the 932,000 in
Decrease in the contracts
category, and they both
Cover the recommendations for
the magistrate, court leases and
those increases.
The LFC recommendation funds a
portion of the agencies
Projected Courtney lost by
sweeping funds from the Water
Rights adjudication fund and
placing them in the magistrate.
Court Warrant Enforcement Fund.
Executive recommendation.
Covers 2.7 million of the 3.1
million projected loss with
General fund revenue. We reach
consensus and our performance
measures and targets and we do
not recommend any of the
expansions for this P code.
Onto the next 1620. Mr Austin.
Thank you.
Thank you so much, Mario.
The L. C recommendation for the
General fund is 94,000 higher
than the executives
recommendation.
Both recommendations. The
revenue do philosophy, court
fees and both recommendations
fund use through the General
fund.
Regarding the base. The LFC
recommendation is 2.7 Nation,
the majority of the differences
between the two recommendations
is in the drug court program
where the LCS recommends 2.6
Nation.
The LFC recommends 332,000 more
than the executive for the Drug
Court operating budget and 553
more for the court. The
executive recommendation is
505,000 higher than the pretrial
services and 255,000 higher.
In the court appointed special
advocate program.
Both recommendations. The jury
and witness program from the
special court division engine
The recommendations also fulfill
the agency's request to move
funds from the admin support and
the magistrate court divisions
for the pre trial services
division.
Madam Chair representatives.
Thank you also knows a great
summary and I will pass it off
to Chief Justice. Bacon and
Director Arthur Pepin.
Thank you. Chair Dixon.
At the outset.
At the outset, I would like to
draw your attention.
To my colleagues.
Sitting to my left Senior
Justice Michael V. Hill.
Justice David Thompson.
Justice Julie Vargas and Justice
Brionna Zamora.
This is every member of the New
Mexico Supreme Court.
We have never until today.
Felt it necessary for the entire
court.
To appear before any committee
of the Legislature. Never
But today is that day because of
the calamitous effect.
Of the LFC recommendation, and,
to a lesser extent, the
recommendation.
On our budget.
The impact that it will have on
the courts and the impact it
will have on public safety.
The recommendations have
significant and real effect on
jury trials, warrant
enforcement, pretrial services.
Technology.
I will be tethering. My initial
comments to the outline provided
to you that you all received
earlier today yesterday every
day it's up on the screen.
The bright green piece of paper.
I will then turn to other
judicial priorities that will
come before you that we haven't
even had time to think about in
this session because of what's
happening to the AOC based
budget.
So last session, the Legislature
and the governor rightfully
passed a bill that eliminated
using post adjudication fee
funding to fund the judiciary
and other important government
entities and functions.
The conversation we had
regarding the impact of that
bill passing was that the fee
funding would need to be
replaced with General fund
money.
We had that conversation at
every turn. It was in the F I R.
There was no surprise about any
of that yet. We are here without
any replacement of that fee
funding, much less expansion of
any program for the judiciary
statewide.
Due to the elimination of post
adjudication fees just to bring
us where we where we were last
year. The AOC needs $7.833
million.
In recurring general fund
appropriation. Lfc s framework
provided only $979,000.
For that.
The D F A recommendation
replaces 6.541 million of that,
So it's a much
Better step in the right
direction, but we still have
some shortfalls in judiciary in
the jury fees.
Which I will explain here in a
moment.
So I'm gonna walk through jury
trials weren't enforcement
pretrial in the like and the
order on the green piece of
paper, But I'm going to start
with
Article two Section 12 of the
New Mexico Bill of Rights.
The right of trial by jury.
As has heretofore existed shall
be secured to all
And remain in Violet.
Related to that constitutional
directive to all of us.
Our statutes passed by this
body.
Person summoned for jury service
are to be paid.
For travel.
To the courthouse where they
have been summons.
And person summons for jury
service and jurors shall be
compensated for their time and
attendance.
In service at the highest
prevailing state minimum wage
rate That's found in M s a 38-5
dash 15.
And related to that, in very
importantly, is an M s a 34-9
Dash 11, which explains how
these funds are to be used not
just for the payment of juror
time.
But it's also to pay for the
expert witnesses that the
district attorney and the public
defender's rely on to move their
cases forward.
Medical examiners, gun residue
experts Ballistics, All of that
money comes out of the AOC.
Jury fund.
So by creating drastic cuts.
To the jury fund for the
judiciary.
And this applies again. This
particular line item applies
both to LFC and D. F a
Jury trials will end in the
state of New Mexico in December.
There will be no money.
For the expert witnesses
required by the district
attorney to make to meet their
burden of proof.
Individuals accused of crime
will not be able to adequately
defend themselves because of the
lack of there has been a 67%
increase in jury trials in the
state of New Mexico, which is a
good, healthy, robust public
safety thing.
Um
But
The funding provided to the
courts because of the
elimination of fee funding also
doesn't recognize the increase
in minimum wage that were
required to pay all jurors.
So there's a brewing storm
related to jury trials, and Mr
Pepin will get into greater
detail as we move forward, But I
want to give you the highlights.
Um
This is the appropriation
provided will also eliminate
four statewide jury. Next is
warrant enforcement and this is
found in the AOC Magistrate tab.
It's a holdover from the days
when the Magistrates were under
the auspice of the
administrative office of the
courts. But this is about
warrant enforcement.
Lfc s recommendation only
provides 27.8% of the funding
for the warrant division of the
Administrative Office of the
Courts.
It will require laying off 35
employees who are largely are in
Dona Ana County. The warrant
enforcement group for the court
does
To really critical things.
First. They are the place where
everybody in New Mexico can
place a phone call and find out
about anything related to their
case.
Last fiscal year they fielded
over 100,000 phone calls.
Assisting New Mexico's new
Mexicans in the court system.
We don't have the ability to
take that on internally
individual courts because we
don't have the staff to do that.
But I think more impressively.
In FY 23 what the Warrant
enforcement employees were able
to do with warrants they process
5771 new warrants.
And facilitated the surrender of
defendants who had outstanding
warrants to the tune of 20,800.
And 62.
North of 20,000 warrants were
cleared by this group of people.
You all gave money to the city
of Albuquerque last year.
For them to improve their
warrant. Um, clearance and they
cleared with that funding less
than 2000 warrants. They were
very important warrants to clear
no question about it.
But if you're looking for
investment of dollars in a
fiscally responsible way,
The folks in our warrant
enforcement division.
Um
Do you just tremendous amazing
work, clearing those warrants.
And what that does is, it
provides more time for officers
to be on the streets.
Because if you pull somebody
over for speeding or because
their tail lights out, or any
number of those traffic
violations, and they run that
person's information through the
system, and they find out
there's a warrant.
They have to arrest the
individual impound their car.
Wait for backup, then take that
individual to jail.
That entire process cost time
and money.
In terms of law enforcement
being on the streets.
So this has a two way effect.
First, we clear the warrants out
and we get people right cited
and compliant with the law.
But it also impact the day to
day work of law enforcement.
Whether it's a PD, sheriff,
state police and the like.
Next alternate to the technology
funding in the AOC budget. The
LFC recommendation does not
replace $2.675 million of our
tech technology funding.
What this will result in is no.
Updates expansion of any kind of
technology in the judiciary.
Every penny will be spent on
people.
Because we need to pay their
salaries so that we can meet the
needs of the judiciary. Um,
keeping our network running,
providing our case management
system and helping protect from
cyber attacks. That will be the
sum total of what we're able to
do with technology in the
judiciary. Despite the demands
that we become a much more
technology driven, proficient
reliant
Branch of government.
Last on the green sheet is
pretrial services.
LF C and D F a
Provide the judicial branch with
no funding.
To complete implementation of
pretrial services throughout the
state.
Which the Legislature has said
is a priority.
And wants it to expand
statewide.
This believe 13 counties in New
Mexico without any pretrial
services.
Chavez, Eddie Lee Sacharow,
Sierra Catrin Torrance,
Guadalupe, Guadalupe Curry,
Roosevelt Quay, Harding and
Ibaka.
Will not have
Pretrial services, and what this
does is when a judge has
somebody accused of a crime come
before them and the judge needs
to know a very robust picture of
their background, their criminal
history, their education their
age. Are they employed all of
those things. The judge doesn't
have those tools at their
disposal to make a decision.
This is also the division in
which the 27 24 7 monitoring of
ankle bracelets, lives.
We will not be able to fund that
going forward.
That is antithetical to public
safety and the message of both
the executive and the
Legislature.
So these are big critical items
of constitutional proportion.
That impact public safety in the
state of New Mexico.
And we need to find a path
forward for adequate funding for
these critical programs.
And this funding just takes us
to our base.
It doesn't address any of the
other needs and priorities of
the judiciary. This is just
taking us to base.
I would be remiss if I didn't
briefly touch upon upon what
those other priorities are
because they are important.
It will be of no surprise to
this body that there are a
number of judicial salary bills
percolating through this
building this year.
Um, the judicial salary bill
comes in at the tune of about $6
million. This is the same bill
or substantially the same bill
that you all have overwhelmingly
supported the last two
legislative cycles. It's back
again.
Um, this year we have the added
benefit of the fourth floor
being in support of that bill.
We've also time and time again
asked you for assistance to
provide additional compensation
for our employees.
The last two legislative
sessions. You've given judicial
employees at 2% greater raise
then.
All other state employees
because of the gap between the
executive and
The judiciary.
The gap last year. Um, and it
persists there this year is 11%.
So we pay our employees 11% less
for the same work that the
executive does, and this results
in us losing employees. All of
the time. I'm pointing at one
such individual sitting behind
me, which will make him very
uncomfortable. Scott Paterson.
Um, who is our expert on
behavioral health has been
poached by C. Y F. D.
That's great. C y f D needs lots
of help, But so do we. And we're
losing a fantastic employee.
And I think the wage I won't put
him on the spot, but I think the
gap in the salary is to the tune
of about $20,000.
So we struggle to keep up and we
struggle to do right by our
employees, and we would ask you
again for some measure of
improvement for our employees.
To make up the entire gap would
be $11 million. We know that
that is a sizable number. But
every year we're here again and
again as we try to slowly close
that gap, and every year the
executive jumps in front of us
through targeted compensation
and other sources of funding
that they have that we don't
have.
And then last. This is in the
materials that were provided to
you all yesterday as well as
what we called statewide self
help.
Um, self help our centers within
the largest districts in New
Mexico that provide information
and resources to litigants who
are representing themselves in
the judicial system.
Um, they can help with
Assisting with virtual
proceedings. Interpreters
providing the packets telling
them where to go file the
paperwork that they need.
Um, it is one of the most robust
programs in the second in the
Metropolitan Court. They assist
more than 15,000 people a year.
Um, that are navigating the
court system.
Outside of the major
metropolitan areas that that
help doesn't exist, so we would
like to create a program that is
centralized to accomplish that
goal so that individuals who are
in San Juan Eddie Leave Mubarak,
Catrin Sierra Union, Colfax, San
Miguel, have the same access to
justice that everybody in
Albuquerque and Santa Fe have
That program to take its
statewide because it's largely
human beings that are providing
this we lean into lawyers and
paralegals to do this would
cost $575,000.
And that would allow us to
really explain, expand that
access to justice. Um, piece of
the puzzle that the state of New
Mexico struggles with because of
the small number of lawyers,
high rate of poverty and the
like. You also received two
letters in support, um, that
this program rather than people
trying to, you know, stand up
and insert themselves here. I
asked for letters instead.
One is from Asia. Brooks. She is
the incoming president of the
New Mexico State bar. But she
also was the former director of
the self help program in the
second judicial district in
Berna, Leo County, So she knows
of what she speaks.
The second letter is from the
statewide pro bono coordinator
from the volunteer attorney
program at New Mexico Legal aid.
These are the people who work
with lawyers regularly to try
and get them to take on these
cases where representation isn't
available because of lack of
funding. They have also provided
a letter of support in favor of
statewide self help. It is a
program that is near and dear to
the judiciary's heart, in
particular the Supreme Court
because of the outsized impact
it can have on people's lives
when they're dealing with
housing and child support.
And domestic violence and all
measure of problems that face
our community.
With that.
Um, I am going to stop talking.
I know it's a miracle. Ah!
I'm gonna turn it over to Mr
Pepin to see what he would like
to add. And then certainly we
are happy to answer any and all
questions that you have really
appreciate your attention today,
but also the attention and time
you've given us over the last
several days, as we have raised
the alarm bells about where the
judiciary stands in this year's
budget recommendations, and I
think my colleagues
For being here In this unusual
chief justice Mount cargo
briefly over oversight, um as a
cheated, but then I'm going to
deal with each one of these
budgets.
Uh, I'm on the high level. You
know, you run this entire branch
of government. You're running it
in fiscal year, 24 on $225
million
It's a lot of money, but it's
not that much money in the
context of a $10 billion state
budget.
There was a time and we we got
about 2.8% of the state budget.
The budget that's proposed by
LFC would be 2.39% of the
proposed general funds funding
and that's if you believe you're
only gonna spend 5.65 0.9%
more than you did last year. I
think it will settle more at
least 7% or so, but
What's the big deal? Half a
percent? Well, it's about $50
million.
We have a $225 million budget.
It's a lot of money and we're
here. Not for all the 50 million
or anything like that. There's
no magic in a 2.8% number, but
Uh, I want to be clear about
what we're talking about,
because in the AOC budget, which
is about $42.5 million of
General fund, that's where all
these fees go. That's where you
see the revenue and they go for
programs that are critically
important. I'll discuss in a
minute jury, for example.
If you replaced all the fees and
not quite $8 million in fees,
which is what was contemplated
when HB 139 was passed and
signed by the governor.
You would you would. You would
score that as an expansion of
18.4% in the IOC's budget,
because
Other state money that comes out
of the sky because we collected
in warrant fees are collected in
a jury fee on the backside of
traffic citations.
Um, that's been funding a lot of
things that you haven't had to
worry about in the General fund,
or if you take $8 Million in
General fund to replace those
fees as you should have good
reasons for that. There's all
the reasons you passed HB 139.
You would you would look at the
agency's budget is having an
18.4% increase if we got 5.9% on
top of that.
24% increase. We'd be in good
shape. Um
But it's just that 18% is just
to be able to do what we are
already doing.
We're just doing it with a
different color of money. It
used to be free money. Now it
has to be general fund
recurrently.
Um
We critically need
Those fees to be replaced and
I'll go through why, but I
wanted to be real clear. You
know, we need a $8 million just
to do what we're doing already,
and I hope to convince you that
what we're doing already is
really important. So I'll start
with the administrative budget
and madam chair.
You're looking at four budgets
in the administrative office of
the courts. Um, I can go through
each one. I don't know if you
want to do questions after each
one. I'm going to start with the
administration budget, which is
where jury is, Uh, I don't know
if you want to go through all
four. You want to go through
each one and then take
questions.
Oh,
Um, thank you. I think that if
you want to go through the four
quickly
And then we can go to member
questions. Thank you, Madam
Chair and I am, um, quite open
to your signal that I'm not
going quickly and I'll try to
move on if I get that signal
was regarded jury, the chief
explained how important this is.
It's critically important.
This is in the admin budget,
which is P 559.
Um
That increase in the minimum
wage that you impose beginning
in fiscal year 19 over the last
four years. That's a 60%
increase in minimum wage. Great.
I'm really happy for people who
work at minimum wage that
they're getting a more decent
wage now than they were a few
years ago at 750 an hour, but we
have to pay minimum wage to
jurors.
And we didn't come and say,
Well, we need X dollars to fund
a 60% increase. Why? Because we
had the revenue and fun balance
we could
Depend on that fun bounce has
gone down steadily over those
years where that, uh, cost has
increased.
And this in chief mentioned the
significant increase in jury
trials as continued into this
fiscal year. In fact, this
fiscal year will be higher than
the previous fiscal year.
Um and we won't have money in
fiscal year 25 to get past maybe
December.
Unless we get the funding that
we need.
We asked for the replacement of
$995,200 million dollars in free
replacement.
Million $300,000 in costs
increased due to the minimum
wage increase in the increase in
the use of jurors to pay them
all.
Um and $500,000 for I T
infrastructure that supports the
jury program.
We pay. AOC pays all the jurors
statewide. Obviously, the jurors
are in each court in each
county where we pay them. We
work with local folks to get
them into the system getting
paid schedule them all those
kinds of things.
So
The recommendation from the LFC
is a million and a half dollars
of one time money.
Half million. That is is great
because we have a shortfall of
about $480,000 right now.
In fiscal year 24 injury
That's where our fund balance
ends. And we go into the red to
pay for jurors that we expect to
have to pay. This fiscal year.
Both y'all have seen the DFA
recommended One time funding.
Uh, $500,000, that's great.
LF CNN put another million
dollars in one time funding,
which I guess is to
Have covered the short ball. We
have going forward. Um, the FAA
did put in the recurring for the
fees but not the increase.
I need a million 800,000. We
need a million $800,000 to be
able to run jury in fiscal year
25.
$1,800,000
If we don't get it, Um, I well
If you want to know, I'll tell
you about what we'll do if we
don't get the money.
The next program. Oh, also an
administration not having to do
with jury. We have a request for
$150,000 for the modest means
helpline. The chief justice was
talking about access to justice.
The modest needs helpline is a
contract we do
Happens to be through the bar
association, and they have a
call in service where people who
are unrepresented were in court
can call and get legal advice.
Um and, uh, since you you
started funding that program
last year or the year before,
anyway. Yeah, the year before.
It just keeps growing and
growing. Why? Because we have a
tremendously unmet need for
representation of folks.
Obviously not criminal cases.
They get representation. These
are civil litigants and all
kinds of situations if you could
manage
Juries number one by about 1000.
But this little request would
really help us support that
programs growth. So that's also
an admin. That's why I mentioned
it.
Next warning fortune, which is P
610.
Um, is, uh
Up until
June. 30th of this year is
entirely fee funded $100 warrant
fee.
They collect $3.2 million a year
in revenue, more or less, and we
have a fun balance in there we
had. We started this year. Um
Hmm. They collect $3,200,000 100
dollars at a time.
You're eliminated that fee.
That's great. That means
starting July 1st to have $0 to
operate on
And their recommendation from
Lfc is I understand we had some
discussion about this is to take
Funds that we have in our
waterfront now you do with
Warren enforcement.
384,000 and and use that for
Warren Enforcement. That's great
884, but I need 3,200,000.
The fund balance in that fund is
think the current projections
about $86,000 maybe $100,000 at
the end of the year, so we're
not going to get very far in the
$3.2 million program. If we have
it and $94,000 of water money,
and maybe $100,000
Um
So there's a need within Warren
enforcement.
Uh, for $2.3 million or
recurring funding.
Under the LFC recommendation, or
at least $400,000 of recurring
funding under the
Of the recommendation because
the s a replace the fee money.
Largely to point almost $2.7
million. So at least it's about
$400,000 short. Almost two
point. Yeah. So this is about
$400,000 short of what we need
to run.
Uh, could we do it on that? I
don't know. We certainly try,
but the number is $3.2 million
of recurring funding, and the
chief mentioned some of what
they do. I want to talk very
briefly about that traffic stop
that the chief was talking
about.
Law enforcement pulls someone
over for going 10 miles over the
limit.
And they get up to the car and
they find out when they run the
person that they've got an
outstanding work because they
didn't pay the money they owed
For the last time they went over
and got a ticket. They forgot
about it.
It's gonna take that off about
five hours to go through the
process of pulling the person
over running all that
information through getting a
tow truck to come impound their
car, taking them to the
detention center. And if they're
lucky that detention center is
somewhere in their county and a
dozen or so counties. It's not.
It's in a different county.
If you pay if you pay that law
enforcement officer
$50 an hour total salary and
benefits and that's probably
low I think, and it takes them
five hours.
The 20,000 warrants that are
cleared by Warren Enforcement.
Would require them to spend
100,000 hours of time police
time dealing with the people who
have those warrants that they
might come in contact with.
And if you pay him 50 bucks an
hour, That's $5 million to do
just those weren't activities
which we clear as one third of
what are worn enforcement folks
do 20,862 warrants achieve
mentioned in addition,
When law enforcement comes
across someone who's got an
outstanding warrant their
responsibilities to arrest the
person and take them to your
detention centers.
I know that you talked to the
folks in your county is about
challenge. The detention centers
are
When we clear weren't almost
always it's done remotely over
the phone, giving advice to
people, sending them paperwork
that they can fill out to get
themselves straightened out. And
whatever issue they've got
In this warrant issue.
And they don't go to jail.
So that's on top of the $5
million. You're spending on law
enforcement time spending money
$100 a day to have them in your
detention center. So, um, I do
think it's important to
recognize the significance of
what the the warrant folks do
how important it is for public
safety and how much it allows
law law enforcement officers to
spend time on
Other things, which
I think it's a very valuable
think to do
Um, chief method and have
$100,000 calls so I won't go
into all that, Uh, next on the
technology funding I T, which
you fund as a statewide
automation budget in P. 560.
Uh, the revenue for technology
amounts of 2,000,607 6
$2,675,000 a year that's not
Uh, replaced in the
recommendations from LFC and D F
a
LFC put a million 38,000 and
recurring and DFA put 944,300.
Okay, so we're about a million
dollars short there.
Uh, even if you take the LSC
wreck because they'll see it
seems to talk about
Funding 13.
Personnel, which I think is what
they think we're going to do
with a million dollars, But of
course they're budgeting. $2
million of fun Downs will be
happy to talk about why
Funding court operations for a
year with fund balance is not a
good idea and what that fund
will otherwise do that we can't
do if we don't have, uh,
funding. Sorry. The funding
that's needed. I'm sorry.
Was I talking about automation?
I made a mistake. The data I was
giving it was in, uh, pre trial
services. I'll talk about them
in a minute.
Recurring funding from Lfc is
$0.
Because they expect us to budget
$2 million of fun balance and
deal with the problem of not
having the the funding someday
later, uh, the FAA put almost
1.9 million in $100,000 short of
what we generally get in
revenue. So that takes care of
the fee if you had the
recommendation.
Ah, at least as regards our
operations $680,000 of that fee
revenue is for municipal court
automation. And if we don't get
that money replaced, we won't
support municipal court
automation.
The minister. Parties will have
to do the best they can on their
own.
Um
In addition,
We have, uh
About a dozen employees who are
paid through that feed the
Supreme Court Automation three.
The post adjudication part of
that fear is going away.
I would urge you to consider at
least funding eight of those FTE
s who are paid by the fee at a
cost of a little over a million
dollars in addition to replacing
the feet funding because
automation is critical eye
I'm guessing you know how
important it is, but we run a
statewide system on automation
and, um
If we don't get the funding, we
can't do many of those things.
I'll talk briefly about what it
is, Uh
The technology does regularly
replace all kinds of soft
hardware, equipment, routers and
all kinds of things. I don't
know what they are, but I know
they're expensive. Um, all the
hardware that runs the system.
They are in this fiscal year
using
This free funding revenue that
we have that we're not going to
have any more to extend
broadband bandwidth rather out
to, um, multiple rural areas,
including Hobbs through the
consequences, Trauma gel, Cuba,
Lovington and more.
Um, that's an increase in
operating costs every year, but
we need the bandwidth
improvement. Um, because of the
way we're operating now, they
created an automatic automated
text messaging system that
integrates with the case
management system.
Um, so that people get notices
that they have court appearances
coming up so they don't miss
them tremendously beneficial
impact on reducing failures to
appear.
Um, they build and maintain a
robust network for interactive
video. This obviously was a
product of the pandemic, but
it's a great way to go
litigants, lawyers
Judges, court staff.
We do an awful lot remotely. In
fact, almost every traffic
citation is now handled by
video. Instead of having people
have to drive all the way to
wherever it is that they got
their citation and deal with it
That way, you can do it on your
phone doing any computer.
Um
Recently out in the Navajo
nation we established called
places where you can go to a
Chapter house and connect with
the courts and deal with your
issue with the courts without
having to leave the reservation.
Go wherever it is that you would
have to go to deal with your
citation.
Um, Mr Pepin. Just want to check
in. I've got seven members that
do have questions. Okay, so I
don't know if if you're almost
done with move on and talk about
pretrial services.
Um
I have to know you have got in
the recommendations from LFC in
the book. It says that we were
trying to fill 27 vacant FDs
That is not correct. We have 27
people working who are funded
through a one time appropriation
from the Legislature of $4
million
We've been paying them with that
for a couple of years Now we're
going to run out of that money,
and we would like to replace at
least enough money to keep those
people employed in fiscal year
25,
which is critical in order for
us to maintain the operations
that pre trial services does,
um, achieve touch briefly on
what they do. I won't be happy.
To answer questions about
pretrial services. I do want to
tell you that, um, the chief
talked about those pre trials.
Those reports that they do
background investigation reports
and public safety assessments.
Um, the the this unit that we're
asking for funding for its
16,000 assessments last year,
16,000
Um
They handled the electronic
monitoring unit that you briefly
mentioned for people who have an
ankle monitor they handled
131,000 alerts overnight. They
work, uh, in the dark, while
most of us are asleep.
Um, which resulted in some
arrest warrants that I could
talk about how critical those
were.
Um
They also do record court
notification reminders under a
different system for people who
have appointments with pre trial
services. For example, their
very first month they did that
which was November they sent out
16,116 notices.
Um
The process is very valuable if
you have any questions about its
value, I'd be happy to answer
those questions. Um, with that,
Uh, madam Chair? Uh, I urged the
committee to consider at the
very least.
Adopting the DF recommendation,
but making some additions that
I've mentioned we really need
about another $10 Million in L.
C to cover the fees and the
other things that I mentioned
like the 1.3 million were short
and, uh, jury because of the
increase in usage of jurors,
even if we replace the fees.
Um
And I'll be happy to talk about
any
And all of that if you have
questions, Thank you, Madam
Chair.
Thank you so much, Um, couple of
announcements that I want to
make, and then we'll move to
committee questions We're gonna
When we're done with this
hearing. We're going to take a
30 minute Lunch break. So if you
are presenting after this agency
know that there's going to be at
least 30 minutes. Lag. Um,
members, we will have lunch
provided
When we are done with this
hearing.
I say all of that we do have a
good number of members who have
questions, and this is a very
important agency. And so I don't
want, um, for us to miss any
questions that are pertinent and
that will help in this
discussion. However, I would ask
that our members be concise.
And that our panel also be
concise in the response that way
we can get through all of the
questions that we do have
And so with that I'd like to
start with the ranking member
Armstrong.
Thank you, Madam Chair and thank
you for your presentation. And
welcome to all the honorables.
It's almost very intimidating.
Ah!
Because you're professionals
that asking questions and
presenting so I I appreciate
that. So thank you, Madam Chair.
This is a
They've done a very good job
explaining what they requested.
what we gave them. What did Faye
wants the problems with it all
This is ultimately a problem and
it's crime and public safety and
with crime at the top of the
list for most new Mexicans.
Um, I think that
It's an edible, inedible.
Yes, that
That we take a second. Look at
this. We We understand. I think
every single person at this
table understands
Where you're coming from What
you need what you want.
So I I don't think that that is
going to be an issue. I think
we're we'll get somewhere. I
don't know where
Um
Madam Chair. I, uh
I want to talk about
What the Legislature did we
removed to the fees.
We raised minimum wage.
Whether some of us voted for it
or against it. It happened it
past the governor signed it.
So, madam chair.
I want to talk about also
If we create a problem, we
should be willing to fix the
problem.
That's pretty common sense where
I come from, and Magdalena, New
Mexico.
Uh huh.
Pretrial services.
A lot of our
People were on that list. Madam
chair.
I don't think that
There's a question that
something needs to be done The
question that I have
Is on page 14 Volume two
On the budget issues.
Where it states.
The agency reported existing
within the internal funds fund
balances of 15.8 million spread
across 12 separate funds
And most, and I believe only one
of them is reverting.
So the question I have
Why do we have all those those
funds? Why do we make it so
difficult? And why do we have
money in their when we're
requesting more money?
That's really my only question.
I think all of us at this table
want to fund you?
But we need to meet personally
need to understand what are all
these funds and why is there so
much money in there and is, is
that
Adequate.
Thank you very much.
Madam Chair representative. I'm
strong and members of the
committee.
Um, I saw that in the
recommendation and immediately
contacted, Um
LFC Austin and said, I think
there's a misunderstanding about
our fund ounces.
What I can tell you is that most
of the fund balances in the
areas that were supported by
fees will be added close to zero
fun balance.
Automation is an exception. I
talked about that, Um, by the
end of this year, for example
injury As I said, we're going to
have a half a million dollar.
We have a half a million dollars
shortfall in this fiscal year.
We began the year with a little
over a million dollars 1.1
million.
If you think we have 1.1
million. That's true on July
1st, but it won't be true on
June 30th of this year was true.
Last July, 1st.
And I think similar things
happened in areas like the war
in enforcement, which is also a
non reverting fund.
You made these funds not
reverting at our request because
they were the funded in large
part and the fees go up and they
go down, right? We don't have
any control over how often the
fees get assessed and collected
weren't collects them.
But, uh
In the non reverting fund were
able to handle things like a
significant increase in minimum
wage.
Right, And we could carry that
until Oh, about fiscal year 25
under the old fee regime, And
then we would then we need money
because
The cost has caught up with our
revenue. We're not gonna have
any money at all in that fund to
begin fiscal year, 20.
Five.
We've got. We started the year
with a $2 million fund balance
in drug courts Adult drug court.
Um, that would be significantly
reduced this year, and it will
be
Well close to zero by the end of
fiscal year, 25.
Because of expiring federal
grant money.
Ah, from from Tst. Uh, $400,000
I t expense to run our system.
We had one time money to get it
started, which is great. There's
a $400,000 year cost there.
Uh, these are these are costs
that we have to build into our
budget now and
Uh, I'm not sure what's going to
happen with
Liquor excise tax revenue
because you have a liquor excise
tax. We have several of them.
Apparently, we get 5% of the
liquor excise tax collections.
That's roughly half of the
budget for adult drug courts.
So
Uh,
It looked. You had those all up,
You add up the recurring funds
that are gonna go
Down. We started the year with
roughly $11.5 million in those
funds.
We're gonna have maybe 1.4
million by the end of the year.
We have a lot of non not a lot
of reverting mind reverting fund
balances that are counted in
there. A lot of those are one
time appropriations to do a lot
of things. For example, last
year
Fiscal year. 24 You gave us an
$11 million to implement speech
to text, which is a software
program court statewide.
fantastic thing. Everybody loves
it. It's great.
It's going to be expensive.
Um
There's an $11 million fund
balance on that on the list for
us to do FDR. We also asked for
$2 million because the recurring
costs are going to be 2 million
A year in this budget was not
recommended for funding, so
we're losing fees in automation
and that fund had a $4 million
fund balance at the beginning of
this year.
Would be to pay those $2 million
in fees or, for example, I
talked about expanding access.
Um, I say, Broadband. I'm sure
that's integrated by now. It's
some other term, but
We're spending $905,000 out of
that fund this year.
To do that.
We budget 2 million other
quickly. The fun pounds will go
down to just about nothing. So
the reason we have we don't have
the fund balances. I believe
that are reflected in their in
your environment to
We did.
And on July 1st of 2023. We
won't until I first of 2024.
Thank you, Madam chair. Um, I I
just really believe that we
should keep our end of the deal.
Where we should replace those
for sure. The, um
The court fee replacement.
And and other things. So, um,
whatever.
We created that has created more
cost to you. We should be able
to. We should be funding. So
with that, madam chair. I know
there's a lot of people on the
on the list, but I appreciate
everyone's showing up and all
the feedback and information
that everyone has given us. And
I'm I would highly recommend we
work more on this. Thank you,
Madam Chair. Thank you,
Representative Armstrong.
Um, just to give folks the head
up. Heads up. I'm gonna read the
list so that you know where you
are. Representative Baca
Sanchez, Chatfield Garcia. Luhan
Brown Herndon. Okay, so we're
gonna go to representative Baca.
Thank you, Mr Chairman. Madam
Chairman. I will be brief, so I
expect the answers to be brief.
Um, first thank you for your
presentation. It's been said
many times before I as a
community member and in full
support of adequately funding
our judicial branch at all
levels.
My question, Madam Chair is
Regarding the warrant roundup.
We talked about this We said in
Albuquerque is about 2600
statewide.
Through the court system. How
many warrants were basically
cleared through that process?
Um, Madam Chair.
Representative. Thank you for
the question by. Our estimates
are calculations and fy 23 we
cleared 20,862 warrants.
Sorry, Chief Justice did you
said 20 20,862?
Thank you, madam chair that that
is a huge number and again we
talk about safe communities and,
um, you know, making our
community safe.
My last question, Madam chair
and panel.
Is this funding? How is it going
to affect our local courts or
local communities with that
funding with a lack of funding?
Um, Madam Chair representative
Vodka. In many ways, your courts
won't be having jury trials if
we don't get Juries funded if we
don't have the warrant funding
to support the program that's
been free funded.
None of that weren't work is
going to happen. Your citizens
are going to spend a lot more
time in detention centers
because they've got warrants for
not paying their speeding ticket
or whatever it was.
Uh, cars getting pounded your
citizens experience an awful lot
of costs in the automation
field.
Hmm.
We've we've ramped up remote
system where a lot of people
interact with the courts through
their phones or through video on
their computers.
We have a hard time supporting
all of that technology. If we
don't have any money, and we
can't and we will lose people.
Thank you, Madam Chair. I have
no more questions. Thank you for
your answers. Thank you,
Representative, Representative
Sanchez. Thank you, Madam Chair.
Uh, Mr Chair. I just want to
point out
The layoffs that you guys
mentioned. It's pretty
Concerning an organ address that
issue
The second thing.
I want to thank Mr Pippen for
agreeing to meet with me brought
up an issue several times to our
chief justice regarding Ah
How all the courts are on the
state are sentencing. Uh,
Drug addicts that are involved
in crimes.
To the treatment facility and
Espanola and
And that substantially increased
our homeless population there
checking in and they're just
walking outside. Look forward
to, uh
Meeting with Mr Pip into a
Hopefully, fix that issue. I
know Armstrong top talked about
issues we've created.
I know the courts have created
an issue for Espanola. So I look
forward to Ah
Working with you guys to get
that fixed. Thank you, Mr Chair.
Uh, thank you, representative. I
want to give an opportunity to
Austin to make a couple of
comments, uh, regarding the LFC
recommendations.
Thank you, Madam Chair. I
appreciate that. I just wanted
to give the committee some
context as to the LCS
recommendation.
During the LCS recommendation. I
apologize. All right. During the
process, the LFC used the
document called the S 10
documents to get that overall
fun balance. So that's where
that fund balance of the volume
two is reflected. In addition to
that the funds that exist within
the AOC are under the
appropriate of power of the
Legislature. And those are
things that the L C would just
like to take into context of the
S s recommendation very much.
We're gonna move on to
representative Chatfield.
Followed by representative
Garcia.
Thank you, madam Chair.
Uh, you know, as I look to the
right and the left, I can see
that there's a lot of concern
amongst my colleagues about this
budget.
Of primary importance to me is
your safety.
No one should be put it put in a
position of not being able to be
safe. You know our judges
because of the types of
Decisions that they have to make
every day. So that's top of the
line for me. Pretrial services,
You know, you just sat down at
night and watch the news and
time and again we see someone
who's been released for
committing one crime who commits
a bigger crime. I was astonished
and appalled when I found out
That the egg of
Monitors and were not monitored.
At night.
I mean, nobody commits crimes at
night. Right? So sorry. Uh,
I just think it's unacceptable
that they're not monitored.
And that
Funding would have an issue in
that it's just totally
unacceptable.
I think it's pretty well known.
We're going to take another look
that being said
P. S. C b. I see a transfer out
of a hunter of a million
116,000.
And I see a reversion.
Have a little over a million
dollars.
Can you all speak to that?
Uh, Madam Chair, Mr Chair. If I
could have the our chief
financial officer in Porto FOIA
come up and answer some
questions about that, Uh, why we
took transferred, uh, and from
which program you're talking
about representative um,
personal service and
And the employee been a million
116,000 transferred out, which
is the problem area that you
spoke about needing money into
it was transferred out.
And then I see a reversion of
over a million dollars in that
same area.
Reverses a little easier.
Mr Chair represented Chatfield
regarding the
Regarding the budget transfer.
Uh, unlike the District court's
AOC does not receive a single
line item budget. So we have to
budget Thank you very much, um
According to what's listed in
House Bill two, so a lot of the
transfers is just right.
Budgeting where we need the
actual funds once we initially
budget and based off hospital,
too.
Um, the reversion.
The 1,060,000 of it was from
operating budget. It was
budgeted the 500 category. We
couldn't um, utilize those
funding, so we had to revert it.
The bulk of the reversion is
from specials and one time
appropriation. Two thirds of
that was based off of, um,
security personnel. Um, specials
that we just couldn't utilize
the funds for because we
couldn't. Um, um
Procure the security personnel
because of the legislation where
people couldn't the retirement,
the retiree
Um, law enforcement could not
double dip so we couldn't use
the fund and we had to revert
it. But that's the bulk of the
reversion was the one time
appropriations. So, madam chair
That kind of makes my point that
those, uh, both the transfer
And the reversion.
Came out of
Uh, funds for your needing more
money this year, one. On the one
hand, you were not able to hire
more.
Ah, security and and that that
we have rules that block
Are retired law enforcement from
providing that
Security is another thing that
we need to visit. We need to
talk about that because we need
to be able to utilize their
those. And and I think you all
need to funding. I'm just
bringing up the point.
Thank you, madam chair
represented track feel very
quickly with regard to the
funding that was reverted on the
funding for security. Those were
in the magistrate courts. It's a
lot harder to find qualified
security personnel, especially
when you can't hire retired law
enforcement in places where
magistrate courts are in
Bernalillo County, For example,
the courts contract for security
and they have personnel.
I pretty confident the Supreme
Court in the Court of Appeals
could contract for personnel in
Albuquerque and Santa Fe.
You want to try to fund security
in the mastery course which you
we need.
We tried it. We just We couldn't
get people to do it in the
places where magistrate courts
are located.
Your eyes. I support you, 110%.
We're gonna We're gonna see what
we can do to
Help you fix that problem?
Mr Davidson, Did you have
anything you wanted to add?
Thank you, Madam Chair. I just
wanted to turn the committee's
attention to your volume ones
really quick, and it's going to
be on page 209. This is just in
regards to, um, language
reauthorization that the LFC has
in its recommendation. There are
multiple programs within this
that have substantial funds for
a variety of things that are
priorities for the AOC. So
Well, there might not be stuff
in the base budget, necessarily
Regions programs, the language
reauthorization.
Could you repeat the page
numbers, please? Page 208 and
209. I apologize, Volume one
page 208 and 209. Okay, Thank
you, folks. Look that up. If if
they're interested, I'm gonna
move along to representative
Garcia. Thank you, madam Chair
on.
You're honorables. You know, not
too many people get to sit in
front of the whole deal one time
anyway. With that being said,
uh, Runner or Marty wherever he
wants to answer it. How
effective is a judge without
pretrial services?
And making decisions.
So Madam Chair representative
for those counties that I listed
the 13 counties.
When somebody is, um acute
accused charged with a crime,
and they come in front of a
judge for a detention decision.
Absent the work of pretrial
services, the judges
Looking in Odyssey kind of
winging it.
Um, it's not the complete
picture of the failures to
appear.
There's all of these key
indicators that go into a
detection decision. What's the
age of the person are they
employed? Do they have prior
failures to appear? What is the
full picture of their criminal
history? Not just in that
district because
Crime isn't located in a
particular district. You could
have somebody with charges in
another county.
Um, pretrial services is the
mechanism by which judges are
provided the information that
they need to make any decision.
Absent that those 13 counties
that don't yet have pretrial
services and wouldn't under this
budget recommendation are very
hamstring and making those
decisions.
Uh, thank you, Chief Justice.
Uh, Chairman.
You mentioned you just it
earlier that
In the Constitution. Everybody
deserved was
How do you put it?
Anybody wants to have a dream
crown should have on my
correction.
Madam Chair representative
again. It's Article two section
12 the right of a jury trial has
heretofore existed in Shelby
secured to all and remain in
Violet. That means that people
have a right to a decision about
their case whether it's criminal
or civil made by members of
their community.
Um, and that exists in almost
every case type in the state of
New Mexico.
Thank you, Mr Chairman, Chief
Justice. In other words, if I
would do good record in front of
you
And we're looking at December,
Okay?
And you did not have a jury
trial and I requested one. What?
What would happen? How could you
prosecute me without not having
something that I'm entitled to
that, please? It's that is the
question. Madam Chair
representative.
Um without jury trials.
We are violating people's
constitutional rights and what
will happen in criminal cases.
Civil civil jury trials will
just be put on hold.
Until this body.
Properly funds. Those jury
trials so the people who have
been you know, critically
injured harmed oil and gas
disputes. Whatever it is, those
won't happen at all until the
funding comes in. What little
funding we have would go towards
criminal trials. But when that
dries up
Those individuals don't have
that have been accused. Don't
have a opportunity to have a
jury trial in the victims don't
get resolution of the case
either. And what eventually
happens is what we refer to as
the speedy trial rule.
Trials have to happen in a
certain measured period of time.
And when that doesn't happen, we
are forced to dismiss the
charges against the person
accused of a triumph of a crime
and they are
Released.
Thank you, Mr Chairman. She just
That's the problem we're having
right now with our system, you
know?
They get released.
And giving some are not guilty
in some art, But if you cannot
give somebody a good trial, and
they are guilty, and then you
have to let him go now we've got
a bigger problem now that
revolving door just opened up a
little bit more. They put
reasons to go for a little bit
faster with that, and, uh
This is not a question. That's
just a comment on the last one.
You know everybody in here we
created this monster.
The world the primary having
right now we created it. We need
to fix it. You know, it is not
fair.
For anybody in this state, put
on your back and to make a
decision of the man is guilty or
the management innocent water
trial.
Thank you. Thank you, Mr. Thank
you, Representative Garcia. Um,
we're gonna move on to
representative Luhan and then
representative Brown, followed
by representative Herndon,
Sarin, Yana and dela Cruz.
Thank you, Madam Chair. I think
a lot of what has been said by
other members rings true with
me, too. I think that the
constitutional
Um, awareness that we have here
today. What's going on with
Reflection to what our budget is
proposing.
Needs to be seriously addressed.
That's been mentioned and also,
I really appreciate some of the
things that
Representative Armstrong has
brought to us as well. In what
we have tasked you with and some
of the
Reasons behind some of the
policies that we've implemented
and made statute needs to be
looked at as well. I think
there's a
There's a lot of things we need
to look at. But just based on
what representative Garcia said.
I'm gonna leave it right there
and say we have to readdress
this part of the budget.
For the constitutional
Reasons stated in
And the rights of every citizen
that we have to protect. Thank
you, Mr Chair.
Thank you, representative Brown.
Thank you, madam Vice chair.
So, um
Cheap dresses bacon. I am very
bewildered. These items being
looks like they were left out of
the budget requests from both D
F A
And um and the LFC.
Um, So, Madam vice chair. I
appreciate that. You have given
Mr Davidson a chance to
illuminate some of why
differences and I have a feeling
there's a whole lot more
discussion to be had. You know,
Lfc has reasons for doing things
the way it does.
And so there's just something
here just got left out. It looks
like a number of things.
So, um, I think we're going to
get this fixed man, Vice chair
Chief justice we have to we have
to, and some of these are very
easy calls. We need to increase
funding.
And ultimately, I don't need an
answer today, Matt advice here,
but I kind of like to know.
Why lfc was not or even to
really not briefed. Well on the
green sheet. Something broke
down. I think in the
communication
And, uh, I don't fault anybody,
but we will need to get this
fixed, and ultimately it is
about access to justice and we
have a duty to make sure that,
um people have, um, use of the
courts.
Again.
Madam Chair manifest Here. This
is we call it an agency or
agencies.
But it's truly a branch of
government.
Thank you, Mr Courtney.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Thank
you, Representative Brown.
Uh, John Courtney, deputy
director of LFC, So I you know,
I I think part of that issue
goes back to what? Um
Kevin was saying as far as, um
perhaps changes in their
perceived fund balances as a
part of their budget
submissions. AOC provides
projected fund balances, which
is how the LFC funded a number
of these requests that
The court. The AOC is now asking
to be addressed in general fund.
The other thing that I would
just point out really quickly
for you all if you could turn to
page 140
Of your volume one. We're gonna
be talking about courts for the
rest of the day and into next
week.
Um and I think it's important
for everybody to to keep in
context that the Legislature has
prioritized.
Increasing funding for courts
and public safety.
Ah, since going back to FY 14.
Those budgets have grown at a
quicker rate than the General
fund.
And I think another important
thing to keep in mind going back
to what representative
Chatfield said. Madam chair and
representative Brown is some of
the resources that are that are
out there. Um, that still need
to be, um, still need to be
addressed, including, uh, for
example, the $1 million
reversion.
You'll see a number of of
existing, um, special requests
that are being reauthorized and
including reauthorization for,
um, technology.
Um, that was one of the things
that, um that, uh
AOC mentioned, um, you know, in
addition to the L C
recommendation, including
reauthorization for that
funding, there's additional
funding on top of that in
special appropriations for items
like, um
Like technology. Um so, um, you
know, I, uh
Madam chair and rest in Brown.
You know, we're absolutely, uh,
I think willing and excited to
work with with the AOC at your
direction to, um, to address
some of the some of these
concerns. Thank you.
Uh, categorized your thank you
very much, Mr Courtney. And
again. This is about the rest of
the story, and we see what we
see. But, you know, we do have
in our binder, a
2024 special, supplemental and
just deficiency approached
creations for the AOC and that
does give us some of that
additional rest of the story.
Um, but there are some even
differences in evaluation. And I
know I know he'll do that. Thank
you, Manager.
Thank you, representative,
representative Herndon.
Thank you, madam Chair with
respect to clarification, Um
Madam chair and Mr
Happen is the it's a civil legal
services budget under the
administrative Office of the
Courts, Madam Chair
representative Herndon and
members of the committee is not
although we're very concerned
about their funding, but it's
not part of our budget. Okay,
Thank you, Madam Chair and and
Mr Pepin. Then I would just like
to go to the 11th Judicial
district just for a moment.
That is with respect to the drug
court. In that district. It
seems like they had more people
needing the services then could
then there were funds or the
ability to address them. So the
question that I that I have is
that if there are other
districts that don't utilize
their funding for drug courts,
especial courts are you
reallocating it?
Because I'm really concerned
about Gallup being in the
position that it was in and
people going to other states to
get services and being subjected
to proud and other misuse.
Madam Chairman, representative
Herndon and members of the
committee.
Yes, that's a concern that we
share with you. There is funding
that goes directly to the
district courts in some cases,
but we get about $10 million and
we moved that money around and
There are courts. I have to
close courts because they can't
get sufficient participants. But
we use that money to start a new
drug courts as well. Rob
Mitchell is a statewide
coordinator for our Department
of Therapeutic Justice, which is
where the drug courts lived. He
can answer. I'm sure better than
I specific questions about
farming to gallop about the 11th
judicial district and the
funding distributions there.
Uh huh. And in fact, he is from
the 11th district, so he knows
it even better than other
districts. So
I don't know if you want to hear
from him now or if you'd like to
talk to him when there's an
opportunity. Um, Mr Madam Chair
Mr. Pippen will hear from him
later. As these workgroups are
formulated. I just wanted
clarification on that. Just two
more quick questions. Mr
Chairman of Mr Pepin, with
respect to your being the
administrative offices of the
court one of the questions that
I'm sure is going to be raised
with respect to the
Administrative services that are
provided. So we heard the courts
asked for their own HR services.
Maybe they don't financial
services. Why is it that the
administrative offices of the
court cannot provide that? It?
That combined service.
Madam chair represented heard
that are members of the
committee in most courts, most
district courts anyway, you have
a fiscal officer and you have an
HR officer. Depending on the
size of the district, you might
have higher level professional.
They're all supported by our HR
Department, which is authorized
to be 11. People currently has
nine.
Um and they do. Our office does
an awful lot of training.
Uh, of all kinds for the HR
people. For example, our HR
Department as does the fiscal
office. Same thing. Um, they
oversee the rules.
They oversee all of the actions
that have to be taken that
require approval of the
administrative office. So, for
example,
Well.
Races that are extraordinary
raises have to come through the
office changes in the personnel
in the job classification. All
these kinds of things, part of
which is because AOC is charged
with oversight responsibility
for the courts and their
budgeting. So we sorry.
Oh, I'm sorry. So, uh, we forgot
to fiscal uh, each entity with
needs a fiscal officer in order
to be able to administrate
administer of the local courts,
which is usually multiple
district court locations. But
again, how many counties I have,
and also Magistrate Court
locations. So they said
statewide policy, but they can't
They can't manage the day to day
the payroll. All of those things
that have to be
Administered. We also oversee
the expenditure of not just 45
million million $42.5 million of
General Fund, which is
responsibility of our fiscal
department. But every grant
funds or the grant funds all the
one time funding that comes out.
For example, there's a
recommendation to give a R C. I
think $2 million of all the
requests from all the courts for
Vehicles and equipment and all
kinds of things we have to
oversee the minister of that and
transferred to the district
courts, So they do an awful lot
of things. And as I think you
heard from the Chief justice and
the chief judge at the Court of
Appeals, um, trying to support
two more entities like even
local entities like the Supreme
Court and the Court of Appeals
that are right next to us is an
additional serious strain on
both our fiscal department.
An HR. Thank you, Mr Chair, and
thank you, Mr Pepin. One last
question with respect to
information that you presented
regarding program called the
members of modest means. One of
the things that I heard is that
there is a deficit in that
program. And if I understand
correctly, that program helps to
carry out
Providing access to justice to
people when organizations like
New Mexico legal aid become
unavailable or not able to carry
out the work for that for that
organization, So although it's
not criminal aspect of it, there
is a civil aspect like domestic
violence, child custody
evictions that really do need
help. Where people need to have
access to justice. Is that
correct in the way in which that
programs utilized, Madam Chair
representative? Yes, and in this
fiscal year
Uh, L C took money from
someplace. We figured we could
Save spending it and put it into
the program because we thought
the program needed uh more
funding support. That's why you
see $150,000 request in our
budget.
This year for fiscal 25.
All right. Thank you, Mr Chair.
Thank you, Mr Pepin.
Thank you, representative
representative Sarin Yana and
then representative Taylor Cruz.
Thank you for your presentation.
I'm going to go alone. I'm gonna
turn away from some of your
stuff. And I m I t more I t
connect. So tell me exactly as
as few words as you can. What,
exactly?
They do. Sorry. What exactly you
need for all right? Sorry.
Um
In, uh
Sorry, and this is what we need.
$2.5 million recurring.
Under the LFC recommendation, or
about 600,000 under the D F a
recommendation. And In addition,
I'm asking for a million dollars
for eight FTE s that are funded
through the fee Fund Court
Automation fund.
We do have fun balance there,
but it's going to run out
because there's no more revenue
coming in on the post
Adjudication side, so $2.5
million recurring, in addition
to the LFC recommendation, and
another million recurring, if
you want to fund those
personnel, Okay, Madam chair so
specifically, what are the what?
What is the money for?
What? What do the people do?
Or what? What is it going to
just for people? Or is it just
or is it? What else is it for?
Okay, So, um
Well, I probably should have
Cassandra Cassie hadn't come up.
She's the director of, uh
Judicial information Division,
which is stay with automation
under your budget. I have the I
can tell you the people that
would be paid, But there's lots
and lots of things that the
recurring funding supports.
Okay, I think yeah, man chair.
She would. It would be good
because I need some of your
answers.
Thank you, Madam. Chair members
of the Committee. Thank you.
Arty, Uh, already has covered a
lot of it. There is obviously
the personnel costs that already
mentioned the recurring funding.
Expansion in our base budget is
specifically to cover the
licensing fees for the For the
record software that is used in
courts across the state to
capture the official record of
the proceedings were in the
process of a major upgrade that
produces transcripts of the
proceedings in real time and
makes them available to trust.
Excuse me, Justice partners who
need them.
Uh huh.
Basically immediately rather
than induced that alone is a
$2.5 million license annual
licensing fee for the software
that we've asked for in our
expanded Medicare. How How, Um
How much do you work with do it?
Thank you.
Uh, Matt. Thank you. Chairs
member of the committee. We
coordinate with do it,
particularly around
cybersecurity and direction of I
t We do not. Do you give them
your scan results critical
information that they need so
that they can see what's
happening in your department or
in your agency. We are members.
active members of the statewide
Cybersecurity Committee, which
does Madam Chair that's under do
it or no.
Ah do it as the chair of that
committee? Yes. How many
agencies manager does your your
your network access Information
from? Thank you. Chair members
of the Committee. We actually
are responsible for all court
locations district and
magistrate across the state and
our scans that they use are
consolidated Network and our
security scans cover all of
those occasions.
Okay, madam Chair, So I'm
sucking more about Do you work
with state police? Do you work
with their system? Do you or
their network stay placed MBD.
Who do you work with?
Thank you. Chair. Remember this
As of the members of the
committee, we coordinate often
with those justice partners. We
interface, particularly with the
state police on many items,
including warrants.
Um other specific state agency
integrations are driven by
specific needs. So, manager do
you feel like you have
everything you need to work with
these other agencies? And and
I'm thinking about if you were
hacked.
Because you don't work real
closely with what I believe.
What would happen to those other
agencies that connect to you?
Thank you, Madam Chair members
of the committee, there would
certainly be an impact. Um
For instance, we are in 10 days
going live with a new interface
with state police to automate
the delivery of warrants from
our case management system
directly to their system to
avoid a hand delivery process
that would if we are not fully
funded projects like that would
stop or never get started. Okay,
So my biggest concern, I guess
is
Um, you're one of the agencies
that doesn't quite work closely
with do it, so we don't know
exactly what's happening in your
agency. And the concern is if
you were hacked what would
happen to state Police's
network? What would happen to
em? VDs, everyone you you work
with. So do you have money for
that? So that you are secure If
a bad guy comes in
Are you? Do you believe you're
secure enough to to handle about
that coming in and hacking you?
Madam chair members of the
committee. Great question really
difficult to answer.
We never feel like we are secure
enough.
We do prioritize our spending to
support cybersecurity, but then
it means it's at the expense of
other programs, and we are
balancing those trade offs as
best we can.
And if I'll just say under the
current proposed budget, we
would have to make some very,
very painful decisions about
what to fund.
Oh, man Chaired mostly. I just
want I want you to work closely,
if possible, would do it because
they are. The office of
cybersecurity was under them
because
What you do affects a lot of as
you integrate.
Fix. A lot of agencies could
affect municipality state
different things. Um, but I do
believe you need to be funded,
Especially in I t at the most
you can, because
I don't every you know, they are
huge. They're an agency that
connects to so many and their
critical agency. So I'm hoping
we can find you in everything.
Everything. One. Thank you for
your answers.
Thank you, representative. We
are going to go to
representative dela Cruz and
finish up with Chairman Small.
Thank you, madam Chair. The
courts are tasked with handling
wide array of matters. Many of
those matters if not, most of
those matters are around crime.
This legislature is poised to
pass a number of crime bill I
for the life of me. I can't see
how that's going to happen if we
Don't
Fund or the enforcement of those
laws. And then the the
adjudication of those laws. And
so we really have to be mindful
of that. Otherwise, we're we
passed laws that will be
meaningless.
And worst look terrible in the
eyes of the public who fund all
of us. Thank you, madam. Thank
you, Representative. Chairman.
Small, please. Thank you, Madam
Chair. Thank you Apologize for
being away. I was another
meetings. Um
Uh, Madam Chair, Mr Pepin, just
so that I'm clear in this may
have been brought up. But on the
sheet that we have on the back
side of the sheet, um with
regard to
Pretrial services, much of the
technology funding certainly the
security and fiscal oversight.
We've heard of priorities. Those
were not fee funded, though.
Previous is that right?
Uh, Mr Chair members of the
committee that technology
Funding. We're losing $2 million
2,000,676 $675,000 in the
funding. So in technology, yes.
$2.6 million of the funding will
go away on June 30th. Madam
Chair, Mr Pepin for pretrial
services. No, that's protecting
the technology. Pretrial
services has not been fully
funded. The challenge there is
you one time funded.
Us to get the program going for
a million dollars. We're
reaching the end of that funding
and the people that it supports
you work at a O C doing all
those things. We need a revenue
appropriation so that we can
continue to pay them once the
one time funding runs out. Okay,
Thank you, Madam Chair. Thank
you, Mr Pepin and I on the
security and fiscal oversight as
well. Those are priorities.
Those weren't fee funded,
though.
Yes, Chairman. Yes. And last
question, Madam Chair, Mr.
Pepin. Um
Given the challenges and the
river versions on hiring
security.
Can we as the chair as Madam
chair directs.
Can the you all work through
various options?
If there's money from the
Legislature, we need to ensure
that that money is going to be
utilized, and given that it's
been reverted in the other on
the for other courts, What's
your level of confidence that
Additional money can be
utilized. Madam Chair chairman
members of the committee the
money specifically on the green
sheet of paper is for the
Supreme Court and the court of
Appeals. There are entities in
Santa Fe and Albuquerque to
contract with, so we feel
confident that we can use that
money in an appropriate way. The
money that was reverted were for
magistrate courts that are in
far flung locations where there
aren't security services to
contract with.
Coupled with the inability to
double for law enforcement to
double dip, so they just aren't
any human beings to use that
money for but for the appellate
courts because we're in Santa Fe
and Albuquerque, we feel
confident.
Um, that we can engage those
entities that provide those
types of services for government
entities. Much like this
building. Understood. Madam
Chair, Madam Chief Justice.
Thank you. That's very helpful.
Thank you, Mr Chair. Um, before
we go to emotion, um, I want to
just let folks know that we will
be taking public comment as the
chairman has been doing at the
end of the day. So if folks are
here and want to speak about any
of the agencies that we've heard
this morning, they can do so at
the end of today, um, and
remembers
Lunches in 305.
And with that
Mr Chairman.
Madam Tribe moved the LSC
recommendation. Understanding
that wonderful, So we have
emotion from chairman Small with
a second from representative
Garcia, Um, to accept the LFC
was significant work ahead. Do
we have opposition to this
motion?
Nope. We're good. Excellent. So
the recommendation has been
adopted 30 minutes for lunch.
