Mitt of projects. Financials.
Can you just explain to the
committee? Um
Why that's has been taken out.
I'm going to refer to market on
that question.
Okay?
Thank you, Mr Chairman,
representatives, so the law
basically requires that we audit
the the actual project rather
than the entity And right now
what we do is they are required
pursuant to executive order and
our own rules to have audits
done of the for the entity
itself. But getting an audit of
the project is, um, inefficient
since we oversee each
distribution as it goes out, So
when a paper request comes in
where overseeing that pay
request, and we're monitoring
the budget
And and so auditing the
Um, the project's records after
the fact is, um, uh, inefficient
and and difficult to
inexpensive.
Thank you, Mr Chairman. Thank
you, Mark. Thank you.
Representative.
Thank you. Ranking member.
Armstrong. Next represent
Garrett, please. Thank you. Mr
Chair representative had had
adjust this pertain to what we
talked about in New Mexico.
Finance Authority oversight
about funding more water
projects. Is this related to
that?
It's Mr Chair and representative
Garrett. It's very much related
to that we this committee. Thank
you very much has put 100
million more into the water
Project fund. What This does is
eliminate kind of the the
bureaucracy that that we put on,
You know, a small mutual
domestic systems are these small
cities or small counties to
To do even more work and it's
not necessary. And we read that
the this
Both sent second. Both engineer
Hammond and CEO marketed wrestle
looked at all these things and
said, How can we make this
process work faster for the
people that that have a that
have received the money that
have been bedded for the money,
so this will really speed up
this process, and that's why
we're doing it.
Thank you, Mr Chair. Thank you
for seeing its food from the
beginning.
Thank you Represent good
Represent Luhan, please.
Thank you, Uh, Mr Chair along
those lines So we are. We are
agreeing to suspend legislative
authority over these projects
and funding and giving it to and
I meant, uh, make sure Finance
authority is that correct? Mr.
Chairman? Yes. So, basically
right now we start our
application process in August
for the distributions that will
be made in
June or the approvals that will
be made in June. The closings
thereafter. What this allows us
to do with the amendment is that
it would allow us at least for
2025. It would allow us to, uh,
start that application process
much later go through the same
steps, but because we wouldn't
have to report back to the
interim committee on the project
on the final look.
Right now happened. I think it
was November 1st this year it
would give us about four or five
more months in order to give the
applicants more time to actually
make their application so it
would reduce the timeline
necessary for the applicants to
complete the process and would
allow a little more flexibility
in the timing.
Thank you, Mr Chair. I
appreciate that. Would you still
report to an M F a oversight
committee? Mr Chair?
Madam Mr Chairman,
Representative, we'd be
reporting, but of course, we
wouldn't be starting the
application process as early as
the interim, but of course
they'd be receiving reports
throughout the interim on the
process and you know how we were
able to adapt the process for
the benefit of the applicants. I
would not. There's you know, In
addition to adding wastewater is
an eligible entity or eligible
project.
The other benefit of this piece
of legislation is that it allows
for the water project funds to
be used for technical
assistance. And so our hope is
that in combination with the
longer application period is it
will get more smaller systems
able to apply and that's what we
were trying to prove that and
we'll be able to do that with
this piece of law.
Thank you, Mr Chair. I
appreciate that. The
thoughtfulness and everything I
just and and that you will be
reporting to the oversight
committee. Thank you, Mr Chair.
Thank you Represent Wuhan. By
Sir Dixon.
Thank you, Mr Chair, and thank
you, Chairwoman. Uh, this looks
like a really interesting bill.
Um and I just wanted to flag and
see if you could
Briefly mentioned the reason
for, um the last one of the last
pieces, which is providing that
money in the water process.
Truck Water Project fund.
May be used to hire contractors
to provide technical assistance.
Ex excellent question. I'm going
to let market answer that. Um,
Mr Chairman, Uh, representative
As I mentioned, it's the two
expansions one is to allow for
wastewater, which is a
significant need that we found
the other is to allow the water
trust board to oversee some
technical contractors using the
water project funds. So we've
heard that the small systems
have a difficult time Applying
for these part of it is the
length of the application
process.
Part of it is the lack of, um
The capacity both at the local
level, but also at the
consulting engineer level and
getting some more technical
assistance dollars out there.
Well, we think will increase the
amount of participation by small
systems.
Thank you. I am Look forward.
Sorry, Mr Chair to, um
Hearing about the results, and,
uh
Thank you.
Thank you, Vice Chair, Dixon. I
would echo what the committee
has said representative Think
this is shows really good work
between our different interims
this um uh, Appropriations and
Finance Committee and it was
really exciting to see the work.
Thank you very much for it in a
compliment to all the members
who serve across the many
different interim committees.
Shows an interim idea made his
way to finance. We were able to
find that the funding and
continue to work together, so
just a big thank you and kudos
to everybody.
Mr Chair, I would move a do pass
on house agriculture
and Water Resources Committee.
Substitute for House Bill 211 is
twice amended.
Motion by Vice Chair Dixon,
second by representative
Garrett. Is there any opposition
to that motion?
That's perfect. Uh, please show
over the same Chatfield
abstaining.
And, uh,
Good and we're okay. Thank you
very much. Representative. Thank
you. Committee.
Okay, let's go back to our
agenda and members. Thank you
all very much. I know there's a
lot of different demands. Um
We are going to go to a house
Bill 271.
We're saying Cerrato.
Which again
Oh, no, she just leave.
Okay? Yeah, I apologize, Mr
Auditor.
Um, we'll be quick. We'll come
right back.
Um, we
I promise we didn't do that on
purpose.
Okay?
Okay. Represents Rideau. Please
briefly explain your belt. Great
to see auditor. Uh and then we
do have an amendment once we get
to that point. Great. Thank you.
Mr. Thank you, Mr Chair. Thank
you. Committee. Um, this is
House Bill 271. I have with me.
The New Mexico State Auditor
Joseph Estes and his staff
member Christopher Hall. And so
essentially, what This bill does
is three key things one the
Public Finances Accountability
Act codifies the executive order
requiring fiscal agents be up to
date on their audit.
Before receiving capital outlay
funds to it creates the public
Finance and Capital
Accountability Fund.
Which will be used to support
smaller local entities to be in
compliance with the auditing act
and make sure their audits are
up to date and three it funds it
at a million dollars and and
that's a key piece of it. We
know that there are more than $3
billion in unencumbered capital
outlay funds right now, and we
are not serving they're not
serving our communities. Um,
this bill will help rural areas
get up to date on their on it
and receive the support they
need to catch up. It also
ensures that we are spending the
money.
That we're getting in the
community. The activities of
this phone have already
essentially started. The office
of the state auditor had
received a $500,000 special
appropriation last year to
assist small local public
bodies, and this resulted in
$2.4 million in capital outlay
being fun actually being funded
so that $500,000 results in $2.4
million in the community as a
308 181% R O. I
Um it's effectively been in
place since 2013 through
Republican executive order, and
it's maintained through a
democratic governor as well. And
so this essentially will ensure
that our statues uphold that
idea with that we stand for
questions. And for the
amendment. Thank you. Thank you
very much for President Serrano.
Um, let's go down to the
amendment.
If we can move that amendment
read out the number and make
sure that the sponsors have it.
Mr. Chair, I would move, um,
House Appropriations and Finance
Committee Amendment one to House
Bill 271 and the 2 to 8 number
is 228152.1.
Okay. Is there a second?
Okay. It's been moved by Vice
Chair Dixon seconded by
representative Garrett. Uh,
You are You have the copy of
this? Thank you, Mr Chair. Yes,
We have the amendment, and it is
really great.
Okay in this simply removes the
appropriation represent figured,
always gonna point out and we're
gonna add that to this
amendment that on line
15 Page one. We should remove
the semi colon.
No so represent figured out
because we're creating a fund
that needs to be appropriated
funds from that's why that
stays.
Ah, okay.
So
Page one is safe.
Is there any questions on House
Appropriations of Finance
Committee Amendment one.
Seeing none. Is there any
opposition to adopting House
Appropriation Finance Committee
Amendment number one k that's
adopted.
Great represents cerrado. Uh, Mr
Auditor, Anything you'd like to
add briefly before we go to
comment just to say Mr Chairman,
members of the committee. This
is truly a good government piece
of legislation. As the sponsor
mentioned this policy has been
in place for 10 years, and it's
working wonderfully.
Um And I think you've seen you
know some of the efforts that
we've put forth to avoid. You
know, this kind of withholding
of capital outlay to be punitive
in that we're taking very
proactive, um, steps to help
folks that are being affected.
Uh, by the policies of this
executive order, So we just see
it as good government. And we
would hope that that this
committee would
Would approve it. Thank you very
much. Auditor. Thank you for
your work work on this with past
appropriations, and we have
included this amount in the
budget for this purpose.
Okay, let's go out to the public
Any buddy here who wishes to
speak in opposition to House
Bill 271 as amended.
Anyone online, see none. Anybody
here who'd like to speak in
support of House Bill 271 as
amended.
Oh,
Please come on forward. I'll
make this very quick and I
support this. I support this
legislation with the cautionary
tale. That's what I'm gonna say.
At the local level. We have a
lot of turnover in elections,
you know, and sometimes these
new elected officials don't even
know what is starting balances.
I mean, they really don't
understand the auditing process.
I'm going to say that that is
that is true in my district, and
I know that I know
I know the reason is to create a
good solid
Foundation and to be able to
help people But I'm just saying
If we could also just add a
workshop.
On how the budget process works,
Mr State auditor so that
incoming
Incoming elected officials
really understand how important
that is. And you know, I speak
as a
Director of a nonprofit I had,
you know.
17 years of clean audits, So I
think I had to. What do you call
mom? Ah, findings to findings
over those years. Everything
went well, but I'm just saying I
had a lot of support in that and
and sometimes when a new
administration comes in the old
ones go out and they There's a
lot of hiring and firing there,
so I think it would be helpful.
If before base, they start
making decisions on budgets,
they at least have a workshop on
how the auditing process works.
Why it's important and and they
need to know what their you
know. Starting balances are that
it's just again a cautionary
tale. Thank you. Thank you very
much.
Okay. Um, we're going to go now
to questions of several
Huntley's
Thank you, Mr Chair.
Um
Mr Chair. Um, you you mentioned
you've had this act has been in
place for 10 years. Is that
correct? Thank you, Mr Chair.
Thank you, representatives, So
the executive order has been in
place since 2013. This just
codifies it into our statute,
And it also creates the fund
itself so that weakness so that
the auditor's office can assist
some of those smaller bodies
that need assistance.
Getting their audience up to
date.
Thank you, Mr Chair. Um
Through our local government
office with the FAA. Do they not
do that work already or how do
you work with him to chair
I'm going to hand it to my
expert to answer Mr. Chair.
Representative. Yeah, Typically,
my office has a duty to Mr
Chairman, Representative Han has
a duty to inform and report. Um,
We don't have enforcement
authority, its its Department of
Finance and administration, and
they're the primary agency
that's been enforcing this
executive order.
You just heard from N M F A and
You just heard from N m F A. M A
fait also enforces the executive
order, but they enforce it at
the application stage for any
applications to the water fund.
Um, So what this does, is it?
It, codifies it into statute and
eliminates any questions about
the legality of it.
For one thing, and it makes it
permanent.
Uh huh. And really makes this
good government law the law of
the land.
Thank you, Mr Chair. How many
local governments and have been
affected by not having their,
um, being in compliance with
their
Audits.
It's a joke.
Um
Well, we're focusing on the
local public bodies.
Um, we projected that there's
about 2000 annual financial
certifications.
That are needed for local public
bodies, local public bodies or
bodies that have revenues under
a half a million and depending
on the revenue levels, they're
subject to varying degrees of
financial compliance.
But so the situation is much
worse for local public bodies
and, as was mentioned with a
half a million dollar
appropriation to implement this
program. We freed up 2.4 million
in with health capital outlay
with the potential to free up
another 2.1 million, and our
ultimate goal is to bring all
these local public bodies.
In the financial compliance.
That way. They don't have run
into any problems and getting
capital outlay awarded and
accessing their capital outlay.
Thank you, Mr Chair is this then
be is duplicative of what do you
have A does then Mr Chair.
Yeah, this really just, um it
puts it in law now.
Um, D f phase authority to
enforce. Thank you. Practice of
having audits on time and having
audits that are not filled with
deficiencies and material
weaknesses that would cause
anyone to doubt that particular
energy's ability to manage
public money. Thank you
understand it, So you would then
but with this $1 Million.01 time
non recurring fund.
Then.
Do the work. What of what do you
have A is doing with no shaking
head? Can you explain that to
me, Mr Chair? You want to do
that?
Mr Chair, representative Luhan
What we would be doing is
continuing a project that we
have already undertaken.
Which is helping small local
public bodies, mostly Seki,
association, soil and water
conservation districts get
caught up with their financial
reporting. It's just different
From what Mr I understand that
piece of it. I actually helped
support the bill for that first
million dollars for that
project, and you did use it
efficiently effectively.
What? Why? Mr. Chair are you
adding to codify into law, the
executive order that was from
previous administrations chair.
Thank you, Mr Chair. Thank you,
Representative for the question
again. Food when it's codified
into, um, dental law. It is not
up to each governor to, you
know, utilize it as they see
fit. It is just part of how we
operate as a state and
especially when we're looking at
again $3 billion and
unencumbered capital outlay with
this creates a process so that
when people when, as
legislators, we are distributing
our funds, we have a very clear
idea how the auditor's office
can assist our local bodies. Get
that money moving and it
actually
Is very specific. And it
outlines that, um you know,
should there be any material
weaknesses and significant
deficiencies. You know the the
the need to have those remedied
and they work with the EFTA
also, should they decide to
still offer that fund to ensure
that those are fixed. So we want
that in law. We don't want that
at the discretion of you know,
whoever is elected at any given
time. Thank you, Mr Chair. I
understand that the in the
language you're using their
around it.
So, Mr Chair and I'm bringing
this to your attention to and
codifying something this into
something like this into law. Do
you have language in your bill
that would exempt small
communities that may not be
compliant in their audits. But
our experience in emergency like
a fire forest fire or any other
type of emergency cause onto
this, Mr Chair.
Uh, I believe that's already
been done in in the last session
when there was some state
funding appropriated to small
public entities that were
impacted by the catastrophic
fires. Um, basically the their
requirement to have a clean and
on time audit was waived of
those so
I think you all have
demonstrated that you have the
authority you know to do that.
But in this, this just mirrors
the executive order and again, I
do want to point out. We also
retained a very important aspect
of the executive order. 2013
006, and that is, um
If someone is not compliant, and
they have capital out late, and
they want to get it obligated.
They can find a fiscal agent to
do that subject to approval by D
They can find a fiscal agent to
do that subject to approval by
DFA. And so it's not completely
punitive. They're not turned
away cold.
Um, so we are continuing to
allow
You know?
That that process to occur for
folks to to access their capital
T.
Thank you. Mr. I understand
That's that's great, and that's
already available to entities,
whether they if they can be
their own fiscal agent or not,
they can
They can go to another entity.
For instance, Santa Fe City of
Santa Fe has gotten has
contracted with our
North central card to to do such
so that's already available to
them.
Um
But
Um, I'm just trying to digest
this as we have a lot of
problems. We have a lot of
issues with some of our local
governments and really getting
to the heart and making sure
that we're going to help them.
So you think things through
And your $1 million that you're
asking to start. The fund is non
recurring, and this would be
this would be something that
would need to be recurring. Is
that not true? Mr Chair?
Mr Chairman, Representative Han.
We've been approaching this on
on a year by year basis. I think
it's incumbent upon us to report
to all of you the progress that
we're making and how our
obligating and using existing
appropriations to really justify
additional appropriations. But
when we surveyed
This backlog of annual financial
certifications of local public
bodies. We estimated that there
were 2000 needed at a projected
cost of 4 million, and so we
have several years, uh, to
really help these local public
bodies come up to speed. But in
the meantime,
The the auditing firms that are
already assisting these local
public bodies, particularly the
ones that have with health
capital outlay. They're
providing them with training
free of charge to help them, you
know, manage their books and,
you know, acquire the necessary
technology and just get up to
speed and be good stewards of
their own funds. Thank you, Mr I
do support
The spending of the money for
what you've been doing. As you
demonstrate. I mentioned
previous, I just I'm trying to
digest the codification codified
into law.
What the executive order is now
because I know there's a lot of
conflict around it, and I think
there should be some further
conversation around that, But I
appreciate all your work that
you've done, Mr Auditor around
this and how you've used funding
in the past to help our local
secures and smaller governments.
Thank you, Mr Chair. Thank you.
Johann. Next five, represented
Chatfield and represent Herndon.
Some Chatfield
Thank you, Mr Chair.
I guess there's some advantage
of having lived through it.
Yeah.
These? I'm just gonna take
there's several different types
of subdivisions of government.
Ah involved. I will take the one
that I'm most.
Uh, familiar with some water
conservation districts they used
to get at one time $10,000 a
year that was their base budget
each
Finally got that moved up to
$17,000 a year.
Uh, if they do nothing
They're on the bottom tier.
And it's not a major issue for
them to get an audit. If they do
something actually improved, the
watershed actually put in a
Water line actually do work.
But then it kicks them up to the
top tier.
And that audit will cost them 7
to $10,000. So it
It leaves them with almost
nothing to even pay a secretary
with
So
Yeah. In
I think that the governor's
executive order It was a good
thing. I think we need to have
our books in order.
Few years ago, somebody was
appropriated to the US to the
auditor's office, and they began
to, uh, help. Hey,
For these artists for anybody
that's not familiar with the
process. The state auditor does
not do the audit they outside
firm is hired.
Uh,
In the
These
Water Conservation district.
Whatever subdivision of
government has to pay that
outside doctor, then we then the
the audit is turned in to the
state audit.
And, uh, um to the state
auditor.
And so we've had some funds
there to help.
Pay for that.
And it's It has been working
really well, to have a little
bit of help out there. And and,
uh, I know the auditor has
talked about maybe doing start
beginning to do it internally or
or to fund. Some of these
artists and groups or lumps, and
and I think that probably might
work well also.
My only question is
Is
Do we have some money in the
budget to pay for this?
Um, representative? Yes.
Thank you, Mr Chair. Thank you
all for for a good job done. And
I appreciate it. Thank you.
Okay. Thank you very much. We're
gonna go to represent her name
for a question. Thank you, Mr
Chair. I, um And Mr I'm just
looking for to clarifying
questions with respect to the
audits that are done since the
office of the auditor doesn't
perform them.
Are these audits, uh, submitted
out on an RFP and then with
every single
Every single agency. That's a
little bit confusing. Based upon
our conversation.
Now, um for the small local
public bodies again, These are
entities that have revenues
under half a million and are
subject to the tier approach. Mr
Chairman, Representative
Herndon.
Um, the old way of assisting
them was the office and it was
prior to my tenure would set
aside about 20,000 and they
would issue an application for
these financial compliance
assistance grants.
The problem is there are only
$2000 a pop, and they can only a
system for one fiscal year.
And so
We're talking about local public
bodies in these rural parts of
the state, and it's hard to
attract any accounting firm to
go out to a rural area for a
$2000 engagement. So the program
that that's underway right now
is we're aggregating were
clustering a large group of
these local public bodies on a
county by county basis.
That way. There's more work.
It's more attractive to
accounting firms to bid on it.
So instead of this single fiscal
year piecemeal, application
based program, we have a more
aggressive, centralized
procurement process that that's
a win win. It provides
accelerated direct assistance to
the small local public bodies.
And stimulates interest by the
industry. So those are the small
local public bodies, the other
entities that have revenues over
a half a million.
They have to. They have to hire
their own auditors, but they
have to hire auditors from our
approved list. We that
Auditors. And right now we have
about 54.
That we vet every year. We have
to ensure that their current on
their training and staying up
with all the you know the the
standards.
So basically, they can. They can
sole source and they can hire an
auditing firm by RFP for up to
four years that they choose to
do that. Or they can hire an
accounting firm. Uh, year by
year basis, and so
It has to be from our pre
approved list.
We have to approve the
contracts. We don't approve the
multiyear. RFP s the procurement
code limits how long they can
engage with an auditing firm,
and that's four years right now.
Thank you, Mr Chair, and this
started to one other clarifying
question with respect to these
small public bodies. If we are
no longer I mean, the goal is a
good one to make sure that their
capital lively funds are given
to them. But what happens if you
do find that there was
malfeasance or misused? Do you
then still continue to hold the
capital outlay? It's just
unclear to me what happens under
those circumstances.
Mr Chair.
Mr. Chair, representative
Herndon. What happens in that
case, if if an entity is up to
date on their financial
reporting
But they have significant
deficiencies or material
weaknesses. Then there are new
sets of requirements that can
come into place that the FAA can
impose whether that's getting a
fiscal agent whether that's
imposing special grant
conditions or requiring the
entity to prove to the to or to
show to the EFTA or the granting
agencies.
Satisfaction that they have
repaired those issues so
It's like a two way It's a two
part function in a way you've
got to be up to date on your
audits. That's part one. And
then if you are up to date on
your audits, and you have
problems with your audits, then
there are additional potential
hurdles or not hurdles. I
shouldn't say, but requirements
to help satisfy to prove that
The money. The money is being
spent the way it's supposed to
be. And Mr Chair representative
in the bill itself. Some of
those are outlined. If you go
to, um Page three, Section four
to a talks about them that
starts online 14, but that the
grantee the local body would
need to remedy all the material
weaknesses, um, that the state
agency can have restrictions on
that, or that they have another
fiscal agent takeover.
If you continue on to the next
page explains also that, um once
they're up to date once
everything's fine, then they can
make the adjustments. But
really, this is what I why I was
appreciative to carry this bill.
Mr Chair and representative is
that it's both carrot and stick
in a sense, right? So we're
keeping everyone up to date on
audits that we are accountable
to our districts, But at the
same time, we're also offering
them the resources. They need to
be better in compliance with the
auditing act that they're under.
Thank you very much. Thank you,
Mr Chair. Thank you very much.
Representative Herndon. Um Okay,
um
I don't see any other questions.
Uh, for thank you for going
through. Auditor. Great to see
you. Thank you for being here.
Let's go to a motion for house.
Bill 271. Thank you, Mr Chair. I
would move Do pass of house Bill
271 as amended.
Okay?
It's been moved by Vice Chair
Dixon, seconded by
representative Garrett. Is there
any opposition to that? Are we
going to take a roll? Call?
Vote, Mr. Chair? Um
No.
Unless we
I don't see any opposition to
that.
So, um
Okay. Thank you very much. Thank
you. Thank you. Okay, let's um
members. I know it's getting
pretty late. We're gonna
probably wrap up here pretty
soon. I'd like to get us
through, Um
102201 and 288 if we can
Um
So represented Chandler. If you
could come on up for one of
House Bill 102 as amended
Mr Chair.
Mr Chair. There is an amendment,
which appears to be being handed
out as we speak.
Shall I address the bill? Just
generally generally, and then
the amendment. Please introduce
the bill and then go to the
amendment. Very good. Thank you,
Um
So good to see you, all of you.
Continuing your extraordinary
hard work. I admire your late
hours. Mr Chair and Committee
members. This bill, um, changes
the Magistrate court in a couple
of ways. One is it makes it what
we call a court of record right
now. It is not a court of record
meaning There is no recording of
the proceedings, and it is
All appeals go to the district
court in a way that we call de
Novo, Meaning you get a second
trial. So you try it, and
Magistrate Court if the person
appeals that goes to District
court in its whole new trial,
this changes that
From a process of it will be a
quarter of record in the appeal
will go to the court of Appeals
in the normal course where it is
not retried, but it is appealed
on the basis of the record, and
you have to find legal error or
some other sort of defect that
would cause the Court of appeals
to overturn the case. And then
it would go back to the
magistrate court again.
To be retried if that's the
appropriate course of action,
the amendment, Mr Chair and
Committee, um removes the
appropriation and I do want to
say this. This bill got a
message, so it's not an
appropriation. That was added
and anyway, you know, in terms
of German nous and whatnot, and
if you have questions about how
it's going to be funded, I have
Carl from AOC, who can describe
their anticipated path forward,
Should this path that? Thank
you, Church? Chandler. I do want
to note we we are. We don't have
a quorum right now. We won't
take any action. Um, we're gonna
sort of double check to see if
we're concluded, or if we will
be getting a member to back
Uh, let's we can go. We can sort
of ask questions without taking
any action. We can't take action
on the amendment right now, Um
From Sam Chatfield. Did you have
a question that you would like
to ask?
Yes.
Thank you, Mr Chair.
Okay, let's do this is it? Um,
we've got the amendment now.
Um, can we go ahead and move the
amendment for discussion,
please?
Okay. Uh, And is it 2 to 8?
153.1. Yes, Mr Chair. Okay,
We've got that, Um
And this as you noted, uh, chair
Chandler. This strikes the
appropriation.
Any questions on House
Appropriations and Finance
Committee Amendment one
Representative Herndon, please,
Mr Chair and Madam Presenter. My
concern is with respect to the
Magistrate Court and then not
being a court of record. So now
we're people who normally used
registry court with those who
were not in countering the
difficult expenses that may be
encountered if they went to
District court, starting as
opposed to going into Magistrate
Court because there is no court
of record
So now they have the BSD Nagara,
for it has to be a method of
keeping those those records. And
so what? What costs are we
adding to those individuals who
would have been using a
magistrate Court for purposes of
the cases that they were taken
through the judicial system? Can
I Before we get to that
question, Can I ask if we can
adopt that? Can we adopt the
amendment?
Is there any opposition to
adopting the amendment? Okay.
We've adopted the amendment
represent turned it to represent
Ferdinand's questions. Thank
you.
And Mr Chair, Representative
Herndon. I'm Carl Rife. Second,
AOC deputy director
Um, currently excuse me.
Currently, the magistrate courts
do record hearings in felony
cases for preliminary hearings
actually record the hearing that
determines probable cause and a
felony case even though they
can't try the case and so that
the courts currently have
recording equipment for that
purpose.
So that we wouldn't need to add
recording equipment. We would
need to continue to update it
and that sort of thing as we
would normally there's so
there's we don't anticipate
added cost to litigants or to
the courts for for this
In a Mr Mr Chair, and Mr
Presenter. What about in a civil
matter?
And so now, you would have to
have a copy of the proceedings,
which they would not normally
have in a magistrate court.
Could you please address that?
Mr Chair and representative. I
wanted
Answer your question. I also
want to point out an important
carve out in this bill.
This bill does not place
landlord tenant appeals or
mobile home Park appeals on the
record and just for the sake of,
um
Understanding the scope of what
we're talking about last last
year in FY 23 magistrate courts
decided 113,641 cases.
Of those cases, 482 were
appealed.
And 200 of those 482 were either
landlord tenant cases of Mobile
Home Park Act cases. So we're
talking about, um
You know only 282 appeals in 97
of those are civil
On the civil side. There would
then be the audio record, which
can just be, um given to the
court of appeals rather than
pink. You don't have to pay a
stenographer.
Mr. Here.
Mr presented the only thing I'm
concerned about us. I understand
what you're saying about the
record in the recording. But if
the case is going to be appealed
that that means that the record
is established in the Magistrate
Court, and so then when they go
to on appeal, they're taking the
record itself and they're
dissecting it for purposes of
showing why they should have
said that one.
Those individuals normally don't
have an attorney. When they're
there. They're there alone, So
I'm concerned about the
additional cost the whole
purpose of these magistrate
courts was for the purpose of
giving them a mechanism for
having their cases heard even if
they without the additional
expense that may occur with a
district court. I'm just asking
you. How are you addressing
that? I'm really concerned about
those people who are looking for
access to justice and using the
magistrate court system.
Mr Chair. So if I get try to
answer that, so what we have, so
we've carved out landlord
tenant, which is one of them.
Sure. Great concern to you
Mobile. Um, home Park type, um,
cases so
Then you have whatever's left.
So how is it less expensive to
have a proceeding in Magistrate
Court? You're not satisfied with
that. You've got a district
court. You have to retry the
entire case. Um, that is
expanse. There are filing fees
and so on associated with
District Court And then if
you're not satisfied with that
you go to a
Court of Appeals. That seems to
me to be more burdensome and
cumbersome for the litigants
going through three different
levels of processes, Mr Chair
and Madam Representative, Mr
Chair, and Madam presented my
response to that is how many
what was the percentage of those
cases that were actually
appealed? I think they were
fairly low.
And people were looking for
access to justice, and that's
why the magistrate court was
used in the first place so with
if they decided to utilize in
additional core proceeding if
they had chosen the magistrate
court, they would have started
that I mean they could go in
district Court. But if they did
go to district court under the
current proceeding, it would be
a court de Novo. And so that's
what I'm concerned about those
people generally who has started
a magistrate court
Never. I mean, what were the
percentages, Mr Chair? I'm just
asking Chairwoman. I mean, Mr
Chair and Madam Representative,
I think you're proving your own
premise.
They're getting their day in
Magistrate Court, Mr Chairman.
So I'm not sure how they're
being impeded in any way.
And how any additional expenses
that I'm very confused by the by
the question, Mr Chair and Madam
Presenter. I think I'm very
confused about why we want to go
in this direction. So that's
okay. Thank you, Mr Chair. Thank
you very much for furniture and,
uh, we're going to go next to
representative Chatfield and to
represent Brown Chatfield,
please.
Thank you, Mr Chair.
Um, Mr Chair. My question is
about the court of Appeals.
They're all of a sudden gonna
get this giant influx of cases
and, uh
That they most probably might
not have ever seen before. So
what's it gonna do to their
caseload and their costs?
Mr. Chair, Representative
Chatfield. This is an area where
we're certainly focused on as
well.
Again.
In the last fiscal year. We're
talking about 282.
Cases that would have been
eligible. Had this law been on
the books for appeal to the
Court of Appeals, So it's a
small number, but that's still a
big number of appeals. Um,
they'll have to again point out
errors so that 282 is premised
on G. I didn't like what the
magistrate judge ruled in my
case now I went to District
court. I filed one piece of
paper. I got a whole brand new
trial. We wiped out that cases
if it didn't matter.
And
Right now. The inefficiency Mr
Chair, and Representative
Chatfield is the Magistrate
Court tries misdemeanors like d
w I s domestic violence every
day and there are
There's a prosecutor.
And defense attorney and you
have the right to court
appointed attorney. If you can't
afford one in those cases.
Uh,
The arresting officers coming to
testify. The victim is coming to
testify. A jury in many cases is
deciding the ultimate question
of guilt or or not.
And even after that conviction
That gets wiped away and then we
asked the officer to come in and
testify again. We ask the victim
to come in and testify again. We
have to prosecutor to prosecute
the case. And so there's there
is that sort of inefficiency
that we're trying to address by
saying, All right, we want to
value that hard work that the
magistrate court place put into
that, um, trying that case and
that all the folks put into
trying that case.
Let's have the Court of Appeals
review that for any error.
There's bill also has a one year
implementation delay so we can
come back next year and asked
for any resources the Court of
Appeals might need.
So, Mr Chair. I'm not concerned
about
Whether it becomes a quarter of
record. I think that's that's
awesome.
What I'm concerned about is that
we have a quarter of appeals and
I know that there
You know, they're probably maxed
out.
Maybe.
True Or maybe not true.
Uh,
Maybe someone in here was
Tell me whether that's true or
not, but I just know that it's
gonna dump in an additional load
onto that.
Court of Appeals, Mr Chair and
representatives. Well, the
alternative would be to have the
appeal in the district court as
a appellate level and the
district courts are also as I'm
sure you're aware representative
of Mr Chair have significant
caseloads. I know and speaking
with the chief justice and
members of the AOC staff, and so
on.
There is a concerted effort to
be working with the court of
Appeals on their caseload and
and they expect to be able to
support them in
Taking on this relatively small
additional work, Mr Chair and
representative. So So, Mr Chair,
I guess the district court's
handling it now, so I'm not. I'm
not gonna pursue that any
further, but it just seems like
it moves the load from the
district Court over to the Court
of Appeals. Maybe I just am not
understanding it.
The district court right now
they get a brand new trial. It's
not an appeal and trials are
very time consuming. Can be Mr
Chair and and represent can be.
It depends on the nature of the
case. So then there's that load,
and then it goes to the court of
Appeals.
So we're still bringing some
level of caseload to the Court
of Appeals under the current
system, Mr Chair and
representative
Okay. Thank you. Mr. Thank you
Represent Chatfield. Next, we're
gonna go to represent brown,
please.
Thank you. Mr Chairman
represented Chandler. I
I just want to know whose idea
this was.
Mr Chair and
Representative, Certainly the
court, the Supreme Court and the
AOC support the idea. We had a
working week We were called the
commission. But really, we were
committee of at the request of
the
Chief justice and others to look
at some of these process
improvements and this is one of
the outcomes of those
discussions, Mr Chair and
represented
Thank you, Mr Chair and
represent Chandler. So did the
Magistrate. Court judges provide
some input in this whole matter
I will defer to Carl. But yes,
they did. And I would note and
house judiciary. We had some
call in and very much in support
of this bill.
Mr Chair represented Brown. Yes,
Magistrate Judges had lots of
opportunity for input. We have a
unified budget process and the
judiciary through which our
budget request go the money but
also all of our legislative
priorities get vetted through
this, and so there
Internally committee, Uh,
hearings and July and then again
August, September October, all
the way leading up to the
session, So there's there's
opportunity to weigh in.
Okay. Thank you. And Mr Chairman
and representative
We've had some cases are not
cases but matters we've heard
regarding software requirements
so there will be audio
recordings. I understand.
Will there be that bridge to
take an audio recording and turn
it into a paper transcript?
Should someone want to do that,
Mr. Chair, Mr represented Brown
that is currently
Very large project. The
judiciary is undertaking we
received special appropriation
from you all last year to do
this throughout the judiciary.
and so were were moving forward
with that we have a test
courtroom in Bernalillo County
and another one in Curry County
right now, and we hope to
implement the software. It's
called speech. Generic terms of
speech to text.
Um, so that that takes the audio
record and using the software
gives you an unofficial
transcript that you can then
click on and then it will play
the official records, so it
makes it easier for prosecutors
and defense attorneys, um going
forward, and we would
Hope to bring that to the
magistrate courts.
But we'll come back to you all
for funding in the future. Okay?
And then finally, Mr Chair. I
just want to make a prediction.
I think this will actually
reduce the number of cases that
are appealed.
There's something
Local about having a magistrate
court and then a district court
not too far away.
I think people feel better about
Pursuing something if it if it
goes to Nova to the district
court, at least it's kind of a
local procedure. Um
To go to an appeals court might
actually retard some people from
one to seek, um, and appeal. So,
um, I've always wondered Mr
Chair. Why we don't make our
magistrate courts courts of
record.
And so this in some ways is a
very logical thing to do. So.
Thank you, Mr Chair. Thank you
very much, Mr Brown. I don't see
any other questions will go for
a motion.
Mr Chair. I moving Do pass on
house Bill 102 as twice amended
Okay. It's been moved by Vice
Chair. Dixon, second by
representative Han. Is there any
opposition to adopting that
motion?
Seeing none. Okay, briefly,
Member, please. Congratulations.
Uh, you have a do pass a couple
of quick things members first
after some research, and I've
been informed, Um, while it is
very much our customary practice
to ask for a second for motions
when it came to representative
Pettigrew, whose tabling motions
earlier today.
That does not need a second to
be voted on. When I see
represent Pettigrew next, I will
certainly share that with him.
Members. I wanted to announce
that to you all my apologies. We
will continue with our practice
of asking for a second on
motions. But when it came to
that circumstance, and the
tabling motion wanted to
announce that second, we're
gonna conclude we want to wrap
up with two bills.
House Bill 20 1% stayed with us
the whole evening. And then
we're gonna go to house Bill
207. Those will be our final two
bills for the evening.
Reserve at at, uh, please with
house Bill 201.
Mr Chair. Members of the
community has spittle tour when
God simply, uh, gives an
appropriation of now
100 million to continue funding,
though water trust board, um,
projects that have already been
approved, and, um
Ah, that it and we're really
very, very grateful for this
appropriation and
I'll stop there. Thank you,
representative. I've been
informed by the staff and, um
that this is already done. We're
just tabling this. Thank you
very much for the can. I have a
motion to table.
Moved. Is there a second
Yeah, I moved and seconded. Is
there any of not didn't after
that needed to be, But it was
Is there any opposition to that?
Okay, please show represented
Chatfield abstaining. Okay,
we're gonna conclude with
represent Garrett. Come on up.
Yeah.
Thank you, Mr Chair House. Bill
207 is about public school
capital outlay grants. It makes
a simple change that formalizes
the current practice. It changes
the word made to shall
Ah, and it originally had a, um
Appropriation to the revolving
funds, the charter school
facility.
Funny that we did two years ago
with that I stand for questions.
Thank you very much for percent.
Jarrett, we have an amendment.
Can we move that, please?
Okay. Uh, it's been moved. Is
there a second ranking member
Armstrong? This is Amendment 2
to 8155.
0.2. Is that what you have?
Yeah, Let's make sure that
sponsor as a copy. I'm going to
assume. Yes, we'll just
Okay. 0.228155 0.2.
This removes the appropriation.
Is there any questions on the
amendment? Is there any
opposition to adopting the
amendment?
Saying that okay, Anybody here
who wishes to speak in
opposition to house Bill 207.
Online. Anybody here who wishes
to speak in support?
Online.
Okay, Great.
Okay. Please, Uh, say your name
and give us a brief public
comment on house Bill 207.
Good evening, Mr Chairman. My
name is Terry Colon, The
president and CEO for the
Greater Albuquerque Chamber of
Commerce. You know, we're in
support of this bill. It takes a
lot of work to start up a new
charter school, and it takes a
lot of money to the revolving
fund created two years ago,
revolutionized charge, charter
facilities, funding and this
extra appropriation will make it
possible for more of our new and
young schools to take full
advantage of it. We want to
ensure that the public
Click charter schools that serve
our communities. Kids don't have
to settle for private loans with
high interest rates that forced
them to compromise on their
vision. We urge your support.
Thank you, Mr Chairman.
Thank you very much.
Okay. I don't see any other
public comment. Any questions
from committee represented
Chatfield, please. Or did you
have a question?
Okay, let's go over percentage
Chatfield for question first.
Mr. Is the money in the budget?
Thank you, Representative
Garrett. The fund is for is
capitalized. Can you explain and
Mr Paul
Mr Chair and representative
Chatfield, the public school
capital outlay. A council
received severance severance tax
funds for facility funding. They
have
I don't know what the balance
is, but it's very healthy right
now, and the least assistance
that's gone out has never been
reduced its held flat in years
past, But the funding has always
been there and you'll see in
your eye are that there's
there's money there for it.
Great. Thank you very much for
observed Chatfield.
Any other questions.
Represented Brown for the
motion.
Thank you, Mr Chair. I move that
do pass on house Bill 207 is
amended.
Okay. It's been moved by
represent Brown, second by
representative Chatfield there
any opposition to that motion?
Seeing none.
We are You have a do pass. Thank
you very much for being here
Game members.
That's gonna conclude our
business. I'll go to ranking
member Armstrong. I just wanted
to thank you, Mr Chair for
acknowledging what happened with
that motion, and I appreciate
your
Openness.
Absolutely. Thank you very much.
ranking member on Thank you for
bringing to my attention.
Represent Montoya. Yes. And Mr
Chair also thank you for rolling
the bill so we could take a
closer look at it. Appreciate
it. Thank you. Thank you very
much. Mr Montoya, thanks to the
committee for Excellent work
tonight. I know there's a lot of
