Conceiving was and this was a
very important point because I
know that you and I have
conversations multiple as of
conversations that we expressly
prohibit the department from did
delivering and user internet
broadband services I think what
we're we're I can demonstrate
for the strongest that that
companies are not going to be
destroyed in your words Mr
chairman not mine but actually
enhanced is we are through this
legislation in the amendment the
definitions of the things we had
to do methadone before fifty two
which is in front of you right
now.
This office is going to do the
yeoman's work of building up the
middle mile which has been the
biggest challenge in New Mexico
because we are the fifth largest
landmass in the forty sixth in
population this office is going
to shoulder a lot of that
network building.
Reducing it open a large manner
the capital outlay of private
companies on the other end to to
make the speeds deliverable on
the other end I I can't think of
a better way actually Mr
chairman to support business
then to build out that middle my
which is been the biggest
challenge for me.
Mexico warm and fuzzy.
Senator thank you for trying to
help to help me with that
I understand your fourth bullet
point.
I would choose chairman and
senator that that would stop.
The
stop you from being able to
provide our fire within the
state network on your own.
Mr chairman and senator the
office will not be a delivering
the broadband services on the
other and we have on to the end
user where the market is the
We we can't really be picking
and choosing how we deliver that
middle mile because we have
topography here in the mid the
topography of our state requires
an all of the above solution I
will talk about that and I know
that you want to keep moving Mr
chairman the that give community
of come the New Mexico which is
just about less than fifty miles
from here right now the only way
to reach from the New Mexico and
trust me I have tracked I have I
I don't live in this command
ever actually been there
actually but I'm trying to get
them brought in as much as
possible is going to be a
wireless connection to a fixed
wireless connection down into a
full essentially a mini little
valley to delivered on the
rooftops that way.
So.
I think that creates a market in
the town of Camille for someone
to go in there some enterprising
young you know or or whatever
business person set up a
delivery system on the other
end.
Chairman Senator thank you for
that of bills one of those very
defined that works before and
that's the reason why I'm
concerned thank you thank you
for that.
Thank you very much
Representative Pettigrew let's
go Representative Chatfield than
Representative Garrett and
Representative Bach.
Thank you for bringing this bill
I live in the middle mile I live
in the land where most of the
mile for the middle mile in the
state land office and the
department of transportation R.
have said that they are going to
charge you can you know
comparable to what they on the
State Land Office comparable to
what they charge an old company
for a pipeline going across
which is significant.
on the
state
department of transportation.
You know five thousand dollars a
mile something like that to go
within an existing right away
how would this solve that
problem Mr chairman and and
Representative we actually have
another piece of legislation
that is now in the that was
actually passed there were more
bills in the house and the
Senate the bill was being
carried in the house I by
Representative Chandler was
house bill one sixty one two one
six one sixty and so I actually
worked with her we put this
together work with Land Office
what have you and it is also to
make those lines at fair market
value available when the when
the earth opened up along the by
ways that next to the state
owned plants or what have you so
I think that that legislation
coupled with what this office is
doing you're you're going to be
able to see some dramatic
decreases in the rates with
which that's delivered through
the middle mile and then
companies will be able to tap
into it all along the route and
Mr
So Mr chair representative to in
addition State Land Office
worked very closely on
legislation with us they have
their own founding documents and
and what they can do and they've
already made assurances that
they will be reducing the rates
for broadband projects when it
comes to right of way issues as
the reason for for the the one
sixty the house bill one sixty
so I apologize for having
several questions I haven't read
have education and appropriation
than either of those have I seen
any of this is in a I don't want
to you know when the state if
you will but we got across the
state thirty two million dollars
will possibly eight hundred nine
million hundred ninety million
so this I need to understand
that Mr chair
so.
When you build that anymore
you know in the in our part of
the world usually there's a coop
and they'll build a middle mile.
out to.
Where there's only a few people
Mr chair.
And then they get a little bit
of money in the probably had to
get a grant to make it out there
so.
Are you guys going to fund the
middle mile bill contract middle
mile build it are you going to
put up requests for them to
build that with matching funds.
Mr Chairman representative of
it's basically all of the above
and then on the other end but
say for kicks I and I don't know
if this is the case that I can
specifically think of one but
but let's let I I know that
there is a scenario in the.
I want to say it's just south of
Hobbs
the company that services that
area will be able to apply this
other piece of legislation has
which is called the one fifty
five which is the the real
universal service fund to build
projects on the other end of
when the when broadband dust
private expenses done with their
work then you need to actually
build a network rain or whatever
around where for their services
those communities to be able to
apply for a company that's
willing to go in there and do
this and get this set up could
be a coop to by the way they can
apply to the rural universal
service fund which is now valued
at thirty million dollars for
projects that you're describing
so Mr chair.
Right now plateau till has all
of these provide service for us
we have super fast internet in
Moscow New Mexico do a great job
But there's some other places
were that might not go so are
they going to be in a position
of being against other
entrepreneurs to for their own
in inside their own cut a
district area or is are these
areas divided up across the
state already how does that work
Mr Chairman those Representative
those are private companies and
they go out and do their work
and their business what what
this will do is provide this
other fund that I was talking
about we'll provide them an
opportunity to deliver in
another modality which would be
something along the lines of a
fixed wireless connection or
something that they would we may
have to make that decision as a
business to to do that or not I
don't know that a company's
going to get out there for three
customers right customers and
try to compete with the plateau
plateau is doing a phenomenal
job in that area so I don't know
that that would actually come to
fruition but I guess it's
possible and it's possible so so
it does it does you build the
middle mile and then the
ultimate delivery company is out
for B. as that's right yeah it
for that.
how do they be able to obtain
that service we're going to the
mid to this entity that that
we're talking about do they how
do they decide how do you decide
who gets to find this ultimate
service to the customer Mr
Chairman representative of as a
biz the business is incorporator
what have you they would run
down the PRC they would file an
application I can't remember
what it's called right now but
to deliver services in a
particular area and they would
be granted or not granted based
on their application or whatever
they did I can't imagine that in
some of the more rural parts of
New Mexico we have some very
well established other call the
roll you know the New Mexico
strange Care group there's about
ten or fifteen of them that I
work with regularly and I've had
two other pieces legislation
this year working with them
so I I can't imagine someone
going to go in there to deliver
to even just fifty customers out
there it's going to be the
plateau in that area Mr chair
one more question in my district
it would be Clovis and some
other places it might be
Albuquerque has three of them go
down to the PRC and then they of
all file for the same customers
how do you decide who decides
and how is that decided Mr
chairman there are rules
established very well defined
rules of the public regulation
commission that that would that
would make that determination
the PRC would make that decision
whether they're granted a
license to do this work or not.
And one last question Mr chair
are the co op so supportive with
this or not supportive of this
Mr chairman and Representative
they have bins speaking in
support of all throughout the
process but it it's been
effective.
It is an effort to bring all of
them together they almost all I
would say we're a hundred
percent but I'd say eighty
eighty five so that they all
support everything that we're
all trying to get them for all
but it has taken since me at
least since two thousand fifteen
to get us to that point so thank
you Mr thank you very much
Representative Chatfield okay
we're gonna go to Representative
Baca than ranking member arms
thank you Mr chairman I've got
just two simple questions why
don't need so on the eve of FY
are here
looking at the preschool you're
twenty four looking at three
hundred ninety six thousand
dollars that correct Mr chairman
Senator that's correct and so
what also included that is to
have to use that would kind of
oversee this project is that my
miners that MI pretenders and
the Mr Chairman those are FTEs
and then there's also operating
costs there as well so it's not
that we're hiring two people
with three hundred I. six that's
right I do see that there's a
hearing fees and the hearing
officer of the I do see that.
Mr Chairman your your your
expert there mention of a huge
amount about seven hundred
million dollars can you tell me
as far as how this connects with
what we're trying to pass with
this legislation house bill or
Senate bill four fifty two yes
Mr Chairman representative thank
you for the question so with
this legislation right we have
the ability to build out the
middle mile broadband equity
access and deployment the funds
that is one of the big pots of
money were going after from the
NTIA right now has the ability
to create requests for middle
mile has the ability to create
programs for middle mile as well
as some last mile and so being
able to do this work being able
to actually get the middle mile
out there and make sure that
whether it's a private company
being able to do it through
grant whether they want to build
on their own or you know whether
it has to be us you know as a as
a last choice being able to get
to those most rural communities
allowing one of those eyes peas
in New Mexico exchange carrier
group or other you know enters
an internet service provider who
wants to do that last mile
that's what we're trying to
really do here and be able to
reduce those barriers and so it
having an effective strategy
requires all of those abilities
and especially being able to
that middle mile Mr Chairman
representative I just have one
one last thing to so the
legislation itself in the state
we have to have definitions that
link one of the it accurately to
the federal definition of what
this that the other means if we
don't then we're we're we're
we're we're doing that we're
getting points are taken away
from us we apply for the also we
have to have things like the
reporting mechanisms in place
all of these things have to be
in place otherwise we simply
knock ourselves out of
contention thank you Mr chairman
I'm gonna December of a COVID
no with this I mean with this
we're just talking about the
impact is going to be three
hundred ninety six thousand
dollars when you said that it
could process of up to a hundred
forty two million that would be
a conversation for this though
to come in front of the
appropriations so that we can do
this my preferences if we can
tie Federal.
Money is to reduce the cost of
New Mexicans I want to do it I
also recognize the need to
expand our this far as the
internet connectivity to my
friends are the north is some of
my others well so thank you Mr
chairman is have no more
questions thank you very much
for percent bucket we're getting
a ranking member Armstrong and
Representative Lujan thank you
Mr chairman thank you senator
so tell me what is the
difference between this bill for
fifty two and half of Senate
bill two sixty nine.
Two sixty nine is with which one
is the
it just says the that it
conflicts in that they both.
It's it's conflicts and relates
at the same time looks like it's
kind of hanging out there in
this no words to chairman it's
primarily and representative
primarily duplicative maybe
that's what the complete the
conflict is and then both bills
I'm sorry.
You know they both addressed
primarily each other's concerns
and comments we had to redesign
this bill in the reason you're
hearing it here at the.
Eleventh hour and fifteen minute
is it simply because we had to
re write the entire thing as we
were coming into the session two
sixty nine I believe it already
been introduced and we found
many errors there so we decided
to move forward with a porn
version before the thirtieth day
when we can introduce
legislation thank you Mr
chairman and senator so doing it
in that manner are you not
worried that there may be
something that we're missing.
Well it it's it's like any other
piece of legislation I do
believe we will come back with
the this is a very important
thing for New Mexico I believe
it's going to take us probably a
couple years to get it all
completely right we know for
certain though that again the
representative Bachus comments
Mr Chairman representative
we know we need to do the
minimum that the things that are
in the bill to make us eligible
for these federal dollars.
and is the money in the budget
says indeterminate flow does
that mean nothing or does that
so yes Mr chairman of the money
for the actual operations
proliferation build out for the
Mexican economics Fund the
granting process all that's in
the budget was last year this
year at all that's out there the
monies that you see here
actually being absorbed by the
department itself so that this
isn't an additional you know we
I think we'll see a fire so we
don't know how to percent agree
with I I know I.
I see them all the time thank
you Mr chairman thank thank you
very much ranking member on
from.
Of the hunt thank you Mr thank
you for bringing this is sorted
we're communicating this but
this **** right to the fiscal
implications Mr of Mr chair and
into the notes from do it.
This bill it is a huge issue
noted arrived noted so far that
it is to build up the middle
mile through the through grant
programs in the previous
legislation together I was
getting a synopsis of of how I'm
grasping all this information
into the short amount of time is
to build up the middle mile and
it's really setting this up to
to work and have.
Have the funding or have their
needs met so that we can
implement
One hearing processes and and.
So to have a regulatory
enforcement.
The procedures in this office
because we're gonna be we're
going to be administrator
monitoring or managing grant the
grant process is that correct Mr
chair
Mr Chairman representative
that's absolutely right yes and
so without this and we're we're
going to be held back from
getting federal grants all this
incredible these large amount of
monies that are out there that
our fingertips so to speak
Mister chair Mister chairman I I
put consider better gaps right
there's certain things as I
reviewed want to introduce the
bill that we went over quite a
few of that are going to be
required that we have in law in
place in order to make this
fully eligible with me we're
gonna get these monies but I
feel very good that we are
because the states that have
actually a stab and that's why I
introduced a bill to create the
office couple years ago the
states that have done that are
really miles ahead of other
states that want to pull federal
dollars to and now we have to
come back and say gosh you know
there's these definitions that
have to be in place this this
hearing process it has to be in
place the reporting mechanisms
that we place once all this is
in place we're and we're looking
pretty for some of this money so
thank you Mr chair thank you and
I mean I think it's great and
the X. it's quick work like you
said and and we are going to
they're going to be some gaps in
one of the gaps in here I think
we're gonna have to come back
and work on is is is what I'm.
One of the concerns is it what
is this agency.
becoming the regulatory
enforcement
A agency in and of itself so I
think you know this is good work
I think you really put something
together because we are going to
lose a we're going to we run the
risk of losing those funding to
search I think.
Thank you thank you very much
Representative Lujan now
Representative Brown please.
Thank you Mr chairman Senator
Padilla good to see this new
fund looking at section nine of
the bill sort of a page twenty
six and I have a question just a
moment so it's my understanding
Mr chairman and senator that
this bill would enable the state
to have a state owned broadband
network is is that correct Mr
chair Senator Chairman
representative your correct it
would primarily be and and
education all the educational
institutions would become over
time the network itself because
we know that we have schools in
every community so we thought
why don't we just.
you know that they're from the
Office pilot then respond so
that we knew we had a map of
where everything was and we
would all boats rise together so
when we get gig speed out to say
you know the the the the the
women to school right in the
middle in New Mexico everybody
around that everybody wins so we
knew that we had that already
built out why wouldn't we just
use that as the network itself
and that is state owned so but I
don't know if anyone wants to.
Do it yes of the secretary
please I'm sorry this is a the
chief counsel for the department
of international dollars ballers
hardware and I asked him to get
his body years humanly possible.
Great thank minus thank thank
you very much Senator
Senator Mr Chairman
representative so the state
already has its own broadband
network which the department of
information technology uses to
connect all state entities what
this bill is going to do is
allow us to actually own parts
that network and when we own it
then we can actually offer some
of that capacity in the private
sector but not to compete with
localized peace but only to
provide competition the middle
mile secretary for areas that
are unserved and underserved
communities for talks Mr we've
already covered the middle mile
thank
you.
Mister chairman Senator and
thank you for that information
so I'm looking
the bill says that the
department may sell or otherwise
transferred ownership of a
portion of the state owned
broadband network percent state
law
and but it's provided that the
department and any successor in
interest shall not transfer
ownership of any portion of the
state owned broadband network to
a wholly private entity for at
least twenty years after
construction.
And Mr chair and and Senator I
wondering is this is essentially
a non compete clause.
Consegui area here with me today
I don't want to be a gray area
for me someone asked him to
Mr chair Representative yes it
is so we we we're we we we can't
get a federal grant to build
that network which you know
actually funds it and then sell
it at a discount to the private
sector okay and the following Mr
chairman and senator Mike my
greatest concern is that our
rural co ops not be adversely
affected by this bill and so the
question I have is Mr chair
Senator is there anything in
this bill and I don't pretend to
understand everything in this
bill and I just thought of
course few minutes ago is there
anything that could harm the
investments are assets of rural
electric co ops Mr chair Senator
Mr Chairman representative yes
so so we have language that was
specifically for this reason
which expressly prohibits the
department or the office from
selling or otherwise delivering
internet service on the other
end we're truly helps those
companies is the capital
investment to get the the the
the the vast middle mile built
out that was the big met to
crack for the state of New
Mexico so I think.
Rural co ops
broadband companies might be
popping up all over New Mexico
they're gonna benefit for by
what we're doing here in a big
way Mr chair that triggers one
more question so the state is it
true Mr chair some of the state
would lease middle mile to the
collapse they they could yes we
could.
At a significantly reduced rate
and then having to build up
themselves okay thank you thank
you very much for Representative
Brown Senator for the motion.
Mr chairman we do pass for
Senate health and public affairs
committee substitute for Senate
bill four fifty two as amended
second it's been moved by
Representative Garrett saying by
Representative Cruz.
Can we please call call the
roll.
Representative Allison yes.
Representative Armstrong.
I.
Yes I'd like to swim of.
Representative Brown.
Yes.
Great at thirteen four this
chart we didn't did we come.
One yeah we go okay and we we
have
Okay thirteen in the affirmative
one in the negative that yes.
And and and to to explain their
vote we have Representative Baca
first and then Representative
census Representative Bach thank
you Mr chairman thank you
you know this does to make
important bill to get it at this
point in this session the at the
I would like to take a look at
this I don't pretend to
understand this and not the
technology person so those are
more
As far as involved in this can
provided the feedback but I
didn't want to I do want to
support this moving forward but
I would like to sing this
probably earlier on in this
process thank you Mr.
Thank you Representative
Sweetser please.
They have their territories for
their protected.
Friction for.
Thank you very much
Representative Sweetser thank
you senator Senator chairman
to make out thanking him for how
to turn this thing thing off so
I'm gonna take it off of the
state okay this is off now yeah
we're gonna we're gonna have a
vice chair Dixon to present
Senate bill four zero two.
Along with an last miss Russell
to come on up as well I see
Senator Hickey I apologize
Senator come on up please.
Come on.
Although there that this will be
very brief thank you Mr
president and please also know
where the money is in the
budget.
Taking mistrust of please go
ahead thank you Mr chairman
committee
for to
helps of venture capital fund
established last year by bill
with Linda Serrato merit Dixon
and myself and fifteen million
it is in the house bill two to
supplement the fund and the last
year the NMFA has been bringing
in vetting and getting that
right vetting companies to help
them look at
to venture capital projects to
invest in and essentially what
it does is it so the money is
already in the in in house bill
two and the rest of this gives
them more latitude in investing
to have a higher probability of
getting better returns and the
other key piece that they've
hired a company to help them
with is being sure we're
spreading it around the state
and rural areas and that's a
summary mistrustful anything
that Mr chairman I would just
note that last year you you
asked us to run something that
was slightly different than a
traditional venture capital
model which really does invest
in predominately high tech
industry we understood by ten
percent industry cap that you
want to just go as wide as
possible traditional models
won't fit every industry in the
state we won't get agricultural
investments we won't do other
things that really will up
lifting major rural parts of our
state so we're asking for
changes to allow us to operate
the program we believe you
instilled upon us last year
these were things we brought up
last year but given the timing
of it we weren't able to get all
the changes made so this is kind
of a follow on from last year
and we are really ready with two
investment companies on board
strategies in place we're ready
to start these investments in
these would just help us get
deeper into New Mexico faster
thank you very much mistrust
okay let's go over to the
committee.
The first representative
Pettigrew than Representative
Lujan.
Thank you chairman thank you
senator for the bill
my first question the two
venture capital groups that you
have.
State.
How did they added how are those
to provide with respect to the
legislation from last year or
are they better defined with
legislation to provide for a
two.
Mr Chairman we have a hired two
investment advisers to help us
determine where the money should
go one of them's a Santa Fe
based advisers called sun
mountain capital they currently
are an advisor to the state
investment council and the other
one is a these are two
nationwide firms that have come
together for this mission driven
finance and next right they're
the ones that are helping us
develop the more alternative
models that are in place so what
this will allow us to do if for
two passes is it allow that
second part to the more
alternative model to be fully
developed and implemented if we
don't get this we will end up in
more of a fund to fund
investment much like the
catalyst one from last year Mr
chairman and that's it was a
great fund it's a great idea but
it's not very diversified and
it's unlikely that we'll be able
to get a lot of matching fund
investors for things other than
again high tech.
Chairman and senator
I think I misunderstood the the
opening I understood that you
had to venture capital
investments in the wings waiting
not to groups
chairman Senator that were
helping you define the venture
capital so to chairman and
senator with that of the thirty
five million I think to your
given last year how many
programs to do look at and how
many of those programs
If any did.
What I say programs I mean
specifically investments
chairman.
Mr Senator mistrust of.
Mr chairman we've not yet made
an investment and I think
frankly we haven't even had the
thirty five million transfer to
NMFA at so we have just finished
doing our landscape and and
putting together an investment
strategy that we think both
meets the mission and is
fiscally prudent for the dollars
that you've I'm interested in
this.
Thank you chairman just two more
questions you would please first
one being you the state that
changes made paid for items C.
and.
I know my well I.
Mr chair of the The New.
Chairman.
Program.
Looking at some kind of venture
capital investment with respect
to the incubator process is this
going on in Albuquerque and if
so will you expand on that.
Secondly the.
Would be.
Right.
Two more questions and
To provide the differential
right to to have discussed and
then third.
Would be.
Chairman Senator you know the
number of venture capital
investments out there that are
successful compared to every
phone.
I'm just curious what the
safeguards are for the state in
New Mexico thank you.
Distrust Mr Chairman also with
the second question because I
believe I know that with the the
the differential rate investment
Mr chairman last year one of the
objectives you gave us and house
bill one oh four was to create
new job opportunities support
new emerging and expanding
businesses enhance economic
development objectives you did
not in bed into that piece of
legislation some of it was based
on a financial returns prepped
predominately we believe the
differential right investment
solidifies our understanding of
that so we believe what you're
telling us is put these things
into of a prudent investment
that will create economic
development you go to the state
investment council they're
predominantly investing for
return that is their job but
they also have an ability to do
investments for economic
development reasons and they
have a differential rate of
language we would like that same
kind of direct direction to us
through this piece so that's why
that piece exists I do not know
and I don't have with me my
internal expert I have on staff
and someone who who was with the
finance authority when this
piece of legislation was
introduced as got twenty years
of social impact investing as
well as two attorneys on staff
who did this of also in their
jobs I just happen to have been
very lucky because I didn't know
this was coming she would be
able to answer that question for
you and I apologize we were cut
short handed and I Mr chairman
I've already forgotten first
question.
I think Mr chair Senator of New
Mexico senator and
representative
The answer to the first question
are are these with this work
with thank the angel investors
in Albuquerque and a lot of the
start ups that are coming out of
the lapse absolutely and this is
as much to me when I got
interested in it is a jobs bill
because we do now thank you bait
many many.
The logical ventures here in in
in New Mexico between the labs
and the Air Force research
center and what have you but the
problem is when they get through
their first stage where they
proved concept and then they are
demonstrating there should be a
market they're out of money and
they have to get money well the
only place where money is coming
in is from out of state and when
they come in from out of state
they left the whole thing and
move it to Massachusetts or.
California and we lose it we we
do the incubation they get the
jobs what this does is these
companies have to stay in the
state of New Mexico and the
money is here to incubate and
grow up and grow middle class
jobs which will then grow a
middle class tax base at the
state so desperately needs to
develop over the next five years
so that's answer number one so
there's lots of opportunity
answer number I think we're good
thank you very much thank you
Representative Pettigrew thank
you very much Senator we're
gonna go to Representative Lujan
and then ranking member
Armstrong.
Sure appreciate the tent so.
You mentioned Mr chair
marketed that.
This would help
looking at some of the the way
that you would do this at the
state to help other of small
businesses I guess to start ups
you mentioned Ecker culture what
other with my money sticking
that you wanted to you wanted
this to increase not just be
technological type of industry
so can you expand on what others
what's missing and with this
could really help.
Mr Chairman so there's a ten
percent requirement currently in
statute so we obviously believe
that you wanted us to go as
quick as far across the industry
as possible what we'd like to do
is to be able to move that to
thirty percent take advantage of
some momentum that's occurring
in some of these underlying
industry so you see see growth
and momentum occurring we'd like
to be able to participate by
heading capital to that more
than just have more than ten
percent of our funding into one
industry so that's the reason
we'd like to expand it to thirty
percent but the industry that
you see across New Mexico are
the ones we anticipate we would
be funding so
Medical
Because agriculture is a big one
for the state I have to say that
that's one of the areas that we
really felt less constrained by
the ten percent requirement so
could be some significant
agricultural investments made
geothermal the owners of the
pandemic okay Sir.
Without without direct language
identifying additional there's
different types of sectors you
feel like putting this that
thirty percent thirty percent
growth of it said ten to moving
to thirty would would expand in
those those sectors with that
move in and have an opportunity
is that correct Mr chairman
that's correct.
I would like to talk more about
this too because I don't
understand how that does that I
do understand that in you recall
you know when the new part
parliaments that investment at
in any one industry cannot
exceed that's where it is I did.
At the same page with you all
right that's all I have Mister
of the high ranking member
Armstrong please thank you Mr
chairman can you tell me why we
got bit I read of the funding.
On page five of line eight Mr
chairman we believed it was an
added expense that was not
necessary NMFA is covered under
the tort claims act so much so
that language just isn't
necessary thank you so much that
explains it and then where is it
in this or is it in the
agreement that you make where it
says they have to state the
business has to stay in state.
That region Mr chairman in order
to qualify they have to be in
state and then we will add the
requirement we understand
exactly the reason you want us
to be investing in these
companies as for the job so we
anticipate that they will at
least a five year will we be
subject to negotiation but at
least a five year requirement to
stay in after of the companies
featured okay thank you and then
who sets up who sits on the
board.
Mr Chairman The New Mexico
finance authority has a cabinet
secretaries from the department
of finance administration
Environment Department energy
minerals and natural resources
economic development we have
I'm just fumbling right now
that's okay these counties in
for public members okay so it's
it's a NMFA's board of directors
Mr chairman that's correct okay
I would that wasn't real clear
to me and then what's the
difference in this.
The
lead up right yes the the kia go
ahead please she can do a more
concisely Mr Chairman leader
invests in infrastructure and
this invests in ideas and the
and the germination of of
product so you can take this up
an idea it becomes a viable
product and then it has to grow
into a business that's where
this money comes in leader comes
in that it allows you to do
building and land for companies
that already existed already
have the jobs thank you and then
one last question is
In the new.
A new material on page on the
last page at the top it it says
that.
Shall be confidential and not
subject to inspection pursuant
to the inspection of public
records act new material Mr
chairman that's correct so if we
are going to do
If we're going to be doing
investments in companies that
are really.
Subject to a lot of growth and
potential for big return they're
going to want to make certain
that their information is kept
private and so this will hinder
our ability to really get some
good investments thank you Mr
chairman I think you market and
so we would know what the
companies are and where they're
being invested in just their
trade secrets would be Mr
chairman that's correct thank
you that's right they were
coming from so Representative
Brown and substances thank you
Mr chair ever so quickly Senator
Hickey it seems to me that some
of the changes actually
increased risk.
we talked about bonding and I
understand the explanation on
that Mr chair Senator but this
idea of not having to raise
matching investment funds is
that not some added risk.
Mr chairman I don't believe it
is it actually will allow us to
get the investments in with
potentially other investors who
are looking not so much for
economic return but potentially
for economic development or
social return so it we don't
believe that's an indication of
risk we just believe that that's
of of of who are partners will
be in getting these transactions
completed thank you.
Thank you very much
Representative Brown process on.
We're ready a motion by
Representative sciences second
second by by our Dicks and and
miss Santa Baker would you mind
calling the roll please.
Yes Representative.
Representative back at the.
Representative Brown.
Representative yes.
Representative.
Representative.
Price your Texan yes.
Sure Sanchez over we have a vote
changes.
On
the surface
Yes.
Okay thank you very much figure
thank you committee members
thank you very much Senator
thank you Mr.
For thanks.
