Just as a quick announcement
following the conclusion of
today's committee hearing there
will be an opportunity for
public comment if you are
interested in making public
comment please remain after the
meeting no pressure we've had a
couple of meetings with and
Senator without that would only
be that would be limited to our
subject items today so with that
we're gonna go ahead and go to
miss raven are excellent
analysts also for folks in
committee as we know we start
with our legislative finance
committee analyst who will then
introduce her counterpart with
the department of finance and
ministration as well as the
individuals from the agencies
here today and Mr secretary to
you into your team thank you
very much for being here that's
right.
Thank you Mr chairman members of
the committee as the chair
stated my name is Ellen Ramon
LFC fiscal analyst for public
safety and we're here discussing
the budget for the department of
public safety agencies seven
nine zero I'm really glad I'm
able to be with you all today I
was not able to be here
yesterday but it was important
to need to attend to talk about
this budget because of the
really close relationship that I
developed with the department of
public safety over the past few
years this is an agency that I
think has come leaps and bounds
in terms of improving and
performance reporting and
collaboration with the
legislature and I just think
it's really really important to
acknowledge their great work.
I'm joined this afternoon by
secretary Jason Bowie it's come
to my attention that this call
may have introduced him as
secretary David Bowie.
I saw I wanted to make sure to
get that right I I would say I
think that just reflects my high
opinion of him.
I'm also joined by Diego Jimenez
the executive budget analyst and
deputy chief of the New Mexico
state police for you select.
I'll start by pointing you to
the LFC volumes for additional
background information in volume
one pages fifty eight through
sixty seven there's policy
analysis on pages one thirty
four to one thirty six of all
you want to you can find the
performance report hard.
in volume two hundred pages
three seventy five to be three
eighty four have the full budget
narrative for the LFC
recommendation for DPS and
volume three has some additional
graphs and charts on pages fifty
one to fifty three and all of
these are also noted at the top
of the page two of your packet I
will just orient you briefly to
the package page one we have a
high level summary of the
General Fund recommendations
I'll be referring to this a lot
so to take it out put it in
front of me make sure I have it
you don't have to Representative
it but but I think it's
important to me so you all know
I mean referencing back to this
you to Fairmount.
Starting on page two or the
different Keith.
On page ten starts the
nonrecurring different sheet.
On page twelve you'll find
performance measure different
sheets and in the house the
following pages you'll find PS
health for a man power
projection and some other
vacancy rate tables prepared by
the department.
Start by briefly giving an
overview of the two
recommendations I'll review the
differences of for each program
and ask the ago for his input
and then we'll head over to
secretary voted for his
presentation.
So starting with so just a high
level of the business unit the
differences on page two of your
packets.
Overall the executive
recommendation provides a
slightly higher recommendation
it's about three hundred
thousand dollars higher overall
and it's about six hundred
thousand dollars more from
general fund the executive also
adds nine more FTEs.
Most substantial differences
between legislative and
executive recommendations are in
the in the differences in the
base budget and the differences
in expansion and so this
reflects sort of different
approaches to addressing
personnel issues the executive
is supports larger expansions
add positions for key programs
in areas the legislation
provided recommendations support
smaller expansions in those key
areas but also provides funding
for targeted compensation for
those areas to help of
recruitment and retention for
the existing position so that's
why you'll see especially the
statewide law enforcement
support program really big
differences in the face really
big differences in expansion but
overall really small differences
between the recommendations did
you have anything to add
overall.
Thank you Mr chairman miss rises
well where the LFC tended to
prioritize targeted compensation
the executive
Recommended expansions and
positions in areas to ensure
that the agency.
has room and ability to grow and
and the key areas like
I do
and forensic labs and as the Law
Enforcement Academy separates
into its two new distinct pieces
thank you Mr chair thank you
very much.
Well now move to the different
she for the law enforcement
program which can be found on
page four of your packets this
is also reflected in lines one
for thirteen on the high level.
The legislative recommendation
in this program for general fund
revenue is actually one point
four million dollars higher than
the executive there's also a
small difference in federal
funds because the executive
accounts for a recently received
federal grant.
The legislative recommendation
for person in law enforcement
program is one point two million
dollars higher than the
executive this reflects a
proposed pay increase for
merchants the dispatchers
although the vacancies among
dispatchers have increased
twenty seven percent in the past
three years despite the fact the
legislature has provided
multiple targeted pay increases
for these positions more
information on this can be found
in volume two page three seventy
eight under the heading in
dispatch and commercial motor
vehicle inspections but I just
wanted to really know that this
has been an area of legislative
priority but these are very very
low paid positions so even
though they receive significant
percentage increases in the past
others still relatively low rate
and the department has had a lot
of trouble recruiting for them
other positions where they've
been able to raise the salaries
more light for transportation
inspectors they've actually seen
of the vacancy rate I think
decreased by about twenty seven
percent.
In the other category of the
differences are really with
regard to the recommendations
for software maintenance and
equipment you can see these
online for three seven of the
high level.
All know the legislative a
recommendation does fund some of
the differences in the equipment
costs is the those in line at
five and six these are funded
these differences are funded as
a nonrecurring appropriation of
special appropriation.
with regard to language the
legislative recommendation
includes language that doesn't
make it so the one point two
million dollars for reasons for
dispatchers.
The executive includes of
language is related to funding
from the weight distance tax
identification permit fund and
that is not included in the
legislative recommendation I
think this is the first of of
three times I'm going to note
some changes you might want to
make if you if you choose to
adopt the legislative
recommendations in this case if
the legislative recommendation
is adopted I would suggest that
this language be added or that
the amount of other transfers
in person expenditures be
reduced by ninety four point
five thousand dollars that's the
amount of that that that
language covers from that fund.
We've come to consensus on
performance measures and targets
and any can I bills starting on
page twelve packets and in this
program there are no expansions
you know if you have anything
to.
yes thank you Mr chairman of the
committee
While the executive it was
forming the recommendation and
consultation with the agency
that came to our attention that
the HSD believe that they would
be able to absorb the the cost
of the of the all righty then
answered for the record
management and can cat the
computer aided dispatch systems
for FY twenty four of FY twenty
five is is where they're more
likely to a to need additional
funding for that Senator in
addition it's it's important to
note that well that provided
recommendations fully funded the
taser and.
Ammunition requested ability
they.
Out of that into a a
nonrecurring recommendation but
those are actually recurring
costs and the the executive
thought it was important to
fully recommend those
As they are the recurring cost
so that officers can be safe as
they do their jobs as they
interact with the public.
Thank you Mr chair.
Language.
We can.
Do you have.
I Mr chat was trying to address
the question with regard to the
language I'm hoping that you
don't have it on him but if not
we will.
So for million.
Yeah we will certainly provide
that language to.
will now
Mr chair members of the
committee move on to the
statewide law enforcement
support program this starts on
page six of your packet is also
reflected on line fourteen at
three thirty of the high level.
The executive focused on
increasing FTE in several high
priority programs here well the
legislative recommendation
prioritize providing targeted
pay increases to recruit and
retain for existing positions.
that's sort of what I mentioned
earlier and you can see this
reflected online for seventeen
through twenty seven of the high
level.
the executive recommendation is
overall about two point three
million dollars more than a
provided recommendations on I'm
actually gonna skip down to
expansions first and then go
back up to the base to try and
try to make this clear so with
regard to expansions both
include substantial inspect and
expansion for some key programs
this is the law enforcement
records bureau the forensic
laboratory bureau the
information technology division
the law enforcement
certification board the law
enforcement standards and
training council legislative
recommendation provides three
point nine million for this and
adds twenty nine fifty eight act
provides six point nine million
and as forty three of the others
can also be found on lines
twenty three through twenty
eight of your a your high level
if you would like to look at
those specifically on mmhm but I
I do want to note specifically
on line twenty six and twenty
seven that there is funding for
the newly created law
enforcement certification board
and standards and training
council which were created or
will be created
at the beginning of FY twenty
four due to twenty twenty two
house bill sixty eight the
omnibus crime bill.
returning to the base
The record the legislative
agenda this is here hello.
Which provided recommendations
than in the face is higher than
the executive of the differences
entirely in in personal services
employee benefits and it again
reflects this prioritization of
providing targeted pay increases
to recruit retain for existing
positions over adding new
positions and this is outlined
online sixteen through twenty
one of the high level.
Additionally the legislative
recommendation provides four
hundred and fifteen thousand
dollars and I FTE to added five
new victim advocate position for
the agency I will no victim
advocate funding related
positions would more properly be
placed in the law enforcement
program.
And if provided recommendations
adopted it may be desirable to
move these funds and positions
this is not a huge problem since
these are in our new positions
being created but the agency
would probably request that they
be moved in its next budget
request so this would have to
say the hassle to fix it now.
Of.
What also would move if you did
that of is the language related
to the victim advocate positions
there is of language specifying
four and fifty thousand dollars
is for those positions there's
also language in the LA provided
recommendations delineating the
budget for the law enforcement
academies boards which will
become the new law enforcement
certification board in language
really needing a budget increase
for the law enforcement academy
and there's no language
recommended in the executive
recommendation for this program.
now turn it over to do it for
any additional comments thanks.
Mr chair and members of the
committee this agency right and
described the the differences
here are primarily and and
targeted compensation on the
legislative side and on the
executive side we prioritized
insuring that the agency has
additional positions this
program in particular is growing
and expanding and evolving very
quickly
in the near future the
department will have a new
forensic labs opening the
information technology division
has taken on the tremendous
amount of very large projects
lately as the committee may
remember appropriating
over the last couple years some
projects on intelligence led
policing the new records
management system and the
criminal justice information
system as well as a criminal
justice data security projects
in regard to the to the
certification board and the
standards and training council
the executive felt that it was
it was very important to ensure
that that as the academy breaks
into is two different pieces
that they are.
Are fully supported and that
able to execute their their
reassign duties thank you.
Thank you the Diego Mister chair
Diego actually reminded me of of
something that elected
commission which is that the
legislative recommendation for
the certification board is lower
than the executive this is
because these funds were put
into a contingent special
appropriation of contention on
legislation moving the duties
that those provisions would
cover from of the AG's office to
that of to the certification
board and the department and for
me they no longer expect such
legislation on the but that is
what that's why it's not
recommended in the recurring
budget in is in a nonrecurring
appropriation.
Will move on to program support
this is on page eight of your
packets also online thirty one
through forty five of your high
level.
This one is pretty easy have the
legislative recommendation
provides almost three hundred
thousand dollars more for
targeted in general fund for
targeted compensation for key
support positions
the legislative this side this
is on line thirty four of the
high level.
Legislation that recommendation
also you'll see there's a large
difference in other transfers
and fund balance the
recommendation but it's three
million legislative
recommendation budgets three
million from the law enforcement
retention Fund as other
transfers the executive budget
that has fund balance and the
executive is is proper it should
be budget just fund balance so I
would suggest you all consider
making that change as well
with there's no language
recommended for this program
again performance measures all
for you to page twelve of the
packets and and either
recommendations supports the any
of the requests expansions for
this program.
all handed over to Diego to talk
about this program and then I
will also briefly talk about
some of the nonrecurring
differences.
I thank the lord for that that
Mr chair as a miss raven had
described the.
The difference here is.
Primarily technical it is kind
of a significant point of that
that three million dollars the
budgeted and appropriated fund
balance rather than transfers in
regards to the to the difference
in the person category of the
executive recommended a flat
budget thank consultation with
the with the agency we decided
to prioritize more programmatic
FTP and funding rather than
rather than.
For program support in this
instance.
thank you Mr chair.
All right and just turning to
page ten of your packets you'll
see on this is where the
nonrecurring different seats
start these are provided
information only not for any
action there's a lot of
appropriations here and a lot of
differences I'm not going to go
over all of them happy to stand
for questions about any of them
but I'll highlight three for you
right now on page ten line three
you'll see that the executive
recommended funding for the
peace officer survivors funding
amount of four million dollars
from the general fund this is
not included in the legislative
recommendation of this generally
this fund has been funded from
the law enforcement protection
fund and has not had a problem
with that revenue stream however
there have been some recent
concerns and much lower than
expected revenues to the law
enforcement protection fund and
so that could put that revenue
stream at risk for also on page
ten at the very bottom line
seven this is where as I
mentioned provided
recommendations included some
nonrecurring funding for
equipment tasers and ammunition
that was requested in the
operating budget and finally
page eleven very last line line
fourteen on the that the
executive recommendation is
about seven million dollars
higher fruit prop and I. T.
project to modernize the federal
justice information system and
other critical public safety
data systems legislative
recommendation is funding the
project with is expected costs
through FY twenty five aware of
the executive recommendation
fully funds the entire up
project.
Do you have any additional
comments on the nonrecurring
differences.
Mr chair now I do not but we
want to address the the language
issue from from the law
enforcement program.
Mr chair I do have the exact
language if you would like me to
either find our legislative
leader let's.
Thank you Alice for the for the
presentation and members this is
a.
That concludes your portion
sizes before Secretary Stewart
before we turn over to you and
your team just want to thank the
analyst members is as was
pointed out by our analysts
they're very small differences
between amounts and full time
employees there are many
different differences and sort
of approach but this is a great
example of really collaborative
work and then some policy things
for us to really consider and so
it's a great again just to thank
you Mr chairman thank you
mystery men as and Mr secretary
turn it over to you now thank
you Mr chair thank you very much
Mr chair members of the
committee thank you for the
opportunity to present to you
the art FY twenty four budget I
want to start office real
briefly with the introductions
and recognition for the people
that are sitting behind me they
really are they can the constant
debt DPS there are a lot of
people here that have more than
twenty five years of state
government and that really mean
for into every challenge that we
have in the PS they really
deserve all the credit a lot of
time to get to the station
sitting up here but they're
really the ones that do all the
work and so I'd be remiss not to
recognize those people at least
not by name we don't have that
much time at least of their
presence and their support are
really appreciated of they were
together every day to really
meet not only the needs of the
P. S. but for everybody across
the entire state of New Mexico
that the accounts on the
statewide along for support we
find through GPS so I will
introduce real quickly to my
left here shortly Sir W. for
cities and planning special
operation iterations you might
be answering some questions so
yes Sir which is my is the
director next to her budget
director Louis Louise Reavey and
David Baker there you are
W. secretary also interim acting
as the New Mexico Law
Enforcement Academy director but
I just said my name is William
the cabinet secretary for DPS Mr
chair with your permission
before I carry on with my
presentation is one think for a
moment this committee and
legislative body for all the
support that we've received last
year when I when I can.
I'm here from the committee is
only on the job about six months
and that was a learning process
for me and I was pleasantly
surprised how much support we
received and not only in this
committee which is through
legislation as a whole for the
PS New Mexico state police it
really was a refreshing not what
I expected expected to be a hard
balance I want to take a moment
to thank everyone for that so
thank you very much
thank also just real quick are
are analyst and the both of the
LFC side and DFA side day they
do a they're great partners for
us and they do a great job be
sure that we're supporting the
things that we need
all star a move on to what the
presentation I will be doing
power point for beta I will try
to condense as much as possible
and I want to know how much time
we have left Mr secretary we we
do have the our district
attorneys after but we we really
do want to take the time with
you and and your colleague so
please don't don't cut yourself
short I appreciate that like I
said I won't followed verbatim
but what I'll do is I'll provide
an overview of each the PS
program after I find the
overview and then we're going to
the ask you guys an idea of the
executive recommendation the IOC
recommendation contest what we
initially asked for
those statewide again we will go
to law enforcement a program
referred to that AS Ellie P.
statewide law enforcement
support which encompasses New
Mexico Law Enforcement Academy
information technologies
forensic laboratories alert
which we refer to as our law
enforcement records bureau and
are HSD R. program support and
with that I tried to do my best
to demonstrate how our budget
request of course support all of
our priorities and our strategic
goals for the department of
public safety so combining
slides two and three which you
would see is our vision our
mission our guiding values and
then on slide three you would
see basically our of base
request priorities in line with
our strategic goals in our
priorities these are really the
things that shape our strategic
goals and of course it underpins
our decision of what we do with.
And part of public safety how to
provide services to our
community.
Moving onto slide four we tried
encompass here a little bit is
is a lot of people see New
Mexico state police as as as
being DPS and that certainly is
the most public facing piece of
that we have but we do so much
more than I want to remind
everyone of that read the
beginning of this hello are are
a.
Law enforcement of records
bureau would you see there that
the that unit in of itself has
grown tremendously over the
years and will expand upon that
as we go through this this
presentation our information
technology division maintaining
access for statewide databases
and they provide that support
twenty four seven three sixty
five four of a lot of federal
local partners throughout the
state of New Mexico grants
management lab we have three
labs across the New Mexico we
have a lab in Santa Fe Los
crucis and Hobbs and so I wanted
to make sure that people
understand that of the service
that we provide in large part is
for the entire state of New
Mexico through a lot of these
additional services well beyond
the New Mexico state police the
starting out with our law
enforcement records programs
like I you would notice that
slides five through eight we'll
be covering next one for a quick
overview the program again the
service that we provide in the
strategic goals if you look at I
I as an overview page you would
see is I'll start here for
example on the top right for the
tactical team tackle team right
ran eighty four missions for the
New Mexico state police our
thirty four those were for other
agencies and it shows how much
we support other agencies
throughout the state of New
Mexico if you look at the block
on the bottom left is the same
thing for traffic crash
reconstruction unit as we have
fatal crashes or those that have
great bodily injury the
assistance that we provide to
other agencies thirty six fatal
crash investigations for other
agencies officer involved
shooting whether we respond as
a.
Metropolitan task force or ask a
primary on these we had six for
the New Mexico state police
thirty three for other agencies
and on line officer involved
shooting task force
investigations that takes a
tremendous amount of time we
provide the expertise to this
other agencies to make sure that
the investigation is conducted
properly fairly impartially so
and we will see on the slide
either I want to highlight this
for a minute I did this for LFC
is well is is some of the
support that we provide to the
other agencies in the metro
operation is is a perfect
example of that did a metro
appropriations back around the
same time with the blue fiesta
and the New Mexico state police
and the Albuquerque here in
order to reduce crime
the total hundred seventy to
rest of the third to seventh two
arrests hundred twenty those
were for felonies they recover
thirty two stolen vehicles they
seized twenty four farms and
there's a transfer of control
surfaces during that time frame
we continue to provide a type of
support to each community
regards of where they are
regards to the you know who
needs it.
Another great example of that is
the the the the fires in Las
Vegas in the Rideau so area we
clocked fourteen thousand hours
of support to those to those
areas three hundred ten of our
state police men and women work
those areas tirelessly to help
with evacuations to help with
notifications of providing
resources to those communities
and and what you don't see it on
the sly as well as not just the
New Mexico state police it does
is it puts a tremendous amount
of demand on support staff as
well as they're out there
working that require supports
that so from dispatchers to a is
the to everybody who does the
counting the billing there's a
lot of people that work on those
efforts to moving on slide six
this is a quick overview of our
priorities and our request a
request.
We want to focus for the New
Mexico state police again for
Ellie P. on the retention of our
police officers making sure that
we have pay equity improper
State step placement for
officers we want to continue to
focus on technology those things
that are needed to properly
investigate crime and to us
solve the crime issue than the
state New Mexico we wanna make
sure that we have an emphasis on
hot there's a pilot I believe
training and so if you move on
to slide seven this brought here
overview over asking for I want
to start this would quickly just
explain the format of its slide
you'll see you'll see the
request in the top block in the
middle you'll see the
justification for the base
increase request or the special
appropriation then you see some
special notes at the bottom
whether it be executive
additional recommendation are
those from the LFC so in this
particular case for the a law
enforcement program the base
increase request of we had a
request of two point three
million the executive
recommendation was two point
three in the LFC was two point
two point one the only
difference there was really a
matter of where the ammunition
was place I believe the LFC
recommended the ammunition be
placed under special
appropriation they may have some
reason for that it is a
recurring costs but that's with
the recommendation was from the
LFC.
Of as far as the compaction and
pay as you see the justification
there in the middle we are very
generous increase for the
medical state police and
salaries and and again we're
very appreciative of those
things we try to be competitive
with in New Mexico and we do
provide obviously all the
service that I mentioned across
the state of New Mexico so we do
feel it's it's best to to pay
our state police officers of
those increases did not fix our
the compaction issue that the
raises further compacted the pay
disparity for some officers we
have officers are starting with
the New Mexico state police that
are starting sometimes at a
higher rate of pay the people
who have been there so this
compaction of six is will
requests in order to resolve
that issue.
The LFC recognition listen
double lows and it's really part
of the executive recommendation
but it was part of our initial
request and again the there's
some justification for those we
want to make sure that we had
maintenance and hosting costs
for New Mexico state police
software records of we also
needed maintenance for kattar
computer aided dispatching
system maintenance costs expired
there and then the dispatcher
pay we recognize that as we are
investing in public safety we
can get where we need to go that
the investment in our
dispatchers and we want to make
sure that we included them in
and continued increases as well.
Page eight a law enforcement
program special appropriations
also for the New Mexico state
police of we requested one point
two million the executive
recommendation was one point two
and the LFC recommendation was
one point two as well.
A justification there again
listed in the very middle of
that just one legislative
distinction between play
carriers and soft armor of the
play cares that we're asking for
is basically hard armor that is
messes they police officer to
put over top of their uniform to
provide additional protection
during incidents of like active
shooter high thread persons with
rifles and that kind of thing
currently there's a level of
protection for that within the
uniformed or and so we want to
make for sure that we provided
an extra level of protection of
the like a scanners is basically
a three D. mapping capabilities
very important for our crash
reconstructions it's important
for crime scene investigations
of the amount of time that it
would take us to catalog
evidence at the scene would be
astronomical if not for this
equipment and so of that is our
requests there.
Of the executive additional
special recommendations you see
off to the left hand side the
New Mexico state police honor
guard distribution program this
fund from the the tragic loss of
life and the death of lieutenant
Fred bears the brunt County
sheriff's office of the diving
helicopter crash in Paris with
along with the other three and
so the governor and speaking
with the widow of the lieutenant
Fred beers his wife had
mentioned that he very often
with spend money out of his own
pocket to make sure the had
honor guard equipment to to
honor all those other people
that have followed in the state
of New Mexico and so it is the
governor's request that the that
that is added as a result of
being able to provide honors to
those that would follow
following the line of duty
I would just make a quick
mention as far as our tasers are
concerned they they do it's it's
a technology and equipment like
everything else it does have a
shelf life of once the Phillip
once they get all the failure
rate starts going up and we have
a failure rate within the
quickening like that a lot of
times the COVID filler often
leads to an unintentional
escalation of force when you
intended for something to work
and now does not work now we're
left the divisions where we have
to escalate Korea escalates the
altercation and so having proper
equipment there to make sure
officers the state safe is is
very important to us there.
Moving on the next seven slides
and all all combine these all
very quickly which is basically
a statewide law enforcement
support in the next seven slides
with private what we did is we
provided a highlight if each one
of those units units a really
quick high level overview of
each one of those and so again
in the slides nine through
fifteen sorry for the medical
offers an academy it's important
to note that we've really
increased the professional in my
opinion under the leadership of
deputy captain secretary Baker
and many others that are working
there at the school all for
CENIC Adam we have really look
to increase not only basic
training the level of service
that we provide there we have
been looking at providing
advanced training to all
officers in the state of New
Mexico so as a result of that
we've really seen in my opinion
we really raising the bar what's
required field really feel it's
important to stay on top of
those things and and not be
reactive to the challenges
facing law enforcement to make
sure that we proactively or
teaching everyone to the level
that they should be we are
turning out more a law
enforcement officers and public
safety tele communicators
through the next law enforcement
at me that all the line said
like Adam he's cooperating so
yes allocate means AP BCSO
Western Michigan University
Hobbs has informants in the New
Mexico Law Enforcement Academy
writers Santa Fe are turning out
more dispatchers and police
officers through the medical
force McAdam and and all those
nine satellite academies
combined so again investments in
New Mexico Law Enforcement
Academy it definitely does that
expanding that alone on page ten
wanted to highlight this because
it feels so important we start
hosting for free of training for
again as I said for law
enforcement across New Mexico's
anybody that wants to come we're
hosting it will paying for
filling the auditorium with a
fair and impartial policing that
we've offered in internal
affairs ethics realistic the
escalation instructor course we
have hosted training for our
base or school resource officers
would you find of course
important for that only
direction with their teens
because of active shooter and.
That type of thing and we really
increased not only through the
academy but also on the New
Mexico state police side
president mentioned mental
health awareness training.
Moving on to slide eleven of
information technologies I feel
this graph in the middle really
kind of demonstrates the most we
find again as I said technology
and support for not only local
state and federal tribal
agencies courts correctional
detention facilities and
dispatch centers if you look at
the graph in the middle you see
the PS supports a total of
thirteen thousand users across
the entire state of New Mexico
within our I. T. only twelve
hundred of those are are
basically internal so again are
I. T. primarily exists for
everybody else out there I
always say to people you see
police officer out there
punching keys on the computer no
matter what your station works
and that information comes
through our shop and and in some
shape or form so it's kind of
important for us to kind of put
that out the I. T. is a space
where we simply cannot fail and
and we thank you last year for
supporting those are
cybersecurity initiatives to
make sure that we have a robust
security there to make sure that
we can work in the services.
hi Taylor
A similar in the space and
learning and for to learn about
our law enforcement records
bureau we provide criminal
justice information
information to cross the entire
state of New Mexico we get the
authorization so to speak from
the FBI but we're the ones that
administered and pass it out to
those agencies to use and so
Again it's a very.
Lara and I. T. working together
very important state New Mexico
as far as making sure this works
flawlessly.
We on the slide thirteen hello
for some records bureau was
really significant about this
slide is like if you look at how
many units within the law
enforcement records lots and you
think low for some records it's
just that it's just a repository
for records that's not the case
if you learn started out with
with the two or three initial
units over time as we have more
more mandates placed on the PS
these are the units that have
been added year after year after
year the ones that are in in in
green on the very right hand
side of that are the ones that
are been added most recently
some of them unfunded and over
the years we of course then
request funding as it goes on so
as as built legislation gets
introduced we're we're hundred
percent in support of course
make sure that we provide the
service that we need for the
state New Mexico but sometimes
we we at the onset of the very
difficult to find the service
and to continued to find them at
all state one last piece about
this infrastructure was restored
both at the scene the river into
a place where we can't we don't
have places to house people in
longer at some point and so it
in future meetings in years
Wallace are discussing you know
how to expand the New Mexico Law
Enforcement.
the PS as a whole.
slide fourteen in combination
with slide fifteen is the
forensic laboratory and again
this is just demonstrates the
service that we provide across
the entire state of New Mexico
nineteen thousand pieces of
evidence last year four six six
hundred criminal cases serving
three hundred agencies across
the New Mexico which is really
phenomenal and if you see on
slide fifteen there we have our
new friends is laboratory that's
being built
we're of just no not long out
from actually occupying that
which is wonderful the thing to
remember there is it takes a
long time to orient and to not
only to hire to bring a person
into train and certify these
people before they can work
independently so investments in
the forensics laboratory in
particularly their staff is
extremely important just like
anywhere else New Mexico some
doesn't come training ground for
bringing in sciences we teach
them and then they go to other
states to seek employment and so
we ask for continued investment
as well of four of our last
staff.
So slide sixteen is a
combination of of those SLAs
statewide law enforcement
support program expenses or
increase the base.
The executive our substance use
our request was eight point
eight million the executive
recommendation was six point
eight and the LESC
recommendation was three point
nine a lot of these was a result
of the expansion positions
respective to those numbers DPS
had requested sixty six position
the second recognition was forty
four in the LFC was twenty nine.
Looking at the justification
there in the middle information
technologies
we we need maintenance costs to
make sure that servers and
secure databases and
applications for Senator DPS
manage programs excess will
again by all of for some
agencies are requests and there
you see a little bit of a of a
break out of the expansions
positions as a whole at the
bottom of that you'll see
additional addition additional
this is the base recommendations
from the LFC forensic science
salaries as I just mentioned we
got people leading state for
hard paying salaries large
staffing proper alignment you
can see the justification
they're making sure that you see
a theme throughout these to make
sure that we provide
compensation increases will make
sure that we can fill the
vacancies that we currently have
a positions and then we maintain
current staff of those very
important to us so we can
continue to to hire people of
course expand we wanna make sure
that reinvesting the people as I
mentioned are sitting behind me
they're doing the work today
One thing to note of those
requests
Specific The New Mexico Law
Enforcement Academy has
statutorily required by HB sixty
last year the certification of
board and the standards and
training council are statutorily
required and I would just point
that out as you're making your
decision on that particular.
Slide seventeen we'll go to
special appropriation statewide
law enforcement support our
record request was a one point
eight million the secretary
recommended one point eight and
the LESC recommended five
hundred thousand in that regard.
We'll go to justification in the
middle.
Our video surveillance and
services will be really stood
out to me when I was talking to
our CIO about this we're
currently by part of the day to
make sure that that we can keep
the system up and running
because that antiquated it's a
really stood out to me that this
is really something that was
that we needed to fund at least
try to get off of cross the
finish line to make sure that we
can continue to have a video
surveillance and and server.
Storage.
Where is access points this is
basically our personal you know
drug trials across the state of
New Mexico show up a lot of
different districts need to make
sure they connect their
computers and ensure they can
have all the capabilities as if
they were in office regardless
of where they are in the server
and storage in chart of body
cameras we know the legislative
mandates on body worn cameras we
need to make sure that we are
successfully uploading that
equipment and make sure that we
have a robust system that can
have that information accessible
has needed.
He would fight L. C. additional
recommendations there below as
well for your for your.
This was to be pretty easy slide
eighteen.
Nineteen and twenty there's a
basically our our HSD RAC
program supports currently has a
fifty seven employees and they
support about twelve hundred DPS
employees at any given time they
really do a tremendous job we we
need more people in HSD but we
also recognize the need to
retain and so at the time of the
initial submission of our budget
to the executive and R. LOC
presentation we have recognized
that we could find a greater
need in HSD for the retention
and recruitment at this time and
some do one make sure that we
can retain and recruit the
people that we have and then
should we do that and be
successful in that space
naturally we want to add more
people there as well so slide
nineteen CYFD
are requests initially was the
the five hundred thousand
dollars for those expansion
positions but as I mentioned of
the shifting priorities the
executive is recommending for
not funding that has is the LFC.
With that so slide twenty is my
last slides Mr chairman as the
roll up through this summary of
all the request and the
executive recommendation and so
are requests totaled twelve
point nine million dollars the
second recommendation was nine
point two in the LFC
recommendation was six point
eight with their Mr chairman
thank you and there's a
committee for your time hearing
may help you would stand for
questions.
Mr secretary thank you to you
and to your team again thank you
for going through we have a
number of questions we're gonna
go ahead and start with
Representative box.
Thank you Mr chairman thank you
Secretary
I want to first start with the
thank you in the district of the
district eight Y. representantes
County the state police have a
policy through the local tenants
that they visit our schools
every day and so that increase
presence has not only
helped our schools to to be
safer and feel safer familiarize
the officers with our campus but
also as you know in our district
that we want to really help our
students run towards a police
and away from the place and so
that increased presence is
greatly appreciated from the
tenet Bob Dr Dennis Smith and
also want to thank you Mr chair
my question is this is regarding
communications as far as I know
that the move was to go to the
digital system of as the support
so many different communities
around the state.
Of is there a need for increased
that we support the statewide
digital system and I believe the
cost is twenty one dollars per
radio per month is that correct
for the digital system or to my
my wrong about that of Mr
Chairman.
Mr members the committee
representative pocket I'm not
sure about the the actual cost
per radio
W. Whistler does work our
special projects has probably
been more versed on the radio
communication as our CIO tassels
question specifically.
I think that.
so the I don't know if anybody
knows the actual radio cost off
of their head but so as far as
the digital rollout
While I think that there is so
the funding for that all goes
through do it so we don't
actually handle any of the
funding in house so any
expansion funding would go
through them I think of my
understanding the the the
majority of the issue
I mean that roll out that at
this point is come along the
interstate corridors I think
we're good pretty good coverage
in that area but you know some
of the more rural areas are
taking a little bit longer I
think the biggest hold up right
now is not so much funding its
the
Motorola and the different
vendors being able to get the
equipment
to build the the sites to expand
the digital Network so I think
that's kind of the biggest issue
right now but specifically for
funding like say a at this you
have to just do it probably a.
Because we don't handle that
particular portion of it thank
you Mr chairman and really my
point was justice for that
because of this you know the in
the better we have communication
with our other agencies the
special religion state please or
sometimes you guys are primary I
think that is going to make our
communities safer and help us to
support our state better so
thank you Mr chairman.
You very much of Madam Baca next
we're going to go to
Representative setting other
than Representative.
Chairman and thank you for your
presentation and all your
support from Bernalillo county
Things page well how many FTEs
did you get for I. T. we talked
about it under statewide law
enforcement support these are
you on.
In our in our one of the seven
you have.
Mr chair and Representative Eli
the state department under the
expense okay under the expansion
for I. T. the agency requests
ten FTE the executive
recommended seven and the LESC
recommended for.
I I just because
Have questions on if your
department is having trouble
participating in do with cyber
efforts the expanding the the
phone but the probability checks
are you having trouble with that
as far as and do you need money
for it I guess does that make
sense.
I'm not sure Representative so
Mr Chairman representative I'm
not sure that I understand the
question Mr chair for cyber we
do it as the ultimate owner
ability tax rate in the scanning
are you is your department
having trouble doing that
because of network problems or.
I'm not familiar CIO's here
could really answer the
question.
The nice thing about the team.
Mr chairman and CIO can talk to
see if the NMAA this was August
in any I can talk to see the the
DPS CIO
so what you're referring to is
the cybersecurity standings if
you're doing junction with with
do it we actually are making
some significant changes to our
network right now as part of the
state the C. to a special
appropriation for cybersecurity
division received in the last FY
and so we actually I'm right now
working with the cabinet
secretary there and chief
information security officer
there we've actually actually
registry start those standings
part of a request was for
additional people that our
security team that's very
important two years ago when I
came on there were no people or
security team we're now up to
three people but we need to be a
have a larger we're response for
a lot of security for other
agencies as well so but but we
are in the process of
instituting.
And so money isn't a problem as
far as networking or anything
you guys have what you need not
not specifically with that issue
expanding the.
okay thank you.
Thank you very much
Representative said no.
are you is that are okay great
Representative please.
Thank you Mr chairman and thank
you secretary for the
presentation
chairman I think the first
question I have is actually for
staff we.
For her just a little bit about
the log for.
The statement about the language
and I would like to hear the
details of the language.
Randall law enforcement
protection fund bill last year
that got.
They just knocked out and I know
the risks money put in the.
Into the probation last year or
make sure where we're at going
forward thank you.
Mr Chairman representative.
Just.
If the question is about the law
enforcement protection fund
potential shortfall that I noted
so there's there's no language
related to that but the the
executive recommendation does
provide funding for this peace
officers survivors fund which is
funded from the funding source
but if you'd like more detail on
page.
Three seventy seven of William
to I believe of there's a
header.
A lot that's a lot for the
protection fund and I have a
couple paragraphs written out
there explaining the issue but
basically when revenue revenue
collection for about Fund moved
from the office of the
superintendent of insurance to
the taxation and revenue
department we saw substantial
reductions in not revenue
this is of after conversations
of the taxation and revenue
department they're certain that
they are calculating the correct
distributions to this fund so
it's possible that it was over
funded in the past I cannot
speak to that with any level of
certainty but basically I mean
we saw last year that the fund
received less than six million
dollars when we were projecting
it would receive somewhere
around twenty three or twenty
four million.
More more
that.
Argument.
For the reason why the the bill
died last year was.
There is to have a potential of
of the building too hot too much
and not reverting back in
because I have no reverting
language in their areas chairman
and presenters of if we need to
fix that because by my
calculations is going to be a
problem seem I I by the
information I'm receiving is
going to be a problem.
And and so we just.
Really curious as if that's
something that we need to re I
need to re look at the chair.
So I can take that offline and
then continue to go
chairman the.
It's kind of a side bar there's
a bill coming up.
For committees right now for for
a and what back license plate
secretary I'd like to know your
thoughts on on how that would
improve performance in the field
with respect to being able to
chase people that.
Thank you for your support for
chairman maybe maybe we can just
of pros and cons on enough for
you thank you the representative
Ripley's.
Thank you for the question if
you want to answer secretary
that's fine word obviously we've
got a number of issues to work
through but if you don't Mr
Chairman representative you know
I I haven't really quite
important opinion on that yet it
means that the license plate in
of itself a lot of times lead
you towards the offender right
it's the totality of what you're
looking for a lot of times
you're looking for a vehicle
description and license plate is
probably one of the last things
a lot of times you confirm when
you get behind the vehicle it's
a lot of times you're looking
for a car matching his
description that is the first
thing I would like for you to
start paying attention to motor
vehicle color window ten
stickers on the car a number of
occupants all those things and
it's not a license plate that I
that I would look for if I was
out there working and so I don't
know all the arguments around
the building my first thought is
is I don't know that really has
an impact on crime as much as as
other things might.
Chairman Secretary I appreciate.
Chairman my next question on
page one sixty one of our I
think three
right looks like the twenty
twenty one we reverted almost
ninety million dollars and
twenty twenty two we reverted
twenty million I'd like to have
a brief discussion or answer
with respect to that then it
looks like we also pull money
out of salaries and benefits to
the tune of about.
Three point seven five million.
And twenty twenty two for the
full the full salary and
benefits and put it and others.
Optional what will happen with
those funds and
so thank you for that in my
district the secretary
mistreatment you have anything
that and Mr so.
Yes Mr chair representative I
wanted to to clarify with regard
to the reversions
I believe you all heard about
this with the corrections
department yesterday some of
this funding was of us walked
with federal comment really
funding so that's
Versions in both twenty one and
twenty two I believe the actual
the actual reversion of of money
that wasn't purposefully of
reverted in small was.
One point three million.
One percent or one point one
percent.
Mr secretary you have anything
to add that to this is a better
Mr I appreciate that so the
numbers are what they say they
are here but that's the
difference as I understand it
chairman is just what we receive
from the feds but what we had to
put back in and we ended up with
the net somewhere around one
point three.
Mr chair that's correct it might
be helpful to to reference
appendix D. of the executive
budget recommendations document
there we have two different
reversion tables one is a we
called the total general fund
reversions by agencies by agency
that includes.
Any and all free version any
money that was returned to the
general fund from the agencies
that would include the items
like here with the P. as a
corrections department we're
cares Act it would also include
other items like late reversions
or special appropriations but
the the first table that we have
and for.
The fight and and all the the
first one that I mentioned
different agency reverted more
than a million dollars we
provided some context to explain
why that happened or what what
was reverted
But for the corrections
department
you see on page one eighty
eight.
Is our.
Representative table specific to
the FY twenty two general fund
operating budget.
What the HSD is reverted from
what was appropriated in section
four
and for the correction we're
sorry for the PS
the total reversion amount.
From their operating budget was
about one point three million or
one point one percent as miss
raven has stated thank you
chairman and presenters thank
you so much Senator one last
question for the secretary with
respect to the expansions lines
twenty three twenty seven.
The numbers between the agency
requests the executive the the
LFC request for pretty
significant in my opinion and
and I just like to secretary to
maybe give you a minute to
expand on why your numbers or
where they're at and.
How that will affect you if if
either the executive or the LFC
only pull together.
Mr chairman members of the
committee Representative
Pettigrew thanks for the
question and as I mentioned you
know part of our question
actually we had sixty six FTEs
that we asked for the exact
recommended forty four LFC
twenty nine I think part of the
the strategy and things two
things on the executive side was
that we were working quite a few
positions during the last
legislative session and still
early on when we present our
budget to the governor's office
and we want to make sure that we
can actually demonstrate that we
can take make the hires of of
the expansion positions which is
provided and so I think that was
part of the the strategy making
sure that we get people to the
door I tell you been very
successful in that space out of
those thirty eight we've we've
we've brought quite a few those
people on board and then as I
mentioned indiscretions with
both the executive and the LESC
on the S. decide we want to make
sure that we focused a lot on
the retention of our people in
the investments in them as well
We have some reference here.
For the total expansion of
positions that we received of
the thirty eight FTEs last year
for the lab we we requests for
we filled two years to pending
on law enforcement records
bureau we requested to receive
and the field to I see we
requested and received six and
filled for Law Enforcement
Academy eight and we filled four
of those and and before I move
on to Law Enforcement Academy we
have a tremendous amount of
vacancies on offer some cadmium
previous years so we have that
and then we would we got a
judicial positions police report
that we were able to fill the
vacancies which pre previously
had plus the expanded positions
we went from a vacancy rate of
of course or near fifty percent
to about seventy four percent
now we have several people in
the process of their on the
listening state police side you
might remember we asked for a
lot of positions for the two.
Take responsibilities away from
commissions police officers of
civilian evidence technicians
crime scene investigators all of
these things that we could then
put on non commissioned
personnel as to free up
commissioned officers we had
received eighteen exact
expansion positions we feel
thirteen of those so far we have
five pending so we we're we're
doing very well in that space
currently but I think there was
some of the thinking and and
certainly LFC to speak for
themselves but I think there was
some of the thinking of for for
the.
Thank you very much
Representative remixes
Representative Garrett and
Representative Lujan.
Thank you Mr chairman thank you
to everybody in the room serving
in law enforcement in any
capacity a few questions and
early County as we've given
money to new software
and equipment for data sharing
that saves officers tremendous
amounts of time my question is
does the state police or any is
there any central clearing house
so as law enforcement agencies
invest in new software and
equipment that that you're
really looking to make sure that
they can talk to each other
communicate with each other
beyond any one agency.
Mr chair Representative Garrett.
We have an intelligence led
policing program that was we
started receiving funding for
last year very sad about this
program and turned over deputy
police years he's been working
on special projects along with
our CIO basically what it does
is it it does exactly that it
takes all the data from
different agencies puts it on a
kind of deadly give information
and makes that information in
digestible so officers in the
field have direct access to
those in the information
obtained from other agencies
currently available we rely on
as I always say is really the
relationship between law
enforcement agencies right and
so if you're out there working
in the field and you need data
or information or you have
someone stopped entertaining
you're looking for data or
information a lot of times
through relationship you're able
to to gather that but it's not
the server at the fingertips or
police officer and that's what
the intelligence led policing
program is designed to do Mr
chairman without altered over
the W. research.
Mr chairman of the committee
representative here just just to
follow up on what the cabinet
secretaries said yes so we
received
funny last year for C. two for
this project
I would I would I would say is
this we are have a lot of the
same sort of stuff that he PED
has we have a lot of similar
projects and similar it we've
been working with them a great
deal and learning from them I
would say we're probably maybe
two years behind them but a lot
of this implementation
we had some legacy systems that
we're upgrading our records
management system the will be
full the coming online in March
which is kind of foundational
system that then we are building
this other
the data lake on top of but yes
so we very much headed in the in
the same direction and working
and hand in hand with them I
mean it's it's it's prove
valuable for us to work with APD
because you know there's some
trial and error on their side
they were kind of a one of the
first the large agencies in the
state and several these deals so
but going forward if we have as
a lot of potential
in conjunction with some of the
expansion positions that we got
last year to improve the
efficiency of our law
enforcement the activity and
enforcement the state.
Thank you and and well as my
other questions offline thank
you thank you very much.
Thank you very much of center
and next we're gonna go to
Representative Lujan.
Thank you Mr chair thank you
everyone here and going over all
of this
I guess really just really
quickly Mr chair I'm looking at
the Law Enforcement Academy.
Additional positions so there's
there's a little bit of scripts
to there but my question goes to
Was there anything changed slide
rule or statutorily on the the
time of the this is the county
spends training Mr chair.
Mr Chairman Representative Lujan
not that I'm aware of you're
you're you're talking about the
duration of curriculum that's
correct Mr it's not that I'm
aware of and and I can defer to.
What is that time though Mr
chair reminders.
Hours months and what is the
total time that we spend
training or.
Seventy currently seventeen
weeks of turn two weeks okay
that's actually more than than
minimum requirement currently I
appreciate that thank you I was
wondering if if that was tied to
some of the budget and the needs
that you're asking for here but
all right I appreciate that
answer the other thing is I see
the
part of the expansion is a for
for the labs and so my question
there is and.
Are you looking for any looking
to trainer bring in interns for
any of a new the work that you
do sister Mr chair.
Mr chair representative Lujan I
don't know the.
Integrity required within the
last and and bring in interns
and I'm not sure what is as
possible there would have to
refer to our lab directors force
that is concerned I would have
concern of course for the
integrity of evidence that's
everything and bring an
entertain turns into a program
so I mean certainly could we use
them for some of the
administrative duties I with it
we certainly could but as far as
actual lab work I don't know
that would be possible that's
that's the extent my question I
really I really appreciate as
you're trying to expand and
created a bigger program and
looking at some of the
functionalities and as we're
we're talking to process the
most of our budget and how we're
creating pathways in I know that
we have many of our higher
education
Universities that have these
programs and just wondering how
we we create some pathways and
help with some of the cost thank
you Mr chair appreciate the time
thank you.
Thank you very much for coming
on seven.
A police Representative heard
the next.
And that.
Where.
As.
And that is the.
That.
Thank right so is there.
Chair representative Hurden the
answer is yes we there several
different levels there at a very
basic level our police officer
training in basic crisis
intervention then you have
advance crisis intervention the
you also have of course our our
our negotiations team that's
even a higher level and when a
person's prices and we have
publications of course to take
the person's custody so there's
different levels of training of
for it for police officers are
out there as far as having of
the our staff on the advanced
training side with of course
handle the people that are
currently law enforcement
officers make sure that they're
adequately trained our law
enforcement academy would
address all those entering into
law enforcement as with the
state police for the basic the
state police records to come on
board so you would receive the
initial training through the law
enforcement academy within spoke
look at advanced training
throughout your career and we're
putting an emphasis on that with
New Mexico state police as well
as offering those opportunities
through the New Mexico Law
Enforcement Academy and so what
that translates to practically
in the field of course is that
those skills and ability that we
then find the police officers
through training for them
actually and put that to use and
since we're on the topic if you
don't mind just expanding just
for a moment of New Mexico state
police cited as an example we
really increased of the the the
training and that and that C. I.
T. that forty hour crisis
intervention training we were at
thirty three percent previously
we have these are not
statutorily required these are
these are above what we believe
is necessary and so we were at
thirty three percent previously
the summer will be a six six
percent we hoping to be one
hundred percent C. I. T. by the
turn of the year so every police
officer out there will have a
minimum forty hours course
invention training.
Of the DC research expand on the
operational side we do again
have specific teams with you're
not gonna find in every district
right so like if you're if
you're having for example those
are attached to special
operations and we had a tactical
call out and we've brought on
board crisis negotiators those
those people within travel to
location here and see them on
every particular every call for
service for the.
Thank thank you very much
Representative part of
and if I see any other questions
don't miss.
Mr secretary analysts are all
have a few questions I think
First.
It would be great Mr secretary
if you could find a sort of a
follow up you mentioned a number
of the expansion positions and
sort of the progress we that you
all have made in filling those
if if you could find that too is
that super helpful because
that's the core difference here
So I did to be clear Mr
Mr secretary the expansion
positions that they were given
in the last two budgets and the
last budget primarily the
progress on on where those
positions are
And
To the analyst and the to the
cabinet secretary we're shown
vacancy rates members this is on
page fifteen of our sort of the
our our the worksheets.
And again these are unless
otherwise noted miss right in
these are sort of September is
numbers is that right.
It chairman many us there more
accurately maybe from August
okay so thank you very much this
raven so members this is sort of
a snapshot August of twenty
twenty two so obviously a long
time to change their Mr
secretary
We're looking forward to the
update on the expansion
positions be great to know where
some of these positions where it
where these numbers are now but
what we're seeing Mr secretary
are
You know a hundred and twenty
six roughly funded vacancies
within the law enforcement
program fourteen and program
support.
Forty one roughly in statewide
law enforcement support.
And so I guess briefly introduce
some more detailed follow up but
Mr Secretary how.
How do you feel in terms of
hiring for these funded
vacancies verses really focusing
on expansion positions that that
is part of of your request and
the executive recommendation.
Mr chair members of the
committee I don't believe some
of the the request that we have
are that are exactly the same
some I get that they see savings
equals money an opportunity the
same though some of the
positions there were expanding
and and asking for necessarily
some of the vacancies that we
hope to fulfill I can turn to my
is the director Miss
specifically to some of the the
vacancies currently and the
numbers always find those in the
mail which you wish but thank
you Secretary I think follow up
in an electronically would be
great
but and Miss right employees
that Mr chair apologies to
interrupt but if you look I just
wanted to to ask a question for
the department
if you look on page eighteen of
your packets this is sort of of
version of the PS health of the
department and I have worked
together a couple of years ago
to develop its by funding source
and purpose of this this is also
all data but it's something if
they update quarterly so I was
just wondering if if the if the
department of provides their
most recent quarterly update
would that be sufficient for
following up and answer your
question yeah thank you the the
big.
This year I would whisper in my
ear here today the chief
Whistler reminding me and and
it's a fair point is a lot of
the things that we we do see are
are the law enforcement officers
themselves obviously we were
still short of the New Mexico
state police side of it accounts
for a large amount of those
numbers will certainly confirm
that and provide you the
information email and get you
the data that you're requesting
Mr chair.
Thank you very much thank you Mr
secretary and so the
understanding that peace
understanding that there's a
commitment from the committee to
fill those and we're seeing the
secretary it sounds like
expand your increasing numbers
of both applicants and graduates
from the academy.
Yes we are increasing applicants
and graduates from New Mexico
Law Enforcement Academy and
there's a time when of than in
recent history where the
academy's weren't filled to the
level of the are we just started
one two Sundays ago and we have
now sixty five people starting
this New Mexico Law Enforcement
Academy currently almost so many
in fact that we're we were gonna
cap around seventy and and so
we're we're almost completely
active Facetti and it's the
largest class we seen here in
the in laws that we can remember
thank thank you Mr secretary
which is fantastic news eight
thank you for sharing and that's
great thank you to you and your
team for please sorry I just
want to clarify something people
get excited when I say sixty
five I think they're on the so
state police officers of it and
sometimes there's I need to
drive to the station I said this
and LFC in people I we had a
graduating in which is a state
police officers when I'm in the
sixty five just in a small
portion can decide on those are
police officers for the entire
state of New Mexico different
than the New Mexico state police
should just clarify no that's a
great it's a great thank you for
the verification and it's sort
of
the state window so one quick
question which is overall the
secretary do you see an
increasing role for department
public safety and state police
sort of in community efforts I
think we're seeing sort of
request you're saying requests
in the governor seen requests
from increasing number of
communities for state police
support is that a role that you
see growing over time I
certainly do Mr chair members of
the committee you know the state
police has a foot print across
the entire state of New Mexico
as you're well aware of
currently even as we are
recruiting
actually we sometimes get
applicants from some of the
rural or smaller agencies and
and it's been report to the
governor to make sure that we
return those agencies to those
smaller communities so we're not
leaving them without but even
still we get continuous a
request for more more Mr state
police officers particularly in
the rural areas.
Of New Mexico and you know they
they are spread thin I would say
across in there during your
search restrictions quite large
here recently we had requests
from the the City of Espanola
and the chief there for help in
there we've tried to commit as
long as we could those requests
come quite regularly we try to
of course those provide
incentives and where we can but
we only have so much so many
officers available at this
current time so the demand of
things definitely increasing I
think the capability of the
agency they please so increasing
as well the services that they
provide across the entire state
of I I I we speak from
experience in that in that piece
when I was with city Rio Rancho
was pretty proud of Rio Rancho
police and we rose pretty
capable Agency there's times
we and still need the request
and systems of New Mexico state
police and and they they never
turn this down even in the act
in a fairly large metropolitan
area so thank you for that and
it really ties in Mr Secretary
with so many parts of the
presentation and sort of the
data especially on the data side
were you really emphasize sort
of the external support that it
does
one concern I think we might
have Mr Secretary just going
back to the expansion positions
verses the targeted recruitment
and retention approach from LFC
you mention compaction.
At fort with within a few of the
areas with the the expansions
give a great to see feedback on
if that's a concern in a few of
these areas you know potentially
line twenty three three twenty
seven of our high level if there
are specific concerns about
compaction in any of those
those entities so that we can be
thanking those knowing that that
we've experienced it and yeah
please describe.
Mr chair of thank you I just I
just wanted to know of with
regard to that that the targeted
compensation increases online
seventeen through in nineteen
were developed in conjunction
with of the in collaboration
with the department and the work
of and that goes the same for
the
targeted pay online thirty four
so these these were specifically
decided I by the department to
not not create compaction.
Thank you very much because I
am.
Why I guess maybe I could just
as briefly then why weren't they
if they were developed with the
department the secretary and
mystery men as is there a reason
why they weren't included in the
the executive recommendation.
Mr chair.
The executive recommendation was
also done in conjunction with
the department
this specific need was was never
communicated to the executive
but on a similar note I can
note that compaction is a
significant issue with the
forensic lab staff and that the
agency has engaged with the the
state personnel office on
reevaluating the the
compensation the the rate that
is there.
the executive recommendation
would definitely help address
that and find different
Different levels of forensic
last staff thank you Mr chairman
I'll thank you thank you very
much for students.
This very did anything bad to.
Mr chair I just.
But they LFC staff specifically
requested the department
develop proposals for member
allocating funding for
prioritizing funding towards
targeted compensation rather
than expansion so that was
specifically requested of the
department I by us because that
was something we knew we wanted
to find out we wanted to make
sure that we were providing the
right numbers understood the in
thank you Mr and so that was
really something that that the
LFC and that we were driving
forward from and that the
department was respond to which
is helpful
Okay I think those were just
sort of the overall questions Mr
secretary to you and your team
thank you very much we're very
close on numbers obviously
there's still a ways to go as it
relates to
How to work through the
expansion verses the target
increases and then so will ask
for a recommendation a motion
from the vice chair but I think
there's there's additional staff
working a few of these areas so
that perhaps were able to come
closer on the expansion
recommendation
if there's a clear understanding
that were avoiding some of the
challenges of compaction and
that there's confidence were
able and you're able to fill
those positions Mr Mr.
Mr chair and move the LFC
recommendation.
I think it's been a motion and a
second is there any opposition
to it up in that recommendation
okay please so Representative
Montoya Representative Pettigrew
Mr secretary thank you very much
to you your officers to all of
the team thank you very much
thank you.
Brief comments from reserve
bedroom so monthly we have all
of our district attorney's
waiting.
I respect that
I just feel very strongly that
that matter for on the ground
floor and chamber.
On the fourth or we can't sit
here and say that we're
supporting our law enforcement
and then turn around port the.
As for what they're asking for
with respect to their expansion
I understand the the discussion
I understand the reasoning
behind it I just feel like
there's a huge gap on on one
twenty eight.
Yes Representative gets made up
throughout the other stuff but
we can't.
I'm not really good with
speaking out of both sides so I
appreciate that.
The monthly.
Yes hi.
Concern.
And.
In order to do that so.
K. so what is your budget.
Don't take it personal.
This expansion.
Thank you very much
Representative Montoya secretary
will we'll be talking again soon
thank you thank you to the
analyst Sarah right and now
we're gonna ask we're going to
go back to.
HSD two sixty four.
We're gonna be joined by
familiar faces.
Your grains.
For starters.
I.
Okay
Mr gray.
If you can start us up then
we'll go to Mr cynically and
follow the sort of the same
order I have great thank you Mr
chair my name is Brandon gray I
am the LFC fiscal analyst for
the judiciary agencies I'm
joined today by Mario cynically
at IDFA counterparts at the
table we have the administrative
office of the district
attorney's address for Henry
Valdez and CFO fitting on that's
all us
The agency number is two sixty
four if you'd like to follow
along and volume to that's on
page fifty two have you should
have a separate different he
packets for AODA.
all make really brief comments
about this budgets and and
Mitchell some mention since but
some specials as well the LFC
recommendation for AODA
increases general fund revenue
by ten point five percent the
executive recommendation
increases it by ten percent
in general the LFC
recommendation includes more
revenue for contracts for the
executive director more revenue
to person
and both recommendations include
general fund revenue to supplant
the revenue that is no longer
being collected by the agency
regarding specials if you like
to turn the page three hundred
different C. packet.
you'll see on there the
differences between the LFC and
exec recommendations for special
appropriation one I'd like to
draw the committee's attention
to is on line I that the LFC
recommendation includes two
million dollars for recruitment
and retention of public
attorneys this is recommended to
code to AODA and the two million
dollar matches the number that
was recommended to the public
defender department for a
statewide initiative to and
increase the number of public
attorneys in New Mexico and with
that Mr chair all have Mr
Smedley at anything.
Thank you Mr chair committee
members thank you Brandon we
covered it mostly we've reached
consensus on performance
measures for the Energy came
from all the dust so with that
I'll hand it over to the agency
Mr Valdez to because all.
Thank you Mr chairman
I first want to thank both
analyst for their
recommendations I I think
they're both of fair
recommendations would like to
say that it would be a
which for those of you that are
new to the committee is a
service agency for the district
attorney's we actually don't
have any oversight on to the
dust such as AOC has over the
courts we do provide services
one of those very important
services is I. P. support on
both analyst did recommend some
replacement funding from what
used what used to fund the
district fund to do a fund which
was worthless check fees and pre
prosecution diversion fees
nobody writes checks anymore
certainly nobody takes worthless
checks anymore and with regards
to pre prosecution diversion of
this legislature a few years ago
took away the ability
on the specific authority for
the district is to charge for
pre prosecution diversion
programs so that Fund has has a
almost depleted itself that food
is important because not only
does it pay for the training.
For the district attorney's
which have obligations to train
their staff
lawyers need their the mandatory
of continuing legal credits and
investigators need to keep up
with their law enforcement
qualifications as well as we
need to train the other
administrative and support staff
for the disparities of but it
also pays for the all other
costs all other operating costs
some of that cost is to provide
bandwidth and increased speeds
to the different offices on in
this post COVID hero we're
starting to see more more
communication done through video
including court hearings for
those that are our lawyers on
this committee you probably done
many many court hearings of when
you have one building in the
probably have you know twenty or
thirty computers on all
streaming unilateralist and so
we appreciate the recommendation
that does need to make it.
At some point a recurring
expense because it doesn't go
away on I do want to add that
with regards to the training we
do for.
Conferences a year in addition
to all the training we do want
last year I'm happy that we did
our first domestic violence
training that was dedicated
solely toward the issue of
domestic violence we
collaborated with the coalition
against domestic violence and
the attorney general's office to
put that on we're currently in
the planning stages and plan to
do that one again in April well
we will do our spring conference
in June we will then follow that
up with R. D. W. I. conference
in September followed by late in
the year of the fall conference
all of those conferences are
open to any state prosecutor
they don't have to be a member
of the disparities office.
All we have municipal
prosecutors county prosecutors
prosecutors throughout the state
government and indeed federal
and tribal prosecutors as well
and I know you guys all pressed
for time take the disparities of
time will stand for questions.
Thank you very much director
both as.
Representative Brown please.
Mr chairman thank you much for
the information I think there's
a typo on in our volume to on
page fifty two.
at the at a glance sectional
what Mr pre get their Mr chair.
it says emphatically as middle
part of the page that the office
of district attorney
administered by Jeff is asking
for a general fund increase of
seven hundred and forty three
point one million dollars.
And I just make sure I get the
right number there Mr chair Mr
chair representative thank you
for bringing that to my
attention that should be
thousand
I apologies thank you that's all
I have Mister chair thank you.
I would take it.
But the.
Very much thank you for thank
you very much Representative
Brown next Representative
Montoya.
Thank you Mr chairman
Henry hello
Representative
just have a couple of questions
I know that we had discussion a
couple of days ago with the
public office public defender's.
and the the discussion was and
I've had this with a couple of
dust across the state that
it's becoming harder to fill to
hire lawyers
and that pay.
Is is a potentially just we're
not able to compete in pay for
lawyers not attracting them even
though we have
some pay back
programs to to maybe pay for
their schooling Dave and we're
trying to recruit from other
states because we're just not
graduating that many could could
we talk just a little bit about
that particular issue that we're
having trouble hiring.
Miss Mister chairman
Representative Montoya and I
don't want to steal our
president's funder he was going
to address I think the number
one issue in any district
attorney's office is recruitment
and retention of quality but
attorneys we have the exact same
problem the public defenders
have indeed I think almost any
state agency has in terms of
trying to recruit professional
staff
I think the two million dollar
Award.
Recognized by the LFC
recommendation is a step toward
trying to address that issue of
the I think the problem is
really you're asking people to
do a job on in a prosecutor's
office that is extremely
stressful.
when we make a mistake when a
prosecutor makes a mistake.
It's a headline.
Or somebody gets hurt
you all have read the headlines
of I've been in hearings in this
building where they said the DA
didn't do their job the
prosecutor didn't do their job
all over things like that will
when you're when you have too
many cases to handle and very
little time to do it and you're
working at.
Salary that's really not
acceptable.
Mistakes do happen and so given
the fact that it's a stressful
job you get paid less they can
walk in almost any other state
agency and make more money and
do less work and so I think that
happens on a number of occasions
so you have the the people
behind me are extremely
dedicated the people of work for
them are extremely dedicated and
they do it in spite of those.
Obstacles I think the problem as
well as New Mexico as one lost.
We're all feeding from the same
trough we're all trying to hire
the same lawyers and you know
we're not only competing with
each other we're competing with
the private sector also yes we
do have to get creative we do
have
of many of the disparities to
recruit outside the state of New
Mexico I know I just talked with
one district attorney who came
back from a national event put
on the national by the national
district attorneys association
it was a job fair and so those
efforts
we're going to continue to try
and staff our offices
adequately.
So thank you for that strolled
as a one one other question in
this the previous
presentation we heard the there
was some discussion about
compaction and we're starting to
run into an interesting.
compaction concern among dust
not all not all offices but and
so it's starting to hit now that
some of our some of our system
dust are in a position now where
we're starting to.
I get to that point where their
natural pay raises are outpacing
our dust who managed.
So I just wanted to bring that
up to the committee
I I know a couple years ago we
forgot to put a pay increase in
the budget for dust I I'm I'm
pretty sure that's not a problem
this year but
well I think we may have to
address overall compensation for
dust so that we can put them at
least ahead of the people that
they're managing
so I don't need to really to
address that we've got plenty of
people in line to to speak today
but Mr chairman I I just wanted
to point that out we have we
we're we're running into a
problem now we're at least a
couple of our D. A. districts we
have we have deputy or assistant
dust that are.
Now inpatient or to get paid
more than those who are managing
them some thank you Mr chairman
thank you very much
Representative Montoya listening
hi.
Thank you Mr chair go back.
Recommendation for the non
general of excuse me.
Yeah the non general of
fundamentalists previously
generate by fees.
Defense rate in the pre
prosecution diversion programs
so I just need some
clarification are we now putting
a hundred ninety three thousand.
As a recurring is this
recurring.
Chair Mister chair
representative that's correct
the about two hundred thousand
is included in both LFC and the
executive recommendation to
replace that the funding on a
recurring basis.
Okay so how do as we as we put
that the budget recurring does
that help fixes the forty for
these charges programs.
Mr chair representative my
understanding is yes it should
address the I. T. infrastructure
needs and the training needs
that was previously made by the
defense about defer to the
agency thank you Mr chair
Representative Lujan I will say
it it goes a long ways toward
doing that but we were up it
was.
The FIA steadily come down from
a high of
when I first started building
the deck director it was nearing
four thousand dollars a year to
this last year and it all just
do with the at that time the the
slow down in the that a
worthless check collect as more
more people moved away from
checks into debit cards and
instant check in and so but the
last year that we were collected
the last full year was two
hundred thirty thousand so there
is a there is there is still
some to be made up.
Okay understood Mr chair so with
this I'm scared some clarity
because now we know we're it
doesn't seem like this is
something that we had to fund
before now we're gonna be
funding in recurring funding for
this making up for.
For the now I'm moving to the I.
T. processing payments
Without you know physically
without the physical tracks so.
Where's we're where we do you
mentioned the forty versus forty
taken away from you Mr chair it
was taken away in of Mr Chairman
it was taken away in believe it
was the House Bill three forty
two
when you all.
Took the ability you took the
specific ability away from
district attorney's office is to
charge a fee for the pre
prosecution diversion.
The legislature took the
philosophy that charging a fee
for somebody to go through
diversion of wasn't the way to
go that you felt that it should
be funded through the general
fund all and that year we did
receive one time funding but we
never received additional
funding after that one time when
you thank you Mr chair that
really that gives me
clarification on how into
historical
What started where where we are
now thank you so much I
appreciate the time Mr chair
thank you thank you next
Representative Cruz thank you Mr
chairman this is more.
Anecdotal information slash
experience.
So my son worked in the DA's
office a few years ago not too
long ago.
And assisted the eighties and
also very serious cases
everything from the W. are used
to criminal prosecutions and so
it's very intense work.
It is very low pay for an
attorney.
And so many young attorneys he
was he was coming out of you
law.
It was a good place for him to
cut his teeth for a little while
but based on the pay he was
never gonna stay there too long
and I suspect that's exactly the
same case that you have with the
public defenders as well.
I think Mr Chairman.
Not that it can be dealt with
today necessarily or maybe even
the session I think it's
something that eventually need
to be really considered because
it would be nice for attorneys
to be able to make a career out
of being an assistant district
attorney because it is where the
rubber meets the road.
And so Mr Chairman.
well it's anecdotal.
I believe that data will show
that it's real and I.
I would like to see us take this
up at some point thank you Mr
thank you very much
Representative daylight Cruz
listening Representative brown
and and Representative.
You Mr chair for the second
question any I appreciate it I
can only have a question
regarding looks like a special
or supplemental appropriation is
been requests for work for our
work workload study
I see that here.
in our packet Mr chair
gentlemen so the office of
public defender did of workforce
study not too long ago it was
very informational I think help
kind of help chart a path for
what needs to change to a to be
a capacity in in that agency.
the question here have is Mr
chair it says that this
appropriate this supplemental
whatever special would be
contingent upon enactment of
legislation during this
legislative session I just want
to know Mister chair if there's
a bill number yet for that.
Mr chair representative I I know
that there's bills being drafted
for that I don't believe
anything's been introduced but
LFC is been monitoring that next
okay
Then Mr Mr chair looks like.
The if I'm reading this
correctly LFC and the exact
person just in two million
dollars for this workload study
but there's language here that
says that would they be spending
no more than one million.
Is in my reading that correctly
Mr chair Mr chair representative
you are you are reading that
correctly in that the two
million dollars recommended by
the LFC recommendation is
intended to be spent in one
million dollar increments over
two years you know this just hi
this pilot last over two years
one million dollars each year in
terms of the workload study that
the intention was to and include
that as an allowable use within
that special appropriation
because the public defender had
a workload study as well so to
allow the dust at the district
attorney's to engage in that
type of study as well but the
primary intention is for
recruitment and retention
purposes.
Very much Mr chair thank you.
Thank you very much of the brown
reserve her to please.
There.
To.
At.
So.
As some of the highest with.
And.
This
best thing about the fact and.
So are you working to go.
Develop.
Mr Chairman representative what
the the focus of the conference
that we did do was trying to get
a coordinated community response
to the issue of domestic
violence in every community all
we for.
What I think works is that if
every the police the providers
the district attorneys the
courts all have worked together
on a domestic violence program
within their own community there
are examples where it's
extremely successful right here
in the state of New Mexico and
so for that to be replicated in
every district would be nice I I
understand that it can happen in
in every community but to know
that there is this model out
there additionally there were
many classes that were done on
how to effectively prosecute a
domestic violence case because
of the nature of domestic
violence the reluctance State of
the witnesses of those types of
factors that come in you know
trying to develop successful
strategies to be able to
prosecute a case without a
victim well with the reluctant
victim and so that's we looked
at there are offices that have
concentrations of domestic
violence well as far as
potential units on I don't know
that and the DA's office
currently and they can come up
and correct me if I'm wrong has
a unit dedicated solely to the
prosecution of domestic violence
cases.
All of us to first.
But also.
To date is I also believe.
Thanks for.
Mr chairman Representative
hurting we have not consulted
with CYFD on this conference we
have of course
joined with the coalition
against domestic violence and we
have another meeting scheduled
all certainly raise that.
Thank you very much for percent
pardon
So briefly director called as
the this is sort of looking
forward but the two percent
increases that we're proposing
is also maybe for Mr great there
are other.
Though are those those are meant
for attorneys and staff for
district attorneys themselves I
know we have that and do those
apply.
Mr chair know what day at two
percent estimate providing the
LFC recommendation does not
include district turns
themselves just attorney staff
understood except that thank you
very much for that clarification
thanks to a representative I
think that will we'll keep that
in mind as we start hearing from
our district attorneys and
appreciate director of all does
your work as you work in this
sort of incredibly important
area with that we'll go to our
vice chair for the most.
I thank you Mr chair I would
move the LFC recommendations.
K. of C. recommendations been
moved since then the framework
and second by Representative
Garrett their opposition to
that.
Okay so first let's we're gonna
we're gonna go ahead show that
Representative Montoya voting in
opposition to them and Clemente
briefly yes briefly Mr chairman
if we've not address the DA's
so salaries I mention the
compaction issue that would just
get worse if we're giving staff
raises and we're not addressing
the ETS salary so I think as we
go forward I know this is not
the end of the budget process
and I think we need to make sure
we take a look at that I believe
statutorily we are supposed to
address dust salaries as well so
thank you thank you very much
for some more direct route as
Kate members we are.
Going to.
Go ahead
we we're gonna start members
this is going to be the order
we're going to start with our
we're gonna go the six judicial
district then the third than the
eleventh than the fifth
so will invite
District attorney event that he
Up thank you so much.
Can't.
And we'll we'll sort of thing go
back and forth like we did with
Mr
Mr gray Mr some English.
Mr chair if it's alright with
you I believe is that at this
tourney Association president
Marcus Montoya had prepared
remarks at the top no that's we
appreciate I apologize Mr
president for that district
association president Montoya
thank you.
Thank you Mr chair committee
members good afternoon thank you
for up to me to address you here
today
I didn't on leading off so a lot
of my initial comments were
addressed with director felt as
a thank you very much really it
was just an expression and a
narrative are unified priority
because that has been requested
by this body before which you
know what's covered as far as
the training see Ellie's band
with the general fund for and
then the I. T. positions and the
recruitment retention this body
is very responsive last year it
was I help too many dust
including my own district the
other item last final unified
budget requirement is the
collected dust right and so
our concern with that was
we were hoping as Mr grey at a
knowledge that the elected was
not part of the two percent and
that we would request a four
hundred six thousand dollars
to be appropriated in specific
General appropriation language
for the elected salary increases
to correct what we believe and
hope we're simply just an
appropriation oversight on that
being said you've heard from the
judiciary for from the public
defender's and they refer to a
three legged stool of criminal
justice I'm more like an eight
two eight three ring elected and
so at the very bottom what gets
to the judiciary which is the
smallest ring has been referred
to as calling balls and strikes
during the Senate state stated
the judiciary address that gets
put in front of the judges to
call balls and strikes to make
sure the procedure the substance
is fair
the next level up is your
defense bar they are the
individuals who make sure the
prosecutor is a biting and
performing by the book that
their client is being treated
fairly in the criminal justice
system by the prosecution.
Let's go up to the.
Big open end of the final that's
us the district attorneys are
responsible for juggling many
interests sometimes competing
victims rights defendants rights
public safety communal health
citizens rights
diversion underlying treatment
facilities we are tasked with.
And I and I kind of have to
openly say this sometimes to my
defense of our colleagues are I
will exonerate more people in
one year than you will in your
entire career as in just a small
example officer involved
shooting in my community three
years ago took me into my chief
deputies each independent.
Forty anymore our review for
coming to independent analysis
that never saw the light of day.
Never charged ever indicted no
defense attorney touched it but
it still was a large resource
and so that's from the beginning
of something that never saw the
judiciary never side defense
attorney
it is our responsibility to.
Ethically.
Inform the community and the
court and so and in an attempt
to remain relevant and
competitive with our judiciary
partners that's why we're asking
for this on increase in in pay
so that way we we remain
commensurate with that with the
other partners and can attract
not just qualified candidates
but high caliber candidates not
just as elected dust but to run
offices and so I know you are
busy that would just my
narrative the committee and I
appreciate the time posted for
comment or we can move right on
to the districts whatever
pleases that the chair thank you
very much president until at
appreciate very much Mr if you
have anything that let's go to
our district attorneys but
your your overall perspective
and also sort of the
illustration of that that you
you just shared with us is very
helpful.
Thank you chair.
Hey at.
District attorney Renteria great
to see you thank you Mr grey
will start with you thank you Mr
chair
I if if it's okay with the chair
I can give a brief overview of
the recognition statewide and we
can go district by district
sounds great so at the first
page of your packet you should
have a high level that looks
something like this hi this has
all the district attorney
recommendations both LFC and
exec
as is been discussed or the LFC
recommendation overall statewide
increases general fund revenue
by five point six percent the
executive increases cell phone
revenue by three point two
percent the primary difference
between LFC and exec is that the
LFC recommendation includes two
percent compensation for
attorneys and staff at all
district attorneys offices
you also see in column hi on
that high level that there is a
targeted workload adjustments
there's three hundred and thirty
three thousand dollars statewide
that's distributed to districts
based on the number of cases
it's been referred to those
districts you can see the detail
that and no at the bottom of
that page.
and and the request cycle many
districts came to LFC and exec
noting that federal grant
funding that they receive for
critical positions was lapsing
both recommendations fully
funded those lapsing positions
similarly many districts note
that high vacancy rate require
them to rely on contract Council
bowstreet both recommendations
fully fund those requests as
well
lastly turn your attention to
the special appropriation page
this is page two hundred
different she packet there's not
a lot of differences here and I
would just note that the LFC
recommendation includes that two
million dollars recruitment
retention for dust but that's
how is within a DA so that's why
it's not showing up here
and with that Mr chair I can now
introduce the sixth and get the
committee granted there please
this is agency two five six the
sixth judicial district this
will be page eleven in your
packets and page forty three in
volume two.
the sixth district contains
grant Luna and Hidalgo counties
and we're joined by DA Michael
Renteria I'll have Mr cynically
are present some details of this
recommendation.
Mr chair committee members thank
you Brandon recommendation would
increase the general fund for
the six additional district
attorney by two point two
percent while the executive
recommendation decreases general
fund revenue I three point seven
percent the LFC recommendation
includes a two percent
compensation increase for
turning in staff including the
contents excluding the
compensation pieces may the LFC
recommendations a hundred
eighteen thousand less than the
executive recommendation the
executive includes an increase
of general fund revenue to
account for a supplemental
appropriation requests to
replace lost grant revenue the
inclusion of those revenues in
the base was not requested a
budget initiatives is not
included in the LFC
recommendation without I passed
on to the honorable do Renteria.
Good afternoon Mister chairman
of and Representative
representatives of the committee
I I really want to start by
introducing my CFO brand new CFO
but has a car than us I
neglected to do that in November
and I felt I paid for it for two
three months sorry so I I said
don't forget this time so I want
to get that right I also want to
start off by of course thanking
you all for the opportunity
before you and to address you on
on our needs secondly I'd like
to also thank you you and the
legislature for all you've
already done for us and and in
times past and I know that
without your help in your
consideration and what we come
here before you to ask for none
of us would be able to do our
jobs and third it also of course
like to thank the analysts to
Mr grave is just to make the
office at that rate of because
without them it it's even
tougher to present what we need
to in in the format that you
need so I'm very grateful it
takes all of us to do a good job
and I I am smart enough to
understand that without your
help my to my job becomes really
difficult more than it already
is it's it's hard to fight it's
hard to follow up district
attorney monthly just
presentation because he had been
a little bit fired up on what he
was presented to you all you
know he's gonna talk to you
about that
but I'll do my best and
hopefully consider decent tone
for the rest of us that are
following
interviewing the LFC
recommendation and the DFA
recommendation it's hard I think
for anybody to say will let's
take a lower one right because
usually you you look at the
numbers and common sense says
let's take the higher one of but
if I understand correctly the
the LFC recommendation does
involve the consideration of
something like a five percent if
I heard right five percent
increase for staff in general
and then an extra two percent
bump from my attorneys my
prosecutors if that's the case
then that's the one I should in
my tail on because that's that's
really what I want to do is make
sure that I'm taking care of my
family my my work family the
people that that works to do a
good job in a pulled what we're
trying to establish in the six
district.
and so that's how I look at it
the if it's a recommendation
based budgeting preset if it's a
little lower but it has all
those other extras that benefit
my staff the nature like to let
you all know that that's why I
would hope you would land for me
I had three points I want to
make a one I want to make a
brief as I know time is of the
essence and there's so many
there's so many others to listen
listen to the first part I want
to make and and I know that we
handed out I think it's a last
minute appeal got two sheets
that I I had my CFO in my stuff
put together I don't want to
really go over everything I I
know you all can read that and
understand it but we always come
to this recruitment and
retention topic and I'm sure I'm
not the only one you can hear it
from it is so hard to to not
only recruitment to retain good
people and for this part of my
talk and like to talk about the
prosecutor so right now it says
here I have for prosecutors
Committee really it's going to
be I I just got word it's going
to be a fifth one so for my
prosecutors the commute each day
from Los crucis which is about a
sixty mile drive it's it's not
even in my district they come
from another district to work in
my district and believe it or
not have another one at the
comes all the way from not pass
Texas which is about a hundred
mile commute one way.
He's told me that I'll pass on
his offer it jobs at the
prosecutor's office but thank
god for me because he's one of
the best young once I got the he
doesn't want to make that movie
wants to stay working in the
district that is located which
is money.
We're very rural district I know
you all know that it's a
triangle that I that I traveled
throughout the week trying to
balance the time of each week in
Deming and then in Los in Silver
City and then endorse for never
wanting to forget larkspur
because they feel neglected as
it is so.
Just take a little bit time of
time on the road of logistically
are planned things out there
when we saw them I'm feeling
like I'm doing a good job of
managing and so that makes a
little difficult just just the
distance a little bit I also
know you know we have to
counties that border Mexico
and I'm I'm so it's no surprise
to you all that a lot of the
criminal activity especially the
violent criminal activity it
comes to those channels the
whether it be drugs nonfederal
is really on the rise I'm sure
you all heard about that it's
killing our children is designed
to kill our children of in the
sex trafficking trade the human
trafficking trade it's still
ongoing I had a meeting with my
ranchers and farmers about three
months ago southern every cut
cheetah we do put animus and
although we deep into the in
into the borderline between
Mexico and they made me aware of
such concerns not only cattle
rustling left that they're
undergoing up but a lot of
disruption in their property
even around where they live
they're they're living area a
lot of trash of dead bodies on
occasion from those that are
trying to cross did make it no
one find someone to their their
just some at the daughters go
out to play in the yard or or in
in the in their Spence they're
expensive ranch and they run up
upon something like that so it's
it's really traumatic a lot of
them are at their wits end and I
wanted to make sure that I touch
base with them so that they
could share with me what they're
going to humanitarian wise it
really bothers them the state
the a lot of times when I just
help and you'll gather more
primitive vehicle and
transported to the a highway or
somewhere else they don't make
them have a little better access
instead of you know suffering
and maybe passing along the road
but of course you know they also
know there's ramifications for
doing that because you can't do
that of some of them were hoping
to sign him for trespass you
know just as a we have
documented showing the numbers
to everybody but I know I can
give were Patrol to take him to
the court to where I want them
they're gonna go with the fit
system takes of things like that
but I I do want to be non
responsive to them I wanted them
to have their say and make me
aware of it the.
A real concern about the border
the security of the border the
fence line there's a lot of
erosion that goes along the
fence line a lot of it's Bob
weir animals get out other
analysts and does that come
through if some others go
through and go the other way
rex's on the other side aren't
very keen to return in the for
lack of it we've seen so a lot
of concerns you know how with
the border not just the criminal
aspect but the humanitarian
aspect and how it affects our
families and so needless to say
I really need the support and
the funding to help and make
sure that I've got people on
staff that will address all of
those types of concerns and I'm
so fortunate because the the
young group I have as well as
the old older group I have
they're good plant there makes
they work as a team they care
for one another they care about
one another the cover for one
another best we can to just make
sure that we're doing a good job
of I don't have to tell you see
there I'm sure you know it
violent crimes on the increase I
put a little bit of notation on
the handles that we gave you all
the the more crime happens and
the more violent the nature of
the crime is a good twenty four
home sites pending right now in
my district I would say at least
a third of them are cartel drug
related at least a third at the
I would say maybe another third
of DVD domestic love triangle
things of that nature related
and then the others are just you
know people just being back and
making bad choices is not value
in life as much as I'd like to
see I grew up in that town in
that area I don't ever remember
being such a high volume of
violent crime
it's very disturbing there was a
time period when I first took
office I thought my sister was
battling cancer I I go visit her
and I believe and then someone
would die the home side and a
lot of they get the call come
back couple months would pass
that go back to see my sister
another homicide this happened
three times in a row needless to
say I started doing I can't
leave town I don't know what's
going on it have anything to do
with that but I felt responsible
of course it weighed on me it
seems like every time I was out
of the office I get a bad news
call but someone killing
somebody else.
It's only fair that just to let
you know it's on the increase I
wish I could tell you it's on
the decrease it's not it's not
on the on the decline and and so
the.
The second point be the
shortfall in salaries and
benefits so I I have various
grant position people six
advocates three of them are
fully are up with the grant
funded positions they're not on
my general fund listing or part
of that budget so any shortfall
there I have to supplement so I
can keep them up employed full
time it's a need I mean it's
such an essential and vital need
I can't even tell you for
example I have six advocates
three are on drugs positions
anything to shortfall I I I put
the money in New Mexicans out of
the general it's getting harder
and harder to do it's a real
strain on on my general fund
budget but anyway back to the
issue of.
My eight supervising advocate
here is a case of about four
hundred plus cases second in
charge carries about two hundred
plus cases and then the
remaining four roughly the
average around a hundred thirty
cases each I would merely in
like to have an would benefit
greatly from adding at least one
advocate free of the supervisor
to do his job of training and
supervising I have the need I
for two but I'd like to start
small if I could find a way to
get another advocate added and
and the and the funds necessary
to do that I'd be I'd be really
grateful the numbers are just
killing us more importantly or
just as important when it's a
violent crime it takes a lot
more time you have to put in
more energy more focus or
contact with the family and so
that four hundred and maybe
looks and played it and maybe a
lot of them are are
what would you say serviceable
but the ones they love in
violent crime and murders and so
forth they take a lot of time we
have to really invest that time.
Star market on the
So knowing that we want to do a
good job in every case is
important there is a one basis
not but some take a lot more
time and energy and effort.
That's why I like to the make
the requests to consider
allowing me to add another
victim advocate under my general
fund and I'll keep doing the
best I can to supplement what's
going on on both on both
requests because I'm sure you
all of her to know every year
goes down lower lower and I even
have some colleagues that
sometimes west how do you get it
we get anything how to get it
not.
Sometimes I don't know what to
say that but I'm grateful I'm
grateful that I'm getting some
but I really didn't need help to
supplement the shortfall and I'm
hoping that I can add at least
one advocate with your support
and the last thing I wanted to
bring up to you all was you know
how necessary it is that we do a
good job of making sure that
victims do receive the rights
that they're afforded under our
constitution under our laws we
take those very seriously as an
example the TV thing question
came up so when I started I did
a little check of the TV cases
to to see how the dismissals
were going so that I know what I
was up against I'm kind of
ashamed to tell you but it's
true I I learned that at least
fifty percent of the TB cases
after I started we do know the
process dismissed or where they
would just readily gives the
victim an affidavit not
persecution and just talked them
into sign in so I think that a
change that immediately the I
was told that last quarter we
had roughly around close to
twenty dismissals that bothers
me but it's not at the rate it
was when I started so we're
making progress and hope to be
able to come back one day until
you is down to five percent zero
percent of I don't like have to
do with the non prosecution the
DVDs of New my best to make a
stop but stopped of but
sometimes they are necessary
they're necessary event and have
to be worked out of certainly I
just wanted to be the norm I
wanted to be the exception and
so all of this is this victim
focuses all of this is about
servicing people of making sure
that we have the right person
I'm short three years I hope to
fill one by March one she's from
Chicago Illinois that's a far
away
that leave me which is to
vacancies which it seems like
I've run run run to vacancies
three vacancies ever since I've
started just hoping to find the
right people it's it's not
always just picking one so with
that the I appreciate the time
you've given me to share those
concerns Mr chairman and I was
sent for any questions thank you
so much thank you very much
district attorney
I don't see any questions go to
a or vice chair for the
recommendation.
Thank you Mr chair I would move
the LFC recommendation.
Right it's been moved by a vice
chair Dixon saying but point of
order and you're on a is there
any opposition to adopting the
LESC recommendation.
Saying none thank you very much
district attorney thank you
chairman thank you the.
K. next we're gonna invite up
the third just judicial district
and district attorney by.
that in members if we can these
are on the two fifty under tab
to.
Right after
right after the law office of
the public defender's reform up.
and remember words so we're on
agency code to fifty three now
this is great to see you
district attorney fires the
themes of the pandemic and
Will take away Mr cynically.
Chairman committee members were
present agency two five three
the third judicial district
attorney page seven your packets
and page thirty nine and the
volume to the third district
encompasses the beautiful Dona
Ana County and we're joined by
the honorable DA General fires
and I will pass it on to Mr grey
hole discussed the
recommendations.
Mr chair the LFC recommendation
increases general fund revenue
by seven point four percent the
executive recommendation
increases it by five percent.
the have different the primary
difference is that two percent
compensation for attorneys and
staff.
And both recommendation support
at the expansion for additional
victims at victim witness
advocate
and the LESC recommendation
funds a program minister
expansion of executive
recommendation does not and but
that have a stroll turn it over
to the need for this
presentation thank.
Good afternoon Mr chair ladies
and gentlemen of the committee
as noted my name's Gerald buyers
district attorney and Los crucis
perfect thank and thank you.
I'll speak up so that everybody
can hear and also to my left is
our chief financial officer
Julie at the Cerro she's been
with our office for a long time
and is very knowledgeable about
all things financial so I can
guarantee you if there's
something that I can answer she
certainly can
first I want to thank you for
giving us the opportunity to
appear before you but before I
get into the details I wanted to
thank you in another way for a
different thing.
We always will say thank you for
what you've done for us which is
true and sincere but I wanted to
express to you the thanks from
the members of my team.
Our attorneys and our staff
because of the budgets that you
have authorized they have been
able to receive.
Hey increases that are.
In that are let me put it this
way when I was a a prosecutor
five years in as making fifty
one thousand dollars a year
doing murder cases.
And sure time has changed but
our folks they're raising small
families and they're not their
salaries as a government
employee are not competitive
with a private sector salaries
frankly private sector firms are
rating government offices for
attorneys because they have been
trained they've been in the
crucible of the courtroom they
know how to handle business and
they can make a lot of money for
those private firms we've had
for individuals left our office.
For
Rader compensate.
There was one individual who had
a year and a half under his belt
we were paying him what we could
afford at the time private firms
snatched him up for over a
hundred thousand just like that.
We can't we can't compete with
that and so the here's another
statistic I've been prosecuting
for over twenty five years and
during that time I knew that my
law school classmates who are in
private practice they were
making three times as much as I
was as a government and employee
government attorney they did not
go call out to homicide scenes
in the middle of the night.
Over thirty year period which is
the amount of time it takes to
retire now that's a six million
dollar deficit in earned income.
And that is a devastating effect
on someone who has dedicated
their life to representing the
public and so I want to say
thank you to all of you for what
you have done for increasing the
the capability of my office to
be able to provide a salary that
is going to at least give people
pause before they reach for the
door handle X. because it's
critical and so thank you very
much for that.
I also wanted to touch on on a
few things that
Are happening in the third
judicial district and of some of
the things that you may be aware
of through our hand out there's
a case management rule I don't
want to get ahead of what the
Supreme Court is doing but we
have been working with the
Supreme Court and as well as the
public defender's office for the
framework and implementation of
this case management rule which
would be similar to what
happened in Albuquerque years
ago.
This is going to put a number of
top of constraints on us which
are not ordinary to the
operation of a prosecuting
office the additional thing
there is that we are currently
at fifty percent staffing for
our attorneys.
Fifty percent imagine any
business that is going to open
its doors every day.
And all have as fifty percent of
staff but here's the good news
those folks that I mentioned to
you our staff members which I'm
proud to report that every one
of our staff members makes at
least sixteen dollars an hour so
that something that we're
thankful for.
But every one of those attorneys
as Mister redirected Renteria
touched on.
They cover for each other they
handle each other's cases and
they fill in the gaps because in
those nine vacancies.
What happens to those cases they
have to be absorbed by someone
and as Representative dela Cruz
noted prosecution is where the
rubber meets the road we are the
ones who look in the face of
those crime victims.
And we represent them to you we
represent our state government
our legislative branch the ones
who and act the laws that we are
going to go forward and and
carry out and and get justice
for them and so that is why it's
critical for us to be able to to
retain and function in this new
streamlined process that is
going to happen.
Kicking the cases down the road
is not going to be an option
anymore and the third.
And that's going to put a lot of
stressors on and if somebody
dangles a hundred some odd
thousand dollars in front of
somebody who's fresh out of law
school and they've got law
school loans to pay you can rest
assured they're going to jump
out of the crucible and they're
going to go get the money.
The other thing that that I
would like to relate to you is.
Have been touched on in
Secretary booties
comments to you officer involved
shootings.
That is one thing that every
district attorney's office does
we also have to focus our
attention on that doing it
properly.
We also have to communicate our
efforts and what the status of
the law is to the community we
do that through our of public
information officer who's here
in the chamber Roxanne Garcia
Miguel bill.
And it's critical for the public
to know what's happening there's
been a lot of discussion about
bail reform I can tell you that
in Dona ana county bail reform
is a matter of significant
interest to every member of the
community lots of folks just
don't get it it doesn't make any
sense and I understand their
frustration we just recently had
a case where an individual was
charged with murder.
He was deemed not dangerous.
How do I explain that to a
family that's got a very
somebody.
I'm not blaming the courts
because I have an ethical
responsibility that that's not
one of the things that I should
do but what I can tell you is
that the people.
The people who you represent the
people I represent through my
capacity are confused and
they're frustrated.
And I know the legal answer as
to why the court made the
decision is made but it made
absolutely no sense that family
none whatsoever.
And these are the kinds of
things that need to be addressed
and worked out and I know that
the issue the committee is
working on that I know that a
number of other committees and
legislators are working toward a
just and on that but I can tell
you ladies and gentlemen
Representative that this is
definitely affecting the fabric
of our society and Onyema County
and it is true there is a
revolving door and we've done
the calculation on it and though
there's at least I believe forty
four people and they each had
six open cases each.
The inquiry is is the person
dangerous for is the person a
flight risk and the way the
rules are being interpreted and
applied gives us the statistics
that we have our office Jenner
will file a pre trial detention
motion sorry district attorney
about this I I want to move us
along we're focused on the
budget here today but I I deeply
appreciate the feedback so
please continue but just to make
sure that we stay focused on
budget I will Sir thank you very
much for keeping me focused on
it because it is it is very
important.
as the part of presenter noted
homicides are up.
As prior member of the committee
noted they had a question
concerning domestic violence our
office does prosecute domestic
violence cases and it is a
significant amount of cases
however we don't have the
personnel to staff and
individualize unit.
Again the great resignation and
compensation so.
We are asking for approval of
the letter LFC recommendation
that will give us the ability to
acquire computer additional
digital support that will help
us manager basis for efficiently
because that's the only option
we have whenever our numbers of
personnel and staff are
diminished thank you very much
and I'll stand for questions
they they very much deserve
providers and great to see you
this is that a
so district attorney buyers up
on our page thirty nine so
members if we turn to the back.
We see a funded vacancy rate
again the copied out these
earlier in the year but the
funded vacancy rate we're shown
for the third judicial district
is sixteen point two percent.
Whether funded vacancy number of
one point one point oh one
million dollars roughly this so
I guess district attorney buyers
we have a strong LFC
recommendation I appreciate for
the recognition there.
There is a substantial amount of
funding that is going on
utilize.
Any any feedback any challenges
there one two.
We need not just for this sort
of
at the top of
your district attorney I think
it's a question that probably
all of us have is as members is
going to understand what the
prosecution rates how many what
your case so it is being I think
those are incredibly important
numbers to this committee Mr
gray maybe you can point us as
we go through each district
attorney for the workload
adjustment that the LFC has
applied which is going to show
us those districts which you're
likely seeing higher workloads
but of deep importance of this
committee is using the dollars
that that are there one item
number two
the prostate how many cases are
are you saying and how are you
able to prosecute those cases.
Would you like me to replay on
funded vacancies shared yes Sir
Thank you chairman small and
members of the committee.
Right now we are doing
innovative
employment we have had
individuals on contracts we
hired individuals who were
experienced attorneys and
Because they were already on
parents they had retired we had
to go to contract.
we have one individual who is
currently working and he is
working remotely from Oregon
because his circumstances cannot
a lot allow him right now to be
physically here
we have recruited as far away as
New York.
And we are doing everything that
we can to
To fulfill those obligations and
the remaining attorneys are
carrying the actual load and
dollar defer to white chief
financial officer she can add
some additional information and
then turn it over.
It I I I appreciate the sort of
the I I know time is brief and
we have twelve additional thank
you very much district attorney
buyers thank you this is that I
think want to pieces of feedback
that we're hearing is that it's
an even if even with the money
that's there to hire folks it's
incredibly difficult to find
candidates for some of these
positions is what I heard is
that fair.
chairman small and members of
the committee that is fair that
is correct right thank you very
much and Mr gray if you might
point us this is going to be a
volume where we can look at some
of the prosecution rates yep Mr
chair in volume one page sixty
five there is
part of the prosecution number
cases prosecuted statewide from
FY fourteen FY twenty two
indicated on that chart with the
knowledge and this is statewide
and may not describe every
district person perfectly cases
prosecutors has generally
decreased over that time period
I will note that and get no I I
know time is short this predates
the other.
Mr Mr gray this predates some of
the things that we've heard
briefly at regarding
constitutional changes.
that there might please continue
opposes
Mr chair
the last one is going to make is
that we've we've seen a slight
uptick in the first quarter of
FY twenty three so as we're
looking at these numbers it
seems like K. loan may be on the
upswing to some extent sense
COVID is receding but in general
case load and cases prosecuted
are down.
Thank thank you very much for
this information members this is
great information and perhaps
district attorney fired we can
look for this is sort of follow
up to the committee as we
continue work to see if you're
saying the same slight increase
in prosecutions just where we
are there.
Yes Sir thank you Mr chair.
Okay great I don't have any
other questions go to vice chair
different for the motion thank
you Mr chair I would move the
LFC recommendation.
It's been moved by saying that
by your Dixon cited by
Representative Sariñana to adopt
the OC recommendation is there
any opposition to that seeing
none.
Thank you very much to you and
to your team.
Thank you Mr.
Okay now we have the Levin
through judicial district
followed by the fifth and then
the line.
Mr chair the eleventh district
has two divisions okay.
Let's go with you Mr Valdez
first of a kind of division two.
The one one thirty now we have
division to thank.
On my list we have division two.
Mr chair the agency code FOR the
eleventh judicial district
Division to is two sixty five
this will be in page twenty
three in your packets and page
forty nine and falling into.
a district contains San Juan
County
and before we get into the
recognition in particular I will
note that in volume two there is
in the state a staff miss the
committee approved the
compensation increase for all
district attorneys but that was
not included in the following
two it is included in the
different sheets before you so
that's been remedied and the
different suits and with that on
that Mr speaker Representative
recognition.
Mr chair committee members the
LFC recognition increases
general fund revenue for this
agency about three point four
percent while the executive
increases general fund revenue
by five point four percent the
LFC recommendation includes a
two percent compensation
increase for attorneys and for
staff excluding that pays the
LFC recommendation for general
fund revenue is one hundred and
twenty one thousand lower than
the executive recommendation.
The LFC funds agencies requested
other revenues making the total
revenue recommendation forty
five point five thousand higher
than the executive
recommendation the executive
recommendation keeps the other
revenues categories flat
compared to FY twenty three
those recommendations include
funding for contract attorneys
the executive recommendation
includes funding to in other
category not included in the LFC
recommendation that funding will
in part be used to purchase I to
placement and I take it that
have Mr Valdez here in place of
DA Bernadette mark.
Thank you Mr chairman I will
date Mr.
Miss Martin certainly sends her
regrets about not having to be
here of the she runs an office
with the a total of seven
attorneys authorized three of
them are filled so for the more
vacant and so she has a duties
that really are difficult for
her to to to do anything but
really prosecute cases or so
analysts who she is working hard
I know during the interim she
did communicate with with the
LFC analyst about the the air I
know that's been corrected and
to certainly appreciate any
consideration this committee
could give and with that stuff.
thank you very much Rodez
Representative Allison the
resentment.
Thank you Mr chair the only
question that I got is
On the
LFC referred we're you reverted.
In the twenty two of fiscal year
twenty two year reverted two
hundred thirty one thousand and
before that in fiscal year
twenty one your verdict two
hundred twenty seven and as I
look at the spreadsheet that's
almost equal to the federal
revenue do they relate to one
another and anyway.
Yeah
Mr Chairman representative
Allison the reversion was due to
the fact that of the inability
to keep staff of particularly
attorney staff you know it's
very difficult for miss Martin
to hire people in Gallup in fact
I think this current fiscal year
she she really had to resort to
hiring contractor needs to
prosecute someone for D. W. eyes
because she just couldn't fill
those positions and that's what
those reversions were about.
And then the yesterday when we
hearing presentations from the
district courts one of the
judges mentioned that his stuff
was the committees of office on
the Navajo Nation that the
public to and I'm wondering if
you did such a thing that might
help your operation.
or any thoughts on Mr Chairman
representative Allison I'm
unaware of such effort but I
will address the issue with this
Martin and ask her to contact
you with with any feedback you
might have okay this was Tax
currently from Farmington Aztec
Office.
Okay thank you Mr chair the
representative Allison
Representative Montoya please
thank you Mr chairman
and misspelled as a just a
question about district eleven
district eleven's very
interesting because.
It is you got a and B..
And they're they're treated like
they're separate in all ways and
all manner is there any reason
why they have not just not been
separated in statute or what
what is what is more white wife
I do not have a fourteenth
district we treat it like a
fourteenth district is there a
reason.
Mr chairman Representative
Montoya the only reason I can
give you is what was told me way
back when I first started and I
asked the same question where's
our eleven one eleven two and
the only answer I ever got was
judging Mexico.
I guess it was political
decision made back when and it's
never been rectified so so
Mister chairman and and Mr
Valdez so but but both they
they're completely independent.
Law offices and all manner
absolutely okay so this is
something that.
I don't know that need to be
rectified but it's just
interesting to me that is the
one district that is split and
it's not like they overlap it's
not.
So okay thank you Mr chairman I
think that might be something
food for us to address.
Thank you very much
Representative Montoya for
flagging thank you Mr Valdez for
stepping in and please pass our
gratitude to to district
attorney Martin
the.
We are a common theme I'm glad
that we brought up some of the
roof thank you representative
Allison for bringing up the
reversions sort of how were able
District Mr Valdez sure if if
there are ways for these vacancy
savings to be translated into
filling clearly needed positions
is is certainly becoming a thing
for for the hearing today with
that we'll go to representative
Allison for the motion.
Great.
Okay it's been moved by
Representative Allison second by
Representative Montoya to adopt
the LFC recommendation
I don't see.
I don't see any opposition thank
you very much.
Okay now we're gonna go to the
fifth judicial district we're
going to ask the district
attorney lose.
And.
District Attorney looses you
come up we want to first thank
you for being here second to
share their committees heartfelt
condolences
on the passage of your spouse
and and we we deeply appreciate
you being here and share our our
love and gratitude and thanks to
Representative brown as well for
making sure let's go ahead we're
going to start with Mr gray I
believe right now and then we'll
go to Mr cynically.
Mr chair at the fifth judicial
district attorney is HSD CO two
five five Page ten in your
packets and page forty two and
volume to.
the district contains eight
Chavis and Eddy county's and
we're joined by district
attorney dina loose on that have
Mr Smedley up have present
recommendations.
Thank you Mr chair committee
members thank you Mr very the
LFC recommendation decreases the
general fund revenue by zero
point three percent all the
executive recommendation
decreases general fund revenue
by one point seven percent the
LFC recommendation includesd to
two percent compensation
increase for attorneys and staff
and excluding this amount the
LFC recommendation is the same
as the executive.
Both the LFC and executive
recommendation meet the agencies
for requests for a slight budget
decrease the LFC recommendation
includesd compensation which
makes a higher now not pass it
on to do lists.
Mr chairman members of the
committee I apologize someone
trying to cross thank you for
your for your thoughts are let
me start with partner or I was
going to start when we start
with kind of where your
questions have gone I have as a
one of the that the district
attorney's I I serve on the
national district attorneys for
the national district attorneys
association just had its first
five annual job fair on and they
had it on Sunday and Monday on
it they had representatives from
forty nine states looking for
prosecutors I think you will
noted interest Texas was not
there.
I'm what we can learn from it is
even Hawaii is having trouble
recruiting prosecutors are but
what we found is that salary is
important it very important and
we I found that I our new salary
plan well maybe you have been
competitive when we just did it
as The New Mexico district
attorneys it's really not
competitive nationally I had a
lot of dust offices that border
isn't states that border is are
already paying what we're paying
your better I'm we learned that
Colorado I is starting brand new
prosecutors hi if the mid eighty
thousands for salary I am we are
not there when you ask what can
you do for us to help us it fill
those vacancies because the fed
has seven attorney vacancies
right now I I can tell you that
the grant that was funded
through the New Mexico
sentencing commission in the
first DA's office in the public
defenders are first applied and
received that grant and then I
have to give credit to the
public defender's office
building Baur and his As staff
for applying for the fifth and
we were just in January awarded
that recruitment retention
grants which will start with
paying prosecutors who will sign
a contract to stay two years
five five thousand and then if
there are there longer goes up
to seventy five hundred and it
goes up to ten thousand if
they've been there ten years or
more in the state.
That is huge putting the money
where we can keep the people we
have and we can have an
incentive for hiring saying if
you come to work for a services
recruitment five thousand
dollars in addition it you will
get hi that is huge I think
that's one thing you can do to
help us and you have and I would
say thank you for the retention
recruitment money that you gave
the dust in our office
specifically last year and then
for funding are requests so that
the sentencing commission has
those funds I would like to know
I've heard a little bit about
that cage management role you've
heard about the CMO from
Albuquerque the second for years
it is coming soon to a district
near you I can Terry the Supreme
Court intends to implement its
statewide.
My office already was creative
we created positions are four I
called evidence liaison some of
your familiar with that are
those individuals at one in each
office it and they get the body
more camera video they get all
they interview videos they get
reports all the things that were
missing to get your case is
dismissed right because you
don't have about it don't want
I'm I have one judge in our
Chavis county who is voluntarily
been entering a case management
rural order I for almost two
years.
I and so we're already living
that experience and Rossell I in
we don't want to have cases
dismissed that the volume will
tell you that we're not gonna be
able to keep up doing things the
same way so not only do we
create those positions but we've
trained we have gotten around
out of licenses for the software
with the police department to be
able to access those directly I
can have prosecutors looking for
reports for body worn camera
spinning around time on that
right that is not gonna help us
retain prosecutors the other
thing that my office is had to
do that you probably are aware
if it's legislators that we're
all getting more imperfect class
the public document requests
due to the volume of those are
coming in hi I heart of full
time person train to just
respond to it for requests hi
there was something that was.
Not necessarily a position that
was already there but I just
took a program specialist
position and use part of that
vacancy funding to do that
because we are receiving
multiple request almost daily we
created a process for how they
come into the three offices
either by if they come in by a
call by a letter by an email
they all go to the email address
that several of us are on that's
called fit there for it and then
we respond to those.
The attorney general's office
under Hector Balderas you know
and Raul Torrez are prosecuting
several cases in conjunction
with my office to assist with me
not having seasoned experienced
prosecutors to do violent crime
I believe I have at least five
cases right now the turning
general's office is assisting
with providing at least one
assistant Attorney General hi
and now the could in usually
part of their investigators
Services.
The new US attorney's office
said they were gonna help
prosecutors in the state and
they are they came in and they
have taken three cases from us
or violent crime and they're
assisting with this with
resources on to homicide cases
so that is how we are
functioning being short
prosecutors we are continuing
you will see if you look at our
case numbers from that chart
that our numbers really didn't
go down COVID our law
enforcement continue to work
cases we continue to file cases
and so you probably heard from
the judges from the fed that are
caseloads our numbers are up hi
I believe we have a backlog our
judges may not say it but I see
it for more cases are pending I
do cases myself I have a
caseload I've basis on all three
counties it and it is real in so
whatever you can creatively do
are we would ask you to continue
to do that and ask you to as.
Fund outside the request for
more DA are case management
system dodgy positions we
desperately need that because if
we're getting deadlocks we can
access our files hi and it
depends can get their discovery
it doesn't work that way so I
would ask you to do what you can
you'll notice that our our
budget was lower a request that
whatever current budget here is
that's our vacancies that's our
vacancies and to comply with the
rules that we're supposed to do
with submitting our budget I and
it it's less it's like a hundred
and twenty one thousand I think
last not that we don't need that
money but what we're telling you
is that we're struggling to keep
people and we're trying to be
creative in what we do I do have
I'm so you'll know why I've
hired an attorney to work
remotely full time or money to
do cases because I couldn't get
somebody it would.
I have and two part time
attorneys are they don't want to
work full time but I need people
to cover court to review cases
in so I've got to part time
attorneys
we're doing what we can to keep
the fifth moving forward to keep
our community safe and with that
I will stand for questions thank
you very much districts during
those we'll go first
Representative Brown.
Thank you Mr chairman and
district attorney loose it is
good to see you today I have
just a few questions.
Mr chairman and district
attorney we've been hearing a
lot about a software program
that converts speech to text so
when we look at court
transcripts instead of someone
having to attorney having to sit
and listen through trance audio
transcript there's a way to get
it to print is this something
that you are using in your
offices or that you would be
interested in using Mr chair.
Mr chair Representative Brown
but we are not using that in our
office I we are still paying to
have transcripts provided that
are done by court reporters I
and if there is software out
there that could reduce our
expense I and that is certainly
probably something that is money
better spent I had to get that
if that's something we can use
we we don't usually we sometimes
still have to have the certified
transcripts for admission for it
but if we're doing it in order
to make our cases I move faster
that softer might be something
that we could use thank you Mr
chairman Attorney are loose
yeah it I know our Supreme Court
justices here are interested in
in saying that I'm just
wondering if there's a way to
get a license that might cover
all the offices so that each
individual office is not having
to pay for it because I'm not
real sure on the numbers on the
cost from some of our written
materials it looks like maybe in
the range of forty thousand
dollars a year not really sure
it looks like Mr chair that some
of the money we saw mentioned
was for more that trial period
and not sure if that means it
would be the cost overall but if
we can save attorneys time of in
that aspect of the to be good so
Mr chair and it district
attorney loose I also wanted to
ask you about.
Do you have any data on the cost
of living in your judicial
district
and how that compares to the
cost of living in other
districts
at Mr chair I think they'll be
interesting for us to know.
Mr chair Representative Brown I
didn't bring specific data this
time I have in the past as spoke
about housing
we do funded I will be here for
applicants funds to be anecdotal
I it is that they funded it is
expensive to live I in our area
as you know the oil and gas is
doing well and Lea and Eddy
counties I and that drives the
process up in availability up
even if they can find something
that I that's one reason why we
tend to pay a little higher in
the fifth I'm starting people
that maybe the other DA's
offices do because they have to
be able to pay their rent and to
live but certainly it seems that
Travis county has the.
At the best available affordable
housing I when I'm recruiting
people often say well can I live
in Los fall because I can fund
House.
Thank you Mr chair thank you
very much thank you very much
Representative Brown next we're
gonna go to budgets in place.
Thank you Mr chair thank you
District Attorney Lucifer The
presentation I really
appreciated some of the
innovative thinking outside the
box of that your office is doing
it's really it's great to hear I
was wondering if you could
provide an approximation
approximate number
of how much your office spends
dealing with it for a request.
Including the staff I mean you
know just a nice round number Mr
chair and Representative Dixon
I'm we have the full time
employee and I'll have to defer
to my CFO.
Fifty six thousand I is the
salary that we're paying that
individual I we've been
I'm purchased I and I don't know
the amount that we purchased
software to be able to redact
videos to protect identifiers
are documents to redact the
identifiers is that the law
allows I and I did I'm.
We normally are not charging any
fees back to the person the
other day and if there's a way
we can like chronically provided
and they wanted in another
format the that is is maybe
there is some small expense but
I really it was up front the
licenses for the software and
then the salary and then like I
said I've got it yes I I
technically have.
For individuals trying to do to
reduction on the software in the
documents I but then what's a
hard to full time person that
person is the primary but
obviously they can be six they
could be on vacation hi and with
the number requests you all may
see that we get a lot of the
requests from inmates once or
convicted they want their entire
it K. are provided to them.
Okay the thank you district
attorney thank you Mr chair
thank you very much Mr Jackson
district attorney just thank you
echoing the comments that were
made about the innovative work
and
the the budgetary working very
low funded vacancy that were
shown here I think it's the
lowest of all district attorneys
just want to know and complement
that with that we'll go to
Representative brown for the
most Mr chairman I move the LFC.
Okay it's been moved by
Representative from saying by by
by remember Armstrong and by
Representative said no
is there any opposition to
adopting that motion I don't see
any district attorney thank you
very much thank you for being
here today and for your work.
Okay members were now we're
going to go with the north then
the twelfth in the tenth in the
separate.
Sorry than this go the night.
Twelve.
Tenth and then seven.
Percent.
And thank you very much district
attorney ray good to see.
Mr civic leader please.
Chairman small committee members
will not presenting agency two
five nine the nine judicial
district attorney page fifteen
in your packet is forty six and
million two issues.
The ninth District Court
content of that to to do it
contains curry and Roosevelt
counties and we're joined with
the liability a Clinton right
now pass it to funding to talk
about our differences the LFC
recommendation increases general
fund revenue by one point nine
percent well the executive
recommendation keep her fund
revenue flat with FY twenty
three that difference between
the two with his the two percent
target compensation and with
that Mr chair I'll pass it over
to do for his presentation.
Good morning Mr good afternoon
Mister chair person committee
members
I just I was just appointed as
the district attorney in the
ninth judicial district as of
January one so somebody has been
in the DA's office in the night
for nine years and coming up
through the trenches it's a it's
a breath of fresh air to hear
that we're not alone in our
struggle finding and retaining
attorneys in trying to to do
this job with the competing
salaries in the private practice
I will tell you a this may
possibly be the most boring
meeting in the world but it is
just a breath of fresh air to me
I'm I feel like Mr Smith went to
Washington just a farm kid from
Grady and I was like well I just
wanna thank you this is not an
easy job you know what people
think about what you do this is
not what they think about
looking at numbers into your
eyes go crossed is not not which
you probably thought this job is
going to be so thank you just in
looking at what happened last
year if you guys were great we
got an increase it really help
our office we were able to give
us staff raises we would get
able to give attorneys raises
and that's huge the small office
is a big deal so this year we're
we're trying to be fiscally
prudent and use the resources we
have we're not asking for a huge
increase and that's simply
because we have the same problem
everybody else does with
attorney vacancies we now have
six in our office and we're
actively trying to find
solutions I I love DA looses I
do have a part time thing I had
not thought of that till today I
talked to a young private
attorney in our area and she
said look I want to get paid my
worth and it's like well if I
give you that much money I got a
raise everybody else my office
twenty grand not that you're not
worth it you are and ultimately
that attorneys that you know
actually funding about the money
I can't commit to forty hours a
week because I
I want to take some time to do
some stuff in my family and the
DA's office too hectic for that
and so trying to be creative is
something we're looking at and.
Part time even trying to look at
maybe contracting out of
services you know just we're
being creative so I I would
Just to say that I'm proud of
our office in the north you know
the the fifth is a stab at a
great moniker the fighting fifth
if anybody can come up with one
for the night I would love it
not in my house the night is the
best I could do and it's not
very good so anybody can come up
with a better monitor we do try
to to do a good work do the
right thing for the right reason
and.
Any support you can give us we
will gladly take and I've turned
back to Mr chairman for any
question thank you very much
district attorney right will go
to Representative Chatfield.
Mr chairman of the LFC Hey
there's a motion second thank
you bye bye regum ember
Armstrong is there any
opposition to that motion CNN
great to see district attorney
thank you very much.
Okay.
Now will district attorney key.
From the twelfth judicial
district.
Good morning folks.
Mr chair
up now we have the twelfth
judicial district attorney this
is two six two the HSD code this
will be on page twenty in your
packets and page fifty and
falling to the district includes
Lincoln and Otero counties and
we're joined by district
attorney Scott key on now have
Mister Smith we had discussed
the recommendations.
Chair small committee members
thank you Brandon the LFC
recommendation includesd
increases general fund revenue
by seven point three percent
while the executive
recommendation increases general
fund revenue by ten percent the
LFC recommendation included a
two percent compensation
increase for attorneys and for
staff excluding this increase
the LFC recommendation is two
hundred and five point eight
thousand less than the executive
recommendation both of the
recommendations include
increased general fund to swap
the anticipated loss of federal
grant funding the executive
recommendation provides more
general fund revenue per person
than the LFC recommendation and
with that I will pass it on to
our DA Mr key.
Just a good morning but I have I
was here this morning so good
afternoon folks in the Mr
Chairman pleasure be here to my
left is our CFO Stacey Manson
and for any technical questions
should be happy to answer those
but I'd like to kind of go right
into the the recommendations as
we have presented earlier this
year we focused our attention on
some shortfalls in federal
funding and state funding in
high to grant money of our grant
shortfalls invoke the shared
files we focused our efforts to
ask Miss but the executive an
LFC for assistance in making up
for those positions
three of those positions are
voca which provides a victim
advocates to our office and
that's one of the most important
areas of dealing with and
hopefully providing
understanding to victims victims
families those are the areas
that to hold our office up and
they have a tremendous amount of
responsibility in those cases
and I'm happy to report and seen
both of the recommendations that
both the executive and LFC
recommendations both
look to fill that shortfall in
that funding
and I see the difference
otherwise is primarily one
position that is fully funded
for HR position and that is
funded in the executive
a recommendation in that
position as we presented earlier
was something that we felt was a
in a creative a position to help
us fulfill our shortfall of
attorneys you've heard that from
from probably every district to
before you today and you'll hear
it from me we're seven short.
And we up.
We have nine working attorneys
that have caseloads that are are
very very high and of course I
as we like to do a I I also have
to have a case law and do many
many cases so that's one of the
reasons why we've we've asked
for the HR position to not only
help miss Manson on on human
resource issues but also to go
out and recruitment and
distributary lusa told me about
the the most recent here last
couple of days Washington and do
a uh job fair.
Our office sent to
representatives out there as
well and we have plans to go to
Colorado and Arizona for the
sole purpose of recruiting
attorneys.
and one thing that they can they
reported back from from this
trip is just as DA Luz told you
it's nationwide and so we have
to do something different
creative
advertising of getting people
that I went to law school in
other states to come down and
take a look at what what to the
New Mexico has to offer and we
do have a lot to offer and to
that's something that we really
need to be creative in bringing
for four people to visit
I want to say if we can get in
here to visit we got one and
that's what we intend to do to
fit all those shortfalls in our
staff.
we're we're up.
Us the the the committee here to
recommend the executive
recommendation under the
circumstances and will stand for
any questions if you have any
I'd be glad to answer anything
that you might have for.
Thank you very much I very much
district attorney Katie
I don't see a question I have a
couple
District attorney Kate what what
sort of drove you towards that
H. our position and is that
different from what a lot of
district attorney offices have.
Usually is this an additional HR
position one as you said focus
solely on recruitment and
retention well they're gonna
have a many other duties of
course to help our finance
director and our CFO
in small offices such as the
twelfth of course we have to
wear many hats and when you call
someone H. R. person they're
going to do it not only H. R.
but the gonna help on out on
citizen requests for information
we we have to fulfill our
requirements of the if for us as
well and right now for example
on on April request we have our
CFO help out in that our office
manager and at times attorneys
that have to figure out what is
legal what is the R. what what's
our responsibility so we where
where many hats and that H. our
position one had that that
person would would have is to
focus on recruitment and
retention issues within the in
the office.
Okay thank you and Mr gray
what's the workload if you could
sort of give us two years where
the workload is with the twelfth
judicial district.
Mr chair I'm turning to the FY
twenty two port card produced by
LFC this is in page one thirty
nine of your volume one if you'd
like to refer to that it has the
number of cases referred for
screening to the DA's offices
that's number have in front of
me it looks like that number
increased by about five ten
percent FY twenty one FY twenty
two so cases referred in the
twelfth appears to be increasing
to some extent.
And thank you Mr gray is in I
was I actually looked at your
the the sort of the targeted
workload package that is been
proposed and here
The the the LFC proposal which
is not in the executive proposal
is is twenty one point six
thousand dollars which is sort
of it's Lexus at a quick glance
sort of mid tier there there are
still some below there are a few
of of this sort of mid tier
workload Mr chair that's correct
the one thing I'll note about
the workload adjustment because
it's also adjusted for the
number of F. T. in that office
of the second is going to have
the highest because as most FTE
so the fact that the twelfth is
kind of in that middle range
even though it has made on the
lower end F. T. is an indication
that workload in that district
is going up okay thank you and
last question
district attorney Kate knowing
the workload is increasing
knowing that the executive
recommendation does not include
the compensation increases for
the the district the attorneys
and staff you still it's still
your preference to go with the
executive recommendation
preference we we study both
recommendations and and believe
me we've there's pros and cons
of either one but because of our
priorities in the office we're
asking for the executive.
Okay.
Please Representative heard.
A district so you mentioned that
your vile invoke a
Funds have been cut because of
what has happened in Congress
but my question to you is
because those positions are so
incredibly important and you are
having a little bit of a
difficulty filling the attorney
positions are you using the
vacancy savings to keep those
those a victim advocacy
positions open and those people
are not being let go.
Mr chairman and Representative
Herndon you're perfectly correct
in in your your belief that
we're using under other general
fund monies to make up the
difference we're we're proud to
say that we have not lost any of
our our positions of for for
voca and victim advocacy in the
office
we have a high priority for that
and and that's what we made it
up with vacancy savings and
money from Travis I all right
thank you thank you Mr chair
thank you for allowing me to ask
that question thank you very
much thank you very much for
center and.
Okay
Yes it's.
Appreciate very much
conversation we have the
opportunity I will be able to
see again as we go through the
summer and into the year sort of
what this approach yields
but appreciate very much the
conversation today.
Thank you Mr chair I would move
the executive recommendation.
Okay it's it's a by
Representative byrd  and is
there off opposition to adopting
the executive recommendation.
Okay thank you very much thank
you district attorney thank you
all.
Okay now we're gonna invite at
the tenth judicial district.
District attorney rose.
Our only recommendation is that
you play for the house
basketball team.
All the time in the gym going I
remember Senator Woods remarking
that yes.
Mr chair up now we have to tents
judicial district attorney this
is agency code to six zero page
seventeen in your packets and
forty seven and falling to.
The tenth contains Harding quay
and to Baca counties we're
joined by D. A. at ten at the
rose hello have Mister cynically
discussed the recommendations.
Mr chair committee members for
the tend to defer this attorney
the LFC recommendation increases
general fund ten point eight
percent while the executive
recommendation keep general fund
revenue flat FY twenty three the
LFC recommendation includesd at
two percent compensation rates
for attorneys and staff
excluding this piece the LFC
recommendation is one hundred
and forty nine point three
thousand dollars higher than the
executive recommendation the LFC
recommendation includes funding
for authorized attorney position
that they're not receive funding
the executive reconciliation
oral fund revenue because of the
agencies funded vacancy rate
both recommendations include
ninety point five thousand
funding for pre trial services
position the executive
recommendation offenses in the
basement reducing person I will
not turn it over to do a rose.
Good afternoon Mister chair
members of the committee
my name's Timothy rose I'm
elected district attorney for
the tenth which is quite a
Harding in the block the
counties been in front of you
number years it's good to see
some familiar faces of it
appreciate your work that you do
I won't go through the same
arguments and and statements
that some of the other attorneys
did we we suffer from some of
the state hardships however what
was special for our office of
what we've been working over the
last two or three years was
trying to create some services
in particular pre trial
supervision services that's this
never been in the pictures so
this report of those of you
familiar for for with the
criminal justice system in other
areas I think every other
jurisdiction has pre trial
services most jurisdictions have
a drug court and children's
court and another type of courts
of that are beneficial were
simply too small I think to ever
get a justification for our
courts to run those programs so
over the past three years we've
worked on collaboration with our
criminal justice partners the
probation officers the courts or
law enforcement officers
detention centers to create a
plan we've implemented that it
would running it for the last
year the last part of that plan
was to create a permanent
position for somebody to run it
through our office and so we've
hired a temporary employee
that's been there here in a
request for the extension is to
keep that employee there
it's a certified law enforcement
officer of that that keep track
of GPS monitors where fenders
are out on the street so we know
where they are liaison with
victims that are that are they
could be impacted if they go
around the victim's house except
around of drug testing
Thank.
Working with the courts and law
enforcement that the clocks no.
That somebody's on conditions of
release whenever the with law
enforcement because of the
contact with them on the streets
Senator it's it's something that
that is strongly supported by
all of our or
or justice the.
The people in our area the law
enforcement courts etcetera of
so that's what's widely
important to us and I think both
agencies LFC and exec and I
appreciate you guys working
meeting with us prior to the
hearings is this most important
to us other than that it's it's
it's
Going ahead and pulling the
trigger getting another attorney
in our office we had one before
we've not rehired simply because
we've hired the state per
employee to run pre trial
services with that
stand for any question they had
a lot to say but I know you have
little time the the US in for
questions thank you thank you
very much district attorney rose
look to my right for any
questions.
Look to my left.
Objective for the motion Mr
chairman of the LFC okay there's
a motion.
Think it move by Representative
Chatfield signed by
Representative Garrett to adopt
the LFC recommendation thank you
is there any opposition to
adopting that today I don't see
any.
Thank you very much district
three rooms.
Okay next members we have
a district pretty well born from
the seventh and now we're gonna
go the fourth.
District three well board thank
you for being here today
Or.
Mr chair committee members were
not presenting agency two five
seven the seven traditional
district attorney which is page
twelve in your packet
information forty three year
volume to the seventh contains
patrons Sierra's to coral in
Torrance counties and we're
joined by the honourable DA
click Welborn I will not pass it
to Mr gray of the LFC for cell
numbers.
Mr chair the LFC recommendation
increases general fund revenue
by seven point nine percent the
executive recommendation
increases it by five point eight
percent the sole difference
between the two recommendations
as compensation are now have
that D. A. made his
presentation.
Thank you Mr chairman and
members of the committee I'm
Clint Welborn and the district
attorney of the seventh judicial
district which is Katrin Sierra
Secor one point counties it's
the largest your graphic
judicial district in the
continental United States we
only have about forty thousand
people in that area of the
to my left is my CFO JB malt and
he's been with the office for
twenty seven years is twenty
seven year presented to the
committee and this is my twenty
third year.
And I want to thank you very
much for the compensation you
gave us the extra compensation
again especially the rural
districts it really helped us we
had three attorneys Lee last
year and I was able to fill
those positions and at a salary
that the I think it'll stay for
awhile and we had to turn is the
the year before that so we've
had why only have ten attorneys
total so we had a turnover of
fifty percent of attorneys
within the last two years and
hopefully we will be able to
keep these we do have one
vacancy still in so coral.
And as you heard we're we're
having a difficult time filling.
It's
Not getting any qualified
applicants is a big problems
we've had some applicants but
the most of them are qualified
for positions and I think it's a
challenge we are asking our
budget we have one physician
would we've had an funded into
your county or us to fund that
one and I think it will be a
challenge just as much to fill
that.
But we're looking at some some
of the other districts have used
incentives as a bonus to try to
get attorneys to come in we're
trying that
we're thinking about changing
our ads to be more attractive
maybe the areas that we have
hiking biking mountains you know
rather than just the job itself
to try to trick people maybe
from out of state that might be
interested in that but it's been
a real challenge and it's a
challenges you've heard for for
all districts and and we found
recently within the last I would
say two years not only for
attorneys but for support staff
in the past we always had plenty
of applicants for support staff
because it's a good job for our
rural areas but the last couple
years we haven't had the
applicant's we've had I think
the last position we had maybe
three applicants.
And it's been very difficult and
a lot of those are qualified for
the position and so that's a new
challenge that we haven't faced
before that's this is the first
time we've had that it that pro
And we would ask for the LFC
recommendation and with that
I'll stand for any question
thank you very much.
Right.
Thank you Mr chairman I move the
LFC second baseman move I
remember Armstrong.
The area is not.
Thank you Mr thank you.
A member of that.
One for.
Of the original.
Mr chair we now have at the
fourth judicial district
attorney agency two five four at
agency code this will be page
nine of your packet and page
forty one in going to the fourth
contains more at San Miguel and
Guadalupe counties and we're
joined by the honorable TA comes
clean all now have Mr Smith
Representative recognition.
Mr chairman members thank you Mr
right the LFC recommendation
increases just general fund
revenue by seven point three
percent while the executive
recommendation increases general
fund revenue by five percent the
LFC recommendation includes a
two percent compensation
increase for attorneys and staff
and excluding that compensation
the LFC recommendation is thirty
six thousand higher than the
executive recommendation with
that I'll turn it over to
district attorney Clayton.
First I want to say thank you
good afternoon
and I've.
Appreciate all the efforts that
you have made and again I want
to echo but the other district
attorneys of said thank you your
efforts over the past years have
helped in the retention quite
honestly in our on our attorneys
we still have some vacancies and
it's and it's difficult but two
things I want to mention of
first I want to say thank you to
our previous see above I have
miss Christina jobs here she
just knew coming this literally
she's green all but she's been
working in that department but I
want to say thank you to call
Martinez publicly she served in
the district attorney's office
three different district
attorney's estimate Santa of
those who may have known him Mr
district attorney Richard FLOTUS
and then she served last year
with me twenty five years I just
want to say publicly thank you
to her our office ran smooth
clean audits things of that
nature and Christina work with a
close leave over the last couple
years and I think we're in good
shape so I just want to that a
publicly the other thing I do
want to talk about an initiative
that our office is undertaking
over the past couple years well
past couple months rather with
our district judge chief judge
Florida Gallegos and I think she
may have come before you all
yesterday we're looking at a
mental health support in our
community in our district that
is something that we're reaching
out trying to create some
diversions of within our
community we have a population
BHR the behavior health
institute is within our popular
community because of that
sometimes individuals that are
committed to our community state
in our community so we have a
population that is that is
unique to our community so we
want to address that the
criminal justice system is not
the place for those individuals
so can create a with the work of
of judge of Gallegos in other
a justice partners a diversion
program and it's a mental health
point of that we look forward to
doing that we look for your of
support in that we've already
reached out.
To the communities we judge of a
guy goes in our office has
conducted community meetings in
Guadalupe County in what county
and in my home county of of sun
begin in the city of Las Vegas
will talking to our our our
providers we're talking to our
law enforcement and the citizens
themselves.
This is a to representative so
we want to provide that so it is
essentially that's that's sort
of the of the the efforts that
were undertaken in our office
all we do have issues regarding
retention in any effort you can
do to help that would be most of
racially appreciated and with
that'll stand for questions.
Thank you very much district
attorney I want to look to my
right and first go to
Representative Lujan for
questions really quickly it
Marva Collins Mister chair if
you would I just wanna say thank
you for for taking that to the
measure of looking into the
mental health court I'd be more
interested in finding out what
that looks like for you
especially in this this region
in this area we've been hit with
the fires and
knowing those communities myself
I just want to commend you on
that because it's gonna leave
lend itself to you and the
communities of region in all
facets and I would encourage you
to reach out to.
Your ATD you're a higher
education communities as well
because they're doing a lot of
work for this thank you Mr chair
pacifica thank you very much.
Representative Garrett please.
I am involved with the macros in
the group I I am I'm a member of
the committee we are reaching
out on different issues with
those in a mental health working
with our our local share for
share focus Lopez and Matt
probes one of percent
communities on trying to create
alternatives in mental health
substance abuse
and everything else that comes
with that.
Thank you.
Thank you very much
Representative Garrett
we'll turn now for the
recommendation.
Representative in the LFC second
it's been moved by
Representative Chatfield state
my vice chair Dixon to adopt the
LFC recommendation
don't see is there any
opposition saying none.
Would up that thank you very
much district attorney now we're
gonna invite up district
attorney Ted Rowe.
from the other half of the
eleventh district.
Mr chair committee members with
Representative agency to six one
eleven today so district
division one is page eighteen in
your packet from page forty
eight in the volume to eleven
district encompasses San Juan
County and we're joined by the
honourable again Rick teacher
and I'll pass it on to.
Mr grey to address Mr gray for
numbers.
Mr chair at the LCS
recommendation increases general
fund revenue by five point three
percent the executive
recommendation increases it by
five percent the LFC at the
primary difference there is
compensation of course the
executive recommendation
includes more revenue for the
agencies other category then the
LFC recommendation the LFC
recommendation also funds an
expansion request for a three
term positions to to converse
wall at the executive funds that
in the base and Mr chair on the
have the dust make his
presentation.
Mr chair thank you members of
the committee thank you let me
first start off first by
introducing myself I'm richtet
drive in the district attorney
up in San Juan County for
fourteen years now it's been the
best job I've ever had and I
appreciate serving my citizens
my community and I enjoy coming
down here and being here and
helping you all and hopefully
not make me too mad sometimes
but it's it's my honor I would
also like to introduce my CFO
Amy on as we say we go to law
school to be lawyers because we
can't do math so none of this
could be done without her so I'd
like to thank her I'm also like
to thank Mario Brandon and Mr
Abbey.
For everything they do for us
throughout the year being being
one of the baby agencies you
know we always seem to get the
new ones and so we learned real
quick that once they get to know
us they move onward and upward
and we get to start over again
but that these two gentlemen
have really listened and talked
with us and we appreciate him
for doing that.
I'd also like to give a special
thanks to both my two reps who
are on here Representative Rod
Montoya Representative at the
Anthony Allison
All my reps are really good
about either taken phone calls
when I have them or calling the
when there's questions that they
can answer for for their
constituents so I I think you
gentleman for for being there
for us.
I can echo what everybody else
says I'll tell you right now
first and foremost recruitment
and retention were problem be on
crisis mode anymore throughout
the state in your area with the
other agencies on that note
Representative dealer Cruz I'd
like to invite your son to apply
for a position up in San Juan
County we're now hiring.
I would also like to emphasize.
We really need you all to focus
on the unified priority requests
that the dust have made a big
part of that is to go to AODA as
our service agency because we
need the broadband we need the
speeds of the internet we need
to be able to fund our trainings
that we have lost those are all
things that benefit this
throughout the state and so as
dust throughout the state we
really need that especially
another request in the up
position we need another
position down there to help with
stuff and
But but also funding to go
towards our training so two
hundred fifty it really needs to
be reoccurring it I think right
now is listed as a one time the
need to get back to reoccurring
because we lost the funding for
it and we're I think that's
really important in my area is
I've heard people talk about
mental health courts I've heard
people talk about veteran courts
things like that.
I didn't bother with the courts
I went straight to my PPE
program fourteen years ago and I
started a domestic violence P.
P. program I.
Stop.
Following a lot of the rules
that said you can only take
these these and these I used.
Did you I wish we could do but
statutes Willis I I wish we
could do more but when it came
to the veterans courts I didn't
bother with creating a court I
went straight to the Veterans
Services sat down with them and
they know if they have a
situation with the veteran the
home and we should and we see
how we can work it out if it's
something small or minor it's
something we can work out to our
PPD and.
Those are the programs that we
fund.
and so I would ask you to really
consider those
But I was gonna ask the chair I
did hear you mention sometimes
prosecution numbers we just like
to warn everybody that that gets
us on a slippery slope sometimes
we like to say the last thing
you want to know is how many
cases we prosecuted because of
our money becomes based off of
cases we prosecute we're not
doing justice I mean were there
to make sure K. and I think game
into a mentioned earlier if it
needs to be dismissed we need to
dismiss and or if it needs
something else we need to do
that something else we've got to
be those gatekeepers and so
I did I just want to point that
out the last thing I would ask
is I know we requests for a
supplemental in twenty twenty
three because we're one of the
other offices the this is losing
Bounkeua my Bounkeua funding in
November when we appeared before
the finance committee we
presented a list and I'm not
sure if you guys gonna learn on
we know how once you get here
you separate but we did point
out that certain DA's offices
were losing Bounkeua and it's.
Maybe in four warn you it's
coming up I'm gonna need funding
to move those local decisions
eventually into some full time
general positions so with that
being said I do believe the fine
gentleman from Los Lunas was
thinking about adding a friendly
amendment to my request to take
the LFC at and then another
hundred forty so I can put my
Bounkeua people on but.
I was been curious is that ever
been done.
They industry.
And thank you thank you all and
I stand for any questions thank
you district attorney I'm gonna
first turned to representative
Allison for any question.
Thank you Mr chair thank you Mr
federal my first question is the
first one to Miss Vigil as well
your reversion of over two
hundred thousand and you can go
ahead and say that McKinley
County can't keep their person
and they spend all of it.
And then my second question is
when we had testimony from judge
girly he said that he had
established a mini sub office in
the club Mexico to help the
people from the area because of
communication problems and
transportation problems and I
thought that was a good of
venture on his part maybe what
are your thoughts on that.
On Mr chair representative
Allison to your first part on
reversions I I just point out if
you guys remember when COVID did
hit we were asked very nicely to
stop spending money we did which
meant a lot of reversions come
twenty twenty one and San Juan
county was one of those counties
it was very impacted during
COVID as in we were not we were
all working we're doing our jobs
but trials weren't happening the
courts were very shut down so
yeah I'm surprised I didn't
think of this they're ready for
backlogs we got backlogs coming
but so that left alone there we
were hiring during those times
because there is no need to hire
so a lot more reversion came
from vacancy savings but I also
believe I I know it's always
said spend your money but
sometimes we have the fiscal
agents and if it's there I I may
need it for the next time I can
hire that person so I'd like it
to be there but will also
reverted when we need to ask for
a a satellite offices sort of
goes to what Representative
Montoya asked earlier is why
there why is that winds are
wanted to
it's a good thing for the second
because it allows them to reach
that area a little quicker and
they may look into if they get
the staff look into putting
someone over there to assist the
people in that area and that is
one of the biggest things that
you'll hear about San Juan
County is it is hard it is to
especially when we get to the
reservation for people to get in
and out of the the areas where
they need to be
that's why I for one reason I
actually did not.
Put our new building which is
six years old now I think in
Aztec and the county seat I put
it in Farmington because it was
the most convenient most local
at least with your red apple
transit and things like that I
wanted to be at least more to
the middle where people could
get their but I think it would
be a good thing for eleven to to
to look at least maybe having
someone there on a weekly basis.
Mr chair what judge governmental
just yesterday was to help the
people that could not make the
court dates and things like that
he took it upon them has the
agency to meet the people at
their closest place because a
trance transportation problems
and communication problem as
well so that's why I was asking
you what your thoughts on that
woods will be out there in a
heartbeat if required to be at
that one so okay thank you thank
you Mr chair thank you very much
Representative Allison next
Representative Montoya than
Representative about I thank you
Mr chairman I was just saying I
don't know why the other dust
put up with you just wearing a
three piece suit on they'll come
in looking like New Mexicans.
So I just a you gotta reach
across the river at.
I do know we've had a lot of
reversions out of and I and I
we've had this discussion Mr
chairman about COVID and you
mentioned something there at the
end and that is the backlog
that's coming.
a lot of things have been
deferred I guess the question I
have for you and maybe just
because on on behalf of all of
the dust
we haven't had that because of
COVID and and some things that
didn't go to trial we we've not
I've not seen a huge number of
dismissals due to
not not being
paid attention to in a timely
fashion how I'm trying to
justify that my mind how did we
not also maybe
have a lot of unintentional
dismissals through COVID.
Mr chair representative Montoya.
The courts actually put in an
emergency order which sort of
told our time on our statutes of
limitations and when I say get
ready for it because once they
left that that the time is going
to start again for us and it's
going to be a question of well
do we could these are two years
old and working right away and
that means one that happens
tomorrow may get time you know
timed out on this because we
couldn't get to a yet
We're not quite sure how it's
going to do but the reason we
were able to avoid in the past
was because courts did put an
emergency order in during the
pandemic for tolling part times
and stature limitations so with
that Mr Chairman just kind of a
COVID to I think the.
Vacancy rates are going to be up
my time is up.
Continue.
I think those all of those
vacancies could come to harm us
and harm you a little bit and
those prosecutions and I think
everybody in the room's gonna be
facing that so just a the
concern I don't know how you
guys gonna manage that but I
think that's something that you
need to keep on your radar.
Thank you very much for that and
we are it is going to this thank
you Representative back at the
thank you Mr chairman in full
disclosure Attorney General
federal line did attend rubble
has visibility County so to my
formal formal rival we have one
question and twenty six point.
This is our quit I wanted ****
of other thing Mr chairman about
the inspector the I. P. R. A.'s
okay have have you seen an
increase in that I. P. R. A.'s
okay and again just very
briefly.
What is the nature of those I.
P. R. A.'s and who are those
that requesting them Mr
Chairman.
Mr chair and the fine gentleman
from Los Lunas and not the land
We are seeing an increase I
think DA Luz did mention we get
a lot from the jails and from
the prisons where they're
requesting their full packages
We are starting to see a little
bit from attorneys attorneys
have learned that maybe it's a
quicker way to do discovery than
what we normally would do in the
process sourcing knows
we're seeing a lot of out of
state advocacy groups requesting
strange things
And we're a I don't think it's a
big dollar cost to us it's a big
labor cost to us because of the
redactions we have to do
Whether a case is still under
investigation verses is
concluded what we can and can't
give out it's very labor
intensive and so where are you
lose people as and I think
somebody else mentioned
sometimes we have to pull the
turning off make a legal
decision on it for a so instead
they're not working on the case
or not we're going to court and
thank you Mr chairman that was
my point I know that the schools
of seeing this I know other
public agencies have it seen an
increase in I. P. R. A.'s and
there is a dollar amount to the
labor this involved putting
these together so I just want to
see Mr chairman if that was
affecting you and so that we may
be at some point we can further
investigate that look at that
thank you Mr chairman you very
much for so Baca to
representative Allison for the
motion.
Okay it's been moved by
Representative aus and seconded
by Representative Lujan is there
any opposition to that motion.
Saying and that's adopted thank
you very much district you Mr
Christian you all.
Okay we're gonna invite up
district attorney Bregman.
the representative
Representative.
three after this.
If you.
Okay I will go ahead and start.
Is it with Mr great Mr Simic
that apologize.
Chairman members the committee
we are not present agency two
five to the second judicial
district attorney page five year
participation thirty seven
volume two the second district
encompasses Bernalillo county
and I am passing on to Brandon
to talk about some numbers Mr
chair the LFC recommendation
increases general fund revenue
by two point nine percent the
executive by one point one
percent at the primary
differences compensation at the
executive recommendation
increases based general fund
revenue for five laps and
federal grant at positions where
as the LFC recommendation funds
those as expansions
Mr chair all now have HSD made
their presentation.
Thank you Mr chairman members of
the committee thank you I know
you guys were all expected to
see a nice big cowboy hat you're
gonna have to settle for the
staff.
My name is Josh Boone I am the
chief deputy district attorney
for the second judicial district
thanks to see some people.
Up.
As much as he wanted to be here
Mr pregnant does apologize for
not being here he had a prior
family commitments that he made
prior to his appointments and
just could not pass that up of
so I'm sure as many of you are
aware the second has gone
through a little bit of
fluctuation as of late we're a
little bit of a transition but
that has not stopped us from
still committed to our jobs so.
As you know our current Attorney
General was our former DA he
laughs on January first what
that did was create a number of
additional vacancies within the
office most of his
administration left with him.
we believe till County was about
sixteen total people that left
out of that sixteen total people
we're talking about eight to ten
attorneys.
so it has been a little bit
while fortunately we were very
lucky in the sense that there is
enough individuals within the
office to promote from within so
we've been able to make handful
promotions and keep the keep the
train running if you will to
that in though it's been about
three weeks and we have already
recruited I believe in the
office nine attorneys
who have actually started with
our office already we suspect
that it's by the end of next
week we'll have another for by
the middle of March we should
have another six coming in hi
one of the specific things that
we did.
Was to hire very specifically
who is with me today Victoria
who is a recruitment attorney.
But it's not just her job to be.
Internet she has experience as a
prosecutor so when she goes out
she can explain to the people
the challenges that they're
going to face and the lifestyle
of being a prosecutor.
Wonderful.
So one of the things that we are
going to be addressing currently
as those of former people have
come up and talk about the CMO
coming to their to districts the
CMO's already here we've been
dealing with it for a number of
years there's obviously the
suspension of the CMO
temporarily during the COVID but
it's back there's going to be a
backlog of cases that we're
gonna have to deal with we're
dealing with the CMO as well we
anticipate that's going to be
extremely challenging but not
impossible situation to
overcome.
So.
Our biggest issues are gonna be
the backlog of hiring new
attorneys which we are already
done.
We are simply we were asking
committee to adopt LFC
recommendation at this time of.
One of the things that
unfortunately happened because
of the limited transition time
and by that I mean a day.
Was that this budget was
prepared by the prior
administration and I think that
based on what they presented
we're very grateful that they
did present that but there are
some changes that I think that
we would have had if they had to
use the best educated guesses
and predictions that they were
available to them so we're
thankful for them doing that
we're going to move forward on
it and at this time we stand for
any questions thank you very
much Mr bode great to see you
okay I don't see any questions
so go to Representative said no
for the motion.
All right we have a motion for
C. is okay great there's a
motion and a second thank you is
there any opposition saying none
were adopted the LFC
recommendation and Free State
you being here today.
Can.
Okay now we're inviting of the
thirteenth judicial district
followed by the first and then
district attorney Montoya with
the eight.
Senator.
Mr chair up now is the
thirteenth judicial district
attorney Agency CO two six three
page twenty two in your packets
and page fifty one in volume
two.
The thirteenth include Santa
Cibola and the let's see
accounts and we're joined by
district attorney Barbara Romo
all now has Mister Smith we
discuss recommendations.
Mr chair committee members the
LFC recommendation increases
general fund revenue by twelve
point nine percent while the
executive increases it by five
percent the LFC recommendation
includesd to two percent
compensation increase for
attorneys and staff including
excluding the compensation pays
the LFC recommendations two
hundred seven point three
thousand more than the executive
recommendation both
recommendations include funding
authorized but I'm funded
attorney positions with the LFC
recommend funding One more
turning into more support staff
and the executive without a pass
it on to do a real.
Good afternoon Mister chair and
members of the committee my name
is Barbara money the district
attorney for the thirteenth
judicial district which as
you've already heard include
Sandoval County Cibola County
and let's see counties.
We're asking that you adopt the
LFC recommendation respectfully
the executive recommendation if
that were adopted would only
fill.
One entry level attorney
position we right now have a
vacancy rate of eleven percent
which includes nine vacant
positions which is
Six I turned right now we have
six speaking attorneys and three
support staff attorneys that are
vacant.
With that said we're not asking
I'm not asking for an expansion
in terms of number of positions
I'm merely asking for the funds
to fill the positions the number
one concern as you all know from
all of our constituents is the
increase in violent crimes
you've heard it from every
agency that's come through here
and I want the committee to
think about the criminal
judicial system if you will in
terms of a table.
There's four legs if you have
four broken legs you have to you
have to prepare each leg in
order for that table to stand.
So it's not only important to
fund law enforcement it's also
important to fund the
prosecutors the criminal justice
the judges as well as the public
defender's we all work together
and the only way we can work
together to decrease the crime
is if all of these agencies are
funded pursuant to their
individual request I will say
that again I want to thank all
of you for everything you've
done especially I echo some of
my colleagues the increases that
we received last year
particularly for the the rural
differential has made a
difference and we have been able
to recruit and retain attorneys
at a much better rate than we we
had before
I will also I would also like to
note that our attorneys because
of these vacancies are
attorney's caseload last fiscal
year was an average of two
hundred forty six per attorney.
And I think it's also important.
You should have received a
couple of documents from my
office that tells you about the
increase in violent crime an
increase in property crime in my
district was an increase of
eighteen percent property excuse
me eighteen percent and violent
crimes and thirty eight percent
in property crimes.
And the violent crimes that
we're talking about the child
abuse crimes against people
domestic violence sex crimes
homicides those are the types of
cases that require a lot of
manpower and it requires a lot
of it requires usually more than
one attorney.
And what's important to to
realize is that when one of
these cases goes to trial that
takes two attorneys away from
their caseload as well as a
support staff which means that
all the other attorneys who
already have a high case load
they have to take on that
Chrysler as well.
The number one issue for all of
us as you've heard is
recruitment and retention and
the number one thing that I hear
from people who leave is salary
in caseload because you can have
a high caseload.
But if you have a high case load
in a low salary your neck that's
that's of rest a recipe for
losing people and I just I also
want to I'm sorry and.
R. for getting this
I wanted to introduce to my left
my CFO and I've been of utis
because cells as well as my
chief
My chief ready to inspection my
chief I. T. information
technology person who can that
help me with all the statistics
I'm a big person with numbers I
like to be able to show you all
you know in numbers what we're
talking about and.
Again this these the simple this
money that we're asking for is
really all is really what we
need to fund the the vacant
positions that we have now I
also will will point out that I
have been very fiscally
responsible to my constituents
with the budget and my first
full audit as the elected
district attorney I had no
findings and last year we
reverted
three thousand three hundred
dollars which was a point oh
five percent so we are really
trying to spend every dollar
that you give us and and fill
those positions but I we really
do need those positions and
ultimately you know it comes
down to the equation that.
You need to fill the vacant
positions
at mid range which as has been
approved to keep in return to re
recruit in return which will in
turn reduce the caseload which
will in turn help with the
recruitment intention which will
lead to quality prosecutions
which will make a safer
community and the reduction
hopefully in the violent crimes
which is what all our
constituents are are asking for
and with that I will stand for
questions.
Thank you very much just
returning rural we're gonna turn
two ranking members I thank you
Mr chairman I move the LFC.
Mr Chairman a second it's been
moved wearing member Armstrong
signed by Representative Baca to
doubt the O. C. recommendation
saying no opposition that's a
tough thank you very much thank
you appreciate it.
Now we're gonna invite district
attorney Carmack all please.
Good afternoon.
This is the regular place Mr
chair committee members with and
I apologies I for this is for
the first judicial district
District Attorney karmic all
twenty seven we're will conclude
today with the eighth judicial
district with district attorney
Montoya.
Mr chair committee members were
not present agency two five one
the first initial district
attorney just page through your
packet to page thirty five in
the volume to the first issue
and contains almost Rio Arriba
and Santa Fe County chairman
honorable district attorney Mary
comic outlays and I'll pass it
to my following list and for
some members have Mister chair
the LFC recommendation increases
general fund revenue by ten
point six percent the executive
increases it by four point seven
percent the primary difference
is compensation the LFC
recognition also includes
partially funds an expansion of
quest to increase the number of
attorney FTE and partial and
funds that expansion for a
witness assistant position
neither of which are funded in
the executive recommendation at
both recommendations include
additional revenue for a digital
discovery IT system and for
contract attorneys Mr chair on
I'll turn it over the D. A. for
her presentation.
Thank you Mr chair members of
the committee thank you so much
I know this afternoon stretching
out my name is merry Carmichael
tweets I'm the district attorney
for the first additional
district which represents Santa
Fe here Rio Arriba counties and
Los Alamos counties we would
respectfully request that you
recommend the the LFC
recommendations
I echo all of my colleagues that
recruitment and retention are
you sick of hearing those words
yet
The and in particularly what do
a Romo just said the rural
differential that was passed
last year has really made a
difference in Rio Arriba county
for us for the first time I
think ever.
That office for us is actually
fully staffed with attorneys we
were able to even add an
attorney there and it's really
making a difference and I think
bringing more justice and so
hopefully crime control to the
citizens of Rio Arriba County
when I was in front of you in
November that I sat in front of
you maybe had a bit gleeful the
big gleefully and I said we're
fully staffed I don't think we
have any vacancies unfortunately
in the last two weeks we've had
three attorneys announce their
respite resignations and it's
all because of salaries I have
one going to the Feds hello PT
still one for me and another is
going to another state agency we
do we were the first district
with fellow PED to come up with
the recruitment and retention
bonuses those have worked to a
great effect taking out the LAPD
stealing one we're gonna fight
about that later but
our issue is retention it is
always going to be retention
Santa Fe and Rio Arriba are very
very expensive counties to live
in over half of my office
actually lives in Albuquerque
and commutes and that starts to
to wear on people and I can't
pay people what they need to be
paid in order to live in Santa
Fe or Rio Arriba or and
certainly not Los Alamos and so
for us the LFC recommendation
with those extra little bumps
they they they make a difference
and we have seen our turnover
rate fall quite a bit but it's
it's all it's always on going
and so for that I I I would ask
for the LFC recommendation
my team we do not have the CMO
yet that you've already heard
about that I've been told by the
Supreme Court to expected by
June and with that in mind we
have been completely re
organizing our office and that's
one of the reasons we need these
two attorney positions is to
create a bigger and more robust
intake unit to make those cases
ready for trial before they go
to pre one
And and then the data system I
think is is something we've also
all been the laboring that is
when the police by these body
cameras that I fully support
they tend to come in for date
four K. HD it takes up all of
our bandwidth and so this money
for the data system is very very
important to us so that we can
keep up with what the police are
sending to us and so with that I
would stand for questions.
Thank you very much district
attorney always and I
Going here I it just briefly at
I don't know if there's any
questions that will go to vice
chair Dixon.
Thank you district attorney
I was wondering Mr chair
district attorney for the
retention bonus how does that
work if you find a retention
bonus to staff because it's one
time it doesn't change their
base salary I assume so do you
run into problems down the road
Continuing to keep them.
Mr chair representative Dixon
that's a actually a very good
question that's what we've been
dealing with for the last two
weeks I had my attorneys sign a
contract that they would return
those retention monies if they
left before the two years was up
one of the attorneys is leaving
have not signed it so and I knew
she was probably not long for my
world but the other two had and
they have made
arrangements to pay us back.
And so the the pace back that
money goes back into the grant
and then we can use that for
recruitment or retention of
other attorneys okay thank you
Mr chair thank you very much Mr
Dixon this journey I I just
briefly ask we we do have a
number of performance measures
and of course these are by each
At four for each district
they're they're lot pretty
similar we see here
For instance number of cases
handled for attorney is right at
a hundred and fifty is the
recommendation hundred fifty I
was twenty one twenty two do you
The the pre trial the version is
here we do have the number of
cases prosecuted is a metric for
for this committee we yeah I
asked about that earlier with
the third.
There's been a tough do you
disagree that the number of
cases prosecuted should be
performance Mr metric or do you
what you're or do you agree I I
I agree that it should not be
a performance metric in the
reason is we get a lot of cases
that come in and we do an
incredible amount of work on
them and we you for either
divert them out for we realize
that they're not viable and so
we don't move forward with
prosecution because that's in
the best interest of justice or
the best interest of our
community or the best interest
perhaps of the victim that does
not want to process that case
prosecuted for whatever reason
and so when you take that whole
round number and just look at
well how many cases did you
prosecute it sets up a binary
where we are.
We are being judged on things
that we didn't do and and the
only way to increase our numbers
just to increase prosecution and
I think everyone would agree
that's that's not what we want
to do if we're really pursuing
criminal justice reform thank
you very much I appreciate you
sort of in those in that and
kind of go on and
this will be something that we
will address more during the
summer I think it's a great for
us to start integrating the
clearance rates for
law enforcement offices within
the judicial districts that
we're hearing because I think
this committee here's and very
much of knowledge is that this
is a multi legged sort of a
three like it's still being able
to sort of compare numbers
across areas including rates of
violent crime and property crime
will be really interesting.
Hi acknowledge sort of the
feedback as as to not just a
wrong number of prosecutions we
also have a number of cases
referred for diversion at for
example but it it seems like it
is a poor.
Number for us to track.
Interesting conversation around
metric or not but we have to be
tracking that and look at what
connection it it has with public
safety and crime in the judicial
districts so with that thank you
very much I go to Representative
Lujan for the motion.
Mr chair I move the LFC budget
thank there's a motion to their
second second by Representative
Sarinana there any opposition to
that.
Thing opposition the LFC budget
is adopted.
Thank you very much district
attorney Montoya we very much
appreciate you starting us and
and now being here going through
all of them
please we'll go to Mr gray and
then go to Mr.
Mr chair at thank you up now we
have agency code two five eight
eight years with this morning
page thirteen in your packets
page forty five in fall into
this district contains house you
and Colfax counties and we're
joined by demarcus Montoya I Mr
Smith Representative addition.
Mr chair committee members the
LFC recommendation increases
general fund revenue by eleven
point nine percent while the
executive recommendation
increases it by five point five
percent LFC recommendation
includes a two percent
compensation increase for
attorneys and staff excluding
this figure the LFC
recommendations one hundred and
fifty six point four thousand
higher than the executive
recommendation.
Excluding compensation the.
The LFC recommendation includes
one hundred and fifty six point
four thousand an increase
general fund for two I. T.
person a pass it on to the
honorable senator.
Mr chair committee members thank
you for indulging us this long
afternoon and for hearing us the
eco up joining me is my chief
financial officer policy
scenarios to her left is
Jennifer was that our program
administrator into Jennifer's
left Victoria Bransford our
district office manager joining
me here today.
I also would like to thank this
is the media Mr gray.
Miss Ramon for coming to tell us
taking a tour of our office
speaking with a with us at
length and taking an interest in
what they're do they're going to
be they already are great
they're going to continue to be
grateful we appreciate for their
interest and their time at the
difference in the
recommendations are agency what
request that this committee
adopts the LFC recommendation as
it does include to I. T.
expansions
that just I. T. that's the way
of the world we do need to
connect we need someone who is
someone knowledgeable in it
other than a just hold the power
button or a plug and plug it
back in that's kind of what
we're doing right now and I kind
of joke I'm not joking also
and with that you want to just
thank you all and will stand for
questions thank you Mr thank you
very much a district attorney
Montoya thank you for your team
being here today will go to
Representative Chatfield for the
motion.
Well better Representative Jeff.
The LFC Mr chairman.
Okay can move by Representative
Chatfield second by
Representative Garrett see no
opposition to adopting the LFC
the LESC is about the.
Okay members that concludes our
hearing for today.
members just a quick note the
you'll have subcommittee lists
that were handed out underneath
a pile of papers just apologies
but please plan to be here we
will have a number of things
that are happening Saturday in
addition to the rest of this
week so thank you in advance
thank you members that concludes
our agency.
