Representative Anderson share.
Last year Syriana.
Mr chair here.
Representative Castellano.
State.
One of the Representative
Chatfield.
Mr chairman Representative
Chatfield is in the process of
getting online and I'm trying to
figure out how to send him the
link so if anybody else can send
that to Representative Chatfield
I know he will appreciate that
will get him on in a second.
Okay I'm sorry we stepped out of
alphabetical listing but I'm
just going down the lists that I
got Representative Garcia.
The issue here Mr chair.
Representative Lane.
I'm here Mister chairman.
Representative a lot of.
One of Representative Trujillo.
I'm here Sir.
The
we have a quorum so let's go
ahead and get started.
We normally.
Identify ourselves to our
presenters by just a very very
brief introduction so who would
do that I'll go on my list again
Representative Syriana.
Hello everyone I Representative
Sari√±ana I represent house
district twenty one in in the
Bernalillo county Albuquerque
that's international district in
the east central quarter thank
you.
Representative Anderson.
You Mr chairman I represent
districts sixty six that is the
counties of we Roosevelt and
Chavis thank you Mr chairman.
Thank you Representative
Castellano.
Okay apparently he's not logged
on yet
Representative Sheryl are you
logged on now.
Okay will you moment to get
along Representative Garcia.
Chair representative Garcia
I represent house district sixty
nine which covers parts of San
Juan McKinley burn this Corman
venture counties who produce
presentations thank you Mr.
Representative Gleim.
Thank you Mr chairperson house
district three which is the
eastern part of San Juan County
municipalities of us build.
Thank you Representative Lara.
Representative is a lot of.
You must wear a Representative
Trujillo.
Yes Mister chairman I am
Christine Trujillo out of
houses.
House district twenty five the
uptown area of Albuquerque when
rock in Coronado malls are in my
district.
Thank you and I'm Anthony
Allison the.
Chair of the subcommittee I.
Representative district four
which is in the northwest corner
of the state by Representative
six Navajo chapters and the
communities of brutal and water
flow Kurt land and a small
sliver referring to.
It was that
We like to.
Welcome all the presenters this
afternoon and looking forward
to.
Seven presentations will start
off with the agency number four
four nine the board.
They're saying so with that
let's start with the analysts
followed by the agency
representative.
Thank you Mr chair I'm Kelly
client with the LFC we're at the
board of nursing as you stated
Representative the board of
nursing is Sasha pool the
director and Donna Rivera from
DFA which was my counterpart.
Overall the LFC recommendation
for revenue this is relatively
flat with the FY twenty one
operating budget well both
recommendations increase other
revenues to more closely align
with FY twenty actual revenues.
The executive recommendation
increase the other revenues
slightly more than the LFC
resulting in a six thousand
dollar difference the base.
The executive recommendation
slightly increase for updated
employee liability costs in
person well the LFC
recommendations supported the
agency's requests resulting in a
five point eight thousand dollar
difference.
Executive recommendation made
slight adjustments for
miscellaneous expenses in the
other cost categories well the
LFC supported the agency
requests we got the agency
requests resulting in a two
hundred dollar difference our
performance measures have been
reconciled and for more
information on the board of
nursing you can find it in
volume two on page one fifty two
your one fifty three with that I
will turn it over to Donna
Rivera for any additional
comments you may have.
Morning I'm sorry good afternoon
we have no additional
compliments I think that the LFC
explained it quite well.
Okay.
To the
To the agency Representative.
Mr chairman and members of the
committee thank you for this
opportunity to speak to you this
morning or this afternoon
just a polite reminder we are a
enterprise agency and we work
very hard to maintain fiscal
responsibility of state funds
the agency has been working from
home and sense of mid March due
to heroic efforts on the side of
our
Information technology
department
And we are currently of fully
staffed we did have three
positions that were open for
short period of time less than a
year for each of those and so we
are fully staffed working with
twenty five F. T. E.'s not
including myself and
We're our recognize the fact
that we are license the single
largest occupational health
category which is nurses in the
state and we are working as
quickly as we can to help make
sure that we are addressing the
licensure needs offer the state
considering we're in the middle
of a of global health.
Emergency and with that I stand
for questions.
Are there any questions from the
committee members.
See the hands.
I don't see any hand so of Madam
vice chair Representative
Syriana.
Can you please stand for the
committee.
Thank you Mr chairman I move the
LFC recommendation.
Okay I need a second on the
recommendation.
We have a second thank you.
We will take this so
recommendation forwarded on to
the full committee thank you
very much.
Thank you.
Okay.
Next on our presentation lists.
Is agency for twenty that would
be the regulation and licensing
department.
We'll start with the analysts
followed by the agency
representative.
Thank you good afternoon Mister
chairman and members of the
committee my name is Allison
Nichols and I'm LFC analyst for
regulation licensing department
I briefly review the executive
an LFC recommendations on doctor
Rivera from DFA and I see that
secretary with the geo is your
author staffs so.
Else I'm.
We
Overall look at the LFC
recommendation and reduces the
general fund budget for our by
three percent well the executive
the station is a flat general
fund budgets
overall of the executive
recommendation is a little over
one percent increase from FY
twenty one and the overall LFC
recommendation is a three
percent decrease and apart from
general fund revenue there's
also licensing and see revenue
on balance transfers.
The executive recommendation has
an increase of a hundred forty
thousand four person to reduce
vacancy rates
these has approximately two and
a half million dollars vacancy
savings and its FY twenty one
operating budgets.
the agency sorry most
recommendations have US three
hundred six point six F. T. and
that's a decrease of six from
the previous year and I believe
that's due to an activity tions.
In addition the LFC
recommendation includes four
hundred fifty five point seven
thousand and transfers from the
mortgage regulatory fund for
foreclosure settlement programs
and district arts and executive
recommendation does not have
that.
and we have.
You have reached consensus on
performance measures and targets
so I'm.
Donna and I will I think briefly
go through each program and an
alternate so Donna to start
with.
Construction industries
management team five million yes
so construction industries
division is P. code five ninety
nine.
And the.
As far as revenue is concerned
the LFC recommendation provides
an increase in general fund of
one point five percent while the
executive recommendation is flat
to the FY twenty one level I'm
both recommendations have
increased fund balances two
hundred ninety one point four
our.
then the FY twenty one level the
overall difference in the LFC
recommendation is four point six
percent higher than the FY
twenty one operating budget and
the executive recommendation is
three point one percent higher.
the LFC recommendations eight a
three point seven percent
increase for person because the
need they feel the need for the
agency to be able to meet the
needs of industry at a time when
construction activity is
growing.
And again performance measures
were in concurrence.
Okay.
The agency representative.
Mr chair finish reviewing the
programs or we can move on.
Like.
I'm sorry can you repeat would
you like us to finish reviewing
the recommendations for each
program or would you like us to
prosper questions.
Thank you hear anything easier
flexible of.
I think we're.
We're good using the agency
representatives give us the
overall of what their agency is
doing and why the need for
increases or decreases so
If we don't have a record agency
representative will move on with
your presentation Mr chairman I
am here is the agency
representative if you'd like me
to present.
Mystery you yes please thank you
thank you Mr chairman and thank
you members of the committee we
this is my first opportunity to
actually present to the the
legislature in my capacity as
superintendent that was
effective on Saturday of this
just a couple of days ago I
think this is day five for me
I'm really excited to be here
this afternoon I do want to say
congratulations to my friends
who were reelected and welcome
to those new members on the
committee it's amazing to see
your faces and and just it's
kind of touch base with you
again we've been doing a lot of
work it R. L. G. and one of the
couple of things I want to point
out is our CID offices in
Albuquerque Santa Fe and Los
crucis have remained open
throughout the pandemic because
we realize the importance of
construction in the state of New
Mexico we take a very good
precautions for COVID safe
practices
which includes of only three
customers in the building at any
given time anyone it's a walk up
appointment only anyone coming
into the building must have
their temperature taken and and
answer some questions about
their own health and and whether
they've traveled outside of the
state our inspectors for C. I.
D. and manufactured housing have
also continued going out and
doing inspections on the permits
that are pulled and therefore
keeping building and
manufactured housing move ins
continuing to most.
We do want to say thank you know
for both recommendations because
of course both of them are not
the five percent decrease that
we originally thought was going
to happen will always ask for
the higher dollar and I think
that's probably expected of any
agency but we're incredibly
grateful for the of funding that
has been recommended for the
department particularly I want
to point out our appreciation
for the two point five million
dollars to help us to continue
to move from old
software programs into updated
sales force application which
will allow licensees to.
Complete their applications
online upload the required
documents rate their application
excuse me pay the application
fees and renewal fees when
necessary the thing that we're
most excited about beyond that
is that they'll be able to
monitor their application and
renewal process that will cut
down on about probably ninety
percent of the calls that come
into the department because most
people are calling to find out
did you get my application have
you gotten all the material when
is it going to be mailed to me
and so this will provide them
that information online twenty
four seven and hopefully it will
also improve the the quickness
turnaround time of those
applications we do have a Levin
boards that are up for renewal
nine of which were recommended
for an extension on their sunset
and three that I believe are
still going to be added to that
sunset
bill that is going to be
introduced we haven't seen it
yet and the last thing I want to
point out is that we're moving
very quickly to hire and fill
positions that are vacant a lot
of our positions are funded
through other state funds
through our energy enterprise
funding and those are not
impacted by any reduction that
may have been happening in the
general fund and it's incredibly
important for us to fill those
positions so that we can
continue moving forward
licensing but also to begin and
some of the initiatives that
we're looking towards
implementing one of which is to
be a better monitors of of
opioid prescription and monitor
that on a regular basis and Mr
chairman we have a lovely power
point pre.
Temptation in the interest of
time I'm just going to email it
to the LFC and if you wouldn't
mind distribute and that I would
be grateful and with that we
stand for questions.
Thank you Mr hero a yes at this
time we will open for questions
from the committee members of
the firsthand ICO is ranking
member Phelps Anderson.
Mr Anderson.
Okay Mister Anderson Mr Stewart
Mr chair representative Garcia.
Mr chair of Anderson.
Mr chair thank you I believe
your your your of the little
turn off the microphone thing
most around on my computer and
it never seems to be in the
exact place I left it but that's
not for that Mr chairman I'll
try to be short to the point I
wanted to ask on this agency of
specific to the
mortgage regulatory fund of
transfer it appears to me that
we we talked in the LFC document
volume two on page one thirty
six about three hundred thousand
and if I'm not mistaken it's now
seven hundred twenty two
thousand is that correct
analyst.
Hi Mr chair representative
Anderson I believe so there's
two transfers from the mortgage
regulatory fund their budgeted
one there's a three there is
three hundred thousand dollars
for one District Court hundred
fifty five point seven thousand
for a second District Court and
then the remainder is for
operations of the financial
institutions division so I
specifically called out the four
hundred fifty five point seven
thousand for the courts because
that's where we differ are on a
recommendation from the
executive rack but yes there are
a few different transfers from
the mortgage regulatory fines.
Mr chairman Representative
Anderson this is Donna rebound
from the executive and I'd like
to point out while the executive
does agree that this is a very
necessary program the executive
finds it funding a program from
a temporary funding source when
fund this program you're funding
positions and so to use this
revenue is not necessary are you
going you know should anything
happen with this revenue source
it could you know you have to
look to the general fund to
compensate for that and so
I would caution and especially
hearing Chief Justice B. hill
mentioned that they're looking
at trying to increase this
program throughout all the
district courts it would quickly
use up all of the balance that
is there and that fund balance
is just basically been
accumulated over time so I would
I would caution with that.
Thank you very much for that of
and that Mr chair at least me a
bit confused on on page
recommendation I might prefer
for of.
One quick question when when
money is put in the mortgage
regulatory fund.
What is that money
theoretically supposed to be
used for and with.
Mr chair representative Anderson
and
I can look up the exact statutes
I believe
It's to be used for operations
of the department
C. H..
Mr chairman.
My name is Rick Martinez A. C.
director up for oral do I listen
would you mind if I do kind of
input on this.
Thank Mr chair if I may.
Mr Martinez thank you yes you're
right Allison we have a mortgage
regulatory actual department and
the revenue comes from license
fees for those mortgage brokers
whether you're paying for
private mortgage officer.
It you you you Corsica's fees
and we have the regulation over
those right all the licensees
the only thing that I caution on
this fund is that that that
revenue stream will increase as
we are and historically lowest
rates that we've ever seen you
know and and and and and history
really so everyone wants to be
in the mortgage industry right
everyone wants to be a mortgage
brokers lucrative business but
the minute the interest rates go
up everyone wants to get out
everyone there's no you know no
one's really refinancing that
one's fine so then that revenue
that fund balance drops pretty
pretty significantly so I guess
that your question the fees are
used we actually have a
department that oversees all
mortgage regular all mortgage
brokers mortgage lenders just
make sure it's safe practice for
all the public and and and the
systems of the state.
And and just to add Mr chair
representative Anderson for some
contacts I believe in past years
there been transfers from the
mortgage regulatory fund to the
attorney general's office and
this year that was removed so
there will be attorney general's
office but the language the LFC
language would have a slightly
smaller transfer to the District
Court for a
a foreclosure settlement
program.
Thank you very much for that I
believe Mr chairman that I'm not
quite as uncertain as I was
however I do believe miss
Rivera.
Explanation of her agent to her
up the executive concern over
the transfer of bears some
consideration thank you Mr
chairman.
Thank you Mr Representative next
we will go to another ranking
member Representative Garcia.
Thank you Mr chairman
Madam secretary or more
supervised and we would the
agency to heal have a good a two
quick questions first of all
what are your vacancy rate.
Mr chair representative it's
superintendent
always be it will always be
lender for you our vacancy rate
at this at the time that we
reported was eleven percent I
would defer to our HSD division
directors to what it is today
because we're actually hiring
almost daily basis a weekly
basis.
Mr chair.
Representative Garcia we have
right now overall for our of the
we have sixteen percent in our
State IT department with eight
point two percent which that has
been
we're celebrating their thanks
to all the members and and of
course the office as governor
for continuing to see the need
for C. ID that's historically
low and probably the last I
would actually been in but the
last ten years right eight point
two percent we're continuing to
hire their we're looking to get
down about five percent which
would be amazing for us and and
the division
in the finance institution
that's higher when we got twenty
percent in in and all call we
got thirteen percent.
And and the boards commissions
we got twenty one percent but
again all together as an agency
were at sixteen percent.
Thank you Mr chairman
Hi on your mobile division what
how much percentage you have on
a vacation that division.
Mr chair on that division we
have there's twelve and we have
only two vacancies they're sore
about.
About.
Thirty percent I guess right
there on that one.
It's kind it's really skewed
because I'm and the only have
twelve employees total net
division is too big cities of
course the director which Mr
Clinton Bailey stated directors
is Ehrman there and we're
missing one other inspector.
Mr chair and all of that
Martinez I guess.
And these are the people you
have working there just be
included to providers that are
are the are considered inspected
is that you are missing people
just no inspection part of it.
I'm sure we actually so so all
the two missing one is of course
the MSD director we had a great
image director in New she moved
on so that's included what and
we're actually missing one
inspector Network and that
includes all you know the the
bureau chief the chief
inspectors and all the raking
specters.
That's good to hear because a
couple years ago we had the Mr
chair I'm sorry we have a lot of
problems getting inspections of
mobile homes rural communities
and I still hear a problem that
are occurring in rural New
Mexico on get inspections in a
timely manner
Well I have one more question.
A couple years ago former
representative rule for Martinez
introduced a bill to split up
the mobile division the
construction division.
Is a mobile division ever did
they ever get financing for that
division.
Mr chair representative of the
the two divisions are split up
theoretically but the budget
remains of one budget.
We'll wind up
chair why why was it never
funded what was your reason for
not funding it because there are
reasons putting them up if the
funding sources just one place.
Missed Mr chair representative I
don't know the reason that the
legislature has decided to keep
it in one fund we've had
conversations that we would like
to see it into funds I know
director Bailey has
he he takes a lot of time and
effort to ensure that each.
Each division is adequately
funded with the money that's
granted to us and as up R. HSD
director Mr Martinez indicated
are are amazing at MHD director
left us about a month ago maybe
a month and a half ago and
Mister Bailey director Bailey
has stepped in and is is really
really doing a fantastic job but
why there hasn't been a separate
budget is really a of of
legislative question.
Mr who would be a I'd
misunderstood will told me but I
I had did the funding was there
but it was never applied.
The mobile part of it that I
might be wrong except for
correction that but if you would
check in on that well for me and
it Domingo and that way we could
see what's going on because I've
had of people call me about the
funding for the mobile division
part of the state thanks so I
would appreciate that thank you
Mr chairman nice talking to you
Linda thank you.
We have another hand raised by
Representative Anderson go
ahead.
Thank you Mr chairman Mr chair
I'm up
just a really a point of
clarification I believe it's to
the LFC analysts what I'm
looking here at my sheet the
four twenty regulation licensing
department sheet and I'm I'm
thinking okay now we're talking
about
construction industries which is
five ninety nine my question is
is when we finish this task are
we going to recommend of the
four twenty we appreciate and
does the for twenty four she is
a compilation of the sub sub
categories we're going through
now do they all add up to the
your sheet analysts please.
Mr chairman and president I
apologize because I don't have a
hard copy so I might she does
not colored but the first page
in the packets it just as for
twenty regulation and licensing
yes that should be a roll up of
all the six programs on the
following thank you thank you
David you're asking.
That no thank you you are you
answer the question the way I
was thinking when I was looking
at this and I was thinking okay.
There this shows up three
hundred and twelve permanent
positions of employment and I
breeze through the white sheets
and I didn't see three hundred
and twelve employees in their
individual employee counts so it
it just sort of made me think
one out in my doing this right
in my understanding what this up
presentation is we're not.
Mr chair representative Anderson
it should add up it should
automatically total and if it
doesn't
that's probably a mistake so let
me let me look into that and see
if maybe something wasn't wasn't
adding are very fine did let one
follow up question and it's
really just get my mind straight
on this.
In the narrative I'm looking at
it talks about the vacancy of it
says the agency has
approximately two point six
million dollars in vacancy
savings in its FY twenty one
budget.
Of.
so then I said OK said two point
six million general fund a
hundred percent general fund.
Mr chairman
Representative Anderson no not
necessarily that would just be
total vacancy savings not not
only general fund okay Mr chair
that was I'm sorry detail
question to better understand of
the presentation from this
agency which we go through the
individual ones in this
concerned enough overall motion
are we taking advantage of a
hundred percent of the banking
savings or where we are we
making sub ones that might take
it out of this one but not this
one and I'll listen carefully I
hope I didn't waste any time
thank you Mr chairman.
Thank you representative.
The next is Mr Garcia again.
Thank you Mr chairman that's
adequate question Mr pretended I
just got off the phone with the
former representative movie
Martinez and he said that there
was a three hundred thousand
dollar appropriation to well
funded mobile home division do
you know anything about that.
Mr chair representative Garcia I
am not aware of that but I am
happy to look into that and and
get back with you after this a
hearing thank you madam chair
but Representative Martinez of
Bernie was a zoom this any to
the conversation and he just
called me Mr chair and you said
there was a three hundred
thousand dollars appropriation
the mobile home division of it
it will deliver never apply to a
and like I said that wrong we
sent to get corrected.
Thank you Mr chair
representative we will get you
an answer thank you thank you Mr
chairman.
Thank you representative of just
a follow up question.
with all these questions being
asked my curiosity is really
getting the best of me.
What happens to all the mobile
home sales that leave the state
and go on to the indigenous
nations do you lose
jurisdiction.
Mr chair representative a we do
lose jurisdiction and if if you
would be so kind as to let
director Bailey respond to that
further I think you can provide
you better clarification due to
so why that is and how that
happens.
Director Bailey.
Yes Mr chair and representative
anything else on on the
reservations we have no
jurisdiction whatsoever so we
have the jurisdiction anywhere
other than that are on federal
land and that's really this
clear cut answer to.
Thank you.
I see no more hand so I want to
thank all the presenters I want
to thank the analyst and Mr hill
and Mister Bailey we thank you
for the presentation.
With that I would like to ask
the vice chair Representative
Syriana.
Can you please make a motion for
the committee.
Thank you Mr chairman I move we
take the LFC recommendation.
Okay.
We need a second second.
Okay we have a second and with
no objections we will forward
these recommendations to the
full committee thank you very
much thank you Mr chairman again
thank you members of the
committee.
Our next presenter is agency for
six four and the board of
professional engineers and land
surveyors.
We'll start with the analysts
then followed by the agency
representative.
Thank you Mr chairman again
Allison Nichols the LFC analyst
for the board of surveyors and
engineers and daughter there and
I will present the
recommendations.
And so the board of licensure
for professional service
surveyors and engineers does not
receive any general fund revenue
it it relies on licensing and
and other fees
is for FY twenty two the LFC
recommendation is slightly
higher than the executive
recommendation by about fifteen
thousand dollars and that
represents us flat budgets
so are Representative the flat
budgets the executive
recommendation provides slightly
less in general fund revenue.
The
On balance for the HSD is at
five hundred forty nine thousand
dollars in FY twenty one and
about twenty seventy seven
thousand dollars FY twenty two
and and that would differ
slightly depending on which
recommendations implemented
And in the in less we received
we've reach consensus on
performance measures and targets
and
This year so all also and
questions Donna sorry did you
want to add anything.
Don I think you were unmuted.
That's fine thank you.
Okay the agency to work.
Agency representative.
Members of the committee my name
is Perry boulders and executive
director for the.
Mexico border licensure for
professions using servers.
Virtually attendance today is
our deputy director of that
Thompson yes along with the
professional members of the
board what will happen and the
call to mentor.
The agency's mission is to
safeguard life health and
property and promote public
welfare.
What is an enterprise agency we
are self funded with revenue
derived from licensing renewal
fees and does not require any
appropriation from the general
fund or top iterations.
Or like to share with all of you
a few accomplishments the HSD.
With your help the board was
successful in passing
legislation.
The process of expediting
licensure.
Another change to further
expedite licensure was made
last.
Last year we're a professional
engineering committee of the
board
voted to myself executive
director issue licenses to those
credits that passed off of you.
Yes reducing the wait times
applicants do not have to wait
to be reviewed and approved at a
board meeting.
In addition legislative changes
included creating a scholarship
program for engineers surveyors
which I'm thrilled to announce
the first cautioned disbursement
from the last fiscal year to
New Mexico institutions of.
Mexico
S. U. S. yes ma'am.
Would also like to highlight
that the board has been diligent
working together with.
To address the questions raised
our licensees during the
pandemic.
The board has made a decision to
to assist for limiting obstacles
in rural licenses then serving
P. Jones was reduced for New
Mexico along with offered a
virtual epic scores that was
offered to all licensed
engineers and surveyors this
course was developed by Mr tone
under the minimum participation
was very credible you have
a proximity to thousand
licensees registered into the
virtual course offered.
The feedback received was
positive and licensees expressed
gratitude.
And we hope to continue to offer
more courses virtually in
future.
The agency continues to grow an
average of six percent your last
fiscal year.
One hundred twenty seven
applications received or both
thirty eight were per serving.
Our FY twenty two request was
submitted as a flat budget to
fund the FTEs of HSD the
personal category insist with
the retention respuesta off
which provides for request
cations and then pay them just
move.
For twenty one operating budget
includes personal actions that
are currently pending approval.
Constructions crews faster more
investigative services in
addition to specialized
investigations.
The cost category which includes
discussion not disbursement.
To any questions.
Okay we thank you for that.
I don't see any hands.
On my board no questions.
I think that there's none.
I'm gonna ask their price here.
Syriana can you please make a
recommendation to the committee.
Thank you Mr chairman I move the
executive recommendation.
Okay any objections and can I
have a second.
Chair.
Thank you Representative Lane.
And with that we will take that.
Thanks for the recommendation to
the full committee thank you
very much.
That would.
That would take us to the next
presenter.
Agency for ninety five the space
of forty.
Analysts whenever you're ready.
Mr chair members of the
committee my name is Jacqueline
Martinez the LFC analysts for
the spaceport Authority they
also have Jeremy put AS from the
exact conditions as well as
Scott McLaughlin with spaceport
in hell introduced many others
with him once we turn it over
I'm taking a look at your
differentiate in front of you.
LFC recommendation decreased
general fund revenue by ninety
six thousand five percent when
compared to the FY twenty one
operating budget.
The LFC recommendation maintains
other revenue at ten million
which is flat with FY twenty
one.
The executive increase general
fund revenue by two million this
is to replace G. R. T. funds
previously used by the
spaceport.
And executive also decrease
other revenue by ninety six to
ninety six thousand I'm due to
recent projections from the
agency.
Both recommendations reduce
personal services employee
benefits by five hundred and
fifty thousand and also
decreased the total FTE by to.
LFC recommendation increased
contractual services by one
hundred and fifty five thousand
to support protective services
and security wants virgin
galactic takes flight.
And for the same purpose the
executive increase contractual
services by one point six
million.
The LFC recommendation includes
an increase of three hundred
thousand in the other category
this will cover multiple other
costs including field supplies
do it fees utilities
subscriptions and advertising
and the executive for that same
reason also increase the other
category by eight hundred
thousand.
I will turn it over to Germany
with any comments on the
executive recommendation.
Mr chair any thank you for
having me today I have no
additional comments on behalf of
the executive I to build my time
to the acting director Scott
McLaughlin.
Mr chair and members of the
committee I I think the best way
to go over our our budget is but
the quick up presentation if I
may Mr chair.
Yes please okay I'll also
quickly say our operations
manager Guillermo blockers on
and I believe secretary Jesus
on.
So I'll go ahead and share
screen.
C..
Okay so are you can you can you
all see that presentation yes
okay so without going into a lot
of detail in the past several
months I think people realize
we've had kind of a complicated
here at spaceport and when after
the CFO and our executive
director former executive
director were gone we had to go
through the budget and trying to
tangle some some improper things
of the past and only last few
months have been able to get a
handle on it so.
Create that help of securities
and LFC but all now goes to the.
Go through this and I'll trying
to quickly quickly stop if you
have any questions
so first of all we've had quite
a big increase in activity in
the last few years if you
remember just a few years ago
virgin galactic had not moved
out spin launch was not there
and we also didn't have
AeroVironment now we have all
three of those spent much has
about forty people on site in
the construction mode right now
that will actually have about
forty people on appropriations
most.
Virgin galactic of course just a
eighteen twenty four months ago
didn't have but just a very
small staff and now they have a
hundred ninety or so people in
town and they're getting ready
to fly again hopefully the
spaces time just sometime in the
next month.
in the past as the agency grew
quickly in the last few years
the past director and the the
CFO started using access plus
revenue at a rather high rate so
that turned out to be on average
of about two million in the last
two years
we are because of the
investigation in the events of
last year we've been directed
not to use the excess funds
revenue and we're waiting for
guidance from the Attorney
General exactly how that can be
used as we transition from a
moment of getting the spaceport
ready for operations to
appropriations so the FY twenty
two budget was was cut
significantly from the original
request and what we were
focusing on right now is simply
supporting operations that are
starting to happen and that
again with virgin galactic.
I think you all know that they
flew try to go to space just
last month and they're going to
try again we hope in the next
several weeks so the executive
budget after consultation with
the governor's office
recommended a one point seven
million special supplemental for
this year and again that's
necessary because of not using
excess funds revenue not having
an improper budget and then two
million next year in addition
for the general fund also to to
keep us from using those access
project news improperly.
The big thing that we I want
everybody understand is our
budget our overall operating
budget is we're not asking for
an increase this this keeps us
from potentially illegally
illegally using the access fund
revenue again we're waiting for
guidance from Attorney General
but we're not asking that our
budget being a larger than it
was we're just asking for those
funds to be in there so we can
continue operations
if we're not able to get those
funds as executive recommended
we will be in deficit and
starting sometime soon and into
FY twenty two we will have to
cut and we will not be able to
support operations and of the
but I've taken others.
We move on show you why I should
point out that it is ironic that
this is happening right as we
start to get into an operational
mode but the investigation show
it's time to to do things better
at spaceport in work and that
the people here are very
dedicated and that's exactly
what's happening.
So if to charge coming up I
wanted to show our department
level it's it's a little bit of
an eye chart but to get your
chance to ask any questions is
to show where we are to fulfill
the mission operations mode we
need twenty eight full time
equivalents and because of the
slowdown of the investigation
admits the past we're we're
below that right now.
That the chart after my
described the departments is
what I'm calling a critical back
up chart so when we're in
appropriations out of sight we
have requirements by the FAA we
have security requirements we we
have both technical and sort of
logistical requirements to run
that site if we're not able to
staff up properly then we we
would not be able to operate in
the in a mode that for example
could have a couple missions in
a day or even one missions that
starts at three in the morning
and ends at noon these critical
backups include airspace manager
they include sight
appropriations include the
safety of range safety officer
so these are needs that we have
to have to so support virgin
galactic and others in a true
operations mode we also have
what I'm calling to start our
basic mission.
Requirements which any agency
might have just simply the
number of people you need to to
to affect your statutory
requirements so moving on to
this real quickly this system
it's kind of a standard chart
for for any business business
operations we have a legal team
we have finance and accounting
and then here's where we get a
lot more specifically ever space
opera aerospace operations and
this is we have to have a range
safety officer we have to be
able to decide whether the the
the customer's operating safely
there has to be a backup for
that person we also have air
space management we work with
the FAA we work with whites is
miscreants there has to be a
back up we have normal business
business development and support
operations IPO you know public
relations and also our space
engineer aerospace engineer and
then we have a site operations
in the sight appropriations
include everything from cleaning
the runway to sixteen inner
conditioner having electricity
and as I most you probably know
we have a water system out there
we have a to see out there we
have roads and all that has to
be maintained and ready to go we
also have to be able to manage
crowds to for crowd shows up
we've been very.
we've been watching closely to
see how how crowd show up for
virgin galactic the COVID that
seems to have not been and
nearly as big as we thought but
in the future will be.
So this is just a basically out
of of our departments this next
we kind of shows where we need
to critical back ups and you
know for example I. T. anytime
we're running a mission or we're
supporting a customer if we can
keep the infrastructure of the
IT infrastructure of a customer
might not be able to finish
their mission we have a radio
towers around the site we have
fiber around the site the same
goes for some of real time
operations for the maintenance
on the fuel farm we also have
their space management we have
again range safety officer and
aerospace engineers so and if we
get into a situation where
there's some sort of mishap or
some sort of accident near by
anything that we have to manage
then all of this team becomes
our emergency operations center
we all have been training for
this working together so we can
handle large crowds so we can
handle any kind of emergency
and we've we've had a few in the
last several months we had a we
had some medical emergencies and
we also have had to deal some
people front gate need we need
to spend all we need to call a
local sheriff for so this is all
of the real stuff we're not
trying to staff up we're not
trying to staff up above.
What we need we we understand
what investigation showed we
understand where we are the
budget for the state of New
Mexico or trying to be rude very
respectful choose the excess
pledge revenue so.
so real quickly fit into the
budget of the spaceport so you
understand more work out again
we're at about two hundred
twenty full time jobs right now
these are private employer jobs
this is a spent much and virgin
galactic if you see kind of
standard multipliers that get
you up to about four hundred
forty or more usually the direct
and indirect jobs and get you
you know two or three times that
the direct and so this is this
is new money coming in the
comedy and then you've probably
seen some articles on on
aerospace and spend much if you
were to look at those in the
last eighteen months or so
there's been sixty million
dollars that was pumped into
both Los crucis and you don't
Ana County in Sierra County for
the construction that happen now
maybe the main part of the
construction was in Sierra
County but much of the material
came out ostriches and there
there's also than other work in
the Oscars this area.
We also expect that once virgin
galactic is operational to hire
more people and and and some of
our other tenants will increase
so we expect this number to go
up again meaning this number
will go up against south and
then we're continuing to work to
attract new players out there
this is been a hard year for
everybody because you COVID but
we still have quite a bit of
interest and we have to how many
of our customers cancel this
year are postponed until COVID
is over.
So now I'm gonna go to the
budget very quickly
that much on a show FY twenty
actuals FY twenty one projected
which are in the middle of and
and the new reduced FY twenty
two and FY twenty one in FY
twenty two of the Executive
recommendations I want to point
out that we are sixty percent
self funded we do collect quite
a bit of revenue from our
customers we hope that number
will go up I know in previous
years the spaceport was thought
that it could be a hundred
percent revenue funded I don't
know if that's going to happen
or not this that we're
continuing to look at that
our focus isn't just on being
revenue neutral so to speak our
focus is on jobs in the
community and so again the
budget is not really directed
any sort of a big growth as it
has been before Act previous
budgets had something like forty
five full time people want to
really just focused on on virgin
galactic and the site as it is
now if we get new customers will
come back and we'll figure out
what to do that but right now we
just want to see these customers
are so be successful.
So again if we cannot get the
Executive recommendations we
will be in a pretty bad state
and we will have to cut services
onsite this one out of the late
our customers because we will
not be able to have a critical
back up and we not be able to do
things like have multiple
missions and today some of the.
Some of the things that have
happened recently and are
forecasted to happen by our
customers are for example
operate on weekends and have
multiple missions today.
C..
One other point I want to point
out is is we are reverting
agency we are able to have a
carryover or fund balance
what we want to do with that
fund balances hold something
like five to ten percent and
maybe that's for emergencies
because we cannot count on a
revenues like some agencies
cannot revenues go up and down
we also have to worry about
emergencies if there is
something that happens on site
it could be something with one
of our customers and
infrastructure or could just be
a water pipe or water pipes and
our water system are over ten
years old now.
So here's the budget very
quickly your if we look at the
FY twenty these are still on
audited because an investigation
the audit is taking the
financial audits taking longer
this year.
So we wound up with the if we
use some fund balance we're able
to get to Revenue the neutral
I'm I mean zero fund up balanced
budget excuse me FY twenty one
we're also focused on a balanced
budget but we need the
supplemental to do that
completely and for FY twenty two
week ending the executive.
Two million dollars to get to
zero and the increase is again.
The increase in the person we're
not asking for a significant
increase in person but there is
a slow increase here that you
can see in the person of
contract and other costs due to
the increased activity in the
last two years and this is kind
of a job from where it would
have been say three years ago
when virgin galactic and others
weren't on site.
Begin the main point of
executive budget is to replace
the your T. access let's revenue
so we are not improperly using
that money anymore.
Looking at the fund balance
again if what if I ended the
year for FY twenty two we do not
have a very large fund balance
which again we wanted to carry
at the rate of about five or ten
percent of our total budget it's
if I if if FY twenty two turns
into a year without a lot of
COVID problems we should see
revenue increased so we hope to
make a to make up our emergency
fund through revenues on site.
Very quickly both myself and
others without our past CFO and
executive director we're very
focused on our current tenants
success we do want to bring in
new revenue streams and we are
focused on the jobs and as a
creating jobs into the area.
We are dependent on on the state
of New Mexico again I don't know
when will will be a hundred
percent revenue funded but we
are focused on new new
customers.
the commercial space market
although comment slow things
down the commercial space market
is still growing at a phenomenal
rate while we're having this
meeting right now the starship
SpaceX starship was getting
ready to launch again I think
they scrub the launch what is
just kind of proof positive how
big commercial spaces going you
know the starship the SpaceX
starship is completely private
funded and if you go back just
twenty years ten years ago that
there was not a lot of private
funding and in commercial space
New Mexico has some very very
good manages we have we have the
right I have this guy we have
their space we have an aerospace
workforce we have we have the
space for we have a remote site
and I think it's important that
we you know I'm I'm I'm I'm
myself on the boomerang I left
the state I came back I came
back for family reasons but I
don't think I want to come back
to ostracism award for the
spaceport I want up working here
but it's just proof positive
that New Mexico needs to retain
its you I I left when I was in
my twenties because you know
their work that kind of job that
I wanted when I when I when I
was in my twenties so I think
that investment is at risk if we
cannot keep this funded
I said in a previous meeting
that I I think the spaceport for
a lot of people I thought it was
a sprint I'm gonna look like it
was a sprint after that sorry X.
prize of course but I think we
all know it's a bit of a
marathon now we're getting to
the point where virgins about co
operation so you know I I think
this would be at a bad time to
cut back on what the spaceport
so hopefully about the company
so Mr chair thank you all stop
sharing and I'll be happy to
take your questions.
I'm sorry I did not me myself we
got Representative Garcia to be
followed by Representative
Anderson.
Thank you Mr chairman all thank
you for the presentation of I
asked the gentleman to in the
presentation I think are from
last year are you mentioned
server.
You had a hundred virgin
galactic has a hundred ninety
employees in town what what did
you mean by that Sir.
So virgin galactic's
headquarters are in Los crucis
and spaceport courses in Sierra
County so and I think in normal
operations if it weren't for
COVID they have something like a
hundred and ten or twenty on
site and the rest would be in
Los crucis I don't actually know
what the balances because a
COVID they running a much
smaller staff on site that's
your County and many employees
are actually operating home or
they're working in three shifts
right now on site so so they're
total a private employer jobs in
Los crucis though is a hundred
ninety.
Of the thank you Mr chairman of
the hundred ninety how many are
New Mexico residents.
We Mr chair let me back up Sir
you should there was a a total
of two hundred twenty employees
hello to twenty how many New
Mexico residents.
So are in discussions with
virgin galactic and spend much
which are right now the primary
employers it's about half.
They expect to there we've had
discussions with them there they
are AeroVironment has for
example been talking to western
university itself city and also
the New Mexico tax but I think
it's part to all the local
university so our goal their
goal in the Senate out of
allowed us to hire locally
it's easier to hire locally than
it is to bring people inside
from California so it's about
half right now as our
understanding
Mr chair on I think we had this
conversation prior in well last
year and there was a save you'll
be told exactly the same thing
last year those of a more have
to do or what we know will be
more.
Are we doing that we are not
hiring more New Mexico people
that's a question because all
these people are getting hired
your and you said there was a
sixty million dollar all.
Well let me G. anyway.
The conversation was last year
you're going to hire more New
Mexico people and we're still
not higher no more New Mexico
people why is that.
Mr chair representative Garcia I
think where we are right now
compared to last time we spoke
which was several months ago are
basically still in the same
place because virgin galactic
has not.
Turn all the way appropriations
yet they're still getting the
space they need they need the
space to to to to get the space
they had a failure you member
six weeks ago I think and then
spend lunch is still in and and
the construction of so they're
transitioning from spent on will
be transitioning to a from a
construction loan into an
operations mode and well that's
where we expect that they'll be
hiring more local people I think
we have the workforce for I
think we have a aerospace
Your program New Mexico state
for example and other UNM I
think things have been growing
but it's up to those companies
to hire and they will I I have
no doubt that they will
Representative Garcia.
Thank you sure Mr chairman.
We also discussed the last time
that the spaceport America was
taking funds from that
unaccounted can committee today
take of that problem.
So I'm Mr chair representative
see that's exactly what the what
the excess pledged revenue is
it's the part of the G. R. T.
that's collected to pay off the
bonds the if the if the amount
collected to pay off the bond
that's amount of collected is
more than is needed to pay off
the bond that is as called
excess pledged Revenue that sits
in a pot of money and the
spaceport has been requesting
that money and using it in their
budget in the last few years
this is part of what kicked off
the investigation and the
governor put a halt to using
excess pledge revenue because
it's not considered proper
potentially the way the
spaceport and been using so with
our former CFO honor former
executive director out of the
picture the executive the
governor and the skis the board
MSA board are all focused on
proper use of that money on the
future but again that puts a
hole in our budget so Dona ana
county this year county are all
supported from our understanding
of the spaceport but they that
they don't want to stand
properly use that money either.
And that's the end of Mr
chairman that the reason I
brought it up to the committee
can cause issue members on and
the need to be aware of what was
happening.
Years old will and another thing
that we hear from everybody it's
slowed down because of the COVID
the COVID this space for was
slowed down way before the
COVID.
You know that everybody uses of
COVID as a crutch that's my
opinion of it Mr chair another
thing all.
The Scott.
You know all this was in the
state of New Mexico puts into
this virgin galactic will
spaceport
would we expect David is our
home of on our on our
investments.
Mr chair and representative yeah
it's a that's a you know that is
the the big question right eight
you know again as a as a
boomerang someone who left and
came back I think Ortiz.
Least evident for me I I again I
don't think I would have come
back to the state if it weren't
for the space part because I saw
more opportunity and diversity
of opportunity if I were to come
back US crucis and and and help
take care of my mom as it were
and Los crucis a yeah that
without the space for would be
kind of the same as it was when
I left twenty years ago and and
I left because of that need for
some diversity so I think the
pay off is in those jobs we I
just talked about the two
hundred twenty private employer
jobs and then the indirect jobs
that flow from having those
private employer jobs and what
our goal is to see that grow you
know to have more and more jobs
I think that's a how we turn the
corner New Mexico and diverse of
on nutonomy and having other
revenue streams so
I I agree with you that knowing
when we've we've met the
requirement of that pay back is
still a question but we're
seeing we're seeing the it you
know last year we had
AeroVironment flew two hundred
sixty to expand solar powered
battery powered airplane to
fifty two thousand feet and at
the same time spend launches
building world's first.
Evacuated chamber that is gonna
try and and launched objects up
to a hundred thousand a hundred
kilometers and and and at the
same time virgin galactic get
slide and we expect them to go
to space so we have three
completely unique diverse
technologies operated spaceport
at the same time so I think
we're getting close to something
where we all feel much better
about it.
Thank you Sir Mr chairman just a
couple more questions are you
said that the the pay back to
the state is the two people are
working for spaceport but yet
over half of these people are
not even from New Mexico how we
think back to stay with the
other than should remote on the
schools are or
Those people are still we had Mr
chair and Representative next
year of the folks who did moved
here it's out for virgin
galactic we saw that they spent
over sixteen million and real
estate transactions last year
and they're becoming there now
citizens of the state of New
Mexico they've moved into the
economy
and then they did hire others
and local areas so
I think.
You know any any any of them is
on any of the companies that
we've as a state and focused on
bringing in the area there's
always gonna be a certain amount
of employees they bring with
them but they I think that they
always hire locally once they
start to find once you start to
get their feet under the thumb
on their business.
Thank you for the answer all.
One question and I'll be done of
Mr chairman of.
What what is your audit finds
what what are you audits I teach
how many bad dollars funded you
have.
Mr chair representative see it
because of the investigation and
because of the questions of
proper at and additional
improper use of access let's
revenue the audit on going so
I'm sure we are going to have
some findings I think the
investigation showed that the
former executive director and
the and the CFO you know we're
not properly doing some thanks
we we we know they work
so I can answer that question
and because not and still
ongoing we have we have already
corrected many things in house
as you know I I I I was only
there
Just a little over a year when
the soul mastication started and
I've now been interim for about
seven months and and myself and
the other staff have been
focused on what the
investigation results have shown
in fixing thank so that it's
been our focus on five I hope I
can answer your question soon
because we're all a bit
impatient about the financial
audit.
Mr chair Mister Scott I was
really concerned about a lot of
knowledge how many bad I did
find you have prior to this one
that we're looking at right now
you know Mr chair representative
see sadly the fines we're very
few are not previous and I think
that showed that
At the auditor are conducting
deeper and I would have found
some of the things that the
investigation showed so that's
another lesson learned for us
on and on and the rest of the
you know folks in Santa Fe that
we probably should have been
digging deeper are you know
early on so there's a lot a lot
to learn from the investigation.
Mr chairman this last question I
have
you mentioned that the previous
administrative had a lot of
problems and this is a six
million dollar question what do
you plan on doing different that
he would he was doing so we're
not in the same situation next
year.
It.
Representative Garcia and and
share those it's always
difficult
as an interim it's there's a
little bit of difficulty and and
laying out strategy for for an
organization until we're able to
move forward with the
investigation ended and and we
were able to look at the results
that help with the audience that
will help but I think the focus
really my focus has been really
kind of thought building a
strong foundation and it's great
that the the previous executive
director had big ideas about
being able to launch to orbit
from here and even what they
call point to point
transportation you can take off
for one spaceport and one
another spaceport but I think
the real focus needs to be on
getting our current customers up
and running successfully and
then we build off of that and
and making sure that our
foundation our our operations
are our finance and accounting
our.
Are are built in such a way that
we're using for example access
budge Revenue correctly so
that's the real focus to get the
machinery running correctly and
then we can look a little the a
little more toward the clouds.
Mr chair.
Thanks for the presentation I
wish you well thank you Mr
chairman.
Thank you.
Thank you Representative next we
have Representative Anderson.
Thank you Mr chairman of.
Mr chairman I I I missed
yesterday very a part of this
presentation and step out for
phone calls so I hope I'm not
redundant but none the less Mr
McLaughlin.
Can I've forgotten exactly what
virgin galactic's contractual
obligation is on the number of
flights to be flown from
spaceport.
Mr chair and representative
Cindy there's not a contractual
obligation you know they're
they're just like any business
they will they will attempt to
maximize the their number fight
sooner and the revenue that the
contract that lease arrangement
with and goes back I think well
over ten or twelve years so
their their business model has
of all that you might know that
they hired former Disney exact
and so their focus has shifted
from development into operations
in to our customer experience if
you will and in the earnings
call that they had in November
they even talked about having to
carrier aircraft these are the
white ninety twos so two of
those and three spaceship twos
so that would be a total of
three spaceships into carrier
aircraft and they're focused on
they said publicly four hundred
flights Year at out of spaceport
America so this seems like a
very high number and we wish
them well and you know they'll
get to space hopefully again in
the next month and then we
should see a big wrap up eight
they have they put weight on
wheels on the second the space
ships
I think about mid twenty twenty
and our I believe there press
releases of said that's the the
third station was also being
worked on right now so that the
future still looks bright but I
think we all understand again
that this is a bit of a marathon
not a sprint so we'll see how
things go over the next six
months to a year.
Thank you Mr McLaughlin and and
I certainly look forward to
their success going forward out
of the spaceport.
I Mr Laughlin heard you mention
sprint a couple of times and and
I to
of turn it around a bit and say
that that I have used the term
ready aim shoot before in the
Appropriations Committee and I
think what we have today is is
sort of a a spreading result it
where we did not necessarily
engage in with some as much for
thought as we might have had in
the beginning but that's not
what I'm here to do today I'm
here to ask you about the excess
pledge revenue and that could
you tell me what the amount is
in that account or or the
analyst and where is that
account kept in who can take
money out of that account.
Representative Anderson chair
I can I think I can answer that
unless Jeremy talk to our.
Okay so the our understanding is
there is about one point eight
million in excess budget revenue
I believe it's in
NMFA we are focused right now
also on refinancing the bond
because of the low interest
rates when that happens the the
holding of access fund revenue
what will shift to taxation and
revenue when and what has to
happen is the NMSA Arbel our
board the spaceport Authority
board and the tax district board
have to agree together on how to
spend that money and there it
had been a previous agreement
that allowed the spaceport to
simply request the money and to
be used for what quote unquote
legal use and I think we all
want to look at that much closer
now and have the tax district
and then it NMSA board agree
ahead of time what the axis
plays Revenue would be and again
that's why the executive budget
included.
That amount we would have gotten
this year plus a little bit and
then also next year to to to
keep our budget again even.
And I will say one thing about
what you said at the beginning
what I think raised in industry
is sometimes you have to go slow
to go fast and I think you're
exactly right sometimes if you
try to go too fast you wind up
with a bit of a mess up thank
you Representative Anderson Mr
chair.
Thank you Mr McLaughlin for that
and I I hope to not forget that
the wisdom of raised as well
and could I just go off in one
quick tangent relative to the
bond refinancing the bonds when
those sponsor re finance are you
contemplating.
Re amortizing the bonds or just
refinancing under the existing
amortization rate at a lower
rate of interest.
Representative Anderson Mr chair
I understand your question
correctly that the bonds
actually we're finding is that a
higher rate and I also had a
blue green so there there was a
a higher
there was a higher reserve fund
that was required when they
refinanced the payment structure
will be evened out so there will
be no longer payment blue
payment at the end this will
drop the reserves and and now
that some of that will actually
wind up nexus budget revenue but
I'm the main focuses are Lee we
heard from native to say that
would save us something on the
order of a hundred and twenty
thousand a month hundreds and
thousands save the taxpayers on
thousand month if we can
refinance to a lower rate and
again the spaceport Authority
board it is working with NMSA
and I am agency to get those
requirements we agreed upon at
the next the next board meeting.
Thank you Mr go off and then one
question the LFC analysts on the
excess pledge revenue who can
take that money out of that
account.
The committee I believe Scott
may still be the best person to
answer that question
Representative Anderson right
now will Scott did you want to
answer.
Yes Sir Declan yes
Representative mentioned yet
though I believe that money can
only be requests for spaceport
use and it has to be agreed upon
again by the tax district and
and the NMFA they I mean the
spaceport authority to be used
and that so again that's the
only legal use I think it's for
spaceport use.
Thank you.
I'm sorry.
That would be for the planning
design and construction you know
me and and management of kind of
a bricks and mortar look at the
what the spaceport needs.
Thank you Mr McLaughlin one last
question the LFC analysts you're
looking at up my order sheet I
see we've got current permanent
employment of nine employees and
we're anticipating expansion to
thirteen under the LESC of the
DFA of request then I see a
offsetting of temporary
employment reduction.
EMI correct that we're we're
shifting temporary employees to
permanent employees in this
presentation.
Representative Anderson yes you
are correct.
And
I may have missed what what the
rationale was behind it if it
was previously discussed if you
could give me a short answer
please.
Mr chair representative Anderson
I believe the agency has just
been working to reclassify and
make sure that their operations
are what they need since this is
a relatively new team that has
taken over
they're trying to just
prioritize everything within
house that they need to take
care of Scott free add on
anything.
Yes.
Representative Anderson Mr chair
that's right we the again they
are chart organization chart
that and previously been
requested had had up to forty
five employees but we're very
focused on this the current
operations for the next year
making sure virgin galactic is
successful in other stop it's
really focused strictly on
operations and not on a lot of
growth over the next year.
Mr loss thank you very much
thank you analyst I wish you the
best of success in your upcoming
flights Mr chairman thank you.
Okay I don't see any more hands
on our board so I would like to
thank panelists and thank you Mr
mark law firm for this
presentation.
As
we move on to the next visitors.
It for seventeen the border
Authority.
We'll start with the analysts
again followed by the.
Need to vote on the
Representative.
Mr chairman I need to we need to
move a motion I have a motion.
Okay sorry about that.
Yes I'd like to ask Miss vice
chair Sarinana can you please
give us a recommendation yes
Mister chairman I move the LFC
recommendation.
Are there any objections and can
I have a second.
Second by Christine Trujillo
thank you we'll take this
recommendation to the full
committee thank you for the
reminder Representative Syriana.
With that let's go to the next
president turn.
The water authority.
Mr chair the committee you have
the same analyst with you for
the border Authority for agency
four one seven.
I'm also fine with us is the
director Marco Gradiva.
I will start with the different
sheets.
LFC recommendation reduce
general fund revenue by twenty
three thousand or five percent
compared to the FY twenty one
operating budget.
This includes.
Nation also includes a hundred
thousand in other revenue in
anticipation of an increase in
the revenue that's collected at
the border authorities parking
lot which is used by people
passing through the port of
entry and local industry.
The executive recommendation
maintain general fund flat at
the FY twenty one operating
budget level they also included
seventy three thousand and other
revenue.
With that I'll turn it over to
Germany for any additional
comments on the budget
recommendations.
Mr chairman of the committee
thank you are both quick base
recommendations we provide
services of employees and
benefits while reducing the
contractual services of thirty
thousand dollars.
Both analysts have.
Came to consensus on all
performance measures and with
that being said I would like to
turn it over to director gralla
to present is presentation.
Good afternoon thank you for the
opportunity and and thank you
for your continued support I did
want to share a presentation if
I can if I can do that at this
time.
Yes go ahead please.
Thank you.
Well.
Everybody.
Yes
thank you and I'll go through
this quickly I did want to
provide some of you know
background on on the way things
are looking down here on the
border some of the highlights I
wanted to mention that New
Mexico exports slowed in the
last quarter we're down by
twenty five percent of the low
twenty nineteen large we did see
a large dip in exports to China
when we look at Mexico the
difference was a little bit
smaller those about a ninety
nine percent dip compared to the
twenty nineteen and that was at
the end of the year considering
the ongoing pandemic we still
had a good year and we still
need to look at the December
numbers.
Some trade highlights I wanted
to flag here for you all since
twenty ten exports to Mexico
have grown by more than three
hundred percent New Mexico makes
up close to fifty percent of
that number we had a really good
year in our ports of entry as
far as commercial vehicle
crossings twenty twenty actually
was a record year for some of
this and Columbus PO we expects
growth of over ten percent in
commercial crossings.
In twenty twenty.
Another quick point on highlight
here the some of those support
of infantry ranks fifth in trade
of all the money entire U. S.
Mexico border and is quickly
nearing fourth so one of the
major projects that we're
working on right now is a New
Mexico border highway connector
or same Frances extension we
have about three million dollars
right now to design and and
complete the feasibility of this
connection that will connect
diminishing highway with
McKnight road essentially
creating a much faster route
from the port of entries to
Senate park we have an update
here of the deadline right now
we're we're in the process of
requesting bids and the deadline
to submit bids to complete the
feasibility design is February
fifth company will be announced
following a competitive review
process again it's a it's a you
know would be a great
road for the region as far as
impacts to some park increasing
retail G. R. T. to the that
community also provide some
safety benefits in terms of
reducing traffic near schools
residential areas and creating
an alternate driving route in
and out of the industrial park
area also improves access to New
Mexico for major road arterials
in el Paso.
Once completed the according to
project within the O. T. will be
shovel ready and as you can see
that's the estimated
construction cost of twenty five
million dollars.
We can see a look at what that's
ruled would look like
it's a lot further south you
know I live in some of park
right now it takes me about
twenty four minutes twenty
minutes to get to the office
once this road is complete it'll
be about six minutes to get to
the part of entry.
I just wanted to highlight here
these other support of entry
expansion and modernization this
will be a major project that
will be pushing this year we're
in touch with the New Mexico
congressional delegation in
particular of the Senate offices
to push for either the design or
construction of this badly
needed.
Expansion and modernization of
the sub the support of entry.
Looking at the stats for some of
that is we have again we had a
really good year as far as
commercial crossings this is
going to support of entry we
actually had a all time record
high in months in December and
July and we reached nine hundred
trucks crossing per day and in
December previously we were
about averaging around three
hundred.
Representative Thursday at this
other support of entry.
On the peel B. side of things
aren't as good and this is in
large part because of the of
federal ban on nonessential
travel that said due to the
ongoing COVID pandemic.
Another major project that we're
working on the NMBA secured five
million dollars in capital
outlay funds to construct a
flood protection burn west of
Columbus of the project was
redesigned since the initial
design call for seven million
dollars
we have an update the ability of
Columbus board of trustees
approved the first purchase of
ten lots on Tuesday of this week
so we're making progress in in
acquiring the land needed to
construct as needed for.
The NMDOT drainage bureau also
reviewed and and concurrent with
the improvements related to New
Mexico eleven so again this
would provide some flood
protection benefit to the port
of entry protect trade during a
major flood in in the area.
It would also make a land that
is currently in the flood plain
available for development.
In here we can look at an
existing model for the area as
you can see all of it
essentially floods right now
when we have a major rain events
and you could see the protection
that will be provided in this
area once that Burma is
complete.
And again four hundred twenty
acres of protected land some
pictures here of the flooding
that has taken place.
Another project that we're
working on we're hoping to get
funding for is a long a
facultative wastewater pond in
and Columbus this would provide
a the ability to expand business
along the border provide safe
and reliable wastewater disposal
and address potential
environmental concerns due to
over capacity and that's in this
one I have a another update to
that that design is complete so
the project is shovel ready.
We're looking at Columbus of
port of entry also there we had
to a lot of growth in commercial
crossings this year despite the
pandemic of the port of entry
expects around eleven percent
growth and a lot of that they
saw in November and December
which are usually slow months of
actually recorded a twenty one
percent increase and twenty six
percent increase respectively in
those months and we are seeing a
growth in alfalfa crossing to
the port of entry as well as as
other commodities including
catalyst.
Columbus also we see a decline
some of the POV numbers again
that's also because of the and
nonessential ban at the port of
entry down thirty seven percent
compared to the previous fiscal
year although we are getting a
lot of folks coming from Arizona
using this port of entry.
One of the highlights revenue
generating projects that support
the the border authorities
working on this is been a
priority for the border
Authority and it's been
highlighted in this committee
that we try to increase our
revenue sources
so one is Tyler some of those
projects that we're working on
this is a project that we're
requesting funding for that
would help us develop a parcel
of the next to our our border
Authority offices to build a
privately owned vehicle parking
lots with access controls
sidewalks landscaping of the
port of entry is actually
required it an expansion of
their staff parking areas so
they plan to close the existing
of parking lot that's currently
available for appeal be.
Folks that are there crossing to
the port of entry.
Again I would provide a safe
welcoming parking area for
regular users create a safe
corridor and also create a new
revenue stream for the for the
state of New Mexico.
Our long term plan we're hoping
to eventually develop a welcome
plaza on the.
Adjustments welcome plaza on the
property that the border
Authority owns we hope in the
long term to have commercial
space available for lease of the
commercial space can be added in
phases so we'll turn potential
retailers currency exchange
vehicle insurance providers fast
food bargain stores again and
also looking at making the area
a lot more welcoming we can
include public art landscaping
that sort of thing.
We're also looking at
implementing a hazmat fee at the
port of entry the southern
support of entry is actually
looking to allow has met cargo
through the port of entry
beginning this year what I'm
talking about with has met Kerr
going referring to fuel rate
medical equipment airbags that
sort of thing of the the fee
that we're hoping to collect
would be in partnership with
them do you see it's a small fee
it's a lot smaller than what
their offer they're requesting
at no pass so what the other has
met port of entry of the revenue
estimates are between seventy
thousand two hundred and forty
six thousand for the border
Authority and that would be
within the first year and then
an MBA statutes actually allow
the agency to implement it the
feeds so we're looking at
creating the agreement on the
process through the rule making
process.
A quick mention of other
activities we hosted a
congressional field hearing
major outcome of that was
Senator support of entry was
selected as the site of a non
intrusive inspection technology
demonstration project again
those discussions that are going
to do with our congressional
delegation that has led to
senator Heinrich really leading
the efforts in Congress to fund
an expansion and modernization
of the port of entry we're also
working with C. P. to reduce
wait times for commercial cargo
now averaging about ten to
twenty five minutes which is
at a lot lower than we used to
have on the port of entry the
next focus is reducing wait
times for privately owned
vehicles.
A quick mention about our budget
recommendations has been
discussed of the LFC this
difference here we're talking
about twenty three thousand
difference between the LFC and
executive budget
recommendations.
Also the LFC recommendation
leaves out the border Authority
special appropriation request
for the New Mexico to wildlife
in New Mexico so a lot of
commissions totaling fifty
thousand dollars up without this
funding if you know the I want
to mention that these important
meetings which are provided
stated we mandated would have to
likely be held via zoom and
assuming of course that we would
be able to hold the in person
commissions a post comment with
that close and again thank you
all for your continued support
and I stand for any question.
Okay do we have anybody with
questions from the board.
From the committee.
I don't okay.
Representative sorry on.
Thank you Mr chairman I just
have one question so you said
the fee is a lot less than half
a port of entry when you talk
about the feet why is that why
don't you have a comparable the.
Well we're we're we don't want
to cause any disruptions or or
prevents a you know folks from
using our port of entry so you
know we also the the NMDOT also
has another the that they have
for a special fuels tax but
we're we're just trying to
remain competitive
as far as a port of entry you
know this would be new to our
port and we don't want to
discourage folks from using our
port of entry so I think that's
what we're looking at keeping it
small still having an impact as
well as a revenue that's
generated what is the difference
can you tell me Mr Mr chairman.
Sure and and Representative
members of the committee the
believe the a city will pass so
charges around seventeen dollars
per day.
In Mr chairman you charge by
okay right thank you.
Thank you.
Thank you Mr chairman.
Thank you
I don't see any new hands on the
board so.
With that.
I'm gonna ask a.
Representative Soriana can you
make a recommendation for the
committee yes thank you Mr
chairman I know that the
executive recommendation.
Okay you.
I am the second owner.
Representative seconds that.
Okay I want to thank the
presenters and the analyst for
their presentation and like I
said we'll make this
recommendation to the full
committee with that that
concludes this presentation and
we move on to the next
presenters which would be the
office of military based
training.
Mr chair members of the
committee Jack Martinez LFC
analysts for this agency
chairman put it is also still
the analyst for the executive
I'm looking at your different
she's.
The LFC recommendation reduce
general fund revenue by twelve
thousand or five percent
compared to the FY twenty one
operating budget executive
maintain general fund at the FY
twenty one operating budget
level.
In the LFC recommendation
contracts are reduced by the
twelve point four thousand this
will no longer provide an
economic impact study and will
decrease commission related
expenses.
And I will now turn it over to
Germany for any additional
comments.
Mr chair members of the
committee the executive
recommendation maintain all
expenses current FY twenty one
instance Fortunatus mentioned we
have came to consensus on all
performance measures and now I
would like to give it over to
correct Miner checking perceived
this presentation.
Thank you Mr chair members the
committee I appreciate the
opportunity to to present to you
Going to sure very brief
presentation
I don't believe this will take
longer than three or four
minutes but
it's just easier for million
growing up in the military to
speak to slides.
so from a budget perspective you
know
We're
expecting that I will get a five
percent decrease but just wanted
to highlight that it is
extremely difficult for HSD was
such a small budget to operate
With such little operating
capital and
There are some things that I
really like to do and I think to
be able to manage it okay but
Really needs to be
The double little bit
I'm sorry did you want to share
your screen you trying to keep.
The well it says it's.
Is going to let me see if I can
figure it out I'm using some of
the
things these days I don't know.
No it's not.
Yes.
You.
Name assuming you can still see
it.
So.
One of the things that is
that interesting to me is that
My operating budget is actually
less than what I get under a my
two hundred category for
personnel and budget but.
It just shows how small the the
program really is.
For our mission
I have two two categories the
mission here the the top Polis
just in general big because the
way the the office in the
commission resigned was to
prevent closure
actions when there is a Federal
bracken way and I think you know
I'm just now approaching two
years into this position but I
think there needs to be a move
toward a promotion of growth
opportunity rather than just
prevention closure I think there
is a lot of opportunity to grow
the the federal missions here in
New Mexico
The commission and I are very
focused on that.
The measures the two key
categories that we're gonna be
looking at one of the primary
ones for me is in the education
realm.
We believe the looking at that
for me workforce provision
standpoint understanding what
the needs of the.
The military installations and
all of the organizations is and
providing The New Mexico were
forced to to fill those
positions is critical another
key element is trying to prevent
encroachment on not only the
installations but all of the
special use training areas that
we have.
In the course renewable energy
is one of the one of the areas
that were watching closely
trying to make sure that we're
getting the developers and the
military installations
communicating early so that they
can mitigate any potential
challengers.
This is just the brief
historical chart of Defense
dollar spent in New Mexico and
the left what are blue line
shows the military construction
in the state and it is little
variable but is generally pretty
strong.
The darker blue line blue bar
shows payroll for our.
Montoya federal employees and
you can see that just.
Over a five year period is
really just the two hundred
million.
increase which a lot of that
will probably account for just
general pay raises that occur.
So in general we're pretty flat
I would say in New Mexico and.
The economic impact the the four
major installations bring to New
Mexico I believe is about nine
billion dollars annually I
believe if the state put a
little bit more investment in to
ensuring the infrastructure and
supporting communities for
quality of life issues and and
making sure that.
Things are are sold in strong
that that there is a great
opportunity for growth.
With that Mr chair all I'll stop
sharing in the the vote to
questions.
Okay I see one hand on the
Representative Syriana.
I think actually thank you Mr
chairman actually that was from
the last meeting but I do have
some comments I'm.
Mr Myers and the Mr chairman our
bases are huge huge economic
have a huge economic impacts New
Mexico and we need as a state to
I think just
bring out more about what are
basically do just we should have
signs that say welcome to New
Mexico home of you know Kirtland
airforce base and how many
airforce base there so many
things we need to do to make our
base is more important to our
state they play a huge part and
we just as a state don't do well
in in the telling them how how
how important they are to us
And this budget does that too so
I I wish we could give you more
Mr Myers we can work on them
But but I understand how
important you are and I hope to
support you more and hopefully
get that word out on how
important are based is our to
our state and
That's all Mr chairman thank
you.
Thank you representative.
Okay I don't see anymore and so
I want to thank the analysts and
I want to thank you Mr Myers for
the presentation.
With that of.
The vice chair can you give us a
recommendation.
Mr chairman I recommend the LFC
LFC but it.
Okay we have a recommendation
can I have a second.
Representative Trujillo is the
second so with that
recommendation we will forward
that on to the full committee I
thank everyone for their
presentation as we go to our
final presentation
In our tribal ceremonial.
Mr chair members of the
committee.
Martinez here the LFC we have
German and with the executive
still we also have secretary
strider secretary of tourism
department to is
administratively attached to the
intertribal ceremonial office.
Looking at your different sheets
the LFC recommendation decreased
general fund revenue by eight
thousand or five percent when
compared to the FY twenty one
operating budget the executive
recommendation maintain general
fund revenue flat at the FY
twenty one operating budget
level.
The LFC recommendation nineteen
personal services employee
benefits flat at the FY twenty
one operating budget.
Well reducing contractual
services.
To buy twenty one thousand and
this will slightly decrease the
main contract with McKinley
County due to the tourism
department taking over a lot
more administrative
responsibilities going forward
I'll now turn it over to Germany
for additional comments Mr
chairman of the committee thank
you once again the executive
recommendation reduced
contractual services with this
agency in order to increase
personnel services and budget by
thirteen thousand to fully fund
we're happy to say there's
executive director now for this
agency and both recommendations
increased the other categories
to cover fixed cost in the do it
category.
analysts both reached consensus
on performance measures and with
that I would like to yield my
time to misplace the sentence
for her presentation on.
I still.
Okay my sentence.
This is secretary Schreier thank
you so much for the opportunity
Mr chair members of the
committee grateful to have the
opportunity to share about the
inter tribal ceremonial as most
of our the eight treasured
events throughout the state
intertribal ceremonial was not
able to occur this summer due to
the virus however we are gaining
some momentum collaborating with
the association that has taken
this event on for many years and
making sure that we're
collaborating together as we
move forward both with the
county and the city.
Our new executive director
Melissa Sanchez comes to us with
Decades of experience not only
for that production but
specifically for cultural events
such as inter tribal ceremonial
and with that I'd like to turn
it over to Melissa to go through
our budget request for FY twenty
two thank you.
Afternoon everybody can you hear
me.
Yes I can hear you okay great
and can you see my screen.
We see the screen of the fiscal
year twenty two budget request
okay thank you good afternoon
Mr chairman and committee
members and thank you for the
opportunity to present and thank
you Secretary shire.
The FY twenty two budget request
for the inter tribal ceremonial
and included that beautiful
photo of Navajo dancers and
wanted to give you a little bit
of background about the Gallup
inter tribal ceremonial.
The Gallup into tribal
ceremonial the first invented it
was in September.
Twenty September twenty eighth
nineteen twenty two and it is
one of the state of New Mexico's
oldest events the event
primarily and uniquely features
native American and indigenous
inter tribal culture and art in
both traditional and
contemporary presentations the
location of the event is at red
rock park in Gallup New Mexico
it is a ten day event and this
includes a production set up
days and there are seven main
attractions the specialty native
American and indigenous dance
group performances in juried art
show two parades pageants which
features the crowning of the
Miss Indian I'm sorry miss
Gallup inter tribal ceremonial
claim the rodeo how well and
vendors it's really exciting
beautiful.
Went on to the next slide the
inner tribal ceremonial of
office as was mentioned is
administratively tied to the New
Mexico tourism department and
some of our combined
accomplishments include statute
complains of the inter tribal
ceremonial at in which New
Mexico tourism department
department I'm sorry.
Mexico tourism department hired.
An inter tribal ceremonial
office director which is myself
thank you again for the
opportunity to serve and as
director I am working to
establish the ICO advisory board
which is in its final stages.
There's also the transition and
collaboration with the
stakeholders in progress.
Established communication with
the Gallup inter tribal Indian
ceremonial Association board
there event coordinators city of
Gallup and McKinley County and
and developing working
relationships conducting event
program assessments and
acquiring production information
a task force has been created
which includes members of the
Gallup inter tribal Indian
ceremonial Association board
their Bancorp Nader's and
interested event staff and
volunteers who will help augment
program assessments
brainstorming and event.
Education.
We have to be insured the ICO
cultural artifacts database
which has been initiated and
onboarded curator Deborah hola
to begin discovery and
assessment of ceremonial related
article artifacts in the ICO
inter tribal ceremony Office
continues to be administratively
structured form I'm sorry.
I went too fast six the
administrative structure of the
office and is being formulated
with the strategic support from
the New Mexico tourism
department.
So we're going to go on to the
FY twenty two budget slide and
the inter tribal ceremonial
office is requesting one hundred
and sixty eight thousand for FY
twenty two for basic operational
expenses and a ninety five
thousand dollars special
appropriation for the one
hundredth anniversary
commemoration.
Thank you for your attention and
I stand for questions.
Okay thank you for that
presentation do we have any
questions from the committee
members.
Madam chair.
Thank thank you Mr chairman I I
do have a couple questions I
know that ceremonials gone
through some major revamping and
retooling the last year so and I
am
interested in understanding what
it what what happened this year
was there anything at all or was
it just cancel due to comment
and being picked up now for the
next year what what's the plan
for this.
Thank you madam chair members of
the committee we had a meeting
with the Association board this
morning in the county.
And we came to a consensus this
morning that it must be it might
be prudent for us to do a
virtual event this summer.
And just not knowing the
timeline on the exact rollout of
the vaccine and when it will be
safe to gather in large numbers
again.
So currently our plan is to
develop with them a virtual
concept where it be televised
similar to how we partnered with
CIS Brett this year in Santa Fe
and we were able to televise
those Oprah and have online
engagement with future visitors
and our residents.
So we're looking at what that
frame of work will look like we
also want to remain flexible so
if we are able to gather again
or have some sort of wide
component we will be able to do
so one of the the things that
were as identified was making
sure that we were flexible to to
consider having some sort of
exhibition for our artisans we
know that that.
Commerce has not been taken
place as much as it has in the
past to the virus so if we're
able to be flexible and have
some sort of gathering for that
purpose we'd like to do so in
regards to this summer of the we
had the association canceled the
event due to the public health
order in the virus we were not
able to to hold it so right now
we're looking at partnering with
the association to determine
what expenses they had and how
we can best come to a conclusion
on making sure that those
potentially are covered so we're
just waiting to receive those
expenses from the association to
to to make that determination.
Okay the staff person that
actually been Gallup once the
COVID
health order and all that is
lifted.
What would you like to answer
that question.
Yes we're able to
get through the Senate pandemic
and all everything that it
affects the in
I'll be I'll be present there in
Gallup at the office.
Okay I want to ask you is are
you going to be living in
McKinley county living in
McKinley county
I really think that depends on
at this point for myself
personally.
Moving depends on the outcome of
what is transpiring with the
pandemic is related to a timely.
What are you what member of what
tribal member you part of.
Im from committee no problems
and I grew up on both
reservations okay so you're not
too far if you had to commute I
just I just don't you know I.
I know there's going to be a
bill that's going to be
introduced about having.
After people that are on state a
rules that don't live in New
Mexico we spend a lot of concern
about that that people don't
actually live in the state but
they're on the state's payroll I
want to make sure that there is
a hundred percent coverage just
like it would be if you were
living in downtown Gallup right
next to the office so it's a big
deal to me that's a thank you
for community it brings in a lot
of
Tourists interestingly ultra
tourism in our area has been
around over almost a hundred
years so my hope is that there
are hundred year isn't going to
be virtual but I don't know that
is that it.
That's something that may
happen.
So what we discussed this
morning sorry protocol madam
chair members of the committee
what we discussed this morning
is that because the ceremonial
did not happen this summer that
is coming would be the ninety
nine.
In twenty twenty one and then we
would reserve that hundred year
when we can actually do it in
person yeah I know I can't
imagine after all those years
and years of putting on that
event that the hundred would be
a virtual event.
Would not make any sense to me
at all
yeah I understood madam
secretary that your ask for this
budget was going to be higher so
what is your actual the end of
the day asked to make this
office work.
madam chair members the
committee right now this is our
this is our ask just not knowing
exactly what this year would
bring we thought it would be
wise for us to stick with this
budget knowing we did put a
special appropriation in the
budget because we we knew
potentially this could be more
virtual and so we wanted to be
proactive and put in that
special appropriation which
would really propel and help us
be able to achieve that but I
think we're gonna have to wait
to determine what the whole
office will actually need until
we go through this year
transition and just with the
pandemic the way it is it's
been.
Well it's been challenging for
everybody.
Okay thank you Mr chairman thank
you thank you.
Thanks for Representative
Garcia.
Thank you Mr chairman and
presenters
Lundstrom just about touched on
what I will not touch about
ceremonial especially the one in
Gallup you know if we don't want
a hundred years old really need
to step up and support that we
can use for officer morning but
the want to Gallup is really
important because it's been
there forever and the people
that haven't seen at you really
need to make an effort to go
down because this in all number
one it's in the gateway to the
state of New Mexico
coming from the east to the work
I mean coming up from the west
of the east that's the first
thing you run into a gallop and
that's our model is huge I've
attended a bunch of times and in
all I would recommend to give
the highest in the the highest
building on the general fund or
do people up there is it is it
is a nice thing to see a lot of
money coming into the state and
ceremonial it's a big big thing
and that's just a my opinion I
want to put it out there if the
supported and I hope the people
support also thank you Mr
chairman.
Thank you representative.
are there any more questions
from the committee.
Hi also supporters Gallup
ceremonial because of it was
there even before I was born so
I'd like to see the one
hundredth anniversary next year
in twenty twenty two so for that
reason I supported.
And since we don't have any more
questions from the committee I
would dress the vice chair
Sari√±ana can you please make a
recommendation for us.
Thank you Mr chairman I move the
LFC recommendation.
Okay we have a recommendation do
we have a second all secretary.
Representative Eli thank you
labor for the second.
Okay we'll take this
recommendation and give it to
the full committee.
Thank you and thank you to the
presenters thank you to.
Miss rotor Sanchez thank you
very much that concludes our
meeting for the day thank you
members.
Thank you Mr chairman.
Have a safe.
thank you Mr.
