Representative Phelps at the
Senate bill fifteen has been
somewhat merged into our to one
ninety nine has been merging the
two fifteen and elements of each
of the bills are present in to
fifteen it is on the floor it
could be heard today they're
they're they're for well we're
not gonna talk about the more
they'll there's there are still
five key elements that are into
eleven that are missing from
Senate bill fifteen.
Thank you representative madam
chair and then.
I'd I fail to understand why
your bill is in front of our
committee with no fiscal impact
and the other two bills have
identical.
Characteristics relative to in
your clients and therefore
one one for all why are you here
Representative.
Madam chair and representative
it's a good question.
Thank you Representative
Anderson is that all on this
madam chair that is all thank
you very much Representative
Dixon.
Thank you madam chair I was
interested in moving a do pass
okay we'll take that as a motion
to have a second all second okay
we have a motion and a second
Dixon and Armstrong is there any
opposition to that motion state
line you have a do pass thank
you.
All right let's go to the next
bill which is Senate bill two to
three R. I understand that
Representative Hochman Vigil is
a co sponsor of this bill is
that correct that's correct
madam chair already we're
listening thank you so much
Senate bill two twenty three I
have an expert madam chair Dr
Cheryl Willman she should be in
the audience speaking they were
move over if we need which I I
hope you all Sen bill to twenty
three would authorize twenty two
million dollars and cigarette
tax revenue bonds to complete
the second phase of expansion at
the University of New Mexico
comprehensive cancer center and
remove the sunset on the source
of revenue for the center as
well Senator sixty five percent
of the state's cancer patients
in Albuquerque around the state
including facilities in Santa Fe
Los crucis Silver City and the
new screening facility clinic
set to open up in Gallup this
additional funding will assure
continued the state funding
support as required to retain
its designation as a national
Cancer Institute and the federal
funding it will exceed fifty two
million dollars annually this
continuation has no adverse
impact on the state budget as
it's simply a continuation of an
existing funding allocation and
with that madam chair I will see
if my expert wants to add
anything if not will stand for
questions I'd like your expert
to talk about the the sunset
being removed because I've got
some heartburn with that so
let's bring the expert in.
Madam chair of the appears that
she's not in here the attendee
list to stop thank thanks can we
ask that part drive up Arbor
Daman the native in his start is
Dr Daman and.
There and madam chair.
Go ahead drive down rents.
Madam chair members the
committee thank you very much my
name is Barbara Cameron achieved
a relations officer Miss
Universe New Mexico as well as a
professor in school of medicine
in college of nursing I'm sorry
doctor Willis unable to join two
seven difficult connections at
this point thanks very much to
our sponsor as of date public
deal for which she is said to
get just to stress this is
construct renovate equipped to
radiation vault for expanded
radiation oncology clinical
services to me that very high
demands that we happen to bring
new technologies your to execute
your patience as we all know
where the only U. N. M. and we
only NCI designated cancer
center this is also to construct
renovate equipped good
manufacturing process
laboratories in support of new
cancer treatment modalities as
we set up the state's only bone
marrow and stem cell
transplantation program I set up
taxes as the first but more
transit program in Texas some
quite familiar with the needs
that we have here in New Mexico
about this regarding your
question madam chair about
removing the sunset from section
seven dash one dash six point
eleven this actually was as a
result of recommendations from
LFC staff AGD staff and NMFA to
restructure re issue these bonds
with the twenty two million
dollars to be able to build
these to fault the total cost is
twenty eight million our unit
was playing in six million so by
lifting the sentence that just
on this one distribution from
the cigarette tax revenue there
are several distributions as we
know we're talking here about
the distribution to UNM on
cancer center from the cigarette
tax and this would restructuring
issue these bonds through twenty
twenty nine it provides that
twenty two million for these
expansions that we're talking
about madam chair is that
employer do you have additional
questions well what I mean is
David Abbey on here.
What I was supposed to send you
a text so I just want to verify.
We we were involved with the
health sciences center and
figuring out how to address this
important capital outlay need
and I think our advice was to
extend but not to eliminate the
sunset that's exactly right if I
can get everybody to look under
fiscal implications on your FIR
you look at the second
paragraph.
About three quarters of the way
through this is the bill will
have a future impact on the
general fund.
According to current law after
bonds are paid off the cigarette
tax revenues revert to the state
general okay so let me tell you
what I need to have
Representative Hochman Vigil and
and Representative and drive
down work with David Abbey
because we want that sunset.
so can we do that we can roll
over this unless you guys can do
it quickly on the fly David I
think we might be able to it in
about fifteen minutes I would
work with mark balance away let
and will contact Representative
Hochman Vigil will work with
Read on that Fund are ready a
change eight all right.
Action will roll over this right
now let's go to the next bill.
The next bill is Senate bill two
thirty four.
Yes Senator Pirtle in the group.
All Senator Pirtle.
Madam chair this is
representative Lente if I may
are you on a sign on this bill.
No madam chair I was gonna let
you know that Senator parole had
messaged me to let let the
committee know that he's
currently putting on amendments
on house bill twenty as we speak
okay because what we want we
want senators to show up to our
committee analysts the house
member on the committee is
actually a sponsor we're gonna
skip over this one.
Let's go to the next bill that
and that would be Senate bill
two fifty six.
Thank you madam chair this is
Representative Gail Armstrong
I'm okay signer madam chair this
bill Senate bill two fifty six
is eight more bill to myself and
Representative small supplier
funds bill and what this is
doing that went through
appropriation is now on the on
the Senate calendar this will
remove the cap the cap allowing
the fire protection grant Fund
to access a hundred percent of
the money for fire departments
and their needs any unencumbered
funds money that's left over
will be reverted back to the
general fund this will help
rural New Mexico volunteer
firefighters and all of the fire
departments across New Mexico
we've all we've all heard this
bill we heard just it we heard
representative Armstrong version
we passed it out is there
anybody in the audience is going
to want to say anything about
this bill.
Let's go to committee
Representative Crowder.
Thank you madam chair I I
believe I heard Representative
Armstrong state this would
revert to the general fund it's
my understanding it does not
revert to the general fund is
that correct.
It only refers to the general
fund if it's not expended is my
understanding from the first
bill I read.
Yes.
If it's not that they cut you
know okay all right thank you
madam chair okay Representative
Sweetser.
Madam chair I move the past when
you're ready okay motion is.
Second representative Garcia is
there any opposition to that do
pass saying not we have a due
pass on Senate bill two fifty
six thank you madam chair that
let's go to the next bill which
is
the Senate finance committee our
generic.
of Bill.
We've called a dummy and that's
four thirty eight.
Do we have Senator manuals here
or anybody that signed off on
this bill.
You madam chair already go ahead
senator minnows we started with
the or thirty eight or thirty
eight.
So what this does house bill two
we have a lot of not
withstanding language this is
good that began the repeal of
the knowledge and language in it
thanks both Barnes from NMFA
and transplant transfers G. B.
O. T. and then back to NMFA so
the not withstanding language
would not have to be in house
bill two.
So we don't have to worry about
what's happening behind dollars.
Okay is there anybody in the
audience my toast got their hand
up to support this bill.
I don't see anybody madam chair
okay let's go to the committee
for questions so we have any
questions from the committee on
this bill.
The committee.
The polls.
Okay that motion place.
Representative Dixon for a
motion for the past second by
Crowder's is there any
opposition to that motion saying
line you've got to do pass on
Senate bill four thirty eight
okay let's go to your next bill
Senator Senate bill three excuse
me four thirty nine.
Thank you madam chair and I
think that everybody knows all
our staff that works hard in the
capitol that has been here
during the COVID from the state
police made to the National
Guard again prodded everyday to
the janitor in all.
We're just trying to say you
know here's our thank you here's
a little bit of a bump in pay
and we appreciate what you did
during this time put yourself at
risk and even going on your
families that something may
have.
Representative procreate roughly
three hundred dollars.
person in the capitol has been
here working.
for them and it's just a way of
saying thank you you to our
staff or.
Okay do we have anybody in the
waiting room that wants to make
a comment on this bill.
Nobody at this time manager okay
I was going to committee
representative.
Garcia.
Madam chair Senator this is a
one this is one time money my
correct.
That is correct.
Have you want to want to call it
we just figured out a dollar
amount that we would be fair
right and so it is one time
money in a one time.
Thank you madam chair Senator
I'm glad you brought this up to
some of the people really pulled
out all a lot of effort into
keeping a safe and all that
stuff I really appreciate that
madam chair whenever you get to
the point they would like to
make a motion.
Representative Crowder.
Thank you madam chair two quick
comments.
Number one is this appears that
we're doing this retroactively
and I'm not.
Sure how we do that.
It may be okay I know it's a
COVID issue.
But to to awards somebody
something retroactively eight
may not be appropriate the other
question I had is the this FIR
shows this is coming from the
general fund in a curious why
it's not coming from cash
balances of this amounts to five
dollars a day per person is all
it is so
I I know that there is funding
in the cash balances I'm just
curious why did not come from
there I think it be more
appropriate coming from cash
balances.
Representative I think this
needs to come from Legislative
Council cash balances and that's
going to be my amendment but
let's go to the rest of the
committee Representative
Castellano.
Thank you madam chair up serving
us at I I'm with you on this
that I think our staff is you
know good to know themselves in
danger but have come into a
support us you know I have a.
Great assistant and they work
hard every day and and I hope we
can now.
Previous information and help
these employees that work so
hard with either.
The staff janitors wherever it
may be madam chair and I thank
you Senator knows for bringing
this forward thank you madam
chair.
Representative Anderson.
Thank you madam chair madam
chair be of short with merely an
observation if the committee is
agreeable to amendment to change
the funding source to the
Legislative Council cash
balances I urge you to consider
taking the motion in and are
bringing the amendment to the
bill and reporting it on the
floor as we are getting very
short on time that's merely a
suggestion madam chairman thank
you very much.
Okay is there any other
questions from the committee.
A request as an engineer and I
don't think it's in house bill
two
The senator can correct me if it
is I don't remember staying at
in house bill two and because
these folks are being paid
through Legislative Council some
of them it makes sense that
provided cash balances would pay
for this Legislative Council
cash balances would you be in
opposition to that amendment
Senator.
In opposition to that amendment
I just think that no matter how
we help we help on so I'm not
opposition with.
Okay let's move the amendment
then Representative Crowder.
Thank you madam chair I would.
The bill.
I would we just try general fund
in in place of it Legislative
Council cast ballots.
Thank you.
And a second by Representative
Sweetser is there any opposition
to that amendment.
Saying the bill as a band
amended and let's go back to
Representative Garcia and
Representative Castellano for
motion madam chair I believe
that the Senate bill four thirty
nine as amended to bass.
Madam chair I second that motion
okay we have a motion and a
second for do pass for four
ninety four four thirty nine as
amended is there any opposition
to that motion saying line you
have in the past motion thank
you senator thank you thank you
guys and we appreciate your help
with our.
Okay we're still got one out
there is somebody contacts
Senator Pirtle.
Madam chairman I've made an
effort to volumes of your
parameters up.
Madam chairman Randy you're on
mute madam chairman hi
contacted Senator Pirtle and let
him know that the our was short
and have not yet received a
response from him but told him
that his appearance would be
needed very quickly
and
that's all I have to report
madam chair okay well we we were
able to get through our calendar
less than thirty minutes so I'll
tell you what still.
I see okay let's bring them.
Madam chair I do apologize
earlier I was trying to you in
participate before I would skip
over I do apologize I out of
respect to the committee and
everybody here I I I I apologize
about that you think we have the
same thing figured out by now
before you today I have a
Senate bill that would simply
removed onerous hurdle for our
home school kiddos that want to
go to secondary post secondary
education here in New Mexico of
having to take the GED and with
that I'll stand for questions.
So basically Senator what this
does is allows home still kids
to to dip into the lottery
scholarship.
And madam chair they they
already can.
That very important point out
we're not include including
anybody that was not included
before they just have to take
the GED.
Your we already have the
requirement of keeping that two
point five for the first
semester which I think is is a
strong enough
hurdle for these kiddos to do
before they qualify for it so
this just remove that that added
requirement of taking the GED
for the home school kids who
already apply would would be
able to qualify.
Okay let's go to the audience
Mike is there anybody who's got
their hand up that has to about
this bill no there's nobody in
the audience thank you must go
to representative Sarinana thank
you madam chair thank you
senator so how are these kids
being evaluated their home
schooled what is evaluation
system it's not the GDP the
state they even have a two point
five.
So madam chair the two point
five is when they actually
enroll in college so in order to
get the lottery scholarship you
have to maintain a minimum two
point five GPA your first
semester before you're you're
admitted into the lottery
scholarship program and and your
school is paid for and so in my
mind that's that's a hard enough
task they would
this the home school program and
how it's all done the rules is
all from PED as to how they have
to qualify with the state for
them to be a home based
education so that's left up to
PED now and so most of the
school day they
Can already enroll even without
taking the GED if they're paying
for it but many believe that
that two point five in the first
semester is a big enough hurdle
to say okay this kids ready for
college and and he's going to be
successful.
I'm madam chair Mister Senator
but it has to have some
evaluation system to say that
they truly valley have a two
point five is that what the GT
is doing.
So madam chair that the two
point five is their first
semester in college that's the
hurdle that we're saying if you
can keep a two point five in
your first semester of college
then that is enough for you to
qualify for the lottery
scholarship and move on as a New
Mexico student because a lot of
the students are leaving the
state and so these are some of
our our our bright stars that we
don't want to leave the state so
let's make sure that they're
staying here and going to our
New Mexico schools and staying
in New Mexico hopefully of being
employed in New Mexico instead
of have to take this unnecessary
yes.
So what was the purpose madam
chair Senator what was the
purpose of the test and you sent
initially.
And madam chair and
representative sure now I I I
don't know this was established
before I think any of us were
here I'm not really sure why the
requirement I think it was an
unintended consequence of the
way the language was written to
put that in there that we didn't
take into account or home school
kids because of of just
sometimes we don't think about
the home school kiddos and their
their small group in New Mexico
and so I think they were
unintentionally put into through
the definition as you can see in
the legislation
they were unintended the left
out of being able to participate
and so participate without
taking the GED so this simply
removes that I needed yes okay
we need to stay on the money
he's played so go ahead I yelled
at them chair.
Representative Armstrong.
I was ready to move that you
passed your content whenever
you're ready okay Representative
Brown.
Thank you madam chair I was
going to do the same and that
I'd be happy to second.
All right before we take that
motion is there any other
questions from the committee
members saying now let's go back
to representative Armstrong and
Representative brown.
Thank you madam chair I move it
to pass.
Okay second.
Okay we have we have a motion of
it do passed on Senate bill two
thirty four.
Is there any opposition to that
do pass motion.
Saying line you have a do pass
thank you senator thank you
madam chair members of the
committee all right let's bring
back Senate bill two to three.
Thank you very much madam chair
we have conferred with our LFC
David Abbey and the amendment we
would like to propose would be
to there is a deletion of
subparagraph ET on page three of
the bill.
I'm we would like to propose
that this B. undiluted.
that should take care of any
concerns with regards to the sun
setting of the provision and
then UNM has been asked to work
with NMFA to study any
subsequent subsequent
ramifications from this deletion
and if there issues will bring I
will correct and in subsequent
years.
Okay so she's just moved this
amendment do we have a second
second okay we have a second
Representative Anderson so David
Abbey can you get on.
Yes ma'am I'm on that okay so
David tell me again what we're
doing well the statement in the
FIR collect the concern that at
the year mark continued for
perpetuity and paragraph II.
Provided for monies to revert to
the general fund after the bonds
were paid off.
Okay and why I'm deleting this
pair paragraph in other words by
leaving it in statute are we
believe that accomplishes the
objective of having general fund
get the money after the
participating.
All righty okay it is everybody
understand the amendment.
Is there any opposition to this
amendment seeing now on the
amendment has passed back on the
bill go back to Representative
Hochman Vigil I'm thank you very
much madam chair I think but
that will will stand for any
further questions from the
committee.
Okay there's a committee have
any questions I want to ask
saying line I need a motion.
Madam chair I move to pass on
Senate bill two twenty three as
amended.
Okay we have a motion by
Representative small second by
Representative Dixon is there
any opposition to that do passed
motion Senate bill two twenty
three as amended saying nine you
have a do pass thank you very
much madam chair members of the
committee okay has I've
mentioned committee members we
have asked for a number of bills
that we see floating around that
have money tied to amend not
tied to any were revenue source
let's hope we get him so as far
as I'm concerned we may be
having meetings some next couple
of days we'll just stay tuned
and and see what we get I sure
appreciate your work today we
got some quick action done
today.
Is there any any comments any
the members need want to make
before we close for the day.
Seeing none thank you all and
see you soon.
The.
