Here.
Represent
Great. Thank you so much. We've
got a quorum. OK, uh, members,
we're, um, we're gonna have a
chair Chandler and ranking
member Reed will be presenting
to the committee, we're gonna
start though uh and ask our
public defender, uh, agency code
280 to come up. I see Mr.
Chavez, Mr. Samiglia.
Uh
For everybody watching, we had a
very long and productive day uh
with Mr. Chavez and Mr. Semiglia
as we went through uh our
district courts thank them.
For their work.
So again, we're gonna go through
3 agencies today, public
defender department, our
corrections department, and our
parole board, and we'll also be
hearing from uh judiciary Chair
Chandler and Judiciary ranking
member Ree We'll go first to Mr.
Chavez. Um, once we get to the
public defender, please feel
free to introduce the members of
your team who are here today,
and we'll get started, Mr.
Chavez.
Good afternoon, chair. Members
of the committee, long time no
see, as you guys may probably
remember because I repeated it a
bunch of times on Saturday. My
name is Felix Chavez. I'm the
LFC analyst, and with me again
is Maria Smiglia, the DFA
analyst. We will be behind tab 2
in your binders agency 280.
What you guys look also in the
volumes and volume 2 for more
budgetary information, they are
on pages 57 to 58. Again in
volume 2, pages 57 to 58.
For, um, some more supplemental
information also in volume 3 on
page 43, there is a graph there
that details the cases assigned
to in-house public defenders by
regions so you guys can have a
better picture of the work of
the in-house attorneys of the
agency.
But with that, um, I'd like to
point your attention to the high
level that you may see in your,
in your binders. This will give
you a better visual
representation of what I'm about
to explain.
But with that in the uh on the
revenue side, the executive
exceeds the LFC recommendation
by $1.3 million in general fund.
The majority of this difference
is found in the contractual
services category, and that is
because the executive
recommendation exceeds the LFC
recommendation by $1.6 million
in contractual services, and
that is because the executive
recommended funding for
district attorney recruitment
and retention, while the LFC did
not. The remaining of the
difference is in personnel.
Where the LFC exceeds the
executive recommendation by
$319.2,000. This difference was
this difference stems from the
LFC recommending um funding
focused on support staff
physicians, multilingual
recruitment and retention, as
well as attorneys. The executive
recommendation provides funding
mostly for support staff and
attorneys, as you can see in the
FTE count, the executive
recommendation.
increases FTE while the LFC does
not because the LFC is providing
funding to fill the specified
support positions and attorneys
to reduce vacancies. The reason
the LSC did that, if you could
please point your attention to
the uh personnel calculator,
which is in
Each packet
And as you can see, the um LFC
recommendation went off of this
is the assumption for the FTE as
you can see for FI 25, they're
operating budget he holds 516
FTE while according to this and
where the assumptions came from,
they had filled FTEs of 439,
leaving 77 bacon FTEs.
And because of that, the LFC
decided to provide funding in
order to fill these vacancies
and bring them back towards what
their FTE count is on their
operating budget.
With that, I'll pass it over to
Mario for his comment. Thank you
so much.
Good afternoon, Chair, committee
members. Thank you, Felix. Uh, a
couple of the differences that I
wanna highlight here in terms of
what the executive recommended
versus the legislature.
Uh, the biggest one, like Felix
said, will be in the contractual
services, the executive
recommends about $1.6 million
more than that, uh, something
Felix has seen and I have seen
in my 3 years with the judiciary
is that it is very hard to find
attorneys in the state of New
Mexico. So a lot of the work
that the public defenders have
to do is through contractual um
contracts with attorneys and um
we want to make sure that we are
funding that at a level that's
appropriate and
Uh, the exact recommendation for
contractual came in about.
4 million below what the agency
requested, so, uh, we're dealing
with a pretty large gulf there.
And in terms of new personnel,
the executive recommended about
$2.455 million dollar increase
over last year, um, the public
defenders uh recently or maybe a
few years ago, did a salary
study, uh, to see where their
salary structure lies and
they've been trying to uh our
workforce, pardon me, to see.
capacity and what they need in
terms of FTE and uh just support
staff and attorney staff. So
that's what I or the executive
recommended for this agency. So
with that, I will pass it on to
the public defender's office.
I don't know who
you that power.
Thank you, Mr. Chair and members
of the committee. My name is
Bennett Bauer. I'm uh honored to
serve as the chief public
defender for the state of New
Mexico. And um
Let me first introduce some of
the folks we have here, um, we
have a, a lot of a lot of talent
and a lot of dedication within
the administration of the public
defender's office, and if you
have questions, I'm going to
keep my presentation relatively
general.
Anybody who wants to dig into
details, we are ready to do it
and we have folks here uh to do
that. Um, with me at the table
is the chair of the Public
Defender Commission, Gina
Maestas, and she'll address you
uh in in just a moment. Uh, we
also have Commissioner Peter
Schoenberg.
In the audience, um, we have
Deputy Chief Jennifer Borrella,
who's in charge of all of the
public defender offices around
the state, um, Deputy Chief
Randy Chavez.
Uh, who's in charge of contract
counsel, legal services, all of
the contractor contract
attorneys and all the other
non-attorneys with whom we
contract. Uh, Deputy Chief
Sidney Sanchez and in charge of
administrative services
division. We have general
counsel Adrian Turner.
Um, our human resources director
Ronald Herrera, I believe it is
here, our chief financial
officer, Debbie O'Dell.
Our Deputy director of policy
and administration, Teresa
Edwards, who served time with
the legislative Finance
Committee.
And our deputy CFO Robert
Cardone, uh, who I believe
served time at DFA as well.
We appreciate the, the word
choice.
No, uh, great to, thanks, thank
you, um.
Uh, for introducing, it's great
to have folks here and your
advice to the committee to sort
of reach out if you want to
leave contact information for
folks. I think it's well advised
that's something we talk about
with our excellent LFC and DFA
staff. So thank you for that and
please take us through the
presentation. Thank you. Uh, let
me just describe because some of
you probably don't know that
much about the public defender's
office or new to this committee,
and I'll keep this short, Mr.
Chair, I think, but uh the
public defenders
Office provides
Uh
Services to indigent dependents
across the state of New Mexico,
which were close to, I think,
uh, almost 75,000 cases a year
around the state. We do this
through uh lawyers who work in
our different offices who are
employees of our offices of the
state of New Mexico, and we also
do it uh through contracts with
private attorneys. Uh, those
contractors in places where we
have offices, the larger, uh,
cities and towns around New
Mexico.
Um, provide representation in
cases where there's might be
conflict of interest. For
instance, there are 2 people
charged with a crime, uh,
breaking into a house and there
might be two co-defendants. Uh,
we can't represent both of them,
so we, we send one out to a
contract attorney, and in rural
areas in uh frankly, much of the
geographic stretch of our state,
it is through all through
contracts, uh, through a private
attorneys on contract with us.
We'll talk about the contract
attorneys and our concerns about
and
request for uh funds to
adequately uh pay them to do
this work, but just to give you
that backdrop, we represent
people in magistrate courts in
the trial courts, the state
district court, and the Court of
Appeals and in the state Supreme
Court.
So we're sort of the the one
stop shop uh for representing
indigent dependents. And as I
talk about this, I want to make
sure that we talk about the
people, because we, as I say,
some the state.
Prosecutors represent the state,
and I feel like we represent the
people. They maybe people
charged with crimes, but they
are citizens, residents of the
state of New Mexico and we
provide that public service to
them, to their families, and to
their community, um.
You may have heard, and it has
long been known that public
defenders are, don't have the
resources we need to do with the
kind of work that we do, um,
just a thumbnail sketch of the
recent history of this, we were
under the governor, we were an
executive agency until 2013. In
2012, there was a constitutional
amendment passed that um
put the department under an 11
person commission, and that
started in 2013. I think that's
really important because first
of all, before then, we couldn't
really come in here and tell you
what our needs are to do the
kind of work that you ask us to
do, uh, and secondly, because I
think somebody has to have a
voice also on the substantive
criminal bills. What happens if
you pass a bill to increase
penalties. How does that affect
our clients? And it's allowed us
to come to you and ask for the
other things other than the
turn.
We need to do the work. Clearly
attorneys don't work alone. We
work with paralegals, we work
with secretaries, more and more
we work with social workers and
case managers who are the people
that um have the direct contact
often with our clients so that
they can try to get them into
treatment so that they can see
if there are other needs,
because more than any other
agency, I would tell you, we
don't want our clients coming
back.
We don't want return business.
We want them.
To get to a point where they are
not coming back into the
criminal system. So many social
problems in our communities are
dealt with unfortunately through
policing, uh, and through
prosecution, and we don't get to
set our workload. Uh, we have to
represent every person who's
indigent who was charged with a
crime, that faces jail time and
so we struggle to, to do the
best we can with what we have. A
number of years ago, um, with
some seed money of $50,000.
from this legislature, uh, we
did a workload study so that we
wouldn't just point at the
district attorney's budget and
say, this is how much they're
getting, we should get.
The same or something similar so
that we could actually
Gauge how much we need, and
that's based upon the number of
attorney hours it takes to
represent someone adequately,
uh, and measure what we have,
the capacity we have, and
compare that to where we should
be. What this did, New Mexico
project done with a number of
outside entities in our study,
this is their study of us, which
I think is important. Uh, and
what it showed was that we
needed, and this is a few years
ago, approximately 3 times the
number of attorney hours.
Uh, we're not gonna get there
right away, and we know that,
but we wanted, we wanted to
know, we wanted you to know what
that was. We'd be happy to share
this with anybody who hasn't
seen it before. I carry it just
about everywhere.
And we got extra copies. We then
knowing that we're not going to
get 3 times the resources right
away. We did a 5-year plan, uh,
which, uh, goes through the
concept of how do we get to
effective representation through
a combination of increasing
resources and perhaps cutting
down on the demand for our
services. We could do that by
decriminalizing low level
offenses or taking things out of
the criminal system to solve
some of the social problems. And
finally, because contract
counsel is a real concern for
us.
Uh, because especially as it was
mentioned here, bringing people
into rural communities to do
this work is difficult, uh, just
this year, we came out with a
transition plan to bring us to a
place where we could pay hourly
rates to our contract attorneys.
Um, the state of New Mexico
pays, for instance, the risk
management, they pay their
attorneys an hourly rate to
defend the state when they are
sued for money damages. We do
not have the resources to pay
hourly rates to those who
represent.
indigent New Mexicans.
We think we should be there. We
think not only does that
compensate them for work done,
but it brings more
accountability because they have
to tell us what they do during
the time. And we, we have
oversight of that. So, these are
all things I'm not gonna
obviously go into the details,
but I'd love to share with you.
It's so important that we have a
public defender commission, um,
now that, uh, provides oversight
and guidance to us and uh if I
can reintroduce uh Commissioner
Gina Maestas, uh, to address you
and then I'll finish up on the
specifics of our requests. Thank
you very much, Ms. Maestas.
Good afternoon,
Mr. Chair and committee members,
uh, I'm honored to be here, uh,
as, as the representative of the
commission.
as the chair of the commission,
and I just wanted to briefly
tell you a little bit about my
background. I.
He worked as a public defender
in the appellate division early
in my career and then I, I
retired from state government 13
years ago, primarily with the
judiciary. Uh, you all might be
familiar with Artie Pepin, who
was the AOC director. I was the
AOC director before Arie. So I
served also as chief clerk of
the Court of Appeals and chief
Staff attorney for the Court of
Appeals. But my favorite work I
did throughout my whole career.
I've been a lawyer for, it'll be
40 years next year, um, I was
educated.
Locally, I went to UNM undergrad
and law school and was my
favorite work was working for
the public defender early in my
career. It was very rewarding.
So when I got appointed to the
commission, uh, I was very
honored and then when the
commission elected me as chair,
I was particularly honored. What
I wanted to focus on was uh your
attention to is this contract
issue. If you're able to really
give some attention to the
contract attorney funding. It
really is critical because when
I retired, I was approached to
do some contract.
work, uh, appellate contract
work for the public defender,
and I could not believe the
abysmal amount of money that
they were paying for I I didn't
expect to make a lot of money, a
lot of it more is uh is kind of
giving back since I had my, my
retirement income, but I was
astounded at how little they pay
and it has gone up, thankfully,
the base rates have gone up, but
they really need uh assistance
with trying to transition
towards uh paying an hourly rate
like they do in risk management
and the civil civil.
Uh,
whereas, you know, these are
criminal cases where people's uh
freedom is at stake and you want
to make sure it's things are
done properly, the person gets
due process and the role as a,
as the commission is to give
guidance and support to the
public defender, uh, the law
offices of public defender and
and and hire our chief, uh,
Chief Ben Bauer will be, will be
renewing his contract in April
for another 4 years, so we're,
we feel very lucky that we found
someone who's doing such a good
job.
uh overseeing the department and
it's created a great team, this
list of people he he mentioned,
um, I'm, no, they can answer
your questions, so I'll let them
continue with the details. Thank
you. Thank you very much. And
Mr. Chair, just briefly because
I know you've got a long
afternoon. uh.
I, I think every agency
considers itself special, but
uh, but here, here's why I, I
want to explain to the members
of the committee why we come
back and ask for more than we
know you're going to give us,
because again, looking at where
we need to be in terms of
providing effective
representation, uh,
I feel it's my ethical duty to
ask that. And so, uh, we asked
for what a little over 13%
increase. Uh, I know that
neither DFA nor LFC recommended
anything close to that.
I want to emphasize to you that
whatever you give us and we can
get into the details of how you
would structure this. We can put
it to effective use, um,
Our vacancy rates right now,
and, uh, you know, there's a
suggestion that perhaps we, we
need to have money to fill a
position but don't need to fill
positions. Our vacancy rate, uh,
I had a chart that said it was
for all positions, 9.66. It's
actually as of today, 9.4. So I
think, uh,
that shows we have an HR
department, a physical
department that are really on
the ball. We do training and
recruitment for all kinds of
positions. Uh, our attorney
Vacancy rate is down to 13.9.
Which I think in the state and
considering that we have 13
offices, many of them in rural
areas. The fact that we can
bring in and retain people, and
that we have taken some of our
money in the past to give
additional salary increases, and
this is really worked, you know,
it's amazing how money actually
brings people in to do good
work.
And we have been able to do
that, and our core staff, our
non-attorney vacancy rate is at
5.1.
Um, again, I think that shows
that we can bring people in, we
can keep them. And the
non-attorneys in all of these
areas are people who generally
have been raised and lived in
are going to stay in those
communities. And so we've tried
to look at the kind of work that
attorneys do and take as much as
we can um witness interviews,
paralegal, you know, things that
might be paralegal work, talking
to our clients, scheduling and
giving that to non-attorney
staff, the, the people who will
stay in those communities who
will
stay working for us. Uh, and,
and tried to be really
thoughtful.
about how we get the work done.
So we can use the LFC
recommendation.
We can use the DFA
recommendation. I think we can
effectively use and apply a lot
more than that. I think we can
fill positions if you give them
to us, we need help.
Bringing in attracting and
keeping uh contract attorneys
and staff and social workers,
and so without going into the
details, because I know you have
things to do, Mr. Chair. Uh, we
would ask if there's any
questions we'd be happy to
address them. Thank you very
much, Mr. Bauer. Thank you, Ms.
Chavez. Uh, we'll go to
questions very much and uh uh
appreciate the work that you all
do. Appreciate to the change and
frankly the improvement in the
commission, uh.
And, and I want to acknowledge
sort of the, the, yeah, the, the
improvement in the commission
too and Ms. Chavez, your
leadership in particular is
deeply appreciated after a
tremendous lapses in previous
leadership. Uh, we'll go to the
committee starting with
Representative Herndon.
Thank you, Mr. Chair and thank
you presenters and um
My first question to you is with
respect to the 13% that you
asked for for the increase,
where would that have put you in
relationship to the district
attorney's office in terms of
attorneys.
And your, and the budget.
Sure, uh, Mr. Chair and
Representative Herndon.
We would, so it, they someone
measured different things, the
number of DAs.
Even if we had the 13% in the
number of FDE that we requested,
we would still be far behind
them.
But it's a little bit of a
different measure because we
have both the attorneys that
work for us and contractors, and
we have lost contractors over
the last several years, um,
especially in rural areas where
a lot of the people who lived
there, who were older, have
retired, and we haven't been
able to bring in younger people
to replace them. So, even with
the 13% increase, even filling
with the position that we asked
for, we would still be behind.
Uh, Mr. Chair, and, and, and Mr.
Presenter then to be more
specific, what's the difference
in the base rate at the district
attorney's office and at the uh
Public Defender's office.
I, uh, Mr. Chair and Mr.
Presenter, I'm trying to find
this out because we're talking
about equal access to justice,
so we're looking at
prosecutions, but we're also
looking at defense. And I want
to make sure that we're given
the defense the same
consideration that we're given
to uh our prosecution. If you
don't have it now, Mr. Chair,
uh, Mr. Presenter, you can give
it to me later. Uh, it would be
important for us to see that.
The other item that I would like
to ask you about, Mr. Chair and
Mr. Presenter, is with respect
to the um
I'm looking at your performance
measures, and it says that each
one of your attorneys has 300
cases. So I'm in the attorneys
do you have on staff right now?
Uh, Mr. Chair, uh, and
Representative Herndon, right
now we have 240, 208 attorneys
filled positions as of January
21. We have 75 to 80 contract.
Attorneys.
Uh
So
The 300, I, I believe app
applies to our in-house
attorneys, and that is uh the
number of cases assigned over,
over the course of a year.
Um, and that's a lot of cases.
That is a lot of cases, Mr.
Chair, Mr. President. The
question is, I mean, are you?
I hope that you're asking for
enough so that you can become
very effective in the work that
you're doing. You already are
simply because of who you are,
but I'm just saying, Mr. Chair
and Mr. Preser, that that's,
that's important and even if it
were to raise you at 26%, but
it's important that we, that we
get you to a point, Mr. Chair
and Mr. Presenter, because
there've been too many people
that I come in contact with who
said, well, I can't talk to my
public defender and they don't
respond to me because they have
300 cases, so that's important
and I
I just want to bring up one last
uh particular issue with respect
to um your program. So in terms
of recidivism, which is
something that you mentioned,
Mr. Chair, Mr. Presenter, that
you want to prevent. Do you also
have a program that is directed
toward, uh, preventing
recidivism as a part of your
bigger operation. Thank you, Mr.
Chair, and Representatives.
We definitely do. And that's why
we employ social workers and
case managers, um, licensed
social workers and we've
expanded our case manager
program. Those are people who
don't necessarily need a
license, but do a lot of work
with, uh, lining people up with
treatment, doing some, uh,
basic, uh, evaluations of the
person to see what their needs
might be. A lot of what we're
asked to do is come in and
provide two courts alternatives
to incarceration. You know,
somebody, if our client's gonna
be found guilty of something,
The question is, what do you do
with them? And I believe that uh
personalresponsibility and, you
know, punishment shouldn't be
necessarily measured in the
number of days of incarceration
or years of incarceration, uh,
we can find personal
responsibility and uh
Getting people out of the system
in some other way. And so we
definitely focus on this, and
that is why we have and are
trying to expand our, as we call
it our holistic defense program
which, which includes uh the
social workers and the case
managers.
And Mr. Chair and Mr. President,
one last point of question, uh,
some of the conversations I've
had with people who are
currently incarcerated right now
is that they have the ability to
submit uh
A, a, I guess it's a petition if
they feel like they're not being
treated fairly within the prison
system themselves and Mr. Chair,
Mr. Presenter, my question to
you is, do you represent them in
those cases because those cases
are coming up far too often now.
And Mr. Chair Representative
Hernon, uh, we don't represent
people in conditions of
confinement cases. We do have a
habeas unit, which represents
people uh who are incarcerated
in the Department of
Corrections, um.
And if there is a pending case
that uh that we have, we may
help people with, you know,
their specific concerns with the
jail.
But we don't do the conditions
of confinement type of uh
litigation if that's what you're
asking. And, and frankly, we
could do a better job if we had
fewer clients and we could
address that, we would be able
to answer those clients and let
me tell your representative, it
sort of breaks my heart
sometimes when I hear that that
from clients that they haven't
had somebody able to return
their phone call. That, that
shouldn't be us, and I can tell
you that we really do strive to
be better with those kinds of
things.
Uh, thank you, Mr. Chair. Thank
you, Mr. President. I look
forward to seeing those numbers
as compared to the DA's office,
that's important for us to look
at, and thank you. Thank you,
Representative Hernan. Next we
have Representative Sanchez and
Representative Duncan.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. I just
want to mention, uh, I don't
sound like a broken record, but
here's another example of uh
where we need to start taking
care of uh
Our employees in terms of year
after year they come asking for
more money, we never fully fund
them and uh we have all these
surpluses.
But then that money goes to
expanding new programs, billions
of dollars.
At some point, I think we really
need to look at ah.
These people are public
servants, they're uh.
They're actually uh I know uh
attorneys usually get a batter
off with.
These people are truly there to
help and uh.
I think we need to take a closer
look at that and hopefully, we
can do something this year, but
in the future, we should really
uh really help them out. Thank
you, Mr. Chair. Thank you very
much, Representative Sanchez,
Representative Duncan.
Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Thank you for what you do
because it is definitely needed
uh throughout the state. Um, can
you tell me a little bit more
about the rural attorney, uh,
recruitment program, whatever
you do there.
Certainly, Mr. Chair and
Representative Duncan, uh,
We, we have a number of of
programs. Uh, first of all, for
our offices, we pay what's
called a geographic
differential, uh, we pay more to
attorneys to go to and serve in
our rural offices when they're
employees, uh, in several of our
office offices, I believe it's
$7800 more a year.
And I mean, we, we love all our
offices, but if somebody, for
instance, goes to um
The Gallup office, let's say,
and then they want to move to
Albuquerque, which happens, uh,
they lose that.
We are rewarding people and
incentivizing them to serve in
the rural areas. Um, we also
have uh some clerkships to try
and bring people in, and we've
been working with the courts to
to see how we can collaborate
with them and the DAs through
the criminal justice
coordinating counsels to get, to
get money to pay for both the
DA's and for us, uh, to bring
people in to work there. So, uh,
we use financial incentives and
so often, what I find is it's
often the teamwork in the small.
office is also in camaraderie
that helps, I mean, you learn
more, you learn more quickly,
and so we really emphasize that
we recruit around the country,
and most of the people that work
in our rural offices actually
come to us from out of state. We
only get 5 or 6 people from UNM
Law School a year statewide.
Uh, into the publicends office.
And so we actively recruit, in
fact, next week I will be going
to, uh, Arizona. We have been,
we've had somebody going to
Portland, um, just this last
week to Houston to the 3rd
Marshall School of Law, and we
actively recruit and pay
additional so that we can
provide the best representation
of the world.
Thank you, thank you, sure. I
appreciate that answer on that,
or the answer to that. Um,
talking about the alternative
sentencing, do you work with the
local municipalities or counties
if they have programs that are
in place and and the reason I
asked the question, are we
duplicating services here. We,
uh, do you reach out to them
and, and use them as a resource
and and recommend them or are we
paying for two different things.
Mr. Chair and Representative
Duncan, you know, it's a really
good question. I'll think about
that more, um, and perhaps we
can follow up, but the answer to
it is that we do not duplicate
services. We don't do treatment.
We just
Find the treatment.
For for our clients and try to
make that contact and get them,
get them there. So we are kind
of in between the courts,
working with the courts, uh,
with probation, uh, sometimes
and, and then with the treatment
centers, literally we give rides
to the treatment centers. So I
don't think that we duplicate
those services, we just actually
enhance and get people into
them.
Thank you, sir. Glad to hear
that. Um, I didn't know how that
worked and when you were talking
about it, I thought.
Better ask that question. Um,
one last question, Mr. Chair,
and, and the folks don't throw
things at me. Um, does your
office represent folks that are
not uh citizens of the US.
Uh, Mr. Chair and Mr. Duncan,
yes, we represent every person
in the state courts in New
Mexico that uh meets the income
guidelines or is incarcerated
and faces a criminal charge.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Can you
tell me what percentage that
group is.
I don't know. I, I will see uh
represent Duncan if uh if we
have some of that information,
um, I'm not sure that we
actively collect that, but I'll
see what we have and I will
provide that to you.
Uh, thank you. I think that's
Um, as I look at the this
committee or any other
committee, um, this is the
people's money.
And uh so I just want to make
sure that we're uh we're looking
at it very carefully when we
not, I'm not saying we don't
provide those services. I just
want to say we need to be very
careful. So I'd love to have the
numbers when you get them. Thank
you, Mr. Chair. Appreciate that.
Thank you. Next, we have
Representative Brown and
represent Herrera.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman and uh
good to see the panel this
afternoon. I, I do have a
question, Mr. Chair, regarding
one of the performance measures,
and this has to do with the
number of alternative sentencing
treatment placements, and this
would involve felony,
misdemeanor, and juvenile
clients. Um, on the performance
measures, I see some really
different numbers here. Um, the
actual number of alternative
sentencing treatment placements.
In 2023, 24 was about 28,000.
I'm gonna round the round the
numbers.
Uh, for the request for 25, 26
is 5000.
And then LFC is recommending
30,000 and then um it looks like
There's a consensus target now
15,000, and so I'm just curious,
Mr. Chair, Mr. Bauer too.
And it's you all want to weigh
in on this. Why, why do we see
these disparities, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Chair and Representative
Brown, uh, first of all, I'd be
happy to have a deeper
conversation with you about that
with somebody who's really
familiar with those numbers. We
We would prefer to have the, the
target number stay the same,
it's sometimes hard to gather
this data and knowing whether
changes in these numbers are
based upon the reporting or the,
the actual outcomes. And so I
think we've gotten a lot better
with that, but it's, uh, you
know,
Using these as metrics uh of of
effectiveness, I, I think are
usually need to look at more
than one number, so I'd be happy
to sit down with someone and
discuss that in more detail.
Thank you, uh, Mr. Chairman, I,
I think of some cases lend
themselves to these types of
placements and others don't, so
I hope we're not.
Trying to meet number targets
where it doesn't really fit the
situation, so that would be my
one concern. And other than
that, Mr. Chairman, I just say I
long been a proponent of better
funding for the public
defender's office and um I know
we are inching our way forward,
but I think I agree with
Representative Sanchez, Mr.
Chair, that we need to take care
of.
The agencies we already have
working for us and bring them to
where they need to be in this.
Period once again of extra
money. Thank you. Thank you very
much, Representative Brown. Uh,
we have Representative Herrera,
then Hernandez.
Uh, thank you, Mr. Chair. Uh,
thank you, Mr. Bauer. Um, I
can't even imagine what you're
to do list looks like, but um.
Thankfully so, I have, I've
spent time with public defenders
in my district and uh
interviewed them and
I actually don't know how they
can do the jobs they have 300
cases is impossible. I've gone
to the arraignment hearings
where
It doesn't take a psychiatrist
to figure out that we have.
huge problems with competency.
Issues and I, I'm hopeful that
this emphasis on behavioral
health and the competent, the
laws that we're bringing forward
will help your agency. Um, I, I
too live for the day when we uh
when we have as much money in
the public defender's offices as
we do in the prosecutor's
office. I, I, I think that's the
definition of a democracy. Um,
I guess, uh.
I guess my question to you is,
um,
How we go and, I mean, I know
you need the money, I, you know.
How are the disparities for uh
our staff in your offices, i.e.
the clerks and, you know, we
hear what the request is for the
lawyers, you have a huge
disparity between the clerks and
the people support the support
staff.
And your lawyers, I'm sorry.
Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Yeah, do you mean, I'm sorry,
Mr. Chair and robes, you mean
between the prosecutors perhaps
and us. Oh no, I mean all the
people in your office, what
we've had is people coming from
the court system and saying
they're they're clerks and their
support staff salaries are so
low, uh, that it's, I you've
done a pretty good job in
maintaining them, but is that is
that not a problem
and Mr. Chair and
Representative, it, it is
definitely a problem. Um, we
have tried to put money back in
when we've been able
To do it and increase of
salaries and really focus on the
lowest levels. I, and we clearly
need more help to do that
because, of course, as other
people are raising their
salaries, we have to at least
keep pace, and I think this work
can be pretty difficult, um, you
know, we have people with mental
health crises coming into our
offices at the front desk. I
mean, I can tell you in
Abuquerque, this is several
times a month, that somebody has
to go downstairs and help
respond to somebody in a mental
health crisis, who we're trying
to serve. I mean, there are
clients or are people.
Uh, and that's not, it's not
easy work, so, uh, I think we've
done a good job.
Um, maintaining our level on 5%
is a pretty good vacancy rate
for that, but yes, we, we
definitely need help, um, to do
that. And if I could just
responding to that, the case
load, and this is in the
handout, the one pager that we
showed, uh, if you
The number of felony case
assignments that we have, and
you, I think you heard from the
court that they're felony cases
are going up. And so when we
measure ourselves against where
we should be.
That was based upon the
caseloads a few years ago when
we did this study, when the
number of felonies go up and
you, you have this handout, you
know, everybody's caseloads in
the court system went down
during COVID because of, you
know, social things, changes in
policing and prosecuting, um, we
are now above, well above our
2018 numbers and we're
It looks like it's going up even
more. And so, even just treading
water is going to be difficult
under these circumstances.
Thank you, Mr. Beer. I
appreciate your work, all of
your work. Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Herrera, now Representative
Hernandez.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I'm
still learning a lot on, on this
uh topic as well. Um, I'm trying
to understand more about like
crossover uh jurisdiction. I
understand that, um, you know,
that there may not be, but does
your office, uh, work in or get
involved in Indian law cases,
um, more, more specifically when
it comes to ICA cases, uh, and,
and how much time and money gets
spent out of your office to
handle those cases. I'll just.
curious, Mr Turman, sure, and
Mr. Chair Representative, we do
not appear in tribal courts.
Or federal court, but we
represent, uh,
Any, any member of sovereign
nation that is in uh in state
courts.
So in areas where there's a, a,
you know, a nation nearby, uh,
for instance, many of our
Many of our clients can be
tribal members, but we don't
appear specifically in federal
or tribal courts.
And I can, if I could respond,
Mr. Chair, uh, Representative
Hernandez, uh, I actually did
some uh work representing
indigent parents on appeal and
abuse neglect cases. So IA is in
those cases and that's usually
uh those attorneys are
appointed.
Uh, a number of them in rural
areas are appointed by the
administrative office of the
court to represent indigent
parents, both at the trial and
the appellate level. And then
there is a new office that's
been created, but I understand
it's only in Albuquerque that is
actual uh attorneys hired to do
that work. Otherwise, it's done
by contract, but it's not public
defender attorneys who represent
uh Indian Child Welfare Act
cases.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Thank you, Representative
Hernandez. Uh, now we're gonna
go to Vice Chair Dixon.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Um, thank
you, um, for the presentation.
Um,
Mr. Bauer, you mentioned the
plan for transitioning over time
to hourly pay. Um, and so I was
wondering, uh, Mr. Chair, if
Um, our analysts both from LFC
and DFA um have been looped into
that and if that's something I
want to make sure that's on
their radar screens, uh, as
we're moving forward.
Mr. Chair, um, Madam Vice Chair,
great question. Um, we were
looped into it, I think, for the
LFC recommendation, that is why
there isn't a contractual
increase as we would like to see
what this transition come in
come into fruition in order to
see what the fiscal impact of
that would be.
So we were in the loop and
that's why the LFC did not
recommend for that category.
Yeah, Madam, Mr. Chair, um, the
agency does keep us in the loop
pretty regularly on these things
and
You know, reiterate what I said
at the beginning, the importance
of the contractual services
category for this agency.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Thank you,
um, both of you for um following
up on that, I think other
members have really um
emphasized the need to ensure
that um, you know, we are
adequately funding um all
aspects of our.
Criminal justice system and
particularly as it is one of the
big areas of focus for the
legislature this year, um, you
know, as we talk about
competency and, um, you know,
increased penalties for things,
um, and how we can really um
make our communities safer, uh,
while ensuring that that folks
are treated equitably, um, you
know, I really do appreciate the
efforts that LFC and DFA have
made in the past couple of
years.
to add additional funding for
more staff, uh, as well as
social workers and, and other
folks, um, but I do wanna just
sort of.
echo, um, I think what other
members have uh sort of
Spoke to, which is that we need
to make sure that, um, you know,
we have staff capacity and the
resources uh to be able to
defend everyone who is uh
brought before the courts, so I
Yes, Mr. Chair,
thank you, thank you. We, we did
uh submit a request for a
special appropriation our our
request number 2 for the
beginnings of the contract
attorney hourly transition. I'm
not sure if that was recommended
by anyone, but obviously we're,
we're putting this out there.
Great, yeah. Thank you, uh, Mr.
Chair and, and Mr. Bauer. um,
and I think we're taking up um
special appropriations, um, in
just a few days, uh, which is
fantastic how early, uh, so
thank you, Mr. Chair. Um, but
really appreciate the work that
you guys are doing as well as uh
the rural um recruitment and
retention of attorneys. So,
thank you, Mr. Chair.
Thank you very much, Madam Vice
Chair. Uh, thanks to members for
great questions. I've got a
couple of quick things first,
just to point out members on our
page 5,
sort of reiterating what uh Mr.
Bauer is explaining the funded
vacancy rate is, uh, is
negative, -2.1%. The they are
spending the dollars pretty
effectively, um.
Number 2, Mr. Bauer, sort of in
your time there, um, we are
seeing continued investments by
the legislature. I think the
numbers we got from LFC staff
since 2019, 50% increase.
Understanding the explanation
you gave at the beginning, which
sort of shows that the
independence only began a few
years before that, um.
One quick question that we do
have uh in the specials which
we'll go into more detail is the
vice chair explained here in a
day or so, um.
A workforce capacity building,
almost $700,000 675.3,000
dollars. Is there, do you see
potential sort of overlap
between the contract funding
that you're work that the
executive provided and the
workforce capacity, are they two
different things.
That's my main question.
Could I ask our CFO to address.
Mr. Chair, um, the workforce
capacity is internal for um
attorneys.
Um, it was
provided for bonuses to get
extras, different things like
that. So that's what that
workforce capacity in the
contractual services that
specifically for our contract
attorneys. So they're very
different. Got it. Thank you.
OK, thank you.
So, um, they will, we'll wrap up
again. Great questions. We've,
and we hear the committee and
the committee's been clear over
the course of a few years that
this is a very high priority.
We'll ask for the LFC
recommendation while
acknowledging that this is a
clear area of
You know, passed, and I think
continued investment, um, the
balance between that workforce
capacity internal to the
workforce that is there and
which we can all agree we want
to continue to build that
workforce, uh, alongside what
seems like the urgent need, um.
We'll have to be mindful of and
sort of work to balance the two,
but I think we've seen again a a
history of investing and clearly
the committee wants to continue
that work, which is very
important for us to hear. So
we'll ask for the LFC. We'll
look to adjust that as we go
forward. Again, appreciate uh
you all being here and want to
appreciate.
Where we have to acknowledge the
remarkable abuse of public
trust, uh, by the previous
person who was head of this
commission, um, the sort of the
breath of fresh air to see
somebody with a story service in
so many different parts of the
justice system to see that part
coming through, frankly, for me
is, is personally very
important. Thank you.
OK, we'll ask for the LFC.
Thank you, Mr. Chair, I would
move that the committee adopt
the LFC recommendation.
It's been moved by Vice Chair
Dixon, seconded by
Representative Garrett. Is there
any opposition to that motion? I
don't see anything. Thank you
all very much.
OK,
we're gonna, I see the secretary
is here, um, we'll ask her and
her team to come on up.
Um.
Mm
Sanchez, great to see you from
LSC, um.
We'll get started and go from
there.
All right, good afternoon, Mr.
Chair members of the committee.
My name is Scott Sanchez. I'm
the analyst for public safety,
um, with me today, uh, my
counterpart from the Department
of Finance Administration, Diego
Jimenez, cabinet secretary
Alicia Depoburo
and the corrections department
CFO Mr. Ed Smith.
Um, I'm gonna go at a very high
level and then trade off to
Diego to kind of talk about some
of the executives differences,
but essentially the LFC
recommendation and Mr. can you
remind us of the
uh
uh agency code 770, um, we're
gonna be looking at
Uh, for volume 2 that begins on
page 367 to 374.
Um, there's a copy of the 4th
quarter performance report card
on volume or I'm sorry, on page
132 of volume 1, and there are
some helpful charts and graphs
that talk about things like
facility capacity, cost of
incarceration facility, uh,
population over time, and that's
in volume 3 pages 46 to 49.
See
Um, so that said, uh, again, the
LFC recommendation increases
general fund revenue to the
corrections department by a
little over $10 million or 3%,
whereas the executive
recommendation increases general
fund revenue by 15 million or
4.5%.
Programmatically, the LFC
recommendations and executive
recommendations largely focused
on covering increases in the
cost of both state-run and
privately operated prison
facilities, though it's slightly
different rates.
The main differences are that
the executive recommendation
adds $200,000 in funding to the
program support program for
staff training and recruitment
initiatives at the Corrections
Training Academy.
And adds approximately 1.7
million to increase funding for
um
My goodness, I'm sorry for uh
contract increases for
transitional living and men's
and women's recovery center, add
a little bit more color to that.
Um, essentially the only other
big difference if you'll notice
in the programs, individual P
codes is that we did try to the
LFC recommendation tried to
right size the budget for some
of the other programs in order
to shift more funding to IMAC,
which has struggled this year,
um, by basically setting a bar,
you know, 102 to 105% of FY 24
expenditures and then setting
revenue there. So with that I
give you permission, I'll head
this to Diego.
Uh, thank you, Scott. Mr. Chair
and members of the committee,
um, I believe Scott actually did
a very good job of going over
most of the primary differences
between the recommendations, as
he mentioned, you know.
There were just some, some
disagreements, I guess in in the
ways that we calculated what the
what the agencies, um, real need
is in terms of um
Really a a variety of different
items, um.
So with that, I think I'll hand
it over to the secretary.
Good afternoon, Mr. Chair,
members of the committee. I'm
Alicia Tafoya Lucero. I'm the
cabinet secretary for the
department. So you have a
PowerPoint presentation there
with you and uh recognizing that
several members of this
committee are new to this
committee. I just wanted to
provide a little bit of
information about the agency and
uh sort of who we are, so on
that first page or I guess 2nd
page you'll see uh a slide
called Corrections Department
leadership, and this is just to
show you who the people are who
are our director level
leadership.
within the agency, uh, many of
them are here, but I just want
to make clear to you all that
they are available to you not
only now but anytime that you
might need them to answer any
questions or any questions that
any of your constituents, um,
might have, so, um, I won't read
everybody's name. I mean, you
can see them sitting behind me,
but if y'all have any questions
for them, please, uh, feel free
to reach out to me directly or
to any of them. On the next
slide, uh, what you'll see are
just two maps, uh, the first one
is.
Uh, a listing of where all of
our facilities are located so
that you can see all of the, the
cities, um, in areas that are
facilities touch and so, um,
what you see here in this slide,
and I put my reading glasses on
here. Um, so we have state 8
state operated institutions.
They're located in Clayton,
Grants, Las Cruces, Los Lunas,
Roswell, Santa Fe, Santa Rosa,
and Springer. We have one
privately operated institution
in Hobbs.
And then we have another
contracted another contract with
the private institution in
Chaparral, and I say a contract
because that facility actually
houses um people like court
martials, US marshal holds, and
then we take up a portion of
that facility, but we house uh
individuals there specifically
because they have a very robust
and proprietary sex offender
treatment program, so, uh, we
keep a large percentage of our,
our, uh, sex offender population
at that location. Um, the next
little
a graphic there you'll see is a
mapping of our probation and
parole regions and so in uh the
probation and parole department,
we supervise about 14,000 people
located across the state of New
Mexico. We have 4 regions, 46
district offices located across
the state. We reach every corner
uh of of the state, and we also
have an office of Interstate
Compact and an office of uh
security threat intelligence
unit who work a lot with local
law enforcement, US marshals and
things.
Like that to do uh warrant
sweeps and other specialty, uh,
crime, um, crime sweeps across
the state, uh, one thing I
forgot to mention to you all in
that in those prison facilities
that we have, um, our population
as of today is about uh 5600 and
um.
We have a total capacity of
7,000,630 beds across the state.
Um, moving on to the next slide.
I, uh, just some real basic
general information that I
believe these gentlemen already
kind of went over, but just a
couple of bullet points for you
there to show you that the
executive recommendation, uh,
which of course we're asking for
includes a modest increase of
4.5% over our FY 25 numbers, uh,
the LFC rec is about $5 million
below the executive
recommendation and, um, as of
course you, um, Mr. Sanchez
mentioned, there is a
significant
increase in the IMAC budget
program code, which is the uh
Uh, inmate management and
control area, but there is a
reduction in all of our other
program code areas.
Uh, in the chart there, what
we're showing you is just what
our FY 25 operating budget was
what the executive
recommendation was, uh, with the
LFC recommendation was and then
we're showing you a difference
and we're breaking it down by
program code as well as
providing you a total for the
entire agency.
On the next slide, just a few uh
things and I won't read through
all of it. I'll just give you
the highlights and uh that way
we can spend a lot of time, uh,
with your questions, making sure
that we have time, uh, for, for
that, but the things that I'll
point out to you is that first
bullet where we show the
executive recommendation
provides a $1.3 million dollar
increase in iMac while the LFC
provides a recommendation that's
about $1.1 million below the
executive recommendation in that
area.
Uh, well, another one we found
was significant was that the
executive rec supports a $1.7
million dollar increase in
reentry, while the LFC actually
decreases funding in that area
by $551,000 and then while the
executive recommends a flat rate
for community offender
management, which incorporates
all of probation and parole, uh,
they
Also, uh, are being reduced by
the LFC by $1 million of flat
recommendation by the executive.
There's a couple of other things
there that you can look at, uh,
if you're interested, uh, now I
know we're talking overall
recommendation, but this was
something very significant to us
in the next slide, and I just
want to point it out to you, um,
for hopefully your review and I
have spoken with several of you,
um, at another time regarding
our supplemental request, but
what our issue is here is that
we made a request.
$7 million supplemental. It's
because we have uh some
shortfall in paying for things
like behavioral health services
and medical services, and then
we also will look be looking at
shortages in our uh salaries and
benefits for the facilities
which is under IMAC and what
we're looking at doing is some
very strict and stringent um.
Austerity measures to see what
we can do to make up this
amount, uh, but we know that we
still will not be able to cover
it with the with the budget that
we have right now and so, um,
we've come up with some
solutions for you all, um, in
order to help us fix this to
close out FY 25 and so we have 3
choices here. They're shown
there in that second part of the
side, uh, that's titled
Solutions to meet Immediate
needs, and so the first one is
that uh perhaps you all
adopting the executive
recommendation, which includes
uh the $7 million supplemental
that we asked for out of general
fund and funds it fully, uh, in
the next option, we are already
implementing cost strategy
savings in the areas of salaries
and benefits trying to figure
out where we can, uh, cut costs
in that area. Maybe not ordering
things that we might need to
stock our warehouses with, uh,
and other things of that nature,
so we're thinking that if we do
all of those things and we keep
doing them throughout the rest
of the year that perhaps we can
drop that knee down from 7
million to 5 and um with that we
would ask that you fund a $5
million supplemental
appropriation instead of the 7
that we asked for, of course,
General Fund is preferable and
in the last area you see that as
an absolute alternative to that.
We do have other state funds
available in the penitentiary
income fund that could be tapped
in the event that there was
absolutely no way to get general
fund.
to cover that $5 million
appropriation, so any support
from you uh in the area to cover
that supplemental would be, uh,
very much, uh, appreciated and
and is quite necessary.
Uh, the next slide, and I'm just
gonna go over it real quick to
give you an idea of what we're
looking to do. This is not
something that we included in
our original budget. It's not
something that's included in the
executive or in the LFC, um, but
what it is is uh we're asking
for an increase in our
essentially spending limits for
corrections industries, which is
an enterprise fund within our
department that uh does self
sustaining work. They provide a
vocational training, meaningful
work activities, and they
produce goods in.
services, uh, well, building
work skills and social skills
for inmate populations in all of
our facilities, and the reason
that we're asking for this
increase is because we're
looking at doing a strategic
shift within corrections
industries in the area of
commissary operations, so right
now, commissary is operated by a
private vendor and we believe
that we can do it cheaper
thereby saving the inmates money
and uh their and their families
and uh what these are.
are just items that are sort of
extras, uh, things that inmates
might wanna buy like specialty
hygiene items or candy bars and
and various things of that
nature, uh, but as I said right
now, uh, we're using a private
vendor and so in order to have
the ability, uh, the purchasing
power to buy on a large enough
scale to provide commissary
services across the state, we
would need to increase our
budget there. We're asking for
that to be increased by $5
million. This is just not
something that we thought about
originally when we were
preparing.
our budget, so I'm just bringing
it to you for hopeful
consideration in, uh, your
preparation of House Bill 2, and
then, uh, the last slide is just
to show you some comparison
between previous budget
appropriations and our
population, which is growing now
and uh we are seeing that the
sentencing commission is
projecting that we will see uh
an additional increase, um, in
the next coming year and uh this
number, of course, presumes the
remain.
er of FY 25, um, it's really
just for your, your visual. I
won't go over it in any greater
detail. Um, a couple of things I
did not mention that I want to
bring up before I get to
questions are a couple areas
that our agency, uh, has within
it that I, uh, I just didn't, I
didn't mention, but we uh
established a division of
reentry. We created a new budget
program code back in 2020, I
think it was. It actually came
on the books about
Y 23 and essentially what it did
was it took services out of
community offender management,
which is probation and parole,
and inmate management and
control, which is essentially
the prisons. It combines some of
those duties and functions in
order for us to make sure that
not only our administration, but
everybody who runs the
corrections department moving
forward will always focus on
reentry needs, reentry
preparation, uh, things like
education, vocational training,
and that.
release planning process and the
reason being is that because
when I started in this role, I
had actually been with the
department uh for a number of
years. I had started out with
the agency in 2001 as a
classification officer and had
seen many iterations of reentry
work coming and going. At one
point, I think the department
had a position called the
reentry Czar, but it didn't last
very long and funding kind of
comes and goes, and then we'd
get a grant and then it would
leave and the agency just.
never put reentry first and I
wanted to make sure that it was
something that would always
happen, uh, moving forward and
so, uh, in that area we cover
all of our education, uh, is
covered through there. There's a
lot of combined work that takes
place between reentry and
corrections industries where
we'll teach inmates skills and
then we'll create jobs where we
sell those products or services
uh to nonprofit organizations
and government entities, um, in.
In order to give inmates real
life skills, opportunities, uh,
to learn trades and uh and part
of that is through reentry and
another part of that is through
corrections industries, but now
because you're able to provide
funding separately to that area,
it will ensure that it remains a
priority for the department
moving forward and uh with that,
Mr. Chair, I will stand for
questions. Great, thank you, uh,
Madam Secretary. Thank you to
the analysts and great to have
your team here. We're gonna
start with Representative Silva.
ranking member of Chatfield and
then go from there.
Thank you, chair. Uh, thank you,
Cabinet secretary and others for
the presentation. um, I
represent, uh, the part of Otero
County that includes Chaparral,
um, and so when I thank you for
the work out there. I have a few
questions. Um, how does one
generate an estimate for future
prison populations. Thank you,
chair.
Mr. Chair and Representative
Silva. So the sentencing
commission is they're they're,
I'm, I'm, I think they've
presented to you all, but
essentially they are
statisticians and policy
experts, and they take intake
numbers from us. They take
conviction rates from the courts
and um I'm not a researcher, so
this is just like my loose
estimation of how they gather
that information, um, but they
use that data to project
forward, um, and I think it has
a lot to do.
with conviction rates in various
areas and particularly the
second judicial, which is such a
large area that it it tends to
feed uh the prison population
for a lot of the state.
OK. Thank you. And um I'm in our
volume 2, page 368. Um, it says
that on facility usage, um, that
there are restrictions based on
custody level that hamper
consolidation in the inmate
population.
And um am I to assume that
there's specific requirements
about how to classify and house
specific um
People in prison.
Mr. Chair Representative Sylvie
absolutely, yes. So we use uh an
objective criteria, several
objective criteria, 9, to look
into the placement of an
individual when they come into
the facility. And so the things
that we're looking at are the
severity of the offense, whether
that person has a uh shown
violent behavior while they've
been incarcerated, um, we're
looking at a potential escape
history behavior while they've
been incarcerated gang
affiliation, age, uh, and just
general.
Behavior and work performance
while they're inside and we
recently underwent a study with
the University of New Mexico
Institute for Social Research
where they relooked at our
system, uh, we made some changes
to it so that we would make sure
we weren't overclassifying
people, um, but essentially
people are placed in the housing
level that's most appropriate
based on their risk to uh offend
while they're incarcerated.
Thank you. Thank you, chair. And
so, the, it sounds like you're
also trying to consolidate the
inmate population, but there's
restrictions to that based on
custody levels. And what I'm
trying to figure out is later in
um in this analysis that the uh
corrections department
classification system has not
been substantively updated since
2003. And so I'm trying to
figure out is what's really ham
bringing the ability for
corrections department to
consolidate its inmate
population. Is that the
restrictions, um, based on
custody level or is it the fact
that um the classification
system hasn't been updated in
over 20 years. Thank you, chair.
Um, Mr. Chair, Representative
Silva. So no, as I mentioned, we
did just recently update. I
believe it was last year that we
updated the uh classification
system, so what you're looking
at might be pre that study, uh,
pre the changes that we made
there as far as consolidation, I
don't know exactly what that is
referring to, but I will say
that we do have vacancies in
several of our facilities and
some of them have large uh
vacancies, but I'll I'll also
say that we've done that
intentionally, and that has to
do.
with the security needs at
certain locations, uh, one of
the examples is the Santa Rosa
facility which capacity is about
600, but we have about 300
people there. It has nothing to
do with the fact that we don't
have level 3s. It has largely to
do with the fact that our
staffing levels are lower there
than what we believe would be
safe to house uh a full
population.
Great.
Thank you, Cabinet secretary.
Um, how old is this data from
Um, the LFC, like how.
Thank you, Chair. Madam Chair
Representative Silva, most of
the information that we have
came to us over the course of
the summer, so we didn't really
analyze anything received after
uh July 1, you know, we
typically reserve that for the
next year's analysis, um.
But I mean, we did a program
evaluation over the summer that
we published about, you know,
everything from the re-entry
division, but we'd looked a
little bit at the classification
issues. I mean, these are issues
that were flagged in the ISR
report that came out in March,
and while they changed some
practices as a result of that,
and we largely stand by the
Claims that we made in our
volume to analysis that, you
know, there, there are issues
with the way the classification
takes place, zapping is an issue
as far as consolidating the
prisons. I mean, ideally, you,
you wouldn't have facilities
that are half full operating,
you know, in various corners of
the state, far away from all the
services they need, but that's
the reality based on where the
people who are willing to be
CEOs are.
Thank you. Thank you, chair. Uh,
one more question. Um,
I'm wondering if um the contract
rates for the two private
facilities that we have of the
contract, have the contract
rates changed or been adjusted
at all since, say, 2020. Thank
you, chair.
Um, Mr. Chair Representative
Silva, uh, certainly we, uh, do
a per diem increases almost
every, well, whenever we have
the funding to do what we do a
per diem increase for our
private contractors.
Thank you, chair. What does that
mean?
Um, Mr. Chair Representative so
I apologize per diem increase
means that we, uh, have as built
in part of our contract that if
we are appropriated the dollars
that we will increase the amount
of money that they get paid per
inmate per day or whatever it is
that there are specific contract
requires.
Uh, in, in this case, uh, 2% a
year is what the increase has
been.
Excellent, um, OK, thank you.
That's all. Thank you, chair.
Thank you very much
Representative Silva. Next we
have ranking member Chatfield,
please.
Thank you, Mr. Chair.
No, I was just looking down
through here what they were a
little bit short on and, and,
and one of them is, uh,
Behavioral health services. I
think we just put a lot of money
statewide to keep people out of
prison. Uh, we need to put a
little bit of money into
Taking care of those people that
are in prison because we already
know that they've got a
behavioral health problem they
got him put in jail, right? So,
uh, let's not neglect that. I
see that one of the other things
is security staff.
And um
I'll tell you, if you're short
on typists, well, it's a problem
because it increases your
workload, but if you're in
short on prison guards, it's a
problem. It's dangerous. In
fact, I know in the, in the uh
Clayton facility when it was
private owned if you were short
staffed, it, there was a huge
fine involved. And uh I think
the Clayton facility part of the
time was getting fined more than
they were getting paid, so it
wasn't very profitable. Uh, and
there's a reason for that
because it's dangerous to be
short-staffed. I believe we've
had a, a couple of incidents in
our prisons where a person was
killed, and that was at a
facility that was short staffed
in and I will try to go back and
whoever it was, but cause I
don't know, but I know that that
has been a problem in the past,
so I think we need to, to, uh,
Take care of the mental health
of these people. We need to get
them the help that they need so
that they can lead healthy,
productive lives. We need to
staff these prisons so that the
people that work there are safe
and the people outside are safe
and uh the uh
Down here, the corrections, the
Cost-effective approach to, uh,
rehabilitation, correcting
corrections industry. You know,
I think one of the best way to
keep people out of jail is to
teach them, teach them a trade,
teach them how to make a living
cause then they don't have to
steal to earn money, right? They
don't have to sell drugs to make
money. They have a trade, they
can sell that skill, and they
can have money, they can be
proud of themselves. It gives
them a self good self-image. It
gives them a way to make a
living and support their
families, so they don't want to
go to jail.
So I think that when you let
somebody out of jail, the, the
tool that they need is a skill.
They need a skill to be able to
make a living. This program
apparently is a self-funded
program. They make enough money
to fund themselves, uh, anybody
that messes with public uh
funding knows that you need, you
need, need several things. One
of the things that you need is
money.
The other thing that you need is
budget. So what I hear is
they've got the money they need
from us the permission to spend
it or the budget. So, uh, Mr.
Chair, I would ask that we could
go back and just take a little
look at this, uh, I know that's,
that's, uh,
we've asked that on several
things, but that's what we do.
And I would like to see that
these people
Uh
They're trying to do a good job.
I think they're doing a pretty
good job.
And I'd like to see us make sure
that they have the tools to do,
do a good job. Thank you, Mr.
Chair.
Thank you very much for bringing
member Chatfield. Next, we're
gonna go to represent Herndon
and then represented them.
Thank you, Mr. Chair, and thank
you, Madam Secretary, for your
presentation today and I, Mr.
Chair and Madam Secretary, I'm
most interested in the fact that
you have such a strong uh
support for the reentry program
and my question to you in which
I didn't see any uh any
information regarding the um
I think it's in your program
regarding your uh
Analysis, your performance
measures, like how many of the
members who are in prison now
actually complete their GED.
And so if you don't have that
information now, it would be
good to uh to find out and then
are you utilizing all of the
funds, Mr. Chair and Madam
Secretary, that is given to you
for uh purposes of helping those
individuals while they're in
prison to uh actually be
prepared for maybe some sort of
job or profession once they
leave, uh, and with that
respect, Mr. Chair and Madam
Secretary, looking at what the
goodwill industries is trying to
do now.
With respect to uh helping
individuals who have been
previously incarcerated to be
prepared for some sort of skills
trade.
Um, Mr. Chair, Representative
Herndon. All right, let me, uh,
let me try to take that in
order. So the first thing the
GED, um, there's people sitting
behind me who definitely know
that percentage, and I hope
they're digging it up right now,
but I do want to say that we
have increased the number of
high school equivalencies earned
by huge amounts. Well, here's
Scott showing me some tiny text.
All right. 75%.
And so we're up to 236, um,
it's, it's crazy amazing there
were years where we got
somewhere in the neighborhood of
30, uh, equivalencies a year, it
was just terrible and I, I don't
exactly know what was going on
there, but I will say now that
we have really emphasized the
high school equivalency because
we know that it's one of the
factors that, uh, directly
affects recidivism and directly
affects a person's success when
they get out of.
prison and our numbers have been
really incredible and we've beat
ourselves a year after year, but
more moreover, we've also
received more high school
equivalencies than any institute
of Adult learning in the state 2
years in a row and so uh we're
very proud of those numbers and
um I would love to send you some
of the links to the stories and
some of the coverage that we've
received in that area, uh, now
as far as people and vocational
training, um.
So this is something that was
close to nil when I first
arrived at the department. It's
been a big deal because you all
have mentioned it and I believe
we've talked about it in the
past where a lot of these people
would leave prison and they
might get some basic job skills,
but you know, knowing how to do
one little thing that's gonna
get you a a a minimum wage job.
That's not necessarily something
that's going to keep you out of
prison, uh, I mean a lot of the
people that end up incarcerated
are there because they didn't
have uh.
A legitimate means of of making
money and so we've really worked
hard to increase vocational
training everywhere. We work
really closely with the
Department of Workforce
Solutions, we've been able to
get Yowa funding, uh, for a lot
of different areas, so some of
the services are uh programs
rather that we offer now we have
like heavy equipment operation
and uh CDL simulators that
several of our facilities and in
fact at our Springer facility,
uh, where we house uh low
custody women.
We even have partnership with
RLD where they will come out to
the facility and actually
conduct the test watching the
women operate the forklifts and
the backhoes and what have you
and certify them before they
leave anybody who's
participating in that program,
we have a really great CDL
program in Roswell where they
actually are uh able to drive
the actual trucks, it's not just
a SIM, it's an actual, the
actual vehicle where you have a
a large enough uh campus there
with a a perimeter fence that
allows us to do that.
We're doing an HVAC program in
both uh the Otero County
facility in Chaparral and now in
the Santa Fe County facility. I
mean Sanoe County, Santa Fe, the
penitentiary of New Mexico, um,
we have uh partnerships working
with uh chef Ruise, um, I, many
of you are familiar with that. I
believe I invited several of you
to join us for dinner at our
prison where uh he's teaching
inmates how to cook using his
fabulous culinary skills, and
then he's offering them jobs.
when they get out. Now these are
just a few examples of some of
the things that we're doing, but
these are all things that were
nonexistent completely
nonexistent before and uh I, I
just our, our staff, they're
really hustling and, you know,
everybody who's part of of the
reentry team really 100%
believes in these programs and
uh I hope I didn't miss any of
your questions. Well, thank you
Mr. Chair and Madam Secretary,
just two other quick follow-up
questions with respect to those
uh individuals who are trying to
be uh receiving a trade.
So, uh, Mr. Chair and Madam
Secretary, the question became,
how do they get their license
because in some instances you
cannot be imprisoned and you
cannot have been in an offender.
And so the question was, how
does the criminal offender
rehabilitation Act work to
support that and are those
individuals actually able to get
their license.
Mr. Chair Representative, you
know, that's a thing that can be
tough, and I'll tell you why. A
few years back we introduced
legislation or we became part of
legislation to remove this
terminology, moral turpitude,
um, it was specifically from
people to be able to get a
barber's and cosmetologist's
license, and so it went through
there, but here's what happened.
It was like this weird
unintended consequence, and so I
think we might need to look at
the the uniform, um, licensure
code at some point in the
future.
But what we ended up seeing
happening was that not just that
like not just that board, uh,
but other boards and commissions
started adding specific crimes
to exclude people from being
licensed in those various areas,
so we are looking into jobs and
areas where we believe that
those aren't hindrances, but
because they're boards and
commissions, they can change
their rules kind of, you know,
kind of regularly with public
comment and whatever they have
to go through to get their rules
changed.
So there have been times
certainly where we've gotten
people to the point of licensure
and then we're told, oh, they
can't apply or they don't
qualify and so that is
definitely something that we're
concerned about that maybe we
can talk about offline for
legislation, uh, in the future.
Thank you, Mr. Chan. Thank you,
Madam Secretary. I think that
would be really important if
we're trying to help these
individuals. I, I do commend you
on your hire Mr. Byron Brown as
your new director of reentry,
that is absolutely great.
a connection. Also, the fact
that Goodwill Industries, I keep
bringing them up, working on a
reentry program and I just bring
up one final program uh for your
consideration. You don't have to
uh respond to this one right
now, Madam Chair, I mean, uh,
Madam Secretary, Mr. uh Chair is
with respect to those
individuals who are incarcerated
now, sometimes they feel like
they are not being treated
correctly or being heard, and
when they file complaints,
they're supposed to be a process
where they complaint is heard,
but it's not
always happening. So Madam
Chair, Mr. uh, I mean, Mr.
Chair, Madam Secretary, I just
hope that you'll look into that
and just make sure that the
process is working like it's
supposed to, if I may, uh, so
we, we, I do hear you and it has
been a concern, right? So what
we did in order to address that
is that we created a new
position that we are calling the
inmate advocates and so, um, and
there might be one of facility,
maybe two facilities that don't
have that position filled right
now, um, but we.
hired people specifically the
job titles they may advocate. We
did get a whole lot of different
types of that, uh, applicants.
It's been very successful so
far, so if you don't come across
any um any clients or or
constituents that have concerns.
I would love for you to just
please reach out to me directly
and and I'll help you deal with
any of that. It's also helpful
for me to know where those
failures are happening and uh on
Goodwill we do work with them
and we are looking forward to
expansion. Thank you. Thank you,
Mr. Chair. Thank you,
Representative Herndon.
next we have representative
down.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Thank
you, Madam Secretary. Um, do
you, are, are you guys asking
for pay increases for the
correction officers?
Uh, Mr. Chair, Representative
Doo, we are not asking for
increases for correctional
officers this time around, um,
we have asked for that for the
last several years and uh, you
know, of course we've gotten
some, we've gotten the regular
legislative appropriations, but
uh, we, we did seek, I believe
it was an 8% last year. We
didn't put that in our budget
request this year just because
we knew how short we were and we
thought that uh we had best.
shore up just being able to pay
salaries at all, uh, let alone
increased salaries. OK, thank,
thank you, Mr. Chair, and our
I was out for 2 years. I know
there was an effort to include
correction officers in uh the
same eligibility for PTSD as EMT
or law enforcement officers. Has
that been resolved?
I'm assuming, I'm assuming the
answer is no since you.
Mr. Chair Representative Dao,
actually I do think that it was,
but I'm not 100%, so as I'm
talking, I've got some people
researching it and I hope to get
you an answer before we finish
here. OK, thank you, Mr. Chair.
Thank you, Secretary. I know
that rise is a program under
courts and Corrections, courts
were here and they said it's not
necessarily directing under
them? Is it under you?
The RISE program.
Uh, Mr. Chair Representative
Dao, that is not us at all. That
is just jail. It's all, it's all
specific to the jail. OK. All
right. Thank you. I, I just need
to learn more about that and
thank you, Mr. Chair and
secretary, you're asking for
money for behavioral health and
medical services. Are you
billing Medicaid and Medicare?
Uh, Mr. Chair and
Representative, no, but that's
because we're not allowed to, so
incarcerated people cannot get
Medicaid, Medicare, however, uh,
recently with the 11:14 or.
11:15 waiver. I remember the
number. Um, we did get approval
for uh Medicaid to be uh
implemented at 90 days out,
however, we are working right
now with the healthcare
authority and we're learning
that there are quite a few
restrictions, so it wouldn't
cover everything. We're being
told it would cover very certain
specific things like medications
or equipment, prosthetics,
things of that nature, uh, but
we will be looking in the summer
to implement that with the
guidance of
HCA as they figure out the
details. Thank you. Thank you,
Mr. Chair and thank you
Secretary. So our, our high risk
insurance pool that's for people
who are uninsurable for any
other method does not apply
here.
OK.
OK. Um
Mr. Chairman and Madam
Secretary, I, I, I think most of
the people who are coming before
us are asking for around 4% or
more. So I think the 2%
adjustment on the per diem is
less than what we're seeing
state agencies asking for that
you're the the contract
adjustments on your private, um,
so I, I just thought that was a
cost savings, it sounds like, or
at least it's not as much as the
state agencies are asking for.
It's just a comment. And then,
um, I'm really, really glad to
hear.
that you're doing the
alternative high school, I think
the GED after it's been revised
a couple of years ago, is almost
impossible for someone. It it
means you're college ready, and
we know that like 70% of our
traditional high school
graduates are having to take
remedial classes. I couldn't
imagine what it would be like
for a population that may or may
not have thrived in traditional
schooling at GED just seems
almost unattainable. It means
they're college bound. It means
they're college ready. So I'm
really glad to hear that you're
doing the alternative. I'm
Um
I had heard that.
Your nurses or behavioral health
providers, psychiatrists, that
because of your financial
constraints that they are no
longer allowed to have two
people going with them at the
most dangerous facilities,
working with the most at-risk
inmates are.
Is that not true? Do they, they
do have security and they are
safe in their.
When they're meeting with
inmates. Um, Mr. Chair,
Representative Doo, you know, so
we, even in the situation where
we don't have a say of, you
know, full staffing at a certain
location, especially in those
high risk locations that I mean
we use over time and so we'll
put out a voluntary overtime bid
and actually escorting a medical
provider tends to be one of the
more desirable positions for
people to take on voluntary
overtime and so even if we don't
have the position filled.
so to speak, we do still fill it
with uh overtime coverage and I
do believe that those folks are
safe in our facilities.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. I'm just,
I'll just run through these
indicators that's sticking out
to me. It looks like your
average um vacancy rate is
hovering around 29, 30% if you
go back a couple of years, um,
and then for your probation
parole officers around 20%, that
seems really high. Um,
The eligible students that are
earning the equivalency has gone
to over 75%. That's awesome.
That's a really great, great
indicator. I'm wondering why
only less than half or I mean,
even 20% from 25%. What is going
on with sex offenders not
receiving uh sex offender
treatment. Why is that rate so
low? And can you tell me the
difference just to save time,
the difference between referred
and engaged because you have a
high referral rate with the
engagement rate looks low.
Uh, Mr. Chair, Representative
Doo. So we don't have as much
capacity for specific sex
offender treatment as we would
like. I mean, I mentioned
earlier that we have that
proprietary contact in Otero
County for sex offender
treatment. That doesn't mean
that all of the sex offenders in
the state are housed at Otero
because you know we only have so
many beds there. We have been
talking with them though about
either purchasing their
curriculum or uh contracting
with their providers to come
over to our Las Cruces facility
where
also have levels uh for and 2,
so we believe if they're willing
to do that, we would be able to
serve a higher population of
people. We did move several of
our lower custody sex offenders
to the Las Cruces area to uh
potentially engage in that
treatment. We're just looking at
it because of the proximity that
maybe those same providers would
be able to provide the service
there, um, and we're just trying
to figure that out what engaged
versus uh the other word it
means.
that they're essentially they're
waiting for a space in the
program and in some cases
though, it means that people
don't want to participate and
that does definitely happen, um,
I, I think that the curriculum
now is much more user friendly
than what it was at one point
and so I'm starting to see more
people have a desire to be
engaged in the program, then
what was previous, uh, they felt
like there was a lot of blaming
and negative energy about the
curriculum, but they have made
some real significant changes
that um we see.
seem to be getting different
feedback from the participants
now. Thank you, thank you, thank
you, Mr. Chair and thank you
Secretary and just again,
congratulations. It says that
100% on a couple of years
running of employee union
grievances were resolved prior
to arbitration. So I just want
to point out something positive.
Thank you. Thank you, uh,
Representative Do. Great
questions. Next, we're gonna go
to representative Baca, then
represent Gary. Thank you, Mr.
Chairman and thank you for your
presentation. Just so you guys,
I will be asking questions or
LLC highlight, page 2, and
working my way down.
OK. Uh, Mr. Chairman and, uh,
secretary, I, I represent uh
Valencia County, so central New
Mexico, um.
So, um,
Uh, can you tell me, and again,
and I know you've presented it.
Looking at the transfer data of
PS middle of the page that graph
right there.
Uh, fiscal year 2223. What was
the reasons for those big
numbers.
And uh
How, how do, how are we able to
get those back until
Uh, Mr. Chairman, Representative
Baca.
Um, the, the majority of those
large ones were moving money
from personal services to
contractual services for
shortfalls in the medical
services contract for the it
makes medical services. Um,
also, we were doing some large
um construction projects that
were outside of Capital Outlay,
so we were moving some money in
the 400s to, you know, finish up
some capital projects as well as
covering, you know, inmate food
costs have gone up a lot.
And the utilities, we're having
some issues. We're skyrocketing
for a couple of years, so mostly
covering just facility expenses
and the medical services.
Uh, thank you for answering.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. The
other, I'm gonna go down to the
next paragraph down there,
vacancies and facility usage,
OK?
Uh, Mr. Chairman, when we talk
about
In closing or entire units as
far as housing units. What
percentage of our facilities are
being utilized for
Um, for inmates.
Is it vary through, I, I, we've
talked about Clayton, but can
you just overall as a state
rough estimate.
What percentage of
facilities are in use. Yeah, I
can tell you that with our
capacity of 7600 beds we have
5600 fields as of right now, um,
in Santa Rosa we've got, as I
said, half the facility shut in
at the penitentiary in Santa Fe.
It's 3 separate institutions. We
have one of them fully shut in,
uh, let's see Central and Los
Lunas, we have two full housing
units and the level one facility
shut, so there are several areas
where we're not staffing them,
uh, beds are beds are.
empty in those areas, so, um,
you know, as you can see we do
have quite a, a significant
vacancy rate, but, uh, as I
showed in that one slide we do
expect that our population is
increasing and will continue to
do so.
Representative Barca, I would
refer you to page 46 of our
volume 3, this uh talks about
capacity and population of
correctional facilities, at
least according to the data that
we had a couple of months ago,
approximately 73% of beds were
filled, um, that includes, you
know, um, public prison
facilities being only about 70%
full private facilities will be
about 83%. Thank you for that
answer and thank you, Mr.
Chairman. The other, and I'm
looking at this on the bottom
here.
When we're talking about vacancy
rates of 30.5 and 34.8%
respectively.
Um
Madam Chair, sorry, I, I
thought, Metature with this one
of what's been communicated to
me.
is a lot of overtime as, you
know, we, with fewer staff.
We have many of our
Correctional officers
Working longer hours, which
Not only um could be physically
taxing, but also leads to
retention and recruitment
issues, so can you, can you tell
me
Madam, uh, Madam Chair and Madam
Secretary. What types of
activities are you as a
department.
Taking to ensure that our
Correctional officers and other
staff working in these
facilities.
Have, are, are being, are being
maintained and also that we're
uh going out and recruiting
them.
To fill those positions. Madam
Chair Representative Baca. So
one of the issues we've talked
about a lot here today is the
capacity situation, right? So
there's really two facilities
where we have significant um
staff shortages, and that would
be Santa Fe, the penitentiary of
New Mexico, as well as Santa
Rosa. The rest of the facilities
have a much better percentages
as far as vacancies are
concerned, and so what we're
doing to try to balance that out
is movement of population and so
as I
mentioned before, right, where
we have huge vacancies right now
in Santa Fe. We also have an
entire prison closed, and so
that means that we're not
needing as many staff as we
would need there. The reason you
still see the vacancy rates you
see there is because we don't
take those positions off our
books just because the facility
shut, we know we may need to
reopen it. There may need be a
need for those beds, um, but we
try to make sure that we keep
the vacancies where we keep them
specifically for purposes of
maintaining safety, not burning
people out.
on overtime, that doesn't mean
there's not overtime, of course
there, there's overtime like in
any 24 hour a day staffed area,
um, a lot of that over time is
voluntary, so people are
choosing to take on those extra
ships. That's not always true.
Of course there's uh sometimes
mandatory shifts that need to be
filled, um, but I do believe
that because of the vacancies
that we have right now, we are
able to maintain a safe balance
of where the staff are, uh,
placed versus where there needed
to be so.
we're not burning people out,
um, and then as far as
recruitment methods, we are
doing all kinds of things. I
mean, we're everywhere. I, I
hope you've seen our
advertisements, commercials, uh,
all over the place, New Mexico,
United, the university, New
Mexico, NMSU, the high school
sports association everywhere
where we think we might be able
to pick up some population or
recruitment staff are going out
to high schools all over the
place. We're working with Nimi
to try to see what we can do
about picking up there, uh, high
school graduates before they go
into.
state police, they come to us
first, so we have a lot of
different efforts in place for
recruitment. We are seeing that
it's increasing our class sizes
and we are definitely seeing
improvements on our retention
numbers as well.
Thank you, Madam Chair and thank
you for your answers.
Thank you. Uh, we're gonna move
to Representative Garrett and
then Representative Herrera.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Thank
you for the presentation. Um, I
would ask, uh, Representative
Herndon asked some of my
questions about the
apprenticeship type training. I
would just ask if we can track
it, like the specific, uh.
Professions that were feeding
into it, how this goes, so we
have a uh an awareness of which,
which lines of uh future
industries are getting the most
attention and where are they
located? Do we need to expand
them to other locations and um I
like the fact the percentages
are helpful, but I never know
the percentage of how many. Uh,
so it's helpful and
And it may be readily, it must
be readily available if we can
get not just percentages like
30% of participating students
completed adult education, or
15%. Well, 15% of 40, 15% of
300, it would just be helpful to
track up as we have these 5600s.
And then my other question is on
page 368 of volume 2, it says
substance abuse remains a key
driver of recidivism can never
say that word, recidivism,
however, access to treatment is
inconsistent and programming
faces capacity constraints. So
we know that behavior health is
a huge driver of white people
end up in prison. Um, what is
being done to improve.
Ace
access
and expand capacity.
Uh, Madam Chair, Representative
Garrett, thank you. So the first
area, the tracking of the
apprenticeship. I just want to
mention that, you know, uh, one
of the things Mr. Sanchez
mentioned was the study that the
LFC did uh of our reentry
division this past summer, and
that was actually one of the
things that they brought up, and
we also determined that it was a
a significant shortcoming of
ours. Well, with Senate Bill 58
from a few years back, they just
recently added some additional
tracking mechanisms that
require.
uh now that individual not only
individual participation
tracking, but the follow
through. I'm sure you've seen
our Senate Bill 58 responses.
They're very thorough and
complete, uh, but since that
change has happened, we are now
tracking that and so, uh, you
know, hopefully that is
something that we will be able
to show you, not hopefully we
will be able to show it to you,
uh, and then the next thing I
hear you on the denominator and
we will see what we can do about
making sure that you have that
complete picture, uh, and then
on that last thing with
substance use and.
Access. I mean, it's definitely
an issue, right? I think it's an
issue all over the place. We're
talking about it a bunch,
especially this session in all
the conversations that we're
having about behavioral health.
So one of the things that I'll
say, and I think we all know is
just community members is that
there's a really significant
shortage of providers in those
areas, and I would say there's
probably even fewer of those
people that want to work in
prison, so, um, with that said,
we are working a couple of
different things. One of them is
that we're talking with our
contractor about expansion of.
The number of those types of
service providers that they can
bring in, um, as part of the
contract because they have
nationwide resources, whereas of
course we have local resources
only, um, but I think the more
important area that we are going
to be able to see uh some
significant change and really be
able to move the needle is with
expansion of our peer mentorship
work inside, so where, uh, I
mean a lot of programs out there
in the world like AA and NA use
nothing but peers, right? And so
we
we're, we're looking at
different ways where we can use
existing program curriculum, but
instead of having to have a
licensed person in every single
one of the classrooms, we can
have peer leaders in the
classrooms and we do have lots
of peers trained throughout our
facilities. We get some people
we get trained out of um this
program that we have uh for
religious services, but these
folks are getting associate's
degrees, bachelor's degrees in
theological studies and then
they're coming into our
facility.
and they're serving as mentors,
they're teaching classes,
they're holding up various
non-denominational religious
services in our facilities and
uh really making a difference
direct, you know, peer to peer
and a lot a lot of our work with
Project Echo and uh of course
now we're also working with the
Opry, which is the office of
peer recovery and engagement
through HCA, uh, to get our
people trained inside so that
they can be the ones
administering these programs.
where we have shortages, so in
that model I envision a
therapist grading all of the
various pods and cohorts, but
that the primary instructor be
an incarcerated individual.
So we're just trying to be
creative about uh how we're
expanding our services without
resources.
Uh, thank you, and I think there
were some additional comments.
Representative Garrett. So we
recognize and we're, we lot in,
in our recommendation, some of
the work that the corrections
departments has done to increase
access to programming and fear
support's great. We definitely
understand the need for it and,
you know, we look forward to
seeing more of the actual data
tracking around what's happening
with Project Echo.
But most effective treatment for
Substance use disorder, as we've
seen in multiple reports as
medication-assisted treatment
and statutes were passed that
have, you know, required that
that be offered to people that
are incarcerated.
That's been a slow project to
get going, and you'll see in our
special appropriation section,
whenever we get to that later on
in the calendar.
We did appropriate the LFC
rather did appropriate money for
that purpose, um, but we're
working with the agency to
figure out what their
implementation plan is because
that's ultimately gonna be the
number one thing that this body
can do to help affect access to
that treatment for people in
prison.
Thank you very much.
Thank you, Representative. Uh,
next we'll have Representative
Herrera and then Representative
Brown.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Uh,
thank you, secret, um, Lucero, I
have been a fan of yours since
the first time I ever heard you
speak.
Um, having said that, can you
just remind me what the cost of
private versus state operated
prisons is.
Um, Mr. Chair and Representative
Vedetta, I believe Mr. Smith is
looking for that in the book,
but I will tell you that state
operated facilities are more
expensive than privately
operated and yes, Madam Chair,
Representative, the average cost
per per day in the in the public
facilities is uh
$169 a day and then the
privates, it's $121 a day. Thank
you very much for that. Uh, I
also, uh, noted, uh, if you
would elaborate on this, the um
Uh, that you want to um.
Reinvest on the uh the uh
commission commissaries, I
forget how to pronounce that,
um, but I think that is a real
racket, so I'm thrilled that
you're going in there and gonna
try and change that around. Can
you just talk more about that?
Yes, definitely, Madam Chair
Representative Vita thank you uh
for giving me the opportunity to
talk a little bit more about
that area, uh, so I have this
amazing director who runs the
corrections industries division.
You'll see his picture there on
that slide there, uh, Mr. James
Yates, but he is just a real get
things done kind of person,
right? And so as he's been
working in that area. He's gone
in, he studied where are we, um,
able to make real significant
changes for inmates, and he
comes upon this area and says,
you know, I
know I can do better and how can
I do better? I want to bring
these prices down. I want to
make sure we're giving people
work opportunities and uh so we
sat down and said, well, how,
how are we gonna make that
happen and what it really comes
down to is he doesn't have the
buying power to do it right now,
um, so that's why we're looking
for that increase just so that
he can have that buying power,
but ultimately we want to make
almost no profit, right? We want
to only make enough profit to
pay the inmates in the warehouse
and to make sure that we're able
to buy enough product to supply.
Uh, the inmates and pay any of
the employees that are working
in that area, but you know right
now and and anytime really when
you're working with a vendor
like that where their purpose is
um, is profit, uh, we won't be
seeking profit. What we'll be
seeking is enough profit to
maintain operations to reinvest
that money, but more importantly
to bring those prices as far
down as we can.
Uh, thank you, secretary, and
thank you, Madam Chair, and just
for those of you who don't know,
um.
I, I had a person in prison that
was a friend, and you know, they
want money and they want money
to buy these candy bars really
or stuff at the prison and
honest to God, for a $25 box,
maybe they get $3 worth of
stuff. It's just ridiculous.
It's it's really horrendous what
this these private companies
charge and um, you know, I
thought they'd get something,
you know, it was ridiculous and,
and it's very difficult to do
that.
So I don't, I'm just curious why
it's gonna cost $5 million. Is
that to stock up at for your
prison population all over the
state, cuz that sounds expensive
to me, but you know, I've never
run.
Commissaries either, so what do
I know? Madam Chair
Representative Verea. So the 5
million would be for the program
overall and it's not just covers
commissary, although we do
believe that that's where we'll
need the major uh uh purchasing
power, but in corrections
industries, they also do things
like metal work and carpentry,
and so it would allow us to buy
raw materials in all of those
areas weaving and in fact, uh,
I'm since I'm still talking
about corrections industries,
one of the things I didn't
mention, but I find
very exciting is that we
recently opened a store that a
little storefront that's open to
the public. It's out on Highway
14 by where the buffaloes used
to be, um, right by our
administrative office. It's
called Old Gumby's Country Store
and what we sell there are
products that are all inmate
made, so some of it's made by
hobby craft painting and uh um
crochet and various little art
projects that people do, but it
also sells work from our shop,
so we do custom metal work and
carpentry and a variety of.
different things like that.
We're open a couple times a
month right now, so I'll make
sure that you all know the next
date that we're open, so, um,
maybe you can stop by and check
it out.
Uh, thank you, Madam Secretary,
thank you, Madam Chair, that's
all I have.
Thank you, Representative Brown.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Madam
Secretary, I really appreciate
the clarity of your answers, um,
and your enthusiasm as well. Um,
Mount Che I, um, do have a
question for the secretary about
recidivism rates. I read here
that the national recidivism
rate is 27%. Uh, New Mexico's
rate is quite a bit higher, uh,
the state average is 39.2%.
There was a period of time
during which the, the New Mexico
rate dropped, madam chair, um,
and as was just uh discussed
substance abuse remains a key
driver of recidivism. So I would
just, um, madam chair, um,
applaud you, Madam Secretary,
for the job skills training that
you're providing, you're
absolutely right that low wage
jobs do not keep people uh from
the behaviors that might send
them back to prison, and when
they get back to prison, we all
get punished because we get, we
have to pay for them to be
there, so.
I think uh you're really truly
madam Chair, uh, Madam
Secretary, on the right track
with that, and um
Regarding the need perhaps to
modify some licenser rules to
allow individuals who have left
prison to get licensed in
various fields, I think that's
also very important and we just
offer you um contact me if you'd
like some help on that one. I, I
believe that's, that's a good
thing as well. Uh, madam chair,
I would like to laud Goodwill
Industries for expanding its
offices around the state, um, we
now have a program in Carlsbad
Goodwill Industries, um,
presence.
And uh very impressed with that
organization and, and their
efforts to help people get
reacclimated. So, um, I applaud
them for that, but the one
question I have, Madam Chair,
Madam Secretary, is
When a person is released from
prison, what is that person
given to leave with?
To help make the transition from
life in prison to we hope a
better life outside of prison,
and I'm thinking in terms of cab
fare, cash, debit cards.
I would hope phone numbers for
job programs. So what, what all
assistants, uh, Madam Chair,
Madam Secretary, are people
receiving as they leave those
prison gates.
Um, Madam Chair Representative
Brown. So, um, on the
recidivism, I just want to make
a quick note because we did this
presentation the LFC following
the uh committee evaluation that
they did over the summer, but
in, in reviewing our rate of
recidivism as compared to the
national rate, I just want to
point something out because it's
very frustrating when when I
hear those national comparisons
because there's no state that
measures recidivism in the same
way, and in fact we looked at
some of the states that were
reporting those.
really lovely numbers like 27%
and we found that they were
doing things like opening up
what they called the
reintegration center, but it was
a prison and they would send
returns back to that
institution, and then they
wouldn't count them because they
were like, oh, they're in a
reintegration center. They're
not back in prison, and so, um,
we count every single person
regardless of the status they
left with in a 3 year period,
whether it's a new crime,
whether it's a a pro violation,
so I just, I want to make that
clear and I am a member of the
correction.
Leaders Association, which is
basically like the me of all the
everybody in the country, and
it's something we debate all the
time and we're always in
arguments about it cause the
states with the cool numbers
like that, they are only, you
know, they have all these clever
ways of reporting things, uh,
and while the LFC study did find
a state where they felt that was
more comparable to us, I would
say that just in talking with
the other states and the people
that I've worked with that just
everybody reports it different
in some systems, uh.
Person who returns as a
technical violator doesn't get
counted or in some states
they're the only ones that get
counted, so there's just like a
lot of variation in how people
report that rate and just um so
you know we have reduced
recidivism by more than 10%. We
did see a little bit of a blip
upward, but now we're starting
to see the numbers go back down
again, and of course these
numbers are like 3 years old, so
I can't tell what I'm doing
today is gonna matter until 3
years from now, which is, you
know, it's sometimes can be a
tough thing to get your head
wrapped around.
Um,
but when you're talking about uh
Re-entry and the process of when
a person gets out and what do
they get, um, so we have a very
uh significant group of people
now we didn't used to at all,
um, but we have people inside
probation and parole, uh,
re-entry coordinators,
classification officers who are
caseworkers in the prison.
Everybody's working with that
person, like starting 220, 210
days before they get out. What
we're doing is we're looking
for, uh, places for them to live
if they can go back.
To, uh, the family or wherever
it was they came from, we're
looking for sponsorship. If that
doesn't work, we're looking for
a transitional living services,
um, we're also doing things like
making sure they get all their
vital paperwork, uh, uh, birth
certificates, uh, we now have
the ability to issue a state
issued ID MPD state issued IDs
in every one of our prisons,
which took forever, but we
finally got it done, um, we have
contracts outside with places
like Eagles Unlimited and
Goodwill Industries.
Where we provide things like bus
tickets, clothing, Walmart, uh,
gift cards, things like that for
people who need that extra
service, um, we will sometimes
be able to get like Uber
certificates and things like
that, depending on where the
person lives, um, so we're doing
a lot of stuff before they get
out now, um, to try to get them,
you know, help them be
successful on the way out, um,
in some situations when the
person has had like a lot of
that vocational training.
We might be able to get them job
interviews before they get out
because not only do we have
those reentry people on the
inside, we have transition
coordinators on the outside
housed at our probation offices
and then, uh, one of the things
we do with Project Echo is they
have all these people that work
for them that are on a contract
to us all formerly incarcerated,
so they've all been there, done
that, and they all like part of
the criteria to work in that job
is they have to have been
incarcerated and then been
successful when they get out and
so we're using those people to
serve as like mentors and uh
guidance for the ones that we
think need extra help, uh, I
mean, we're not able to go as
big as we'd like to with that
service, but um, we go as big as
we possibly can, and now we're
looking at ways to use uh some
of that Medicaid money to get
Oprah mentors to provide the
same service. So, um, I mean, if
you have suggestions for us to
do more, we're always open to
it.
Thank you, Madam Secretary,
Madam Chair, I, um, I'm liking
what I'm hearing. I, I think.
That transition is just
absolutely vital that it be done
the right way and uh I think the
recidivism right here.
Uh, we'll go down significantly
the more we do that, and I would
really, Madam Chair, like to see
people doing CDL and heavy
equipment because there's such a
need for that.
And uh for that workforce, um,
presence there. So thank you
very much. Good answers.
Uh, thank you very much,
Representative Brown. Uh, thank
you, Madam Vice Chair for while
it's gone. We're gonna go next
to representative Little.
Thank you, uh, Mr. Chair, thank
you so much for the presentation
this afternoon. Uh, I hope I
have uh what is a quick
question. I was taking a look at
the uh community offender
management program and the
performance management uh
measure for um probation and
parole officers, um, it
indicates that there were uh the
average standard caseload was uh
in 23 and 24 was 76.
You're budgeting for 88. How
many, how many parole officers
and probation.
Probation and parole officers
are there. I mean, I get an
average, but how many do you
have?
Uh, Madam Chair Representative
Little, I'm looking backwards at
me and I'm hoping one of these
folks is gonna get me a number,
maybe maybe Mr. Smith over here,
but, um, I just will mention
quickly that the standard case
load is at that rate, but we do
have a lot of specialized
caseloads, so standard people
they supervise low custody or
like low and medium level
people, uh, we also have
intensive supervision, sex
offender specific supervision,
community corrections for people
with high needs and high risk.
Um, and so
Standard supervision is a less
intensive caseload where they
see their their person less
often 286 is that number.
Thank you, 286 officers in both
of those areas.
Or in total. Madam Chair, uh,
Representative Little, Mr.
Chair, I'm sorry, um, in total
statewide. OK, thank you. Um,
and as a Representative Brown
was asking about the transition
out. It seems to me that the,
the
The contact with their parole or
probation officers is quite key
as well, so I was just wondering
if that was a.
If those services were
adequately provided to those
that are making that transition.
Mr. Chair Representative Little,
yes, so every offender who's
leaving and I didn't mention
this earlier, but they receive
an evaluation that compass
evaluation kind of tells us what
their needs are, their risks
are, um, and in cases where we
believe there might be uh a
difficulty with the person's
transition. Those are the people
we're looking for that
mentorship for, um, or and we
also do have the ability to
introduce them to their
probation officer via video
prior to their departure.
Thank you very much. That's all
my questions. Thank you. Thank
you, Representative, uh, vice
chair.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Um, I
think most of my questions
actually may be for the
analysts, um.
Uh, Mr. Chair and, uh, Scott, uh
employee compensation, so, um,
are the corrections officers,
um,
Would compensation increase for
them be in the LFC
recommendation for a statewide
compensation increase.
Uh, Madam Chair Representative
Dixon, yes, so it'll be in
Section 8 with everything else,
um, now, one caveat is obviously
that does not include
compensation for those that are
uh see as a private facilities
because that's in their
contracts. But yes, any reason
that's, you know, put in section
8 would apply to public facility
COs.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Thank you.
Um, and also, um,
Scott
My notes actually, and I think
they're in volume 2, which is
where I pulled them out, um,
appropriations to the department
have increased, um, over 20% in
the last 10 years. Is that
correct?
Madam Chair, I'm sorry, Mr.
Chair, uh, Representative Dixon,
yes, so on the first page of the
LSC thing, you can see the graph
where we kind of show the
population trends over time,
general fund budget growth, um,
and yes, so
populations dropped while the.
Preparations to the Department
have continued to recline.
Not necessarily at the rate of
all other agencies, but they've
climbed nonetheless.
Thank you. Um, I totally missed
that handout, so I apologize.
Um.
Mr. Chair and Scott, um bars and
reversions. Um, so it does look
like um over the past couple of
years, um, the department has uh
reduced, um, the number of
transfers uh from PS and uh
EB EB, um, PSEB um for other
purposes and have, has reverted
less funds. Is that correct?
Me, Mr. Chair Representative
Dixon, yes, but I mean, I think
it's worth noting that that's
largely because we took a chunk
of that PSEB money out of the
budget last year. Thank you, Mr.
Chair and thank you, and that,
that is what I wanted to, I
think, highlight is that um last
year, um, LFC really worked to
sort of right size, um, the
appropriation to the department,
um, to sort of fix that, uh,
historic problem.
Um, and then, um,
That is actually the extent of
my questions. Thank you.
Thank you very much, Madam Vice
Chair. Thank you, Madam
Secretary. Thank you to your
staff and great questions from
the committee. Uh, first, I just
want to take a quick note, uh,
members committee, I wanna, uh,
it, it stands as sort of a
testament to your service and
time, Madam Secretary. I always
appreciate that Representative
Herndon, as I understand, in
previous capacities represented
you in previous capacities
working to get fair and equal
pay and it bears just uh.
You know, a lot of appreciation
for the work you continue to do
in your role, and it's a special
note, I think, of pride for us
on this committee to know that
one of our members served in
that. So just that's a quick
little kudos. Uh, second, Madam
Secretary, around a few of the
things the construction
industries division, um
appreciate the proposal.
On a tough note back during the
pandemic, there was a uh there
was a report of the construction
industry's division, uh, sort of
getting uh PPE and then
reselling that PPE at very high
rates to uh other corners of the
state government.
If we're looking to sort of go
to a more self-funded model.
We'll need to see, and I would
definitely need to see sort of
the uh accountability
transparency component of that,
and I would, um, so I'd be
interested to see that as we go
forward. Um,
Secondly, Madam Secretary, uh,
it's great on the specials,
don't wanna go too deep into
that, but I, there is a key
question, which is for inmates
who are receiving
medication-assisted treatment.
Do you know how many folks in FY
25 so far have received
medication-assisted treatment.
And can you give us a sense of
how many the department hopes to
receive medication assisted
treatment in FY 26.
Um, Mr. Chair.
Uh, I would be happy to set that
meeting up, um, myself, we can
meet together with Mr. Yates and
talk about what his plans are
for the future on, uh,
corrections industries as far as
Medicaid assisted treatment. We
just started now in January and
what we're doing is accepting
people who are coming from the
jails who are already on a
Medicaid assisted treatment, so
I don't have those numbers. I'd
be happy to email them to you
after this or text them to you
after this meeting, um, but I
know that because we just
started it in the month of
January.
worry that the numbers won't be
terribly high, uh, but I can say
that the people who uh were
going to the jails who the jail
thought maybe needed this, the,
the meds, but then they were
gonna be coming to prison.
Sometimes they would choose not
to put them on the medication,
whereas now they're not making
that choice because they know
that they can send them to us
and we will be able to provide
that medication. OK, thank you.
I look for, I know the committee
will look forward to that. I
know Mr. Mulligan in addition to
others are tracking sort of the
member request.
For information that that
presenters talk about following
up, so we'll get those.
It's critical to see, I think it
ties in with many of the
comments and I know ranking
member, uh, discussed it, um,
when it's behavioral health and
particularly some of these
addiction services.
If folks are not receiving that
treatment, then it's very easy
to understand that those
conditions and their risk to
public safety, if anything sort
of stays.
At a very high level, or perhaps
even increases during their time
in corrections. Um,
The and and I guess for
sake of time, appreciate very
much the, the proposals from the
department around the special
appropriation that you're
seeking, noted that there's an
increase right now in what's
being proposed, different
levels. There's a very strong
request for at some level of
special appropriation,
potentially from the
penitentiary fund, and I think
that's something that we can be
very mindful of, um, uh, as we
move into the specialist portion
of it. And I want to, yeah, Mr.
Sanchez, if there's any.
thing to add.
Uh, thank you, Mr. Chair. I just
wanted to know we did get the
numbers from corrections. So
during FY 23, for pregnant
females received
medication-assisted treatment
services while incarcerated, and
2 pregnant females received
those services in FY 24. Got it.
OK, so we're 32, and then we'll
be waiting for FY 25, and there
are sizable grow, there, there's
differences, but there's some
very sizable executive and
legislative appropriations to
expand medication assisted.
treatment. So, OK, great. We'll
ask for the LFC. We'll look
forward to the specials and
bringing these two pieces
together in the specials.
Madam Vice Chair.
Thank you, Mr. Chair, I would
move that the committee adopt
the LFC recommendation.
It's been moved by Vice Chair
Dixon, seconded by ranking
member Chatfield, any opposition
to that motion, seeing none,
thank you very much. Thank you,
Madam Secretary.
OK.
Members while parole is coming
up, um, as we're getting into a
busier time with the bills.
We've invited the chair and the
ranking member to submit their
spoken comments and in a written
format. It's hard for them to
make it over here today, so
we'll try to have uh sort of a
written piece from the chair and
the ranking member from uh
judiciary to the members.
And this, so this will be our
last, uh, agency for the day and
we'll be done.
OK.
Mr. Sanchez, go ahead whenever
you're ready, Mr. Jimenez, great
to see you back up there.
Good afternoon, Mr. Chair. Uh,
members of the committee, my
name is Scott Sanchez. I'm the
public safety analyst for LFC
with me today is my counterpart
from DFA Diego Jimenez, and the
director of the parole board,
Mr. Roberta Cohen. So very
quickly, the LFC recommendation
increases, sorry, this is agents
code 760. You can look in volume
2 and page 364, and you'll find
the bulk of our, uh, the LFC's
recommendation there.
The LC recommendation, uh,
increases the parole board's
general fund revenue by about
$24,000 or 3% above FY 25,
whereas the executive adds about
267.6,000 or 33.9% to the
agency's budget.
The LFC recommendation on solely
the personnel services and
employee benefits increases
necessary to cover the GST rates
that are going up, whereas the
executive adds $161,000 in the
same category to cover
compensation and benefits and to
add another position to help the
parole board better integrate
the new offender management
network information system used
by Corrections Department.
The executive also adds
$105.9,000 in general fund
revenue to the other cost
category, which is broken down
into $97,000 for parole board
member compensation and about
$9000 for do it rate increases.
Beyond that, uh, analysts
reached consensus on all of the
performance measures.
And to Diego if he has anything
bad.
Uh, thank you, Scott. Mr. Chair,
members of the committee, that
Scott did a very thorough job.
Um, I guess I would just like to
highlight again the uh the
97,000 and the other category
that um the executive has
recommended for, I want to say 3
years in a row now, um, in an
effort to ensure that members of
the parole board um are
compensated at more than just a
per diem stay for the numerous
hours that they put in for their
work.
Um
And with that, I'll hand it over
to the director. Thank you.
Good afternoon. Uh, Mr. Chair
and members of the committee.
Thank you for the opportunity to
speak today regarding the
appropriation requested as part
of our FY 2026 budget. The
requested salary increase of
$161,700 addresses a critical
issue. The salary for positions
upgraded under the previous
administrations were not
adjusted to reflect the changes
in the classification increases
that were previously uh provided
when I came on board.
Our parole board team, uh,
executive team comprises the
staff members from Espanola,
Albuquerque, and Las Vegas, New
Mexico, one of them being my
CFO, which is behind me, um, as
well as the chair of our board,
Mr. Abraham Anaya. They have
experienced recruitment and
retention challenges, and this
increase would allow us to bring
salaries to at least the
midpoint of the classification
scale, ensuring that we can
retain current staff and fill a
vacant positions that we have.
This is essential to sustain our
ability to conduct meetings, um,
conduct our hearings for the
board, manage records
efficiently and meet performance
measures, including completing
certificates required for inmate
releases within the statutory
timeline. Currently, the LFC
recommended 3% increase will not
cover our rising costs, such as
the $36,700 requested by Risk
Management Division to cover
legal fees. The board does not
have a full-time attorney, which
increases
our reliance on external
resources for current and
potential litigation.
Attention, additionally, Senate
Bill 17, carried by Senator
Jaramillo and Representative
Chavez has prompted discussions
on board member compensation,
with support from Attorney
General's office, we are
exploring how to address
compensation administratively,
while adhering to legislative
requirements. Board member
compensation is necessary to
recognize the growing demands of
their roles, and the extensive
administrative time spent
ensuring public safety.
Over the past year, 8 board
member vacancies have been
filled, resulting in higher per
diem costs for hearings, and the
board is also requesting $8900
to cover increased
administrative costs being
charged by doit. While we
reverted funds due to vacancy
savings and administrative
constraints for board
compensation, we have since made
progress in staffing and
operational efficiency.
The parole board has made
significant strides in meeting
its mission.
With myself being in um this
position in the last year and FY
2024 we conducted 2,544 regular
release hearings and 720
revocation hearings achieving a
43% completion rate of PV
hearings within the 30-day time
frame.
Collaboration with the
Department of with the
Department of Corrections is
ongoing to improve docketing of
PVs and ensuring timely
hearings.
Following the Supreme Court of.
I'm sorry, following the Supreme
Court, Thompson ruling
interpretation, we addressed a
backlog of sex offender review
hearings, increasing hearings
from 2 to 3 per month, and by
March of 2025, we will have
eliminated the 408 backlog cases
and our meeting statutory
timelines for new cases
requiring hearings as of January
2025.
In FY 2024, the board processed
1,553 parole certificates and
cleared backlog of discharge
certificate requests
significantly improving
efficiency.
We held 85 medical parole board
hearings, granting releases in
5.8% of cases thanks to the
enhanced training and
communications with the
Department of Corrections, we
reduced hearing cancellations
due to insufficient information
from 50 to 49 this year.
I and I also had the opportunity
to attend the annual conference
hosted by the Association of
parole Authority International,
where we learned from colleagues
across the country and abroad
about how we are modernizing the
effectiveness of prole
conditions, releases an
executive clemency processes.
The board has and will continue
to collaborate with deserving
life.
ACLU and the Department of
Corrections on the statutory
requirements from the passage of
Senate Bill 64 to review and
schedule serious youthful
offender hearings, and FY 2024,
we identified 37 inmates, which
were possibly eligible for for
review of the 37, the board
conducted hearings for 26
eligible inmates and granted
parole to 9 of those
individuals. We continue to
ensure victims and their
families are given the
opportunity to participate with
138.
Victim representatives attending
hearings this year and continue
to collaborate with NMCD victims
constituent office and
stakeholders to increase
participation.
As far as our future plans, the
board is continuing its
transition to electronic files
to reduce the paper usage and
improve efficiency. This effort
is being carried out in
collaboration with updates to
the Department of Corrections
Omnisystem. Additionally, we are
working on updating the parole
board's administrative code,
staff policies and the rules
that guide both parole board
members and the public regarding
the board's functions. So in
summary, our FY 2026 budget
request insures competitive
salaries to attract and retain
qualified staff.
Adequate compensation for board
members for their time and
expertise and coverage for
increased administrative costs,
legal fees, and operational
needs.
Thank you, Mr. Chair and
committee members for your time
and consideration of this
important request, and I welcome
any questions from the
committee. Great. Thank you very
much. Uh, we're gonna go
straight to questions.
Representative Duncan.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Um, just a
quick question for you. Um, tell
me a little bit about the
conversation with the board
board members are receiving.
So, Mr. Chair, uh,
Representative Duncan currently
the board is a per diem basis,
so any compensation that they
receive is the per diem rate
given for all board members,
which is anything under 4 hours
is $45. Anything over is 95. So
most of the board members are
working an average of 30 hours
per week. Um, they're most of
their hearings are every single
day, most of them work Monday
through Friday, uh, two of those
hearings are done.
um PV hearings are done
Wednesdays and Thursdays, um,
every week, and then they have
regular release hearings on
Mondays, Tuesdays and Fridays.
And then, um, 3 times during the
month, we have specials which
will include sex offender parole
review hearings, um, we also
have, um,
Like for hearings and medical
geriatric hearings, um, and then
depending on the amount of time
uh ordered the release of
juvenile offenders reaching
their time frame, then we will
add a juvenile hearing for the
month.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Thank you
for that. Now, I'm gonna follow
up that question with
I mean that's, that's a almost a
full-time job, not quite.
Um
And so are these individuals do
are, are these hearings in the
from 8 to 5 or the after hours?
Are they full time? Are these 3
quarter time jobs that they keep
and or do they have another job
as well, Mr. Chair
Representative Duncan, most of
these members are retired, but a
few of them do have full-time
jobs. Uh, we do have a
therapist, Miss Brandy Castillo,
who does behavioral health
therapy for her full-time
position.
But most of our members are, are
retired and so they do um we
have some very dedicated
members. I can tell you that of
the parole board that do work
diligently because it's a
passion of theirs to do what
they do. And so for those
reasons, I have been very um
happy with the ability to be
able to request of them the need
for those hearings and they've
been able to oblige me in that.
Thank you, Mr. Sure. Um, now,
uh, um, and I probably heard you
wrong, but, but tell me again
where your board members come
from. So majority of my board
members come from the
Albuquerque area. We do have 3
members that are out of the
grants area. One member is in
the Valencia area and we do have
1 in 33 new members in the um
Las Cruces area.
Thank you, Mr. Chair.
These are in person, I assume
then.
The zoom
Mr. Chair Representative Duncan,
yes, they are in, um, by Zoom,
um, if one of our members is in
the facility for the day, then
some of them may be in person,
um, but if other members, we
have a total of 2 to 3 members
normally per hearing most of the
time it's 3, some may be by
video and some may be by in
person, but a majority of them
are by video. Thank you, Mr.
Chair. That, that makes a whole
lot of sense to me then since
they my video because, boy,
that's a
It's not a whole lot of money to
come up here and drive 3 hours
from Grants or however long that
is for this. So thank you, Mr.
Chair. That's the only question
I have.
Great. Thank you very much for
representing Duncan. Um, are
there any other uh questions? I
don't see any. Oh, sorry,
Representative Brown, please,
yes.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. I'm just
trying to get my head around
this uh new compensation effort.
With the per DM be raised or?
Each of these members uh serving
in a hearing or would it be a
supplemental payment, I'm not
quite sure I understand, Mr.
Chair.
So, um, small uh Representative
Brown, uh, the compensation that
we're looking at it was.
taken out of the compensation
bill that was originally being
submitted. What we're trying to
do now is work with the Attorney
General's office to take a look
at the administrative times that
the
Carrying officers are spending
in receiving information,
reviewing the case files prior
to the hearing as well as victim
notification when they're having
to have meetings with their
victims prior to the occurring.
To incorporate that as part of a
hearing process. So the
compensation would just be
included on set of that time,
um, so we're trying to work with
uh the attorney General's office
to figure out how can we move to
Compensate them for that
additional time rather than
putting it into the LFC or DFA
requirement, which, as we've
been working with the ACLU to
try to determine all of this has
been very
It's been difficult, um, to say,
uh, we are one of one of the
Boards, very few boards that
that work.
Every single day, and so how
they do their administrative
time, um, has been difficult in
terms of that that portion of
scheduling of reviewing their
reviewing their their case
dockets, um, reviewing um victim
notification and reading those
letters to ensure that those
are are being taken into
consideration prior to the
hearing. Mr. Chair, it sounds
like you're still a way, uh,
work to get done to get this
figured out, so I wish you well
on that. Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Thank you very much Brown. uh,
Mr. Sanchez, anything to add?
Yeah, Madam Chair, I'm sorry,
Mr. Chair, um, Representative
Brown, I think the only other
concern that has been expressed
in the past, last year, there
was a bill to give the parole
board the statutory authority to
kind of do this board member
compensation, um, one of the
recommendations I, um, forgive
me, I don't remember which last
year included that.
Appropriation with contingency
language when the bill failed,
that appropriation obviously
didn't get it into the budget. I
think the question that still
remains it sounds like they're
working with the Attorney
General's office to try and kind
of overcome that is, is there a
way to do this without having
to.
Get a bill passed that would
kind of give them that
authority, um.
That question is still open.
That's largely why this is not
something that we that the LFC
considered whenever they were
putting together this budget.
Thank you, Scott. Thank you, Mr.
Chair.
Thank you very much.
OK, I don't see any other
questions. Thank you. We'll keep
an eye on that part of of things
as they move along. Right now
we'll ask for the LSC
recommendation.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. I would
move the committee adopt the LFC
recommendation.
OK, it's been moved by Vice
Chair Dixon, seconded by
Representative Sanchez, adopting
the LSC recommendation, is there
any opposition to that motion?
I don't see any, so we've
adopted that.
Thank you very much. Thank you
for your work. Uh, thanks to the
analyst, um, real quick, is
there any uh in-person public
comment?
I don't see any, uh, is there
any online public comments? OK.
Got that. Uh, members, uh, last
thing for today, uh, we talked
about a public safety
subcommittee. Um, we're gonna
start with a fairly small
subcommittee, uh, or work group,
excuse me, just because we have
a number of other work groups.
We're gonna have uh
Representative Brown,
Representative Dickson,
Representative Baca,
Representative Silva, and
representative Little, um, and
we'll, uh, go from there on
that. Otherwise, uh, we're done
for today and we'll see
everybody tomorrow. Thank you
all very much.
for a great day's work
uh HAFC.
