Representative Garrett.
Representative Hernandez.
Representative Herndon.
Representative
headed up.
Representative Little here.
Representative Lujan.
Representative Pettigrew.
Representative Sanchez.
Representative Sariana,
Representative Silva here.
Representative Vincent.
Vice Chair Dixon.
Chas small. We have a forum.
Great, OK, uh, members, we do
have a quorum. Thank you, uh, to
our excellent staff. Uh, we're
gonna go first to House Bill
229, um, which is the NM grown,
uh, supplier program.
We'll ask our representative
Doo.
Excellent.
Thank you, Mr. Chair and members
of the committee, um, House Bill
229 is um an appropriation of
400 and $430,000 to Mexico State
Board of Regents for NMAD New
Mexico Department of Ag for the
New Mexico grown supplier
program and the purpose of this,
they're looking for reoccurring
funding and any unencumbered
funds they currently revert to
the general fund at the end of
the fiscal year. Um, I do
believe that you received an
amendment.
Or, or did you so I think uh for
this one, I think what we're
this is in the budget, um.
Uh, we'll be tabling today, uh,
but after we'll go through
public comment and the reason
this is a very uh good table
because the committee's work,
your leadership representative
Do representative Luhan, and
many others, uh, have, uh, this
was in House Bill 2 as we passed
it off the floor. So, uh,
anything that your expert wants
to add will go to them public
comment and go from there.
Good afternoon. um
Representative small chair, um,
and representatives. My name's
Elena Pisano. I'm the approved
supplier program director with
the New Mexico Farmers Marketing
Association, um, the approved
supplier program is simply the
pathway to a farm to institution
sales for all producers, fruit
and vegetable producers, value
add producers, and meat products
producers in our state. So the
New Mexico grown program
supports K through 12 schools,
early childhood education
centers, aging centers for
senior citizens, as well as
homebound meal programs.
And are firm to food bank
program in this state, the
market share represents just
about 8 to $10 million depending
on the investment that this body
makes, um, and really our
producers have come to rely on
this critical market
opportunity. Last thing I'll say
is I've seen it personally
change lives and grow new farms.
We get, um, increased
applications every single year,
um, and we would really
appreciate your continued
support so that the farmers know
that we continue to invest in
them as staff support.
Excellent. Thank you for that.
Uh, thank you, Representative
Dao. Is there any public yeah
please representative Bohan and
Represent Luhan, uh, please go
ahead and uh, any comments,
thank you for your leadership
and work on these issues. Thank
you, Mr. Chair. Thank you
committee. I just urge the the
committee to I I thank the
committee for all the support
that we've seen throughout our
budget and and particularly with
this this item in front of us,
thank you, Mr. Chair.
Uh, great. Thank you very much.
OK, uh, now is there any public
comment on House Bill 229.
Uh, I don't see any in person,
um, for or against online.
I don't, uh, Susan Wilger and
Sergio Mata Cisneros. We'll go
to the two of you to conclude
public comment online. Susan,
uh, go ahead.
Thank you, Mr. Chair, members of
the committee. My name is Susan
Wilger. I'm here representing
the New Mexico Food and A Policy
Council, as well as farm to
table, we're in full support of
this House bill, and we really
appreciate the community's
support.
I am also the co-founder of the
Frontier Food Hub, and I know
what it's like not to have the
support and the infrastructure
of programs like the approved
supplier program, we founded the
Food hub, um, prior to when the
approved supplier program is and
it's an extremely valuable
program in making that
connection between the growers
and the markets, so we
appreciate your support. Great.
Thank you very much, Susan. Uh,
now, Sergio for one minute,
please.
Chair,
members of the committee. My
name is Sergio Matta Cisneros,
and I am uh the government
relations manager for the Food
Depot and I also oversee the
regional farm to Food bank. We
highly depend on the approver
supplier lists as part of the
regional pharm to Food bank
because that helps us identify
farmers and also give small
scale producers the ability and
the training to make sure that
they have, they're handling food
and the produce that they're
growing safely, so we stand in
full support and also want to
thank
The Committee for including the
430 and HB 2 to continue the
funding of this program.
OK, uh, great, thank you very
much, uh, Sergio. OK, um,
committee, so we, this is in the
budget thanks to your guys'
great work, very much appreciate
that. Um, any other questions or
comments from committee?
We'll go to Representative
Vincent then.
Thank you, miss.
So
Oh, we just, we did public.
Always good to double check
though. I had missed that the
last couple of bills. No, that's
great. Thank you for double
checking. Uh, OK, I don't see
any others thanks to the
committee for the work.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Thank you
for giving me the opportunity to
do this, but I moved to do a
good table on 229. Great.
There's a motion to table, um,
it's been saying by uh the
ranking member. Is there any
opposition to that motion?
See,
uh, the money is in the budget.
Thank you for all of your great
work and thanks to those who
commented.
Thank you and we look forward to
seeing you again.
OK, um,
OK, we're gonna go now members
to House Bill 128, uh, we will
have an amendment. Can we get
that amendment passed out for
House Bill 128, please.
Uh, leaders Zansky is on her way
over.
And
Uh, Representative Wuhan, thank
you for your work. Well, we can
get started there. We'll ask
when the leader comes in, we'll
have her come up.
Um
Excellent. OK. Uh, go ahead, uh,
representative Lohan, feel free
to introduce your experts as
well.
And let's make sure the leaders
get here we'll grab a seat for
the leader.
Um, thank you, Mr. Chair. In
front of us we have 128, um,
relating to the public finance,
creating the local solar access
fund in the New Mexico Finance
Authority, providing grants for
solar energy systems requiring
the New Mexico Finance Authority
to establish rules making
disappropriation, Mr. Chair and
leader is here.
Excellent. Thank you very much,
Representative Lujan, Madam
Leader, thank you for coming
over.
Um
Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Uh, very pleased to present
House Bill 128, which
establishes the local solar
access fund. The purpose of this
fund is to provide um uh
resources to local governments
who are interested in developing
solar and storage on local
public buildings, um, for
multiple reasons, but, um,
particularly for resiliency in
times of emergency, um, and I'm
here with Miss Alicia Alicia
Shaw.
From um the uh public power in
New Mexico, and we do have an
amendment, Mr. uh Mr. Chairman.
Great, thank you for that. Can
you go ahead and read the 202
number?
Um
For that amendment,
please. 231162.3. Right. OK,
that's one that I have. Do all
the members have that?
OK. Can we move that amendment
for discussion, please?
OK, it's been moved and citing
for discussion. Can you briefly,
uh, explain the amendment.
Um, yes, Mr. Speaker, this
amendment actually, uh, Madam
Vice Chair, had some good
feedback, uh, in the House
Energy Committee that we wanted
to incorporate, um, to include a
prioritization for solar energy
systems that include energy
storage and then the rest of the
amendment is simply striking the
appropriation.
OK, great. Uh, OK, you, there's
an explanation on the amendment.
Any questions on the amendment?
Move, uh, we adopt the on. OK,
it's been moved by Vice Chair
Dixon, seconded by
Representative Sanchez. Any
opposition to adopting the
amendment?
See, the amendment is adopted
very softly for Sanchez.
Can you stretch yourself a
question. So how, uh, will you
guys choose, how will people
apply and how will you choose,
uh, who gets awarded these
funds, I guess I wanna make sure
like uh maybe the high school in
Espanola has a fighting chance
versus uh high school in Santa
Fe or Albuquerque or Las Cruces.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman
Representative Sanchez, um, so
the, uh, NMFA will have an
application process and we do
have prioritization for rural uh
eligible entities so that the
majority of the funding is
allocated to rural entities.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. That was
my only question. Great. Thank
you for that. Uh, we'll go if
any other additional questions,
vice chair did remind me and I
apologize, we'll go to also uh
public comment. Um, any other
questions from committee? no?
Oh, regular member Chaffield.
So,
so I'm on the board of the local
co op, and, and we really have
voted not to.
Make available our lines in our
equipment for local solar, um,
projects because we don't get
anything out of it. We're
providing maintenance, we're
providing equipment or providing
uh all the things that, that are
needed.
For free. How does this affect
that?
yourself.
Mr. Chair, members of the
committee.
Uh, my name is Randy Sadwick. I,
the president of positive
energy, positive energies in
business 27 years.
And work throughout the state.
The um question about
Um
Not using the existing power
lines and uh
Most of the work that's done in
sizing a system is to offset the
loads.
Because these are behind the
meter installations. And so when
we size the system, um, we take
into account, um,
As best as we can, uh, what the
loads are and what the loads
will be.
So that um the benefit.
is served at the point of use
and not using uh the great
services.
And because systems um
You can only sun only shines for
6 hours, part of the importance
of this is it has a battery
system, and battery systems
allow you to shift um the excess
energy during the daytime, that
could be uh backed onto the grid
and store that for evening and
morning use, so all of those
things together are providing an
important grid resilience.
Uh, feature that is really
important, especially for
emergency services like fire
departments and so on. They need
to have um power all the time.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman, members
of the committee.
Thank you.
Thank you very much and
Representative Sanchez, I know
you work in this area, uh, would
you wanna, uh, add any clarity,
Mr. Chair, this was basically
fall under the net metering, so
it'd be behind the meter, um,
basically in the energy they
produce with uh
Offset uh their bill, so, um,
In terms of impact to the
system, it shouldn't have an
impact to the system.
So, um, it shouldn't affect the
line.
OK. Thank you very much. Uh, OK,
uh, thank you, ranking member
next to Representative Duncan.
Mr. Chair, uh, Representative Yu
had stated that um these funds
will be implemented um in rural
will have the first chance at
him, can you tell me where in
your bill that states that?
I'm looking and I just can't
find it.
Yes, Mr. Chairman, and
Representative Duncan, that is
in uh section E.
And
I have the amendments in context
version, just one moment. Oh,
page 3, starting on page 3, you
will see all of the criteria,
and then if you turn to the
following page, uh, page 4 lines
3 through 5. It states that the
majority of the funding would be
to rural eligible entities.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Thank you.
That's what I needed. Great.
Thank you very much for Duncan.
Uh, next, we're gonna go to
representative uh Lujan and
thank you again to
Representative Luhan for
stepping in to start the
presentation.
Thank you, Mr. Chair, um.
Represent this is a bill that I
that I supported in the past and
I just haven't gotten over to
the clerk's office to sign on
to. I maybe I have, but I don't
think I have yet, but I do
support this legislation, Mr.
Mr. Chair, um, I do have a, a
question, um, as we are
continuing to, I'd say educate
and understand how renewable
energy, um, the future of it
really the implications of of
the costs and all this sort.
things. Can you maybe educate us
just a little bit. I think
representative.
Sanches made a point that this,
this wouldn't interfere with
rate costs, but there are other,
uh, other factors involved in
that that maybe perhaps that we
need to, um, highlights when we
have these, uh, we have more
renewable energy in place. What
does that mean for the future or
costs for um energy.
Mr. Chair, members of the
committee, um,
The, um, there's been studies
done and they have proven that,
uh, as volume increases, uh,
costs go down.
As an example of that, um,
between 2010 and 2020 cost of
solar went down about 80%.
Um, and that, uh, that's across
the United States, but in, in
particular in, in our particular
business, uh, it went down
almost that much in the span of
10 years. So volume reduces
cost, it increases the
capability of a workforce to
install it more quickly and that
also uh in competition results
in lower cost. Thank you, Mr.
Chair.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Thank you
for the answer. Thank you.
That's all I have. Great, OK.
Uh, thank you, Representative
Luhan, Representative Her
Hernandez.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman and um
Madam Leader and presenters, um,
I'm really passionate about
solar and um
Uh, Mr. Chairman, um, Madam
Leader.
Um, would you say solar lighting
would prevent crying?
Mr. Sherman
Mr. Chairman, um, and
Representative Hernandez, yeah,
actually, yes, there's
interesting research about
lighting, um, particularly in
areas that don't have a lot of
foot traffic, that that actually
is a good.
prevention measure.
Mr. Chairman, um, Madam Reader
on page 2, line 25. It reads,
provide one, provide grants to
eligible entities to plan,
design, construct, purchase, and
install, equip solar energy
systems, uh, Mr. Chairman, Madam
Leader, um,
Right now, I'm, I'm, I'm working
with Klabato chapter, Dadi Aha
chapter, um, Sataha chapter, the
ship up industrial park, Dane
College, and they all are asking
for solar lighting, Mr.
Chairman, Madam Leader, with
this bill help uh my local
governments in House District 4.
Mr. Chairman, yes, I, uh, I
don't know exactly on the
specific projects, but if they
are public buildings owned by uh
I don't know exactly on the
specific projects, but if they
are public buildings owned by a
local government, uh, school
district, county municipality,
um, native nation tribe or
pueblo, then they could be
eligible to apply for these
funds.
Mr. Chairman, I'm, uh, and, and
again, uh, uh, Madam Rita, I'm
really glad that that meeting
got brought up, uh, I don't
wanna take, uh, uh, my colleague
Representative Sanchez for
bringing that up. Uh, as you
know, Mr. Chairman, um,
The utility company, uh, on the
Navajo Nation doesn't, uh, have
a net metering program, um, Mr.
Chairman, Madam Leader, uh,
would, uh, microgrids be
eligible, uh, aspect of this,
uh, for rural, uh, tribal
communities
Representative Hernandez, yes.
Thank you Mr. Chairman, that
concludes my question. Great,
thank you very much,
Representative Hernandez. Uh,
next we're gonna go to
Representative Pettigrew and
then Representative Vincent.
Thank you, Chairman. Thank you,
Madam Leader for your
legislation.
Uh, my colleague.
just brought up an interesting
question with respect to
lighting.
Um
Is it safe to assume, Madam
leader, that your piece of
legislation also pays for the
training that's associated with
putting in solar lighting for
for areas.
There is a reason, madam leader,
why so many areas don't have
that because they don't have the
staff or the capacity for the
training capability.
vertical above above ground. Mr.
Chairman, uh, represented
Pettigrew. So what it does cover
is planning and implementation,
so to the extent that training
could be part of that planning
and implementation, um, that
potentially would be covered,
um, but it would depend probably
on the specific project and also
how that local government would
want to approach it.
chair and later, thank you for
that answer.
You know, I've been trying to
get a blinking stoplight outside
of Hobbs, New Mexico for years.
We have no electricity and they
don't have the DOT doesn't have
the capacity to send people out
there for solar powered system.
I find it interesting that we
think that rural
Areas are going to be able to
deal with this.
When the DOT can't handle it.
Love to hear a response.
Um, Mr. Chairman and
Representative Pettigrew, we do
have a number of examples of uh
rural projects that have
occurred and are being
successfully maintained, um,
and, uh, I think also my uh
expert would like to chime in on
that as well.
Uh, Mr. Chair and members of the
committee, uh, the
Uh, training and development,
uh, is a, a really important
part and more and more systems
now are being integrated to
simplify the, the training and
development.
Most electricians can sign up
for online courses through uh
SEI up in um outside of the
state, but also with CNN here,
um, and some of the community
colleges also have programs, uh,
that electricians can implement.
We, uh, bid on several projects,
uh, across the state and local
companies uh one those bids and
implemented them, and these
were, um, in one case, I think
it was a uh just electricians
that weren't um
Necessarily um experienced with
solar, so.
There's a lot of resources
available right now for uh to
assist with training and
development. Thank you, Mr.
Chairman and nurse Committee.
Chairman and later, I'm not
gonna put the DOT secretary on,
on, on Mike on how much problem
this is gonna be.
But I can guarantee you if it if
our DOT can't handle it, our
local governments are going to
have the same issue.
Chairman, I'm not gonna get in.
I'll wait till the floor to get
in on battery storage debate.
But
Um
I'm just gonna leave it there.
Excellent. Thank you very much,
uh, Representative Pettigrew
will go to Representative
Vincent.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Thank you,
Madam Leader and presenters. One
of the questions I had was, uh,
could the widespread adoption of
subsidized solar energy.
Disrupt the fine then, you know,
the financial side of, you know,
our traditional utilities.
Um, Mr. Chairman and
Representative Vincent, as far
as this particular program,
these are just specific
buildings that would have the
opportunity to have solar uh uh
systems installed. So for
example, a community center or a
library, we have a fire station
up in Dixon, I think in your
packets, you have some examples
of projects that local
governments have implemented,
um, and so it's just an
opportunity for that.
Building to become resilient in
terms of when when potentially
the electricity goes out, you
know, could this local project
then continue on through that
kind of emergency, um.
This doesn't impact the
utilities or or attempt to do
anything with utility based
infrastructure at all.
Thank you, Mr. Chair, and, and
the reason I asked that question
is I just keep seeing the more
we add solar.
And for the people that don't
have solar.
Is that gonna make their
Is that gonna make their utility
bill go up because of the lost
revenue that people would have.
Mr. Chair and members of the
committee, um,
The
question uh is a, a good
question. Yeah.
Um
Really in this this um energy
transition where um the cost of
electric vehicles and the
maintenance of electric vehicles
is significantly less and more
efficient than internal
combustion engines, those are
new loads.
And heat pumps are also uh
electrifying gas. There are new
loads.
And so, um, there's this
challenge of finding the right
balance of increasing loads, um,
and
Providing
Support for the
Point of use, which is more
efficient than uh sending the,
the power across the power lines
from somewhere, maybe even out
of the state, so it's producing
energy locally instead of
somewhere else.
And, and so this is an important
part of the transition and we're
um and I think that
The cost of these are important
society because the in the case
of the user that is going to get
the benefit of this, um.
This is a a
A subsidy to to help um provide
resiliency, which is an
emergency or an important need
as opposed to
Uh, broad and large scale.
Uh, program this fund does not,
uh,
the size of the sun does not
impact that in any, any material
way.
Thank you, Mr. Chair and
committee. Yes, sir. Thank you,
Mr. Chair and members, I mean,
presenters, that's the only that
balance is what I've been
watching and um I, I, I don't
have a problem with solar.
But, you know, there's a lot of
people that might not be able to
afford solar, and I know we're
talking more on the on the
commercial side, but um, you
know, when people start to
transition over and utility
companies start to lose that
revenue.
I feel like.
They're gonna have to offset
that somehow, and it seems like
that's going to be put on to the
consumers, just to comment.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Thank you,
Representative. Uh, we're gonna
go next to Sanchez.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Just a
brief comment. I don't think
there's an issue with this
legislation. The issue is with
the net metering, uh, law that
we have.
The way that works is, uh, what
you produce gets offset and a
lot of utilities, they recoup
their operational costs of their
energy rate.
So people that have solar, uh,
basically.
Uh, if you're zeroing out that
rate, you're not collecting
those maintenance costs, so
that's really the issue. It's
not this legislation, so we need
at some point, I think we need
to look at that so we make sure
that, um,
Non-solar users aren't
subsidizing solar users.
So I just wanted to make that
comment. Thank you, Mr. Chair.
um, thank you, Representative
Sanchez, super briefly, we're
sort of going pretty far, but go
ahead. Thank you, Mr. Chair,
and, and so a comment on that
was
The utility company, so you have
solar on your house, you're
still running solar back through
utility companies, but they're
never compensated for it, is
that correct?
Uh,
I think we'll, we'll take some
of those up as we've established
here, this is sort of at
specific school sites and some
very specific, uh, but I think
maybe uh for our LSC Kelly,
maybe we'll flag for some of our
energy analysts to answer some
of the questions that have been
raised.
OK, great conversation. Thank
you. Uh, again thanks to the
vice chair. Is there any public
comment for House Bill 128 as
amended. Raise your hand briefly
if you wish to make public
comment.
Great. OK, we have 3 folks come,
uh, we can, uh, we have our, uh,
getting the mic.
Please limit it to one minute.
We're gonna have uh 3 in-person,
3 online.
Just because we have still a
number to go. OK, please. Thank
you, Mr. Chairman, members of
the committee. My name is JD
Bullington, and I am speaking to
you today as registered
lobbyists for the city of Santa
Fe, the Gallup McKinley County
School District, and also the
public of Laguna, all three of
these entities all support this
legislation, uh, it's overdue,
this will help defray the costs
of putting a solar installations
on public buildings and all
three of those entities I just
mentioned.
our public entities and have a
need for this bill, so we
applaud the sponsor for bringing
this legislation forward and
also everyone who's worked on
this, this, there has been an
amazing amount of work that has
gone on behind the scenes over
the last several months on this
bill, and it really shows, thank
you. Great, thank you very much.
And Mr. Chair, members
Committee, I'm Ken Hughes. I'm
here on behalf of the Rio Grande
chapter of the Sierra Club, as
well as the coalition of
Sustainable Communities.
Definitely see a great need for
this, and I urge your support.
Good afternoon, Mr. Chair and
members of the committee, shared
grown horse with P&M. We think
the sponsor for introducing HB
12128 as it may help support
local and educational entities
cover costs for their solar
systems. Over the past year, few
years, PNM has worked with
education and local governments,
such as the city of Albuquerque,
Grant County, gaming schools,
and Santa Fe County on clean
energy systems, and though this
effort may help support similar
entities in their efforts going
into the future. Thank you.
Great. Thank you very much. OK.
Online, uh, we're gonna go to uh
Lynn Crawford, uh, whoever the
606206.
And then, uh, Alyssa.
Um, in that order, and if you
can be brief, we can try to
squeeze in a couple of other
folks. First, uh, Lynn Crawford.
Thank you, uh, Mayor Crawford,
Village of Ruidoso, just want to
speak, uh, on behalf of support
of this. We've done many
feasibility studies here on
solar power over the last couple
of years, and we are planning to
offset our $800,000 utility bill
for our uh wastewater treatment
plant to the tune of $200,000 a
year with a 900.
Uh kilowatt plant, and so what's
difficult, I can tell you, it's,
there's a lot of expertise that
has to be brought into
engineering and all of that, so
I would support this for the
rural communities we need it.
Thank you. Great. Thank you very
much, Marin, apologies for not
uh introducing that way. OK,
606206.
Mr. Chair and members of the
committee, I'm Steve Jenison.
I'm the chief of the Dixon
Volunteer Fire Department about
a year ago through a community
wildfire protection plan
process, a high priority for the
department was to have solar
panels and backup batteries
installed so that the Dixon Fire
Department can act as a uh
response center in the event of
fires, floods, and high winds.
events, we so far have used that
system twice. Uh, we stand in
strong support of this bill.
Great. Uh thank you very much,
Chief, uh, OK, we're gonna go to
Alyssa Kenny Guyer.
Thank you, Mr. Chair, members of
the committee. I'm Alyssa Kenny
Guyer representing Healthy
Climate New Mexico, which is a
group of health professionals
concerned about trying to create
a healthier climate for New
Mexicans. The $20 million that
is included in HB 2 is
contingent on this bill passing.
The bill sets up a framework for
the fund, how NMFA and MNnerd
will operate it and how to
evaluate projects, funding for
planning and implementation goes
to tribes, counties,
municipalities, and school
districts in
rural areas to fund solar, solar
and storage projects to power
their public buildings. This
fund will help these communities
overcome obstacles to build the
solar they need and they want,
investing in their future for
decades to come. Thank you so
much. Great. Thank you very
much. OK, and we're gonna
conclude, I see, um uh I believe
in a school administrator is
Doctor Leticia Archuleta.
Doctor Archuleta, can you, OK,
go ahead, please.
Yes, good afternoon, Mr.
Chairman and members of the
committee and presenters here
today. My name is Leticia
Archuleta, and I am the
executive director at Health
Leadership High School. Our
mission is to prepare for future
leaders while strengthening our
community, and I urge your
support for House Bill 128,
which would fund solar energy
projects for our schools. Since
moving into our new facility,
our electricity costs have
skyrocketed, moving into almost
$10,000 a month for us, which is
diverting critical resources
from student programs.
Installing solar panels with
significantly reduce these costs
and allowing us to reinvest in
student success. The bill
ensures that schools like Health
Leadership High School can
operate sustainably while
focusing on education and not
excessive utility bills, I
respectfully ask for your
support for House Bill 128.
Thank you. Great. Thank you very
much. OK, that's gonna conclude
our public testimony. I
apologize for the folks who are
still on, but that's a good
number both in person and then
online. Uh, there is a member.
who has a question, we're gonna
go to Representative Herrera,
please, or a comment.
There's a lot of comments on
this one. Thank you, thank you,
Mr. Chair. I just want to do a
shout out to the Dixson
Volunteer Fire Department is
Steve Jennison. I just want you
to know what they've been
certified as a firewise USA
community and insurance rates
are starting to go down in a
rural part of uh New Mexico, and
I just want to compliment them
on their work for that and
that's it. OK. Thank you very
much. OK, members, thank you.
uh, thank you, uh, Madam Leader.
Thank you to your experts. We're
gonna go tosentative Luhan for.
Mr. Chair, I move that you pass
on HB 128 as amended.
There's a motion taken by
Representative Silva. Is there
any opposition to that motion?
Sorry, Mr. Chairman, um, the
amendment, I, I don't know if
you need to, I guess we uh we
did not adopt them. We did not
adopt, OK,
no, actually we did, we, we, we
absolutely did.
Yeah, OK, we've adopted the
amendment. Uh, let's go ahead.
Can we, uh, ask our clerks for
the role, please really quick.
Oh, before that, Brown. Um, so,
Mr. Chairman, I understand that,
I believe that $20 million will
be an HB 2 via a transfer, is
that correct? That's correct.
Yes.
Thank you. Absolutely. Thank
you.
OK, we have a motion and a
second for uh Du pass on House
Bill 128, as was amended here in
HAFC and before, uh, we'll go to
the clerk for the role.
Representative Baca.
Representative Brown.
Yes.
Representative Chapfield.
Representative Dow. No.
Representative Duncan.
Representative Garrett.
Representative Hernandez.
Representative Herndon.
Representative Herrera.
Representative Little, yes.
Representative Lujan, yes.
Representative Pettigrew.
No.
Representative Sanchez.
Representative Sariana.
Representative Silva. Yes.
Representative Vincent.
Yes, with an explanation.
Vice Chair Dixon.
Chair small.
OK, um, we'll announce the vote,
uh, before we do that, we'll go
to uh First Representative
Duncan and then Representative
Vincent. Thank you, Mr. Chair.
I, I voted for this
Representative, but I have
concerns.
School districts should get this
in their budgets.
So by doing this, are you?
My question is, are you, uh, Mr.
Chair, our school districts are
able to bypass um and get this
done and then use their money
for other things. That's my
concern. Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Thank you, Representative
Duncan. Uh, Representative
Vincent.
Thank you, Mr. Chair.
That was half of my concerns
right there and the other half
is the more we use solar, I just
don't want to be, I don't want
to see people.
Penalized and their rates go up
for just using solar. Thank you,
Mr. Chair.
Great. Thank you very much,
Representative Vincent. OK, uh,
can you, uh, read us the vote
and then we'll let the later go
back.
it was 12 in the affirmative, 3
in the negative. OK. Excellent.
OK, you have a due pass as
amended. Thank you. Thank you
very much to those who commented
publicly. Uh, the vice chair is
headed down.
We have an amendment for this.
Which we're passing out.
hand out with it too, I agree.
There's also a
OK, uh thank you very much, uh,
Madam Vice Chair. Uh, go ahead
and um talk to us about uh House
Bill 20.
Thank you, Mr. Chair, and, uh,
members of the committee.
I'm here today to present House
Bill 20, uh, which is a
comprehensive initiative to
accelerate New Mexico's economic
diversification and position our
state as a leader in key
technology sectors.
I have two experts with me
today, uh, economic development
Secretary Rob Black and Nathan
Bush with the University of New
Mexico.
Uh, Mr. Chair and committee
members, New Mexico is at a
critical juncture.
Emerging sectors like artificial
intelligence, aerospace, and
clean energy are projected to
grow by over 30% annually.
But the window of opportunity to
establish ourselves in these
industries won't stay open
forever.
Other states, Utah, Texas,
Arizona, and Colorado have
already demonstrated how
strategic investment in
technology and innovation can
drive significant economic
growth.
New Mexico has unique advantages
in these sectors with our
national labs, research
universities and existing
technology base.
But we're missing the
comprehensive ecosystem needed
to fully capitalize on these
advantages.
The 2021 strategic plan for the
economic development department
identified this exact challenge,
noting that while regional
competitors have actively
pursued opportunities in new
industries, New Mexico has
struggled to capitalize on its
immense assets.
The plan identified the urgent
need to foster growth in a
greater number of industries to
expand our economy for
opportunities, sustainability,
and resilience.
It's specifically called for
creating industry councils to
connect stakeholders,
establishing support systems for
entrepreneurs and developing
comprehensive frameworks to
drive innovation.
House Bill 2 addresses this gap
through 3 main components.
First, it creates the technology
and innovation division and
network advisory Board.
Implementing the strategic plans
call for industry sector
councils that provide real-time
feedback on market conditions
and opportunities.
Second, it establishes the
research development and
deployment Fund to provide
matching funds for projects that
can attract federal and private
investments. Addressing the
plan's emphasis on developing
new funding mechanisms, projects
like NSF grant challenges for
artificial intelligence or
quantum computing.
Third, it creates a technology
innovation prize program to
drive innovation and attract
talent and companies to New
Mexico.
Together these elements create
the coordinated, strategic
framework, we need to seize this
moment of opportunity.
I'm happy to walk through the
details of any component and
answer questions from the
committee and my experts are
here to provide real and
technical experience. Excellent,
uh, thank you very much, Vice
Chair Dixon, uh, committee, you
also have an amendment here. Can
you read us that 202 number,
please?
Thank you Mr. Chair. The 202
number is 231-401.1.
Mm.
23141.1. That's what we've got
here. Uh,
OK, that's been moved for
discussion, seconded by ranking
member, uh, Chatfield and
represent Little. Um, any
questions about the amendment?
Uh, I share, it seems like the
amendment strikes the
appropriations.
Uh, in the legislation, uh, Mr.
Chair, that is correct. And are
these appropriations in House
Bill 2? Yes, Mr. Chair, they
are. Great. OK. Um, questions on
the amendment?
Uh, any ops, can we move it any
opposition to adopting the
amendment?
OK, can we move adoption?
OK, it's a move by
representative little saying by
ranking member Chatfield,
adoption of uh house
appropriations and Finance
Committee Amendment number 1,
any opposition, seeing that
that's adopted back on the, uh,
let's go to get my stuff right
here. We'll go to public comment
and then we're gonna go to uh
committee question, um, OK,
first for public comment,
anybody who wishes to speak in
opposition.
Mm
Uh, OK, seeing no one who wants
to speak in opposition.
Is there anybody who wishes to
speak in support.
OK, come on up.
Good afternoon, Mr. Chair and
members of the committee. Uh, we
want to thank the sponsor for
her work. Uh, we believe this is
a good bill for New Mexico. This
will help many businesses with
some early stage grants that can
lead, that can be used as cost
share when applying for larger
federal grants, as well as
helping businesses move
innovation from early stage
concepts to create business in
New Mexico.
In an example of this may be
things like technologies created
in the national labs that that
can.
funding to move those to
commercial technologies.
This has long been discussed.
This has been a long discussed
need in New Mexico in the
research circles, and we are
happy to see this moving
forward. Thank you. Great. Thank
you very much. OK, uh, there's
one hand up online, um.
Uh, I don't see any other hands,
so, uh, for Harold Lavender, uh,
either in, we'll find out if
it's in support or opposition.
Uh, Mr, Mr. Chair and members of
the committee, thank you. Um,
I'm speaking uh strongly in
favor of this bill. My name is
Harold Lavender. I'm here on
behalf of CNM and CNM Ingenuity
to express strong support for
the bill and ingenuity we are
dedicated to accelerating
workforce training, supporting
entrepreneurs and fostering
economic growth through
innovative learning models.
House Bill 20 aligns with our
mission by investing in
technology, research and
innovation.
Critical drivers of job creation
and long term economic success.
Our state needs a more skilled
workforce to remain competitive.
This bill provides essential
resources to develop talent in
high growth sectors like
technology and healthcare while
strengthening the connections
between education, industry, and
government by supporting House
Bill 20, we are investing in New
Mexico's workforce and
entrepreneurs and future
prosperity. This bill can be a
game changer. We
your support for this important
legislation. Thank you, Mr.
Chair and thank you very much.
OK, uh, now we'll go to Felicia,
uh, Felicia Guehan.
Hello, members of the committee
and chairman. My name is Talia
Guille and I am here on behalf
of Yucca, a statewide youth-led
climate justice organization
with thousands of members and
supporters, we are deeply
concerned with HB20 as it
creates new divisions solely
focused on economic development.
It relies on propping up
experimental economies that will
have global implication
implications on our energy and
water resources. This bill has
left us
With a series of questions that
remain unanswered. The lack of
definitions regarding clean
energy and water leaves us
susceptible that this will
create a pathway for false
solutions like produced water,
hydrogen, and carbon capture,
which are not economically
viable without subsidies that
have been cut from the IRA. New
Mexicans, especially land-based
communities face a freshwater
shortage and need intentional
investments in water
infrastructure that bolster
current initiatives.
led by grassroots, water
advocates. The lack of clarity,
oversight, and community
involvement for this proposal,
especially regarding the
language on a target sector for
clean energy and water creates
doubt in the intentions of this
bill. It is critical that
Uh, it's critical that we invest
in our local economies and their
agency on economic development.
Um, this we should lead the
charge on a just transition, New
Mexicans should lead the the
charge on a just transition, so
thank you. Thank you.
OK, we're gonna conclude public
comment online with Sandy
Stolberg.
Sandy.
Hi, are you able to hear me? We
are. My name is Sandra Stalberg.
Thank you very much for taking
my comments. I'm with
Indivisible Albuquerque, and we
oppose this bill as it stands.
We would like to see there be a
definition for what clean means
um and renewable. We would like
to make sure that um going
forward that there are
safeguards in place and that
there's consideration of public
health and environmental impact
and that we also do resource
conservation. Thank you for
taking my comments.
Great. Thank you very much,
Sandy. OK, that's gonna conclude
our comments, uh, we're back to
the bill with the HAFC
amendment. We're gonna start
with Representative Pettigrew,
and then go to other questions
from the commit or did you, if
you didn't have a question,
that's good.
OK. OK. Uh, we'll go to
Representative Vincent then.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Thank you,
Madam Vice Chair, presenters,
what kind of workforce
development.
Will you have for the workforce
too.
To, um, you know,
For the tech industries.
Mr. Chair, uh, Representative
Rob Black Economic Development
Secretary designee, um, there
are a variety of ways that we
would be both partners
partnering with our Department
of Workforce Solutions with our
public education department as
well as our higher education
department to ensure that those
industries that we're focused on
developing in the state have a
strong pipeline into those
careers. And I'll, I'll use uh
one of those, the careers that
is mentioned is, is, uh,
advanced computer tech.
technology, and I'll use uh
quantum, because that is an area
that we think is very, very New
Mexico is uniquely positioned to
be successful in. Already in
you, in New Mexico, UNM has the
best graduate, uh, computer
programming uh programming or
master PhD degree, pardon me, in
quantum in the country.
So we have that high tech, uh,
High-skilled workforce that
we're building right now. And if
we can create those jobs here,
then they will stay here. Now
they are all leaving, going to
work for companies around the
world.
At the same time, CNM will be
hosting their first quantum boot
camp this fall.
Uh, because most of the jobs in
quantum computing are not in the
PhD level, they're in welding,
pipe fitting, keeping things
cold, manufacturing. So we think
it's, you know, that sort of
training tie in with groups like
CNN, like UNM. Uh, another
example would be the
announcement we made yesterday
of a $5 billion investment in
southern New Mexico uh between
Senator Teresa and Sunland Park.
That entity will be developing a
a data center.
As well as, um,
Uh, water desalinization
programs, as well as energy
development and next generation
energy development. They have
already inked deals with Mexico
State University to support uh
uh internships and programs that
will tie into the
desalinization, but as well as
as building out an AI computer
program, uh, training center at
New Mexico State University. So
those are the types of tie-ins
that we envision, uh, working
well with this bill.
Thank you, Mr. Chair, and, and
how long will it take you to
fully staff this division.
Mr. Chair, uh, representative,
that is a good question. Uh, we
are starting that planning
today. We've actually started it
yesterday, not to, not to be
presumptuous, but we want to hit
the ground running. And so we
have already started looking at
what are the rulemaking we need
to do as to develop the grant
programs, uh, and, and what
additional resources, whether
that's contracted or staffing,
so we are building out those
plans now. Uh, it will be
important that whatever does
come out of, of the legislature.
Um, and on the, on the funding
side that there are sufficient
FTEs authorized for us to hire
for that to support that, um,
but we are in the process of
doing that right now.
Thank you, Mr. Chair, and a
question I need you to make me
feel good on is, you know, could
the creation of this division
lead to unnecessary government
expansion.
And or bureaucracy.
Mr. Chair, a representative, I
actually appreciate that
question. I think what we're
trying to do and what the
representatives trying to do is
be very targeted in how these
investments are done, and
they're being targeted based off
of research that's been done
that started in 2021 with their
state strategy, which we've
updated every year. We're about
to publish uh next week, the
update for this year for that
strategy, which aligns to these
sectors as key growth
opportunities. So our goal is to
really narrow how we make.
These investments so that we
increase the, the, the impact.
So our hope is, and our intent
is, is to actually make these
investments more efficient.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Thank you
for the answers. Excellent.
Thank you, Vincent. We're gonna
go represent Garrett and then
represent Duncan. Thank you, Mr.
Chair and thank you. Um,
Mr. Secretary, for mentioning
that New Mexico is a quantum
state. OK, mantra, um, I one
main question, um, Mr. Chair,
this might be Nathan Bush. Um,
we talked over the summer in the
science technology and
telecommunications Committee, a
lot about a captured fund
because sometimes they don't
require money, but if they know
you have money, you get the
grant. Would you say this helps
the
Fill that need, which was
identified as a gap.
Mr. Chair and Representative
Garrett, I appreciate that
question, the short answer is
absolutely yes, uh, the federal
landscape right now for these
big federal opportunities is
very dynamic and very
competitive. I do think without
question, it would be UNM's
position that this bill allows
us to be competitive with states
on the coasts, you know, the
much more powerful, well
resourced states, those are the
The targeted opportunities that
the federal government is
rolling out with the expectation
that the states have uh things
to contribute of their own to
make the federal dollar go
further. Thank you.
Um, Mr. Chair Representative
Garrett, that is a wonderful
question and one of the reasons
um one of the handouts that was
distributed for everyone is just
a small sample of some of the
opportunities that just the un
of New Mexico has had in front
of it.
Um, in this past year currently
or in the very near future. And
if you actually take the sum
total, I'm using sort of middle
point ranges. There are 10
opportunities listed here, uh,
with a need of over $100 million
in a whole range of areas
including.
Um, grid resilience, energized
watershed, uh, quantum AI, so
really um all sectors. Thank
you.
And Mr. Chair, my second
question is simply, some people
felt the committee was too big,
but I note that in section 4,
there's an executive committee
and subcommittees, so you break
up that number with targeted
purposeful, smaller committees
that can carry out the work
effectively. Is that correct?
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Thank you,
Representative. Um, you bring up
an interesting uh point of
disagreement and compromise, uh,
that has occurred with this
piece of legislation. Um, one of
the things that I found in the
strategic plan of 2021 is that
it really called out the need to
have.
Specific councils, um, and
advisory groups for each sector
And to do that would have been
way too large, um, and would
have been unwieldy for uh the
department. So what we've done
is we have narrowed the focus
and created an executive
committee, but also included
positions on the advisory board
from each of the targeted
industries so that there is
always a continuous feedback
loop from the private sector.
To the agency.
Thank you. And, and my last
question is, I, it's my
observation that this builds uh
Mr. Chair, on the existing um
Technology enterprise division
that has been quite successful,
but it's, it's recognizing that
now we have to build and expand
to meet these incredible
emerging industries that are
emerging even as we sit here, is
that correct?
Mr. Chairman, uh,
Representative, that is correct.
Um, we, we, we feel like that
program has been very
successful, uh, and this, uh,
provides additional resources
for that support, um, but it
does fill the gaps that help uh
when we're trying to grow those,
um, so, uh, I think that you
mentioned the fact that filling
the larger gap on the matching
funds, very, very important as
we build those ecosystems that
those businesses will flow up
into. So, we think, I, I would
say that I think that the
representative has spent a lot
of time thinking deep.
about this problem or this issue
for New Mexico. And this is the
most comprehensive approach to
solving this issue and helping
us, I think, position ourselves
effectively, that I've seen in
the last 6 years since I've been
back home in New Mexico.
Thank you very much.
Great. Thank you very much
Representative Garrett,
Representative Brown, please.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Um,
Representative Dixon, thank you
for this legislation. I do
appreciate it. So, um, this
would be using um state funds in
a number of ways including for
match funding, as I understand
it, um, so, Mr. Chairman and
Representative, my question is,
Who will own the intellectual
property. I imagine there will
be some discoveries, some things
that are patentable, uh, so
ultimately I want to know if the
state of New Mexico would have
an ownership interest in in
intellectual property, Mr.
Chair.
Mr. Chairman, uh,
representative, typically how we
structure those sort of grants
is they are, they are not tying
uh that startup or that, uh,
mid-range companies intellectual
property to the state. Um, it's
our, our, uh, goal is to help
them succeed and grow in New
Mexico. I can't say that that
would always be the case,
however, because there are these
federal grants that might, and,
and where there's a matching
component that may be a hub
grant that UNM participates in
that UNM may have an
intellectual property right for
that way they
would be retained or, or be
compensated for. So I think it,
we're trying to create a
flexibility and the types of
opportunities we have to invest
in New Mexico companies in our
ecosystem. So it wouldn't always
attached to an IT but there are
IP, but there are opportunities
where it could.
Mr. Chair and uh Representative
Brown, um, Nathan Bush, uh, from
UNM can speak to some of the
work that's been done with the
rainforest and and.
How that affects it.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Thank you,
Representative Brown. Um, each
one of your major research
institutions in the state has an
arm, if you will, that deals
with intellectual property and
um kind of corporate development
of
Technologies that have maybe
been developed at a research
university, but need to be
privatized. And as they're
privatized, entities such as um
UNM rainforest. I know the
bioscience Authority is very
active in this space. Each of my
peer institutions, NMSU, New
Mexico Tech, they all have
intellectual property
specialists who help advance
those ideas.
While also protecting the trade
secrets, which is important,
because we're a public research
institution and at some point,
we need some very careful
articulation of the intellectual
property becoming corporate
opportunity.
And, and pushing that along the
pathway, and that's actually
what this bill gets at. It's,
it's really setting the stage
to, uh, not just have the ideas,
be out there for the state, but
to have the state benefit from
those ideas by turning those
into a corporate opportunities
that return taxpayer dollars to
the state.
Mr. Chairman, I anticipated that
answer, so thank you. You know,
I, I sometimes think this is a
lot of money.
And if we could get some kind of
royalties or something out of
it, I think it'd be very, very,
uh, good to have that rate of,
um direct return. I understand,
Mr. Chair, the, the desire to
have successful companies within
the state. We know that's
employment, we know it's tax
revenue. Um, I just wonder if
there might not be opportunities
in the future to look for where
the state could actually get
some direct returns. So thank
you, Mr. Chair. Great. Thank you
very much, Representative Brown.
Um, next, uh,
I think um
Uh, represent Pettigroup for a
tech.
Thank you, Chairman and thank
you, Madam Kutcher for your
legislation. I have a question.
On the amendment, chair.
Uh, it's online, on item one it
says strike appropriations, but
then we reinsert.
and appropriation, and then
chair we take out the
appropriations in the back. Um.
That's not typically how we do
this. So uh thank you, uh,
Representative Pettigrew. My
understanding and our uh chief
is out in a staff meeting right
now, um, is the, uh,
to be able to make an
appropriation from a fund into
certain programs, that's the
way, that, that's how we do it
in here. So this is, this is
creating that mechanism, uh, in
ensuring that the legislature is
the one to make that
appropriation. um, and, but not
having any money sort of go
through in the bill.
Thank you. That's great
question.
Representative Duncan, please.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Just, uh,
just one question and then
probably a comment more than
anything and um
In the house
Substitute, there's a 10 million
appropriation something called
technology innovation prize
program and that 10 million is
also an HB 2, Mr. Chair, and
Representative.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Um, thank
you, Representative. That's a
great question. The $10 million
is actually not in the budget.
Um, that portion is being uh
removed, um, the, I think one of
the that there's funding in the
budget for the research and
development research development
and deployment fund. I think
that by doing it this way, we're
giving the department
opportunity to really craft the
rules and and of the program of
the innovation program, um, and
So next year, uh, we can um
provide additional funding. They
The department does have um.
Funding that if they were um
able to get something up, uh,
they do have flexibility now,
but I do suspect that um they
might want to take the time to
make sure that they get all of
the details correct.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Thank you.
I, I'm a small business owner,
so I guess I fall in that greedy
capitalist.
That's thrown around here. I'm
glad to see that I can throw you
in that category now too, rep.
The jobs that you're, that
you're going to go after, um,
secretary are well-paying jobs.
These are good jobs. These are
companies that are going to
employ hundreds if not thousands
of people that are going to be
able to pay taxes, going to be
able to help me pay somebody
else's utility bills and other
things within the state.
For that reason alone, I'm for
this project, and I hope you are
highly successful, um, and
Bringing people into the state
of New Mexico and uh maybe we
can change some other laws that
will make it even more
profitable for businesses to be
in the state of New Mexico.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. I
appreciate that. Great. Thank
you very much, uh,
Representative Duncan. OK, I
don't see any other questions.
Um, we're gonna go to uh the
ranking member.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Mr. Chair,
I move do pass as amended for
House Bill 20.
Kate, it's been moved by ranking
member Chatfield, seconded by uh
representative Garrett, uh, DuP
pass as amended for House Bill
20, in the opposition to that
motion.
Saying none, we've got to do
pass. Thank you very much. Thank
you.
OK, Madam Whip, great to see
you. Thank you for being here.
Um
Also, uh, for the next bill, I
want to thank Representative
Brown and others who are part of
that legislation.
Secretary Cerner, great to see
you.
Good afternoon, Mr. Chairman,
members of the committee, great
to see you. Um, we are here to
talk about House Bill 145 and
Mr. Chairman, I'm, I'm usually
more of an ad libby type uh bill
presenter, but today I'm
actually gonna um read off of a
bill, uh synopsis that my very
smart intern, Hassan Witter over
there wrote for me cause I was
just so impressed by his skills
to um really distill what we're
talking about with this bill,
so.
Uh, Mr. Chairman members of the
committee, Public Safety,
mobility and economic growth are
all largely dependent on the
success of New Mexico's
transportation infrastructure.
House Bill 145 authorizes the
state transportation commission
to issue an additional $1.5
billion in bonds to finance
needed state highway projects.
This includes developments
required for the waste isolation
pilot program and are eligible
as well for federal
reimbursement. This bill.
does not increase the total
outstanding debt cap, which
remains at $1.124 billion.
Therefore, these bonds may be
issued to the extent that the
aggregate outstanding debt does
not exceed this current limit,
which was set, uh, which was set
June 30th of 2001. This is a
measured and responsible
increase in the Department of
Transportation's debt portfolio,
ensuring that a current amount
of existing debt is paid off
until more can be issued.
Um, adding this additional
bonding authority would allow
the Department of Transportation
to continue funding its
prioritized projects in the
statewide transportation plan.
This is a reason this is
reasonable considering the
fiscal impact reports rejection
of a revenue decline beginning
in 2030, and the Federal Highway
Administration's estimate that
construction costs have
increased by more than 50% since
2020. I had to do inflation.
Um,
so as part of this bill in its
annual budget request, the
Department of Transportation
will be required to provide a
report on any project funded by
these bonds. Um, I'm sorry, no,
that, that amendment was not
adopted, so please strike that,
Mr. Chair and members of the
committee, and um with that will
stand for questions.
Great. Thank you very much. um,
uh, with Foxman V Hill,
Secretary Serna, thanks for
being here. Is there anybody who
wishes to speak either in
support or opposition for House
Bill 145 as amended.
OK, uh, anybody in opposition?
OK, uh, in support, uh, Director
Rus, please, and, yeah, line up.
Good afternoon, Mr. Chair,
members of the committee. My
name is Rebecca Russ. I am the
infrastructure advisor in the
office of the governor, and we
stand in strong support of this
bill, um, as you just heard from
Madam Whip, the sponsor, this
bill is in front of you because
we need to fund our road
projects. And I know that
members of this committee are
well aware of not just how
important road funding is, but
also how difficult it can be to
meet the critical needs across
the state, and
Uh, so I won't believe those
points. I just wanna note for
you that this, this bill1 HB 145
is a strategy that we believe um
reflects the coordination that
we've seen between the
legislative body and the
executive team over the last few
years, it reflects the work
that's been done to be strategic
and prudent and how we fund
things, how we use our revenue,
and, uh, and in this
we're looking at providing a
more consistent source of
funding for these critical
highway projects for years to
come, and we're doing it in a
way in this bill that is
transparent, that provides
critical accountability, and
with that, Mr. Chair, I just
urge your support of this
legislation. Thank you. Great.
Thank you very much.
Good afternoon, Chairman, uh,
members of the committee, my
name is Jim Garcia. I'm the
executive director of the
Associated Contractors of New
Mexico representing the
contracting community.
We really appreciate the bill
sponsors for HB 145. We
appreciate the alternative
funding option. However, we
would prefer a permanent funding
source from a revenue-rich state
like New Mexico.
The future funding sources like
fuel tax will be diminishing due
to greater car efficiency and
electric vehicles, uh, to the
tune of 25%. Inflation for the
contractors is averaging 35% to
40% restrictions like Buy
America, Build America are
obstacles for our money or for
our our community.
Bonding, borrowing at 5% as we
did with grip 1 and grip 2 is
another burden on the taxpayers.
This extension will add another
60 $60 million.
Please conclude your thoughts.
The contracting community would
hope that the NMDOT Future
Funding would not be in jeopardy
for most of the repayment. Mr.
Chait I have presented a few of
our concerns, but the
contracting community is in
support of HB 145. Thank you,
Chairman. Thank you very much,
Mr. Garcia.
Good afternoon, uh, Mr. Chairman
and members of the committee,
Franklin Garcia representing the
asphalt Pavement Association,
um, our industry standard
support of the opportunity to uh
increase road projects across
the state, uh, our industry also
is in support of other
legislation, legislation that's
out there that will identify
funding sources that will help
uh pay for the debt and for
future bonding projects. Thanks.
Excellent. Thank you very much.
OK, uh, we've got two folks
online uh will uh go ahead and
start with
Lynne Crawford, Mayor Crawford,
go ahead.
Thank you, Chairman, committee
members, I'll make this quick.
We, uh, we're constantly with co
op, EPF, and that programs and
uh working with District 2 over
the last year, we've seen how
they've really struggled to keep
up with all the projects,
financially and, and otherwise,
we've seen the costs over the
last 4 years of, you know, risen
over 20%. We know that's
probably gonna be more. And I
know as New Mexico is one of the
top 4 revenue generators for the
state is tourism as the mayor of
a small community that we
survive on.
visitor spending, I urge you to
provide the New Mexico DOT with
the resources it needs.
Uh, to keep the traveling public
safety, safe, and uh, you know,
so that people can continue to
visit our beautiful state and of
course my village. Thank you
very much. Thank you very much,
uh, mayor. Uh, next, we're gonna
go to Joe Keeley, Joe.
Hi, my name's Joe Kiley. I'm the
vice president of operations for
the ports to Plains Alliance,
just wanted to, to make the
comment that by by doing this,
this bonding bill, it also will
help the, the department
leverage federal funds. Um, it
provides them another way to to
to provide match to uh federal
grants and such. Great, uh thank
you very much. um.
Uh, so, OK. Uh, any, we'll go to
questions firstpresentative
Silva.
Thank you, Chair. Thank you,
sponsors, and uh Secretary
Serna, um, first, I want to, do
you remember how long it took
for DOT to do capital outlay
like from beginning to end. Can
you remind me how many months
that took. Thank you, chair.
Um, just gonna take a moment,
Mr. Chairman, members of
committee, Representative Silva,
I do need to introduce my expert
who needs no introduction,
really, uh, uh, New Mexico
Department of Transportation
Secretary Ricky Serna, who I
will defer to at this moment, to
answer your question.
Thank you, Mr. Chair, uh,
Representative, I'm, I'm sorry,
I ask you to clarify the, the
question. It's to spend capital
outly funds? Yeah, like your
capital projects. I, I can't
remember the number, but I know
it was, um, better than like our
ability, the state's ability to
get capital projects from uh
from contract to done was really
good. I just remember that and
so that's why I asked that
question because, um, I just
want to highlight that that
using
And um I think HB 145 will help
you complete projects and DOT
under your leadership has just
maintained a really good track
record for using funds wisely
and efficiently. Um, and so I
just wanna name my support for
that. And, um, and for those of
us who have constituents and
represent communities along the
state line, we should buy our
gas in New Mexico. Um, because
that means that it helps the
budget in DOT.
So I just wanted to make a pitch
for that thank you chair and
thank you presenters.
Thank you very much. Uh, and
next we're gonna go to
Representative Vincent.
Thank you, Mister Chair.
Thank you.
Madam Whip and uh Secretary
Serna, what specific highway
projects will be prioritized for
that 1.5 billion or do you have
any picked out.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and
Representative Vincent, so
thanks for the question. That
was actually a very important
amendment that we made in the
house transportation, public
works and capital improvements
Committee, and that all projects
that are to be considered for um
use of these bonding funds have
to be part of the statewide
transportation infrastructure
improvement plan, the SIP, which
is a very well vetted document,
uh, put together over the course
of the year, which identifies
all of those projects.
Um, via the transportation
commission process that.
Should be prioritized and need
to be prioritized throughout the
state and so these bonding
monies will be used towards
those projects. Thank you, Mr.
Chair. And how does HB 145, how
does it align with your long
term goals as far as
infrastructure and everything
go.
Um, thank you very much, Mr.
Chair, and I, I can start on the
answer and I'll, I'll defer to
the secretary to finish, uh,
finish it off, but, you know,
infrastructure costs continue to
increase year by year, inflation
being a big part of that and,
um, you know, we, the state has
an incredible need, not just for
maintenance funding, but to uh
to augment and modernize and
increase our transportation
infrastructure, so this 1.5
billion will
Take a bite out of it, but it by
no means will will fix every
problem, uh, and every road
priority that we have. So I'll
defer to the secretary to Mr.
Chairman Representative, just to
give you a sense of the
alignment. The requirement for
the department to have a
statewide transportation
infrastructure improvement plan
is codified in federal
guidelines. And so those federal
guidelines come with uh
performance measures and
targets, DOT has been adopted a
2.
45 plan that aligns with those
federal measures and targets,
and so the stiff represents
projects aligned with that plan.
And so we have that vertical
alignment from federal
requirements, tying the projects
to that plan, not only ensures
alignment, but it also ensures
that the projects within the
plan received that federal
highway concurrence.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Thank you
for the answers.
Excellent. Thank you very much,
Representative Vincent. OK, I
don't see uh.
OK, I don't see any other
questions. Um, we'll go to the
motion
we,
oh sorry, Representative Garre,
and then we'll go to represent
Brown for the motion or some
girl.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Uh, thank
you, Representative and Mr.
Secretary, just interesting to
me, the original bill talks
about on page one, including
state highway projects that are
required for the waste isolation
pilot project. I, I just thought
that was interesting, the
historical beginning of this.
Bill that's now being amended to
be appropriate for 2025 and
beyond. Do we know the original
date of the statue.
Um, Mr. Chairman Representative,
um, I believe that this began,
uh, with projects targeted in
2000.
One
Actually, um, Mr. Chair and
Representative, I see it's been
the laws of 1989 I just answered
my own question.
Thank you.
Thank you, Representative. Uh,
OK.
Uh, I don't see any other
questions. We'll go to
Representative Brown.
Mr Chera knew would do pass on
House Bill 145 as amended.
Second
by Representative Brown, saying
by Representative Silva. Is
there any opposition to that
motion?
Please show representative
Pettigrew in opposition and
Go ahead. Thank you very much,
Madam. Thank you Secretary.
Thank you. Thank you, Mr.
Chairman, members of the
committee.
We'll ask our uh representative.
Herrera. Thank you, sir.
All right.
Uh, Representative Verera,
please go ahead and we'll get to
your, uh, the amendment here
soon as well. Uh, thank you, Mr.
Chair. Thank you, members of the
committee. I'd like to introduce
my um expert, uh Rebecca Rus,
who is in charge of
infrastructure programs for the
uh uh governor and um.
And uh we are um.
Oh, excuse me, and Tanya to
here, uh, the assistant
secretary at the uh um uh
department of state engineer's
office. Thank you. And uh with
that, oh, I will let them speak
and um make a short
introduction.
Great, uh, Director Rus, go
ahead, um, and members, maybe
let's just go ahead, we'll jump
in on the amendment first, um,
can you read us the number of
the amendment, please?
The amendment number is
231340.1. Got it.
OK, that's what we have. Can we
have a motion uh to discuss it,
OK? It's been moved by
Representative Duncan, name by
Representative Silva, um, can
you briefly explain the
amendments, go ahead.
Mr. Chair members, good
afternoon, uh, as, uh,
Representative Herrera said, I'm
Rebecca Rus, infrastructure
advisor in the office of the
governor, um, just briefly, uh,
to explain the amendments, um,
one piece of it is uh to remove
the appropriation section and
like in an earlier bill in the
title, uh, of the bill, it
changes it from appropriations
to an appropriation, that's #2
on the amendment list. Um, so
that's
Uh,
one piece of this, the other
language on here, the other
items you see listed on the
amendment, um, number one, and
then 3 through 9, all relate to
a wording change that appears in
4 different places in the bill,
um, this is a a request from
Representative Ron Montoya, who
is um in uh House Energy, the
last committee on this bill, and
they suggested that we change
the wording, uh, in the
instance where it appears prior,
the language of the bill talked
about brackish water projects
that reduce the state's reliance
on freshwater resources with
this um set of amend amended
language in each instance, it
will now say brackish water, um,
that, uh, enhances, sorry, um.
Yes, enhances the state's
freshwater resources. So instead
of reducing reliance on
freshwater resources, we are
enhancing the freshwater
resources in every instance.
Thank you, Mr. Chair.
OK, great. Thank you. Thank you
for that explanation. Um, that
makes it clear to me and uh any
questions committee members?
OK, can we have a motion?
Oh, sorry, Representative Brown,
please.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman, uh
Representative and Ms. Ruth. So,
um, we're talking now about
freshwater resources with the
amendment. How is that defined
freshwater?
Um, Mr. Chair and Representative
Brown, um, to, uh, be clear
also, uh, in the prior version
of the bill before this
amendment also had language
about freshwater resources, and
so that's not a new change, um,
but, uh, to your question on the
definition, it isn't a defined
term in the bill and general um
water work and as we talk about
water resources in New Mexico,
um, we will often see freshwater
defined as.
that has 1000
parts per
Mills, a million of um total
dissolved solids or less as kind
of generally understood to be
freshwater.
Thank you.
Uh, Mr. Chairman,
representative, and Ms. Rudison
and the expert.
So I see definitions here for
produced water, brackish water.
Is it?
possible that either of these
could be cleaned up to the point
where they would be considered
freshwater.
Mr. Chair
Um, Mr. Chair and Representative
Brown, um, possible that both
could, this bill doesn't deal
with the treatment technologies
or the standards that would be
imposed to do that, um, but in
if the technology is is there
and the science bears it out,
then, um, yes, the the answer is
yes, and I'd say in the world of
brackish water in this bill
before you has been previously
um changed in a prior committee
to remove produce water projects
from.
The scope of the strategic water
supply, so now the entire scope
of the bill is about advancing
brackish water treatment
projects and those projects, um,
we do know that there's
technology out there actively
used in around the world and
across the US that is treating
brackish water to um fresh water
standards and even further than
that to potable drinking water
standards. Thank you.
Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Great. Thank you very much,
Representative Brown. OK, we're
on, uh, this, we're on the
amendment that strikes the
appropriation.
Um, and, uh, and then makes that
language, uh substitution, um,
any other questions on the,
don't see any other questions on
the amendment. Uh, is there any
opposite can we have a motion to
adopt the amendment to adopt the
amendment.
OK, uh, it's been moved by Vice
Chair Dixon, seconded by
Representative Duncan. Any
opposition to adopting the
amendment.
OK, uh, amendments adopted. OK,
uh, now, let's go, uh, is there
anybody who wishes to make
public comment?
OK, great. Uh, we'll go first,
uh, those who wish to make
public comment in opposition.
Good afternoon, chair and
members of the committee, um, I
appreciate, first of all that
this sponsor took out um
produced water from the HB 137
and now only addresses brackish
water, but
In the last committee, something
very important happened and that
was that Representative Garcia
as well as representative
McQueen raised the question
about
What happens in a situation
where they're, there is drilling
of brackish water, but the
community might know that
there's PFAS or Giardia or
other, other problems that um
ride uh would arise from the
drilling of brackish water.
Right now, this bill, and I did
speak to the sponsor about this
does allow for notice. It does
allow for notice. It talks in
section
5 about um it being required via
newspaper, but then it just
says, well, the ultimate
decision is made by the state
engineer, and that's it.
And so what I'm asking is that
you all impose another
amendment, and that would be if
there's no formal complaint by
the community, then the state
engineer makes the
determination, him or herself.
But if there is a formal
complaint and I have um tendered
uh a document which I proposed
an amendment, um, that would
allow the community who knows
best the impacted community who
knows best to be able to.
request
a formal complaint and that it
be heard.
And procedural due process
requires both notice and an
opportunity to be heard and
that's what we're asking to have
amended. Thank you very much.
Thank you.
OK. Uh, now we'll go online.
Anybody who wishes to speak uh
uh in opposition, we'll start
with, uh, Sophie Sophia Jenkins
Nieto.
Sophia for one minute, please.
Thank you, Chairman and members
of the committee. My name is
Sophia. I'm here on behalf of
Yucca. We are a statewide
youth-led climate justice
organization with thousands of
members and supporters. Uh, we
understand the desire to explore
brackish water, and we're
respectfully standing in
opposition today because we
still have serious concerns
about the scale and risks of
brackish water desalination in
the spill.
While brackish water exploration
might be worth studying, it must
be done in a way that
scientifically, financially, and
environmentally responsible. So
we're urging lawmakers to amend
HB 137 to firstly require
comprehensive aquifer mapping
before any brackish water
desalination projects are
authorized. Um, secondly, to
limit public funding to projects
that are proven to be safe,
effective and necessary. $75
million is too much to allocate
for a potentially harmful
endeavor that's a sunk cost in
terms of energy and resource
extraction.
Um, and thirdly, ensuring that
any desalination plants funded
through the bill are powered by
newly addable added renewable
energy and include plans for the
safe disposal of waste
byproducts. Thank you. Thank you
very much, Sophia. Uh, next we,
we'll conclude opposition with
Sandy.
Hi.
Thank you so much. It's Sandy
Stalberg again with Indivisible,
and we stand in opposition to
this, but first I'd like to say
thank you to the sponsors for um
making the, the changes that
they have, but yet we still
remain without, um, you know,
proper safeguards about what
brackish water might do in the
community and uh any type of um
plans for the disposal of the
leftover residual that could be
um have dangerous components in
it, and we just don't know what
we're dealing with. So again.
Mapping prior to would be
something that should be
indicated. Thank you for taking
my comments.
Great, thank you very much, uh,
Sandy. OK, now we're gonna go in
the room. Anybody who wishes to
speak in support, please sign
up.
Uh
There's 5 folks, so if we could
limit it to, you know, 45
seconds or a minute, please be
as brief as you can.
Oh,
I, I don't think that is the mic
on?
I
Yeah
Mr. Chairman, members of the
committee, Marlahos, registered,
it's still very much sounds like
it is not on.
If you could speak, yeah, go
ahead. I think I see it's, it's
registering on our screen there.
Marla shows registered lobbyist
for the Albuquerque-Bernao
County Water Utility Authority,
we stand in support of this
legislation. We want to thank
the sponsor, the governor's
office, the office of State
engineer for all of the work
that they've done, uh, on this
piece of legislation over the
last year, um, the bill makes
available new water supplies to
open up opportunities for
industry and economic
development in New Mexico,
communities would
benefit from diversified water
resources supported by brackish
water, particularly in times of
drought, the strategic water
supply is an important part of
the governor's forward thinking
50 year water action plan and
preparing New Mexico for a
hotter, drier future. Thank you.
Thank you.
Mr. Chairman, members of the
committee, good afternoon, John
Thompson, I'm a registered
lobbyist for the Middle Rio
Grande Conservancy District,
which provides irrigation, flood
control and drainage from
Cochuti to Bosque Dellapache,
uh, for all the reasons Miss
Schultz just stayed and did not
repeat them, we stand in support
of the bill. Thank you.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman and
committee members Jim Berle,
registered lobbyist was in New
Mexico Association of Soil and
Water Conservation Districts and
we think the sponsors for
bringing this is states are
short on water, any new source
of water would be a great
addition and
For that, we just like to thank
them and urge your support, uh,
it's my understanding that our
neighbors to the south in El
Paso's city water is
Almost all, if not all, brackish
water, and so it's proven
technology, it's not an
experiment. We thank you.
Good afternoon. Share members of
the committee. My name is Alison
Riley, Public Policy director at
the New Mexico Chamber of
Commerce, and we're supportive
of House Bill 137, and we
sincerely thank the sponsor for
her changes. The strategic water
supply Act is a major economic
driver for New Mexico. Projects
that treat brackish water will
reduce our reliance on our
limited freshwater resources.
This diversification of our
water supply increases water
security for agriculture,
industrial, and municipal uses.
By mitigating the risk of water
shortages, we attract private
businesses.
Private investment and
individuals to our state. For
these reasons and the reasons
mentioned for the previous
speakers, we support this bill.
Thank you.
Mr. Chair, members of the
committee, Jennifer Bradfield,
I'm the executive director of
the Water Access Treatment and
Reuse Alliance, and I'm also a
registered lobbyist for
Borderplex Digital assets.
Borderplex digital assets
announced a huge investment in
New Mexico yesterday. $5 billion
1000 jobs. They're coming to the
state, but they need water
resources and the water
resources they're looking at is
desalinating brackish waters for
industrial uses. Additionally,
New Mexico's
and technology and scientific
research and brackish
desalination and water
treatment. We want to leverage
our institutions that are here
in the state, and we think the
sponsor and we think that the
governor's office for bringing
this bill. Thank you very much.
OK, uh, I think that concludes
in person. Uh, we'll go uh to
conclude with, we've got 3 folks
online, um, to folks that
Let's get started. Uh, we're
gonna go to Terry Cole for one
minute or less.
Uh, good afternoon, Mr. Chair
and members of the committee. My
name is Terry Cole, and I'm
president and CEO of the Greater
Albuquerque Chamber of Commerce.
The chamber very much supports
the goal of creating a strategic
water supply in order to improve
the state's drought resilience
and for use in developing green
energy. New Mexico has the most
brackish water in the nation,
almost as much as Lake Superior.
We need the research and
development as well as aquifer
characterization provided in the
Legislation. We also need to get
some projects off the ground, so
please approve HB 137. Thank
you, Mr. Chair. Great, thank
you.
Uh, next, we'll go to Bill Lee.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman, members
of the committee Bill Lee,
president and CEO of the Gallup
McKinley County Chamber of
Commerce. We stand in support of
HB 137, the strategic Water
Supply Act wisely this bill
moves New Mexico with smart
strategies that will serve to
secure the precious resource of
water throughout New Mexico. We
all know water is life in
McKinley County. We've been
working for decades on the
Navajo gallon water pipeline and
due to unplanned costs and
delays created by federal
bureaucracy. Today there is
still no water in the.
pipe across our state, many
water projects face the same
obstacles and challenges,
leaving our communities trying
to plan for a future when so
many cases there are no water
supplies, and if there are,
they're uncertain. The use of
conversion of brackish water,
the smart use of resources
available throughout New Mexico
mining and technology to map out
the aquifers, we'll serve our
state well as we shore up a
strategic water supply. The
quality of life and economic
conclude your thought.
Thank you. I appreciate your
time. Thank you very much.
OK. Uh, we'll conclude with
Keith Julian.
On mute, uh, Mr. Julian.
Here we go.
Mr. Chairman, my name is Keith
Julian. I'm a retired Earth and
environmental scientist and
longtime New Mexico resident.
Um
Passage of HB 137 would provide
nearly 134.
In funding for New Mexico Tech
and New Mexico State University
to investigate in detail the
groundwater basins around the
state which have deep brackish
aquifers and to characterize
both the quality and quantity of
these aquifers while brackish
water is often unsuitable for
direct human uses.
recent advances in desalination
technology make it possible to
treat brackish water effectively
and cost efficiently. New
Mexico's vast renewable solar,
wind, and geothermal resources
provide ample local.
lost energy to power
desalination technology using
advanced reverse osmosis and
modern
thought, Mr. Julian.
Yes, I urge uh HAFC to approve
and provide a due pass
recommendation on HB 137. Thank
you. Great. Thank you very much.
OK, uh, that concludes our
public comment. Um, we'll go to
questions. We'll start with
Representative Silver.
thank you presenters, um.
I
I do wanna um ask a question
about um one of the comments
that came up in public comment.
What if people do wanna file a
concern or complaint. What's the
current process now. Thank you,
chair.
Um, Mr. Chair and rep so I'm
gonna turn that over to the uh
state and junior's office.
Thank you very much, Mr.
Chairman and Representative
Silva. My name is Tania
Trujillo. I'm the deputy state
engineer in the office, and I
wanna make a preliminary
statement that this bill ensures
that all protections that exist.
Both in the water quality
context from enemy and in the
water quantity context from the
State Engineer's office will
remain in place and intact and
so with respect to uh
hypothetical example just to
walk through the process. If we
had a brackish water and
existing brackish water bill
that um
It was close to hops, let's say.
We had, excuse me, if we had an
existing brackish water well,
and
The owner of that well wanted to
transfer.
The use of the water from a
point A to point B, there would
be a public process that that
person would go through, and
that would provide an
opportunity for notice and an
opportunity to be heard, to file
objections with the state
engineer office as that moves
forward.
Uh, thank you, Mr. Chair, um,
and thank you, um.
Presenters and so for this
process though, is there a
similar
Um, way for people to voice
their concerns or complaints.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman and
Representative Silva. So what
this process does is establish
an opportunity for us to work
with together with the
environment department and with
the economic development
department to evaluate proposals
that would be made to entities
who might want to go through
that process that I described
earlier. So there's multiple
steps that would that would be
um taken.
And again, we've been very clear
that any of the existing
protections that are there in
place today, would continue with
even with the passage of this
new program.
Thank you, Mr. Chair and thank
you, Deputy. Um, I'm sorry, I'm
still not clear. Um,
So, cause I'm not.
Fully aware of all the current
protections that are in place.
Um, would a citizen or resident
who has a concern have a channel
to be heard, um, in, in this
scenario under this legislation.
Thank you, Chair.
Mr. Chairman and Representative
Silva, the short answer is yes.
There's an evaluation that would
be taken by undertaken by the
state engineer office to
Here those concerns in that
process that we would follow
does provide for notice and an
opportunity to comment back to
us and and state objections.
Thank you, Mr. Chair and thank
you, Deputy, um.
How, how much time does that add
also, like if there's a concern
or if citizens want to be heard
on a specific issue or projects.
Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman and
Representative Silva in
connection with the water rights
process, the short answer is it
depends, it depends on the level
of complexity of the particular
analysis that has to be done and
on the.
Severity or the the amount of
detail that is brought into the
context, if there is an
objection.
So it could, it could, um,
Be some amount of delay or it
could be resolved very quickly,
and I would add that we always
have an opportunity to try to
resolve issues through um a
mediation type of um a process
and that is something that we
very strongly encourage.
Thank you, Mr. Chair and thank
you, Deputy, um, and then also
for the sponsor would would an
amendment um that was suggested
that has a formal complaint
process, would that be
considered a friendly amendment.
Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Uh, at this point, uh, Mr. Chair
and Representative, no.
OK, that's all. Thank you, Mr.
Chair.
Thank you.
Next, we're gonna go to
Representative Brown and then
Representative Lujan, said
Brown.
Thank you, Mr. Chair and
Representative Herrera and um
the rest of the panel. I
I believe, and I've been told
this many times that New Mexico
has a lot of brackish water.
And I know that's true for my
part of the state and in fact,
Mr. Chairman, that's not much of
a mystery because we have
massive salt beds.
As well, and um, so where
there's salt and a little water,
you're gonna, you're gonna find
brackish water.
Um, Mr. Chairman,
Representative, um, where else
in New Mexico are we?
Fairly certain or at least
guessing that we do have
brackish water. Is it up in
northern New Mexico, for
example, Mr. Chair.
Uh, actually, Mr. uh, actually
chair and and representative uh
Brown, actually we have brackish
water throughout the state. It
depends, you know, where you're
at with the quality is, how deep
it is. We have a lot of shallow
brackish weather, but I'm gonna
let a ribecca speak to that in
detail.
Um, Mr. Chair, Representative
Brown, uh, thank you for the
question. Uh, we, in the areas
that have been studied where we
have a, a fair amount of good
information around brackish
water resources, um, it spans
nearly every uh part or region
of the state, uh, varies in
terms of salinity in terms of
how how salty that water is, um,
it varies in terms of how deep
those brackish water resources
are below the ground, um, but,
uh.
In the information we've
received from the experts who
study our aquifers at New Mexico
Tech in the Bureau of Geology,
um, I, I could give you after
today's hearing a map that shows
um some of the basins that have
been studied, um, that shows
pretty much, uh, almost every
county is touched, um, or at
least a majority of the counties
are touched with what we know so
far.
And I'd like to add to that that
that we've put 19 million in
this bill, um, that this body
has approved uh for the aquifer
mapping and monitoring, uh, and
we never had that kind of money
before to do that.
Thank you for that. And Mr.
Chair and, and panel, I
I'm familiar with the National
Cave in Kurst Institute, which
is headquartered in Carlsbad, a
National Institute and um that's
under New Mexico Tech as well,
and Mr. Chair, um, Neckri has
asked for funding and would
really love to, and it's
federal, state, and local
funding for that, that, um,
Uh, organization, um, they would
like to map the whole state
forarst formations. And we know
we, we pretty sure we, we have
quite a few of those. So I think
it would be interesting in the
future, Mr. Chair, if we get all
that mapping done by tech and
I think you would find some
valuable information there. So,
but, um, Mr. Chair and, and, uh,
Representative Herrera, so let
me
Ask if you think that this bill,
um, this whole effort would be
suitable for public private
partnership, say, to drill into
brackish water, bring it up,
treat it.
Uh, is that something that a P3
would be uh suitable for, Mr.
Chair. I'm gonna give that to
Rebecca, Mr. Chair. Thank you,
Mr. Chair and Representative,
uh, yes, the answer is yes, and
in fact, the potential for
public private partnerships, be
that in a formal context that's
created through, you know,
legislation that's pending in in
this session or through just the
informal ways in which public
entities and private entities
come together to do great.
things, um, that is at the heart
of what uh we're proposing and
creating a strategic water
supplies that we create more
opportunities and more of a
market for our private entities
that are advancing water
treatment technology, um, going
to be the customers, the users
of this treated water, those
private entities as well as our
municipalities, our universities
and other public entities to
come together and move these
kinds of projects forward, all
while
Preserving fresh water and
creating new jobs, diversifying
our economy, um, and, um, using
technology that is out there and
readily available to us to treat
this water. Thank you, Mr.
Chair.
Thank you, uh, Mr. Chair, I, I
just mention there's a P3 bill
floating around here somewhere
and we sure like to see that,
uh.
Garrett knows what I'm talking
about.
So, let me see if I have any
questions, um, oh yes, I do one
more, Mr. Chair and
Representatives. So, um, this
bill has a section 5, which
would amend an existing statute
to allow the state engineer more
time and authority to determine
if uh what to do about an
application to drill for
brackish water.
Uh, my question is, Mr. Chair,
representative, how much more
time do you think is probably
needed for them to come to a
decision on this application to
drill.
I'm gonna turn that over, um,
Mr. Chair and rep to, uh, Tanya.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman and uh
Representative Brown, the
purpose of the amendment is not
necessarily to extend the time
frames, but rather to codify and
put into law the actual process
that we're using now to make
these evaluations. So it, we've,
we heard feedback in other um
committee hearings that we
needed to be very clear about
this, and so now it will be
established in the statue.
in law. What process we will use
to evaluate impacts associated
with the development.
I hope that answers your
question.
Yeah, I think it does. um, thank
you. And then I think I do have
one little tiny question here at
the end.
What happens to the salt.
Mr. Chair
Mr. Chair, I'm gonna give that
to Rebecca too.
Uh, thank you, Mr. Chair and
Representative, um,
It's gonna be case specific site
specific as to whether or not
the uh materials that are
removed during the treatment
process are of value if those um
can be repurposed and reused in
some way to add value to the
overall project. Um, so there's
a possibility for for some of
that, um, there's also, uh, is,
as you heard from our other
expert earlier, every single one
of these types of projects is
going to move forward within the
construct of our existing
environmental and public health.
protection laws and permits and
regulations, so, um, in a
scenario where you have a
brackish water treatment
facility that is treating that
water, generating the treated
water that's going out as 11
product that exits that facility
as a product of value that
people are buying and using, um,
any waste products that are
generated would be subject to
either a solid waste permit or a
hazardous waste permit or both,
depending on what's in those
materials, depending on what um
is uh determined by the
Environment department in their
implementation of those well
established programs. Thank you.
Thank you very much, Mr. Chair.
Thank you, Representative Brown.
Uh, next, we're gonna go to
Representative Luhan and then
represent Little.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Thank you,
um, sponsors. Mr. Chalis has
been a
It, it
Quite a uh expanded conversation
through the last.
I think a few years.
Just going back to the acts that
uh I think you sponsored in
2019, um, and the research that
has been done at the University
of New Mexico, I mean, um.
uh uh NMSU, excuse me, um,
And I've been quite at handed in
um
Participating in the
conversation about this and.
had it assert in the forefront
issues is I had an energy policy
symposium.
And thank you to the sponsors
for being part of that. Um, I
just wanna, I just, I think some
of the questions that came out
of that that are still
perpetuating and maybe you can
answer some of these questions
or the cost.
And we're looking at, you know,
the, the, the type of water that
is that how deep how?
Saturated this water is, um,
what is gonna be the cost to
cleaning and and and making this
a, a type of water that's even
usable for um economic
development purposes, Mr. Chair.
Um, Mr. Chair and
Representative, uh, again,
again, it depends on the project
and um.
And in businesses and
municipalities or governments
will get together and figure
out, you know, is the cost of
doing this, uh, are gonna be uh
effective? Is it gonna be, is it
gonna be productive and, and
that's, I think part of the
whole research and it's part of
it's, it's all tied together,
but I will again turn this over
to Rebecca.
You.
Thank you, Mr. Chair and
Representative Lohan, um, during
the interim, uh, of over the
last year, the Environment
department developed a
feasibility study for the
strategic water supply and that
feasibility study, um, was
available for public comment in
the fall and finalized in
November and one of the key uh
tasks in that feasibility study
was to really examine the
economics of these types of
projects and to just give you a
couple of brief examples in that
feasibility study.
Um, there were several, uh,
Uh, entities that have
participated in providing their
treatment technologies and sort
of costs and the treated the
cost of um treated water per
barrel, um, across 3 projects
ranged from 23 cents on the low
end to 37 cents on the high end
and um our.
Non-brackish water that's
treated by uh our municipal
water utilities, etc. as a point
of reference, maybe in the 12 to
15 cents a barrel, so maybe a
dime more a barrel, um, or a
little bit more than that is
kind of what the feasibility
study, um, lays out and that
then supports this overall
approach and proposal for the
strategic water supply as a way
to have the state stepping in
and providing some additional.
resources and funding to offset
some of those higher costs of
treatment for a period of time
and make this treated brackish
water more cost competitive with
other water sources on the
market, and the other thing that
came out during the feasibility
study is that some of the
companies that we're sharing
information and tracking this
this proposal said that, um,
particularly on the industrial
side, they may be willing to pay
more for this type of water, um,
based on the overall benefit
that it provides for community.
in preserving fresh water.
Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. I'm all
for preserving our fresh water.
We're looking for many ways to
do that through.
You know, the different develop
uh economic development
strategies that we have in in um
just really looking at science
and as we're developing this
strategic, the strategic
scientific um opportunities in
our state. I, I still have to,
um, my next question, Mr. Chair,
do we have a site? Are we
looking at a site where we're
going to look, uh, to send this
water to be um desalinated. Do
we have a desalination plant?
Are we looking towards?
our local governments to use
their
current facilities and seeing
what that cost is overall cost
to and having them do the work,
Mr. Chair.
Again, Mr. Chair and
Representative, depends on the
community. You have a, you have
a project going on in Cuba now
that that that is using uh
desalinization uh and their,
their product really is
fertilizer, but they also send
some of that water to the city,
so it's working for the city on
providing other water resources
for that city, but again, I'll
I'll turn it over to Rebecca and
and Tanya who've done extensive
research on this.
Um, Mr. Chair, Representative
Mohan, another example of, uh,
so, so let me just take a step
back first, um, at this point in
time with putting forward this
legislation, there's not a um a
queue of perspective projects
that sort of lined up and ready
to go, but obviously we've been
talking to a lot of communities,
the feasibility study and and
other outreach during the
interim session brought brought
a number of things forward, um,
but one example of another
community that could benefit
from this, uh, is Alma.
They already have built a
desalination plant in town. It
is not operating currently. My
understanding is that they need
some additional infrastructure
built, um, a pipeline um from
the between the plant and a well
field in order to move that
desalination plant into
operation for that community,
um, so that's one example Santa
Teresa is another example where
there's ongoing research and um
NMSU was involved in that
research, as is the Office of
the State Engineer and some
private partners as well. Thank
you.
Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Um, so I think, I mean, we are
building infrastructure for this
is quite to the point that I'm
getting at and that this is,
this is a very expensive
endeavor on top of that. Um, and
we've been carefully watching
this and and having these, these
expanded conversations, Mr.
Chair, um, and I'm
We're still gonna continue to do
that, especially that's our job
in this committee, and I would
say if there are, um, what I
like about this is that we do
have the local government
involved.
In making these decisions, um,
Mr. Chair, I'd say that that is
an important component in how
this is evolved and how this is
evolving. I think without that
component here, I'd be.
I don't think you'd have my
support or many others for that
matter, so I'm, I'm, I'm also,
you know, watching how we're,
how these desalination plants
are gonna come about. And with
that, Mr. Chair, I'm gonna just
take another dive at this
section, um, 5 and page 6.
Under the the topic of notice.
And, and with the, you know,
with the community involvement
and, and what
What this section does and does
not allow Mr. Mr. Chair, um,
Sponsors, our sponsor, um.
They outline 22, it says the
wells shall not be drilled or
completed prior to 10 days after
the last day. I think we have an
amendment to that, Mr. Cha, read
the bill actually.
Um
I'll start there, uh, well shall
not be drilled or recompleted
prior to 10 days after the last
publication of the notice, and
until the state engineer has
determined that the use of water
stated in the notice will not
impair existing water rights, be
contrary to the.
Conservation of water within the
state or be detrimental to the
public welfare of the state.
Miss, um,
Mr. Chair, um, sponsored, I
think that the problem here is
that
Uh, it, it allows for notice.
The section allows for notice.
But not the opportunity for the
public to be heard in the sense
that
Um
The, what, uh, I guess my
question would lead to be what
can, if the community comes
together and has a complaint.
Do they still have the ability
to file a legal claim.
Um, with their concern or would
this language here.
Um, determined that their
complaint couldn't be heard or
anything to that matter matter,
Mr. Chair.
Mr. Chairman and uh
Representative, I think maybe
just a little more background on
the overall framework that we're
talking about and and
specifically which provision
this amendment relates to?
So in under New Mexico law,
there's an entire section
relating to underground waters.
And so this is an amendment of
Section 25 of 72121 through 25.
If you look at the other
provisions in that, in that
section, there are specific
references to what the standards
are that the state engineer has
to evaluate for.
Appropriating and regulating the
waters of the state, the
underground waters of the state.
And so all of these provisions
are complementary, they fit
together with each other.
But this
particular amendment does is it.
Brings the same level of review
in statute to one particular
category of water that that same
level of review and protection
exists in other places in the
statute already. So what we're
trying to do is match this
statue.
Which this section, which
relates to water that's located
lower than 2500 ft underground.
And has a salinity that's higher
than 1000 that little subset of
water.
is going to be on par with the
other underground water that
exists throughout the state, and
that's the purpose of this
particular amendment.
So, madam, uh, Mr. Chair, um, so
what you're saying, if I can
clarify what I'm hearing is that
we're aligning statute to
Existing statute, which has the
requirements and has the
Um
The
The information uh to where.
The state engineer regulates to
meet this type of water.
supply. Is that correct?
Um, Mr. Chairman,
Representative.
Simply put, yeah, I think what
we're trying to do is make sure
that the same level of
production exists with respect
to this deep sailing aquifer.
Situation as it does with
respect to the other
groundwater.
Resources that we have
throughout the state. Thank you.
I, I understand. OK, that's
fine. So the same level of
review to match a new category
of water is what we're doing
here. Does that still meet the
same standard of complaint of
review and complaint from a
community, Mr. Chair.
Mr. Chairman and Representative
Luhan, the, the way the process
works is if there are
impairments and objections if
there was a public welfare
objection, let's say that is
allowed to be part of the
analysis and part of the
complaint that could be brought.
Thank you. Thank you, Madam
Chair. Uh, OK, and just to be
completely clear, if the
community protests for a
legitimate legitimate reason,
the presence of any kind of
contaminant Pe fast, for
example, or other things, um, or
if there is.
Or if there is engineering
information that drilling will
cause subsidence or excuse me, I
just, my, my throat's getting
dry or any of a number of other
problems or if we have a
different state engineer cause
we have a really good state
engineer, Mr. Chair. Um, when
we've had, um, would any of this
change?
But those protections be in
jeopardy for the community, Mr.
Chair.
Mr. Chairman and Representative
Luhan the protections are
established in law, and so they
would be able to be enforced in
accordance with.
New Mexico law, regardless of
who the.
State engineerings. Thank you,
Mr. Chair.
Thank you. Great question, Rep
Luhan. Uh, we have
Representative Little and then
ranking member Chatfield and
then we'll keep going from
there.
Thank you Mr. Chair, um, and
thank you for the presentation.
Uh, Mr. Chair, my question
actually had been asked
previously, so the next person
go. Thank you. Excellent. Thank
you, uh, little. Next, we'll go
to ranking member Chatfield.
Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Representative, I've long been
an advocate for cleaning up our
brackish waters using it. When I
first saw your bill,
I had a lot of problems with it.
You, you keep amending it and
amending it, and I'm running out
of things to complain about, I
guess, uh.
I, uh,
Probably want to talk about it
just a little bit.
Uh
Ka Bailey Hutchinson plant in El
Paso.
Produces 27.5 million gallons of
water a day. It cleans it up so
clean that they have to add
mineral back into it to keep it
from
Uh, stuck in the calcium out of
your bones, so, so they, it
cleans all contaminants out of
it, all the minerals, it, it's
just just pure HTO H2O, um,
2
7.5 million gallons of water.
Now, I remember whenever the,
everything before, below 2500 ft
was a wild wild west. It wasn't
that long ago that state
engineer's office took control
of that water.
So if I go and drill,
And I start, I plant uh
producing 27.5 million gallons
of water a day, and I put it to
beneficial use has appointed
diversion, which is the world
that I just drilled.
Uh, well, I, well I been on a
water ride 27.5 million gallons
of water just like everybody
else in the state of New Mexico
that puts water to beneficial
use. Can I sell it? Can I trade
it? Can I?
Uh, thank you, uh, uh, Mr. Chan,
Uh, thank you, uh, uh, Mr. Chen
and uh Rep Chatfield and um
I'll give that to Tanya again.
Thank you, uh, Mr. Chairman and
Representative Chatfield, I
think what you're acknowledging
and referring to is the fact
that the legislature has
designated a separate process
for the deep.
Aquifers, and it had to do like
you said with the fact that
there wasn't a lot of
information available and we
still don't have a lot of
information available about
exactly uh the extent of those
deep aquifers. And so the
provision, uh, there are a
couple of different sections,
it's 25, 72, 1225 and 72, 1226
in particular, this bill is
amending 72 1225 to.
Be clear about the process of of
evaluation and of impairment and
public welfare that the state
engineer would go through.
The precise anterior to your
question is it whether you can
establish a particular water
right at a particular location
in those deep aquifers depends
on whether the state engineer is
able to declare a basin with
sufficient knowledge and the the
ability to reasonably ascertain
the characteristics of that
basin, if the state engineer is
able to do that, he can declare
or she can declare.
a basin, and then.
Providing appropriation of water
right.
But this the legislature has set
up a process that.
Requires that additional step.
So Mr. Chair, uh, in undeclared
basins, I would still have a
priority, right?
Uh
It would carry on into a
declaration.
That true, Mr. Mr. Chairman and
Representative Chatfield.
In an undeclared basin in that
deep level, you would, you're
right, you're right and used to
pump water from that location
would be recognized by the state
engineer, and that existence of
that pumping would be evaluated
in the context of any
additional.
Request to develop additional
water from that, from that
region.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Second
question, uh,
We, we just established how
clean you could clean the water,
which is very clean.
Uh
I might want to use that water
to provide water for my city, in
which case I'm gonna clean it
very clean.
Uh, I doubt it. It's gonna be.
Uh
Be economically feasible to use
it for irrigation, but if I did,
I wouldn't have to maybe clean
it quite as clean. Who sets the
standards for how clean that
water has to be for the use that
it's, that it's proposed for
whenever you pump it out. How,
how do you deal with though,
that's just another issue right
there and, and I wonder how, how
do you deal with that?
Mr. Chair and Representative
Chatfield, um, appreciate the
water quality question, um,
that, um, you're right that
there could be a number of
different end uses of this
treated brackish water, um, if
the use at the end uh for any
volume of it is potable for
drinking water purposes, then
the environmental improvement
Board of the state and
implementation of our states
safe drinking water laws would
be the ones who establishes
those standards generally.
And, um, keeping with and in
accordance with whatever the
federal drinking water standards
are for, um, a whole list of
different contaminants. So
that's the answer for drinking
water as the end use for any
other end use, um, a water
quality consideration would come
from the state Water Quality Act
through the water quality
Control Commission and then
those rules that are established
rules and standards for um level
the, the.
exact quality of the water
that's needed, um, is
established by the Water Quality
Control Commission and
implemented by the Environment
Department, um, commonly through
a discharge permit because um
the purposes there are to
protect our natural resources,
protect our other water
resources from not getting
polluted by any um uses of water
that does have some level of
contamination in it. So that's a
sort of short answer to your
question about where the water
quality standards come from.
Thank you, Mr. Chair.
So Mr. Chair, um,
This started out with quite a
few taxes on produced water to
oil companies and people that,
that might be producing oil,
have, has all of that been
removed out of this bill. Is
there any taxes to
Oil producers or anybody else
left in this bill.
Absolutely not, uh, Mr. Chair
and uh Rep Chatto and I, I
really have to compliment the um
agriculture asse and water
resources Committee. We went
through a lot of changes in that
committee and the members voted
out. It was a 54 vote. It was
very and at the same time, they
all said they weren't sure if
they could vote for this bill is
standing on the, on the house
floor, and then we went to
environment, we pulled out the.
water, and we got a a unanimous
vote which hardly ever happens
in energy and um, and so now
we're bringing it to this
committee and then to the floor.
So this has gone through several
changes, very difficult meetings
very difficult suggestions and
um I think we bring you a a
pretty solid bill at this point.
Thank you, madam chair, uh, I, I
appreciate your willingness to
work with everybody. I've been
there, uh, so thank you.
Thank you, Representative. Uh,
next, we're going to go to
Representative Hernandez and
then Duncan.
Thank you, Madam Chair, and um
uh representative, um, and
Presenters, uh, thank you for,
for bringing this forward.
Um, one group I, I would would,
would like you to come back and,
and, and strengthen.
And that's community.
Uh, you know, section 5.
Uh, giving a notice, uh,
through, through newspaper.
Um, state of New Mexico, Madam
has to do better than that,
especially on the in my
community, you know, where we
don't get the newspapers, we
hear, we hear about, um,
information through our radio,
uh, through the Navajo.
Hager radio station. Um, we also
hear information at our local
chapter meetings. We also hear
information from my relatives
who live in the oil and gas in
areas, uh, Madam Chair, my
family has an allotment.
Outside the Choco Canyon, lots
of oil and gas development.
In the area and uh and, and I
want to focus, well, uh, before
I, I, I, I go to the industrial
brackish. I want to take a step
back, Madam Chair. My question
is, um,
In my community of Shiprock, we
have a salinity project.
With, with the, uh, uh, treating
the, the, the water is what,
would this be, is, is salinity
and eligible.
Uh, um, project under what's
defined as brackish, mater
presenters.
Um, Madam Chair and a
representative, I want to thank
you for that and I also wanna, I
also just want to this committee
to know that that uh uh tribal
communities have done a lot of
hydrology studies. They're
probably the most advanced
hydrology studies in the state,
uh, that belongs to uh a tribal
communities that information and
they did that early on because
of the water settlement Acts
and, and so I just want to make
that clear. I don't know if
you're
about a
A drinking water bureau issue or
something else, I'll turn that
over to Rebecca.
Yeah, thank you, Madam Chair
Representative Hernandez, thanks
for the question. Um, the, the
bill in front of you has Bill
137 establishes a strategic
water supply program that would
provide uh opportunities for
grants and contracts in
different scenarios for projects
that involve the treatment of
brackish water, brackish water
in the bill is designed, defined
on on page 2 in section 2 of the
bill as um water that is
sourced.
From an underground stream
channel art artisan basin
artesian sorry artesian basin
reservoir or lake.
Having reasonably ascertainable
boundaries that contains not
less than 1000 parts per million
of dissolved solids and is not
produced water and that 1000
parts per million of dissolved
solids is a salinity, um,
consideration, that's a salinity
uh parameter, and so, uh, if the
project that you're talking
about involves water that is
over 1000, then it's meeting
this definition most likely, um,
and then it could be those types
of projects.
could be eligible for um funding
through the strategic water
supply.
that
Thank you, Madam Chair. Um,
Shifting over to uh
The industrial
Um
Uh, aspect of, of, of brackish
water, um, you know, uh, Madam
Chair, uh, you know, I've, I've
seen many, um, I would say bad,
bad actors and, and, uh, and
just, just I, and I recognize.
Beneath that we, we gotta do
something about it, you know, we
gotta do something about this uh
large uh consumption of, of
brackish water, um, what's,
what's currently
Uh, I, I, I, I, I understand
that in industry is, is, is
taking a step on this, but what
else is happening like with our
state lands, where, where
there's oil, oil and gas. What
happens to that brackish water.
Thank you, man.
Madam Chair Representative
Hernandez, um, I, I do want to
clarify that the program that's
proposed in the current version
of this bill that's as it's been
amended in other committees does
not involve any produced water
that's generated from the oil
and gas industry, um, so I 11
part of the answer that I'll
provide and then see if, if you,
if I'm not hitting on your
question well enough
representative is, um, that the
brackish water resources that
are underground in the state.
Some of those resources today
are being used by the oil and
gas industry to run their
operations. This bill doesn't
really speak to that or address
that in any way. What we're
really trying to do in House
Bill 137 is established a
strategic water supply program
that creates more incentives and
opportunities for community
level use of treated brackish
water. That is not affiliated
with the oil and gas industry.
hasn't been pumped and used or
um or touched by the oil and gas
industry, but rather is still in
that deep or deep or shallow
underground reservoir and um not
being used today, perhaps, and
this creates more opportunities
for community level engagement
and development of projects to
um invest in treatment of those
brackish water resources for
local tribal or state economic
development priorities, so maybe
that's a new industry, this.
bringing new jobs, and they
would use this water instead of
the local drinking water supply,
for example, to, um, it moved
forward their industrial
projects.
Thank you chair and thank you
for the clarification on, on the
direction of this, uh, and I
apologize. I, I, I, uh, I wanted
to to to listen in, in, in that,
and I'll probably watch the
recording. Um, I have more
questions, I'll go offline with
that. Thank you very much, Madam
Chair.
Thank you, Representative.
Next we're gonna go to
Representative Duncan and then
Herndon, um, and potentially
back to Representative Little.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Um, you,
um, Madam Chair Representative
and
Rebecca.
Excuse me, I, I, I don't
remember your name. You had
mentioned where we have the
data.
Uh, on one of your answers. Can
you elaborate on that a little
bit for me?
Yes, um, Madam Chair,
representing Duncan, um, I will,
and then, uh, my colleague here
from the office did engineer may
may be able to elaborate to, um,
where we have the data is
reference to the fact that in
the state of New Mexico, we have
a number of aquifers stretched
across the state. Those are
groundwater resources. Some of
them are deep, some of them are
shallow. Some of them are
freshwater. Some of them are
brackish and across the whole
state, some of those aquifers
have been very heavy.
studied and characterized and we
have a lot of data about what's
going on there in those
aquifers. Some of our aquifers
have not yet been fully studied,
uh, and, and characterized as we
call it once an aquifer is
characterized, we understand all
of the sort of parameters,
characteristics and boundaries
and water quality
considerations, um, and, and
also some sense of the amount of
water that's in that area, um,
and so we have knowns and we
have unknowns, and we have some.
spaces in the state that are in
between. Um, this bill is
focused on advancing projects
around the knowns around the
water that's been studied and
characterized. Let's get some
things moving. Let's make a
difference in communities and
let's also continue to
effectively move forward and
study the unknowns so that down
the road and in the 50 year
water plan, the governor calls
for all of our aquifers to be
fully characterized by um.
10 to 12 years from now, and the
appropriation that we just
amended out the of of the bill
that we've been moving forward
talked about funding the
aquifer, um, mapping and
monitoring program at New Mexico
Tech University that
appropriation which this
committee um put $19 million
into House Bill 2 for that
program as a non-recurring
increase is what I'm calling
supersizing that aquifer mapping
program so that we can get reach
that target 10 to 12 years from
now. I'll.
All of our unknowns have become
known. I hope that answers your
question, Representative Duncan.
Thank you, Madam Chair, that,
that was what I was wondering uh
about right there.
What will it take in dollar wise
to get us to the unknown to be
known.
Madam Chair and Representative
Duncan, um, what I can tell you
is a couple of things. Um, the
program that does this work for
the state at New Mexico Tech is
situated in the Bureau of
Geology and Mineral Resources,
um, they asked for a recurring
increase this year of I think a
million to 1.5, um, that they
said they need in order to
sustain increased activity in
this program, um, for the long
term. In addition to that, they
calculated that for the
3 years, they would need $28.75
million to supersize the scale
and rate of the work that
they're doing through
non-recurring funding for the
next 3 years, and I think going
out all the way to the 10 to 12
year time frame I've heard them
talk about it is over $100
million of need that's gonna
need to be invested into this. I
don't have the dollar amount
fresh in the top of my mind, um,
but 1 100 to 120 in that range
um is what we've heard from
I'm the expert to implement the
program.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Thank
you for that. So that $120
million.10 years down the road,
we will know all of the unknowns
at this point, at that point.
Is that correct?
And um that's the goal if, if we
increase funding and we sustain
that increased funding, and we
just heard from the team at New
Mexico Tech. They said that full
dollar amount for the full 10 to
12 year period is roughly $175
million of investment and what
we had asked the legislature for
in this bill is the first big
installment of that investment.
Thank you, Mr. Representative
Duncan thank you. Thank you,
Madam Chair. Um, are there, I
mean, is there
Potential for any unintended
consequences or what are those
unintended consequences? Can you
elaborate on that a little bit
for me and.
Mr.
Chairman and Representative
Duncan, that's a broad question.
I think
You know, part of, part of the
reason for this program is
because we have a water
shortage.
And this fits in the category in
our 50-year water action plan of
looking for new sources and new
opportunities in this case to
clean up some of this brackish
water to be able to use it for
our community needs, and that's
the reality of what we're facing
in the future, we have to be
looking for this in addition to
conservation efforts in addition
to protecting our water quality.
This is a suite of actions. I
think with respect to unintended
consequences, you know, I would
say if we don't do that, we may
be facing some severe shortfalls
and severe shortages with
respect to making sure that this
water is going to be safe.
And that it's going to be able
to be.
Developed without impairing
other existing water rights.
Those are safeguards that we
have put into this bill.
And that is if this bill goes
forward, it will be
The law and we'll have to be
able to enforce that you will
have to be able to follow that
as we move forward with this new
program.
Thank you, Madam Chair. And Mr.
Madam Chair and uh
Representative Duncan, I.
I realized in the Upper Rio
Grande and the Upper Rio Chama
areas we have never really done
aquifer studies at all. So 3
years ago, I started putting
capital outlay and grow money,
uh, to New Mexico Tech to have
them come start examining our
aquifers and our wells and just,
just to learn. I realized we
really knew nothing. I mean,
EBID and um and the middle Rio
Grande Conservancy, know a lot
more about their about their
water uh sources.
but in the north, we knew
nothing, uh, and I can just tell
you what we have found just, you
know, from we've done about 10
sites now in just the beginning
and we're just measuring and and
you do that by going out to
volunteers in your community,
ask them to go down in their
well, examine it, see what the
water's like and and then you
get a regional, you know, uh,
like a, like a uh El Rito study
or a Dixson study or a a trauma
study and you go down and do
that and you do that with
volunteers.
their wells and going down and
examining the water. Well, we
have found out is that because
we have our infrastructure for
water in the north is about 75
years old. We have, we have
problems with septic systems
leading, um, you know, breaching
down into those uh aquifers. So,
so that's like a real heads up
for us. How, how do we start
getting wastewater systems
implemented and we can do that
through the legislation that we
passed last year, and so it's
really, it's really.
a full court press to to protect
the aquifers that we have in the
and the and the drinking water
that we have and that's that's
just a side note for your
information.
Thank you, madam. Thank you for
that. Um, I mean, I'm trying to
figure out why I wouldn't vote
for this, you know, there's
just, there's just not a lot of
reasons I wouldn't.
I'd love to have the stuff that.
You, the reason you amended it
back in so we could take care of
a lot of water that's out there.
I hope someday that's a bill
that we can have this
conversation over and take care
of that as well. Thank you, uh,
Madam Chair and Representative
for this.
Thank you, Representative, uh,
Representative Herndon, please.
Thank you, Madam Chair, and
presenters. I just want to
circle back to a question that
was raised by uh Representative
Luke uh Lujan and going back to
section 5, page 6, which is been
brought up at least 3 times now.
When you read this section, it
doesn't seem as though that you
are giving a opportunity to for
a public comment if there's
going to be any drilling. It
talks about notice, a notice
being published.
In the newspaper, and then it
talks about drilling that will
occur by the engineer with the
engineer making decisions. So
I'm just wondering if you would
consider, Madam Chair
presenters, another amendment
that says that there is
somewhere in there that there
will be public comment and the
notice and opportunity to be
heard.
Yeah, we, um, at, at this point
know that maybe we'll talk about
this after this, after this boat
happens and see what we can do
before we get to the floor.
That's all I can say at this
point.
Uh, Madame Pierre, um, members
of the presenters that is not
sufficient, I think there must
be an opportunity for the
community to be heard, and it
should be specified in the
section. Thank you.
OK.
Madam Chair, on that point.
Representative Lujan, I would, I
would agree with Representative
Her.
Uh, represented, are you, uh,
sorry,
are you done representative,
Madam
chair, OK.
Uh, you're good? OK, all right.
Are there any um additional
questions from committee
members. OK, um.
Mr. Chair, uh, would you like to
make a motion?
I would be pleased to make a
motion, uh, Madam Chair, I move
a do pass on
House
Uh, agriculture, or no, excuse
me, on house
energy
environment and environment,
natural resources Committee
substitute for house
agriculture, Water Committee
substitute for House Bill 137 as
amended.
Great.
Same represents.
Thank you, um, uh, Jackie, uh,
the motion was made by Chairman
Small and seconded by
Representative Sanchez, um.
Is there
You just.
Is there any opposition?
Yeah, so why don't we uh go
ahead and do um
Jackie, if you don't mind taking
the the role.
Representative Baca.
Representative Brown.
Representative Chatfield.
Representative Dow.
Representative Duncan. Yes.
Representative Garrett.
Representative Hernandez.
No.
Representative Herrera.
Representative Little. No.
Representative Lujan.
Ha.
Representative Pettigrew,
Representative Sanchez.
Representative Sariana.
Representative Silva.
Yes.
Representative Vincent, Vice
Chair of Dixon.
Um
Jackie, can you go back to uh
Representative Luhan, please.
OK. Um,
Representative Luhan.
He has to explain my vote.
That's a yes.
Vice chair
Dixon. Excuse me, but my name
wasn't called. Oh, it wasn't.
I'm sorry I had you.
I didn't. I'm sorry.
Oh no.
I have you down here as a note.
I'm sorry. Representative
Herndon. So the answer is no,
and I'd like to explain my vote.
Representative.
Vice Chair Dixon. Yes.
Cheers mom.
OK, we need to go back to
Representative Pettigrew.
Thank you, Chairman and thank
you for bringing the
legislation.
Chairman, I, I know the impetus
for this bill. I've known the
history of this bill.
Chairman, I know that the
original intent was to
To fee.
Uh, produce water at the tune of
about $50 million a year to gain
a $500 million fund over 10
years.
I understand that.
With the testimony that was
given that, you know, it's
potentially somewhere around 175
million now that they need.
Um
I have no faith.
And we've seen this time and
time again that
Changes won't be made in the, in
the Senate, and I have no cha no
faith, the changes won't be done
during rulemaking. They bring
some of this stuff back in
future legislation.
Um,
Brecks what was originally
intended, and I can't support
that. Thank you. Thank you.
Um, we have Representative Lohan
and Representative
Herndonentham.
Uh, Mr. Chair, um, thank you for
the opportunity to explain me
about, um, I just heard.
From a number of us on the
committee that we'd like to
have.
I look at a potential amendment
to this bill, and I don't
believe that we, we got to have
a full, a fuller conversation or
understanding of that, so I'd
like to.
To make sure that as this bill
as it passes through this
committee that we have the
opportunity to sit with.
sponsors to have a fuller
discussion, I think there's a
missed opportunity here to
fulfill that, um, much like what
was done in the previous
committees where they did work
this bill and, and we have what
we have before us which, you
know, uh has uh
has, uh, had a, a change of a
significant change, but I feel
like there's still more work to
do and I'd like to make sure
that that opportunity happens,
Mr. Chair.
Thank you very much,
Representative Fern. Thank you,
Mr. Chair, and I echo those same
sentiments. I'm very concerned
that the way in which that
notice section was written, it
did not give an opportunity for
the community to uh make any
protests or have any reasons why
the drilling should not occur or
any effect that could be dis
disadvantageous to the community
and then to ask the, the group,
uh would you amend it just to
put that in and there was no
commitment to do that. They
would think about it. I think.
That's unacceptable. Thank you.
There we go. Thank you,
Representative Vernon, uh, I, I
guess I'll take a chair's
prerogative, uh, was this
concern, this concern, as I
understand it was raised a
couple of minutes before the
committee started.
Is that
It was brought up in energy.
There was a concern in energy,
but it was voted on unanimously,
so um I, it wasn't a big enough
concern. It it it wasn't the
discussion that we had today.
Let me just say that it was
brought up and then there was
unanimous votes, so, you know,
we just went for it. That's
great. And thank you to the
members. Thank you to the
members for explaining their
votes. Thank you for a great
hearing. Sorry I had to step out
for a little bit. Um, we have a
due pass. Can you, uh, Jackie,
please, what was the vote?
The vote is uh.
3 in opposition.
And 11 in affirmative. OK.
Yeah, I think it's
It was a 10-4 vote.
Confirming Representative
Herndon, Representative
Hernandez, Representative
Little.
And representative, uh,
Pettigrew in, uh, good for us to
just check that. No, it's OK.
Members, thank you for a good
hearing, uh, and a great day a
productive day we'll be back at
it tomorrow Verrera, uh, thank
