grew.
Representative Sanchez.
Representative Sariana.
Representative Silva, here.
Representative Vincent.
Vice Chair Dixon.
Chairs small. We have a quorum.
Excellent. We have a quorum, uh,
senator, thank you so much for
being here and thanks to your,
uh, folks who are with you or
saying, great to see you. Let's
go straight to Senate Bill 327.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman and
members of the committee, about
reinforcement with me right
behind me are the students from
Alcalde Elementary. While the
exact origins of low riders are
often a topic of great debate in
the entire country in the 1980s
MTV declared the beautiful
Espanilla Valley, the Lowrider
capital of the world, and that
title.
has stuck ever since. Lowriders
are a work of art in our
community, expressions of faith
and culture and cornerstones of
families not only in Espanola,
but all across our great state.
Lowrider culture is alive and
well, Mr. Chairman, and New
Mexico, and it's one I, my
community and the students
behind me are so proud of.
There's an energy enthusiasm and
beauty surrounding lowriders
that this bill celebrates across
New Mexico in communities,
embracing low rider culture. 60
Minutes ran a segment in
December about lowriders and
Espanola. So much so, we gained
so much popularity that we got
so many calls from people asking
about how to come in right.
a low rider asking about the
museum in Espanilla, which were
hopeful representative Herrera
can help us get, and so this
license plate is gonna do one of
3 things. It's gonna ensure that
it shines a light on a community
that so many times we're asked
if we've heard the latest
Espanola joke. We don't want to
hear it. When the students
behind me here the senators say
he's brown, he's down and he's
low to the ground. Their heads
pick up just a little, cause
they can relate to me.
And when they see a license
plate that reads the lowrider
capital of the world, their
heads will be held very high as
they're cruising low, because
this will shine a light on the
community and a win for a
community that needs it. And
with that, Mr. Chair, we stand
for questions. Excellent. Thank
you so much, Senator. Thank you
very much, Representative. We'll
go straight to public comment.
If you wish to make public
comment, would you mind raising
your hand and then we can have
you come down to the middle.
And we know that we have some
folks from Alcalde from the
elementary who are ready, we're
excited for you guys to
To share your support with them.
Hello, um, chairman, um, I.
Support the bill because it is a
significant um stamp for New
Mexico, especially Espanola
where I'm from and it means a
lot to the state, and I think we
should have the license plate,
um, of the low, the low rider
capital of the world.
Excellent. Thank you very much.
Mr. Chair, good morning. And
please tell us your name when
you Robert.
I'm in favor of this bill,
because my, my whole generation
of low riders, I support them
the most, I think that um I
mean, I'm kind of.
I have a low rider on my whole
family does, we have passed it
through generations throughout
the years, and think it's
important to
Mm
I think it's important to have
this bill.
We passed.
Excellent. Thank you very much,
Robert.
Hi, my name is Piper and.
I support this bill because I
think the reds are significant
to this community.
Excellent. Thank you very much.
Good morning, Mr. Chair and
committee members. My name is
Scott Lopez, and I am the
founder of Vida Mejo Capital, a
501c3 nonprofit located at OK
Oing Pueblo in Espanola. We work
on infrastructure policy,
infrastructure financing, event
planning and government affairs.
I am a native New Mexican who
grew up in Espanola, attended
Pawakke High School and
graduated from UNM and also MA
Marine Corps veteran if you
didn't know. I am fiercely loyal
to northern New Mexico and the
Espanola Valley. Many of my
family members and friends.
Build and own lowriders. I
enthusiastically support the
creation of the Lowrider Museum
and a lowrider license plate,
and respectfully urged the
passage of this exciting bill.
Thank you, Senator Jaramillo for
your leadership and sponsoring
this important legislation and
thank you for your
consideration, Mr. Chair and
committee members.
Thank you very much. OK, uh,
thank, great public comment. You
are our youngest public
commenters so far, and we really
appreciate you all being here,
uh, those who spoke and also
those who didn't. We're gonna go
to the
committee for any question from
Senator Hunt.
Thank you, uh, Mr. Chair, I just
want to speak in um.
In support of uh this this bill.
Thank you for bringing it
forward. I too am uh have my, my
family and, and roots and
heritage in the in the valley,
as you say, and um, so this is
just, this is just an exciting,
wonderful and uh way of
preserving our way of life and
our culture and uplifting our
our generations, so thank you.
Great, thank you very much. Uh,
next, we're gonna go to uh
Representative Garrett, then
Vedrara.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Thank
you, Representative and Senator.
My brother was a low rider, but
in California with the 1956 pale
yellow Buick. Um, my question is
the art. Do you have a plan for
the art.
Mr. Chair, representative we do
the, the license plate has
already been designed. We
haven't shared it with anybody
but the license plate is
designed.
Thank you.
Thank you very much, uh,
representative,
uh, Herrera then.
Thank you, Mr. Chair and thank
you my um my senator Leo
Jaramillo and rep for bringing
this forward. I just have a
little announcement to make. We
did get the money thanks to this
committee in the budget to do
the feasibility study for the
Lowrider Museum, and last week
the Espinola City Council, uh,
backed this with an offer of 3
acres of city property right in
the heart of the city to build
the museum, so we are well on
our way to getting the.
lowrider museum in the state.
Excellent. Thank you very much,
uh, Representative Hereta and
great work, uh, on your end, uh,
we'll go to Representative
please.
Thank you, Mr. Chair and thank
you, senators for, for bringing
this forward.
If I'm glad you brought the
kids. I was a little bit on the
fence, but I'm gonna vote for it
now. Thank you. Excellent. Thank
you very much, Representative
Vincent, uh, vice chair.
We'll go to uh representative
Brown and then the vice chair
represent Brown, please.
Thank you, Mr. Chair and Senator
and Representative. I, I just
want to commend you for a piece
of the bill that I think is is
really wise, and that is
You say here that these are for,
um, let me quote the exact
language, uh, motor vehicle
plates, tow trailer plates, or
motorcycle plates, and, you
know, we just had a bill last
night and uh for the watch for
motorcycles plate, we have the
one for vehicles, but we didn't
have one for motorcycles, so
that um they had to come back
and ask for that. So this is a
good piece and I'll support it.
Thank you. Excellent. Thank you
very much for Brown, uh, by Che
Dixon.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Thank you,
Senator, um, and Representative
for presenting this. Could you
please define for me what a low
rider is.
Mr. Chair, members of the
committee, and official lowrider
needs to ensure they have dates.
So day ends are on those wheels,
it doesn't matter the size of
wheel you have a low riders
defined if you definitely have a
day in on your on your vehicle.
Thank you very much, Mr. Chair
I would love to invite any of
you to come to Espanola and ride
in the low riders.
Excellent. Thank you very much
for the invitation.
Representative Duncan,
did you say Dakin?
Could you tell us what that is,
Mr. Cha, Representative, sure.
The date in is the um the wheel.
So it's the spokes that are in
there, it's um every lowrider
has a D.
Uh, great. OK. Uh, thank you for
that, uh, great question,
actually I have the same, thank
you for that question. OK, uh,
members, we're gonna go to uh
Representative Verera and then
Representative Wuhan for a
motion in a second. We'll go
ahead and call the roll just so
uh uh.
With, yeah, we, we get to see
all of the parts in action and a
great suggestion.
Uh, Rosetta for the motion. I
your chair. I move that do pass
on Senate Bill 327. 2nd, OK,
it's been moved by
Representative Herera, seconded
by Representative Luhan at DuP
pass on Senate Bill 327. Uh,
would we go ahead and call the
roll please.
Representative Baca. Yes.
Representative Brown, yes.
Representative Chatfield.
Representative Dell, yes.
Representative Duncan.
Representative Garrett.
Representative Hernandez.
Representative Herndon,
Representative Herrera, yes.
Representative Little, yes.
Representative Lujan.
Representative Pettigrew.
Representative Sanchez.
Representative Sariana.
Representative Silva, yes.
Representative Vincent.
Vice Chair Dixon.
Chairs small.
Uh, yes, uh, and I also want to
note Representative Sanchez's
deep work and support on this, I
know, uh, but OK, uh, was that a
unanimous vote? Yes, it was all
right, uh, by unanimous vote,
uh, you have a due pass on
Senate Bill 327. Thank you,
Senator. Thank you,
Representative, and thanks
especially to folks coming up
from Alcalde. Uh, you're more
than welcome to stay as we go
through our next bills. We'll
invite uh Senator Maestas, uh,
to come on up for uh Senate Bill
377.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman and
thank you to my good friend,
Representative Downs, who went
against her policy of no
unlicensed plates. Have a great
day.
Shows the power of
no twice on the next one.
Excellent. Thank you very much,
Senator, great to see you.
Welcome.
Welcome home to your house.
I missed you guys last night.
Uh, thank you so much, Mr.
Chairman. Very very grateful for
the time.
Oh.
Go ahead. uh
Thank you so much, Senate Bill
377, um, honorable members, I'm
thrilled to present today. The
bill aims to introduce a special
New Mexico United license plate
celebrating our state's lively
soccer culture and boosting
sports related tourism. The New
Mexico United soccer club, um.
It's usually 1 or 2 in
attendance nationally, uh, and
that's on a down the third base
line of a baseball stadium, so,
uh, you know, that's, that's the
love and affection for this
team. The plate, as you know,
uh, Mr. Chairman, it will be $50
extra for the consumer, $38 will
go to the tourism department for
the Newexico troop campaign and
$12 will go to pay for the
plates. There's a fantastic
social media blast email and,
and, uh, marketing presence of
the team.
So pretty much guaranteed that
the initial investment by the
state, uh, the state will recoup
that initial investment. It'll
be black with a yellow.
Uh, with the yellow, uh, symbol.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Thank
you very much, Senator Maestas.
Uh, anybody who'd like to speak
on Senate Bill 377.
there anybody online?
Uh, OK. Uh, we'll go straight to
the committee. Are there any
questions on Senate Bill 377?
uh, Mr. Chair, um, how many uh
different license plates do we
have? Um, for the state. Thank,
thank you, Mr. Chairman. Uh,
we're the envy of every state
because we have a numerous
license plates, but there's a
provision in the bill, uh, in
which after after 5 years, um,
if you're not selling enough
plates, you drop off from the
list, so you stay in statute,
but you're not on the list at
MBD and so this, this that
statutory component is.
included in this, in this
legislation, Mr. Chair, I like
that provision. I think that's,
that's that's sound, um, but I
also really, really like soccer,
and I think um we have a huge so
soccer culture here in New
Mexico and are united. We are
all very proud of our unit uh
team and um uh more we can do to
um support, I think this is
cool. Thank you. Thank you very
much. OK, uh, Brooks sent down.
Thank you, Mr. Chair and thank
you, Senator. Um, I'm gonna have
to buy another vehicle so I can
put another license plate on
another car because I'm really
excited. I know my husband's
gonna want to put the elk
license plate on his hunting
jeep, assuming he can afford to
keep it, but um, yeah, so it's,
it's pretty cool and I wasn't, I
stepped out, what are the
proceeds go to?
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Uh,
Representative Doo, the, uh, the
proceeds would go to the tourism
department to to supplement the
New Mexico through tourism
budget.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Excellent.
Thank you very much for down.
OK, uh, I don't see any other
questions. We'll go for a motion
and do pass on Senate Bill 377.
It's been moved by
Representative Duncan.
by Representative Brown, any
opposition to that motion,
please show.
And she likes to
show up some doubt in
opposition, uh, and, uh, thank
you, Senator. We appreciate you
very much. Thank you. Thank you.
Have a great day, everyone.
Appreciate it. Senator Campos,
thank you so much for being
here, uh, members, I think our
intent is this will be our, our,
uh, last meeting, uh, you know,
sometimes things come up, but
we'll go ahead and ask you to
close this out with both uh
Senate Bill 495 and then with
you with our colleagues.
Uh, Representative Vincent for
10 of Bill 197. If you could go
ahead thank you very much, Mr.
Chair and members of the House
Appropriations and Finance
Committee, uh, in essence,
Senate Bill 495 amends the
Educational television equipment
replacement fund to include
expenditure at public schools,
it adds radio equipment as an
eligible use and that's what
this does, uh, as we have so
much of the public television
and we continue to go and seek
the repairs, if you will, across
the state in both.
Public education uh uh PED and
if you will, HED.
Um
Educational institutions, uh,
radio has for quite a while been
left out, and all we're doing is
we're asking that they be
included, which would be the
word uh radio, and then from
there, of course, they would be
able to go and participate in
the fund. I believe there's
somewhere in the neighborhood of
about $1.2 million in the fund
now, uh, but this would also go
ahead and bring uh more of the
concentration into uh the public
media. That's what this does.
Thank you very much, Mr.
Chairman, members of the House
Appropriations and Finance
Committee. Thank you very much.
Is there anybody who'd like to
speak on Senate Bill 495?
See, nobody, uh, is everybody
online?
OK. I don't see anybody online.
Any questions from the
committee?
Brown please and then represent
Vincent. Thank you, Mr.
Chairman. Uh, good morning,
Senator.
Um, I'm, I'm just trying to go
off what I know who has radio
stations in our higher ads, so
the UNM Eastern New Mexico. Uh,
so with the radio and uh and I
don't have the full list, uh,
but it would go ahead and be,
uh, eastern UNM, uh, Albuquerque
Public Schools, those are three
of the major ones that I'm uh
I'm aware of at this time. Uh,
but there are other programs
that are spread throughout the
state, uh, that are not being
financed, and they're usually
Uh, run by, if you will, the uh
the school districts or a
two-year college. OK. Thank you.
um.
I, I believe I'll be supporting
the bill. I, um, I have a twin
sister who in college worked at
a radio station, and it was a
great experience for her, um.
I know they were at the time
looking at renaming the station,
and I suggested KEGS.
And they didn't use that, so
anyway, thank you for the bill,
Mr. Chair. Thank you very much.
Thank you very much Vincent and
then Representative Herndon oh
sorry,
uh, Representative Her, thank
you, Mr. Chair and uh Senator
Campos, as I look at this uh
higher education ratio. So KUNM
Public Radio has a program
called Youth Radio. So they've
been looking for ways to get
more equipment. I'm just
checking with you. Is this one
way in which it'll be able to
So, so, Mr. Chairman, of course,
Representative Herndon, yes, it
is. This is why we're, we're
trying to add the word radio
because uh this would also give
them another uh funding
opportunity.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Thank you.
Great, thank you very much
Representative Fernan. I don't
see any other questions. We'll
go to Representative Vincent for
the motion.
Mr. Chair, I moved that.
Senate Bill 495 with the due
pass.
OK
Hey, it's been moved by Saint
Vincent sang by Represent
Garrett, in the opposition,
seeing none.
Too fast and then we're down to
Centerville 495. Thank you very
much, Mr. Chair and members of
the House Appropriations and
Finance Committee. Sorry, uh.
9.
Senate Bill 197.
Mr. Chairman, uh, members of the
House Appropriations and Finance
Committee, if I may, uh, build a
very strong relationship with
the individual sitting next to
uh to me to my right, uh,
Representative Vincent has been
a strong advocate as we become
closer as we've been dealing, if
you will, with wildfire and
wildlife and we continue to go
ahead and seek other ways as we
move forward to go ahead and
help rural New Mexico. And if I
may, Mr. Chair, with your
indulgence, deferred to my
co-sponsor to make the initial.
Presentation, and then I may
have a few comments, but again,
I just wanted to go ahead and
express uh the relationship that
we've been able to go out and
build to help people throughout
New Mexico. Thank you, Mr.
Chair.
Thank you, Mr. Chair, members of
the committee. I really just
wanted to sit here because
Senator Campos has been making
me look good this year, uh, on a
lot of the good bills that we
are running together, and I'm
super excited to get to run this
bill with him, this, what a
great concept this is. The fire
fund has been
They've had this concept going
for quite a while, and I've
actually lived this life and
trying to buy ambulances.
I think that some of the
Some of the cost over here are
very moderate, uh, a new
ambulance these days is gonna
cost you half a million dollars.
With all the stuff that goes on
them and for a lot of these EMS
agencies to just go in and buy
them and, and not bond them and
have lower payments. It's, you
know, it's crippling, and a lot
of our rural areas really need
this, so um what this bill
initially does is it just, it
gives the uh medical Service
Act, the capability to bond some
of these ambulances and be able
to get the payments down like.
should be on, uh, it just aligns
it with the fire fund Act. So
with that, I'll
be done there. So thank you, Mr.
Chair, members of the House
Appropriations and Finance
Committee, in essence, uh, an
ambulance today, about 280,000
and that's of course with many
of the amenities in order to go
ahead and uh put together the
package and it takes about 2.5
to 3.5 years, once the order is
placed and so uh in rural New
Mexico as we continue to go
ahead and deal with this. We're
looking for ways to help to
leverage the resources, and this
is a great way to go ahead and
do that. Uh.
And Mr. uh chair members of the
committee, we, uh, hopefully
that you have uh that support
within you today to help us with
our ambulances for all of New
Mexico. Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Excellent. Thank you, uh,
representative. Thank you,
Senator. Is there anybody who'd
like to comment on Senate Bill
197, Ms. Russell, please come on
in.
Thank you, Chairman, members of
the committee. I'm Marquita
Russell with the New Mexico
Finance Authority, and I want to
urge your support of this uh
particular bill. We have been
funding fire trucks and police
vehicles through their dedicated
revenue streams for years. It's
one of the most significant
parts of our PPRF loan
portfolio, not because of the
volume of loans, but because the
impact it has in the community,
loans of this sort come to the
finance authority without any
application fees, loan
origination fees, and most of
these loans are done at a 0.
percent interest, so we, uh, we
think this would be a really
important element for their, uh,
use. Thank you.
Thank you very much. Is there
anybody online who'd like to
comment?
OK, seeing none. Any questions
from the committee or Herndon.
Mr. Chair, and presenters, who
are the other two experts that
are sitting with you, uh, Mr.
Chair, and it's a, it's a very
great comment because that's
something that I should have
done at the beginning, and I
apologize. Uh, we have Alison
Nichols and also Tim Johnson,
and they're with the New Mexico
municipally.
Uh thank you, Mr. Chair, and
then one other question, this is
to Representative Vinson, when
you say that we, they, uh, rural
areas were buying the ambulances
but not bonding them. I'm not
sure I know what that means.
Could you explain quickly?
So Mr. Chair and Representative
Herndon.
Whenever we used to buy fire
trucks, we could bond the money
in our fire fund, and there's
not that option on the EMS Act.
So all we're doing is bringing
these in line to where we can
purchase ambulances, you know, a
new fire truck now is a million
dollars and now, uh, an
ambulance is half a million
dollars and, and Senator Compos
being very modest. I know what
an ambulance costs. I bought
them and it was crippling. And
so this just brings everything
in line to where you can bond
that money.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Great.
Thank you very much for Fernan.
I don't see any other questions.
We're gonna go to Representative
Sanchez and rep uh rank member
Chatfield for the motion.
Hey, we have a motion, uh, from
Representative Sanchez, 2 from
ranking member Chatfield for uh
Du pass on Senate Bill 197. Is
there any opposition to that
motion, see then.
OK. Thank you very much,
Senator. Thank you Mr. Chair,
members of the House
Appropriations and Finance
Committee. I thank you very much
for the diligence, for the hard
work that you put forth the 60
day session, be able to go home
and just kind of take a breath
of fresh air. Thank you very
much for your work. Thank you
very much. Uh, members that I
think concludes us for today.
We'll check in if there's any
other things that come up right
now, we're not expecting it.
Very, very big thank you. um,
please enjoy on the floor, take
good care of yourselves. We'll
talk before we leave, but
Great session and just thank you
for your diligent work. We're
