Representative.
There.
I think we have a quorum thanks
everyone first we're gonna ask
vice chair Dixon in
communication with the sponsor
in the executive House Bill five
hundred can be tabled to us by
our Dixon for that motion Mr
chair thank you and move that to
the table house bill five
hundred as amended.
I move I surtax in second by
Representative Garcia there any
opposition to that motion saying
we've table house bill from from
okay next it's great to see
leader were senator Neville
we're going to go straight to
Senate bill nine.
Thank thank you Mr chairman of
the Senate Bill nines a bill
it's been coming for many many
years for the trying for made
many attempts of trying to put
something together like this so
that we can.
Adequately fund some of the
issues that we have around our
state that we're certainly
compounded by the fires in the
things that we had go wrong with
this last year the some of the
flooding they were probably may
experience a as a result of
those fires
we also have all kinds of other
issues around the state to
create a fights in the rivers
and stream banks and all kinds
of issues that we want to try to
address this would be a major
fund that would put together a
sufficient dollars we could use
as a matching funds for federal
dollars as the key here were you
leaving millions of dollars on
the table every year because of
the fact that we don't have the
matching dollars available to do
what we need to do to come to
maximize those federal dollars
with it so more conservation
district whether it's forestry
weather just came and fish
whatever it is there are
programs throughout our state
government that don't have the
dollars they need to be able to
address our X. access those
federal dollars this funded puts
together I think in the budget
currently we're sitting around a
hundred million dollars is
divided into two.
Two components one is to be
expended in the other one over
the next four years in the other
half is to be saved hopefully
every year will build on that
try to get it up to a
substantial number we're looking
at maybe three hundred million
or something on that order we've
got an opportunity with the oil
and gas prices and we've seen
the revenues we seen to try to
build this fund and it will
benefit all of us around the
state whether we're talking
about outdoor recreation like we
have lots of opportunities in
Farmington our farmers and
ranchers would benefit
substantially and certainly
forestry wildlife and all of
those particular issues I'll
defer now for some of the
comments from my co sponsor
senator Wirth thank thank you Mr
chair and members on one start
by just thanking senator Neville
for his continued efforts to
figure out how New Mexico could
join the other western states
and have a dedicated land and
water conservation fund we are
the only western state without
such a fund as senator Neville
mentions it's absolutely
critical as as we deal with.
Issues with wildfires floods
drought it's critical that we
proactively invest in our state
to.
Again address outdoor issues and
that's what this bill does the
beauty of the bill is that it
doesn't create any new programs
what it does is take existing
programs that we've all worked
on and we've all created as an
example the forest and watershed
restoration act is something
that I worked on with
Representative bandy and it's a
program that's been on the books
but quite frankly we haven't had
the dollars to make it happen
in the Centerville mention when
you put dollars in the match
that comes from the federal
government is substantial the
prescribed burning Act
Representative McQueen did that
that's that's in the west and so
you go down the list of all the
different programs and their
Novell said there's there's two
funds here and.
Kudos to this committee for
getting a hundred million
dollars in the house bill two
and initially was all put into
the permanent fund we were able
in the Senate amendments to
divided fifty percent of the
permanent fund and fifty percent
into the land of enchantment
legacy Fund the key is the land
of enchantment legacy Fund can
spend twelve million five
hundred dollars a year for four
years out of that fund the idea
of being we'll have a steady
source of money during these
four years and then during the
next three years we've taken
step one in terms of the
permanent fund I think we're
going to all need to work to get
dollars into the permanent fund
because ultimately that will
spin off the money that will
then be used for that purpose
and in the second fund this is
the beauty of where we are right
now with this much kind of
nonrecurring dollars and this is
an example of taking
nonrecurring dollars putting
them into a permanent fund and
then if you spin off five
percent on a three hundred
million dollar fund that's fifty
million dollars a year and so
again this bill is the result
of.
An incredible collaboration with
a variety of different groups
and you'll hear from them today
these are groups that don't
always kind of work together but
they've all managed in this case
to come up with this with this
language to come up with the
percentages you'll hear about
and one of the things the center
and develop I have done as we
move through the process is
really we've avoided changing
the framework of the bill unless
there really was agreement
amongst all the advocates for
example there was agreement to
put an amendment on to eliminate
the use of eminent domain
everyone agreed to do that we
made that change you're probably
going to hear some
concerns that different sites
have about other issues and that
they would like changed and and
really what we've tried to do is
kind of hold this coalition
together by not making changes
unless everyone agrees and the
key again as these are existing
programs that are going to be
funded under the Accel with that
Mr chair happy stand for
questions and thank with one
final thought we didn't want to
change statute of echo enabling
statute of current agencies so
we didn't do that we find the
dollars for the funds and that's
it we didn't want to change get
into their enabling statutes and
rules for thank you thank you
very much Centerville thank you
later Wirth Secretary props
right to see you anything you
like that before we go straight
to the public the final thing Mr
chairman here the house sponsor
and we appreciate you being on
the bill as well the work you've
done to get it to here.
Thank you so much okay will what
we're gonna do we're gonna ask
folks to line up we'll ask you
to keep your comments brief and
to trying not to be repetitive
we're on a bit of a time crunch
so we're going to shoot for
about fifteen minutes if we have
to go a little bit over that's
okay and if we can say under
that's great.
Just go ahead and line up and of
course.
Mr chairman members of the
committee my name is Debbie
Hughes I'm the executive
director for the New Mexico
association of conservation
districts so I have the
advantage of working with the
soil and water conservation
district which our political
subdivisions they have a lot of
statutory authority that allows
them not only to work with
private landowners to put things
on the ground also don't work
with state and federal
government
Like for like R. Sanchez said
this is what we need to be able
to bring a lot of this federal
money to the state it will
benefit the ranchers and farmers
in the state I personally have a
ranch and a farm and I
definitely don't want to see at
go out of business but I want to
let you know one thing because
when they're talking about or
there may be some people that
have have opposition think this
is going to be buying land.
The the game and fish has to use
the uniform appraisal standards
for federal land acquisition
which is also referred to the
yellow book so they can't pay
anymore than that so I just want
to bring that up because that
has been a concern it would be a
concern of mine too if I thought
this money was just gonna be to
buy a lot of land but please
support the bill thank you thank
you very much misuse.
Thank you members and chair up
thank you chairman members the
committee my name is a link at
the land I'm competing projects
director with recent with rooms
and action the city a project so
grateful to be here to be
standing in a room with a lot of
supporters and with the youth
that have gone with our summer
out there program who have had
experiences with change our
lives I'm really excited to see
a bill that's going to help our
youth have more connection with
the landed to experience
different things and I'm here to
speak to bring a youth member
who is one of our youngest ones
who wants to speak and I want to
talk about it and I want to
thank everyone who's here and
our to look because of my
representatives who got to hear
some of those stories before
hand I hope that when you hear
the stories you'll be able to
see how important this is for us
and how grateful we are as a
community to be here and to
support this bill thank you
very.
Thank you chairman and members
of the committee my name is yes
you are I am growing up in the
Senator project and I'm learning
a lot of stuff about myself the
rules in that nature I'm here to
ask you to vote yes to SB nine
for a better future for me and
my brother you are my voice and
I hope you say yes
Representative has been nine
thank you so much thank you very
much.
Hello chair hello chairman and
members of the committee my name
is Gabriela Kodi you'll I am a
member of the senior project I
live in the south valley and I'm
here to testify in support SB
nine.
Before I became a member of the
media project I thought the
outdoors and claiming Justice
conversations were not relevant
to me when I was growing up I
didn't realize that being around
nature could affect how I felt
often I feel like disconnecting
from the world around me.
However after joining the semi
of projects some router program
I learned that outdoors are
important for welding.
Through outdoor activities I was
able to recognize we must
protect the outdoors and nature
eco system they helped me
appreciate for the environment
which has impact my mental
health for the better.
As a young person I believe the
community deserves to have an
opportunity to engage with the
outdoor organizations like the
semi up project and many others
I currently found the outdoor
equity fund provides these
opportunities.
To our youth should have to the
chance to experience first hand
why we need to protect nature.
Equis is terms of our state
please consider voting yes for
SB nine thank you thank you very
much.
Thank you chairman members of
the committee my name is
Apollonia solace ordered I am a
member of the senior project and
I'm here to speak in support of
SB nine.
The land of enchantment legacy
Fund last year I got to
experience the outdoors through
summer outdoor program it was a
great experience that brought me
closer to my community and the
U. that resides here I was able
to learn about myself the youth
and their and their relationship
with environment I'm thankful
for the opportunity to of let
such a great diverse group of
youth.
It gave me a bunch of tools to
become a better better advocate
for the community and the
environment as the line will be
a groundbreaking opportunity to
increase access for more youth
all over New Mexico regardless
of their background.
As a young parent I'm advocating
for the future of my eighteen
month old daughter.
And I younger siblings and all
of the youth in the state
chairman and members of the
committee committee including my
very own Meredith Dixon I hope
you advocate this bill and vote
yes to SB nine today thank you
I'm so nervous.
Thank you so much to.
Go ahead please the morning
chairman members of the
committee my name is go to the
south of us and I'm a member of
the senior project yes my name
is very important not only to
everyone but especially our
youth because they're given a
chance.
To explore.
Thanks for an experience are
outdoors and nature it's very
beneficial not only to our
physical health but our mental
health as well growing up in the
south valley I felt as if there
were no opportunities for me to
spend time outside but now with
the semi up project I know that
there are I'm counting on your
support of SB nine thank you
thank you so much.
Thank you Mr chairman members of
the committee my name is
Katherine Christiana and I'm a
registered lobbyist for the
outdoor industry association and
I'm also here on behalf of one
of our members are E. I I'd like
to briefly highlight the
benefits of the outdoor industry
in New Mexico for all of you one
point one seven billion in wages
twenty eight thousand direct
jobs created two point two three
billion and growing in total
outdoor rec value added to the
New Mexico economy.
One important beneficiary is the
outdoor equity fund you've heard
from the semi a project and what
this means to the outdoor access
for all.
In twenty twenty to the outdoor
equity fund awarded forty six
organizations resulting in
getting twelve thousand three
hundred and ninety one and kids
outside I can't say enough about
how important this is to their
future.
Representative creating outside
has changed my life dramatically
it has changed me as a person
and maybe live a healthier
lifestyle in New Mexico we are
so lucky to have some of the
most beautiful recreational
spaces to enjoy these efforts
are not a way of giving and
taking but they are about giving
and receiving for generations to
come we urge your support thank
you very much.
Mr chairman and committee
members my name is Jim Glover I
actually wearing three hats
today and I want to tell you a
little bit about the by product
of SB nine because you may not
be thinking in that direction
one of the hats I wear is I'm
the founder and co director of
endeavor New Mexico which is the
state's outdoor recreation
business alliance we formed a
couple of years ago we've had
over two hundred and twenty
outdoor recreation businesses
and organizations join us all
working together to expand the
outdoor recreation economy my
primary job is a is a consultant
working with rural communities
all over the state of New Mexico
to help build their thriving
outdoor recreation economies and
lastly I've been sitting on the
as an advisory board to the
outdoor recreation division
since it launched a few years
ago what's exciting to me is
this is the future workforce in
outdoor recreation for New
Mexico sitting right in the room
with you and the things that
we're trying to do now with
respect outdoor recreation we
cannot have a thriving outdoor
recreation economy if we don't
have a thriving outdoors so you
are essentially create creating
nature's playground which of
that then become nature's
proving ground for outdoor
recreation businesses moving
forward so we strongly support
this bill and we look forward to
how it will bolster the economy
and keep our youth in the state
of New Mexico with jobs at a
rewarding sustainable for future
years to come thank you very
much thank you very much Mr
Glover.
Thank you Mr chairman members of
the committee Patrick Killen
registered lobbyists for chevron
chevron stands today in
partnership with the
administration agencies
environmental organizations and
conservation groups in strongly
supporting Senate bill nine as
currently written with no
amendments and we appreciate
senator Wirth and senator
Neville for bring the bill
forward as senator Wirth it
noted New Mexico is one of the
only states in the west the does
not have a fund with dedicated
funding and revenue for
conservation and we believe it's
time to take bold action on
conservation chevron supports
fully funding this bill with the
three hundred million dollars
this being requested by the
advocates and we thank you for
your time today thank you very
much Mr can.
Good afternoon I chairman small
committee members for the record
Dan Roper we tried on the needed
I'm really happy to stand in
support of this bill today as
you've heard mention today we we
are one of the states in the
west that doesn't have a
dedicated source of conservation
funding I think you can measure
that in terms of the work that's
not getting done every year
we're not doing enough work to
invest in the health of our
watersheds we're not doing it is
as many projects as we need to
to create more fire resilient
forests we're not investing like
we should and are working lands
in our farms and ranches and and
we can be doing a lot more to
connect our youth with the
outdoors when we began working
on this in earnest several years
ago it was about doing something
transformational it wasn't about
incremental change or short term
improvements those about
literally changing the
trajectory of the health of our
land and water and natural
resources for years to come.
We also want to do this in a way
that that brought people
together and spanned many of the
device that you typically see in
this building something that had
support from from our rural
communities are urban
communities from conservation
from agriculture from landowners
from Republicans and Democrats I
think if you look at all the
groups in the room and support
today I think we've done that
about as well as we possibly can
thank you very much thank you
thank you.
Good afternoon.
Mr chair members of the
committee Louise got a with the
Sierra Club Yogananda chapter
representing our thirty five
thousand members throughout New
Mexico we start stand in strong
support of the creation of the
land of enchantment legacy Fund
this investment we believe in
every corner of our state means
safety and security for the
unique quality of life we value
here the fund helps protect us
from climate driven disasters in
this crucial to protecting the
places that sustain and inspire
us we want to think governor
Michelle Lujan Grisham and the
bill sponsors as well for making
the strong investment in
conservation and protecting the
beauty of natural resources in
New Mexico thank you thank you
very much Sir.
Good afternoon Mister chair
committee members my name is
Keegan king and with the native
lands institute thank you for
giving us some time today.
I'm a conservation and
indigenous rights advocate and
I'm urging your support for
Senate bill nine that creates a
funding source for land and
water conservation this fund
will benefit local governments
and tribal communities protect
against natural disasters
safeguard water supplies and
support are growing outdoor
recreation the state in
partnership with local
governments and tribal nations
will now be able to leverage
this funding and pull down
federal resources that until now
have been left on the table we
desperately need for funding to
ensure that our state agencies
can meet their conservation
goals for the next generation
thank you thank you very much
for speaking.
Chairman members of the
committee my name is Leslie
Allison and the executive
director of the western
landowners alliance and lifetime
member of resident of New Mexico
We stand a very strong support
of Senate bill nine and I'd like
to just give you one example as
to why the San Juan Chama
watershed in northern New Mexico
is critical to the state's water
supply and economic future among
other things it supports the
majority of Albuquerque's
municipal water supply and
landowners and public land
managers in that water should
have been trying for decades to
bring the forced back into a
healthy condition and reduce the
threat of catastrophic wildfire
out there but time and again we
have been stalled by the lack of
non federal funding or other
funding support New Mexico
finally has an opportunity to
act decisively it's not just a
unique opportunity in terms of
the state's ability to do this
but we also have a once in A.
generation opportunity of
federal funding that we can now
leverage into the state and we
can't afford to miss this
opportunity we are aware that
people are concerned about the
question of land acquisition
potential and as private
landowners we understand that
concern however we believe that
the bill works under for three
different reasons in this regard
so one is that the amount of
money that game and fish could
get into this bill is
insignificant enough to acquire
any large amounts of land even
with leveraging funding secondly
the state is required to adhere
to the yellow of a book
appraisal values which means
they generally can't outcompete
private bidders and third there
are circumstances where you know
I thought full acquisitions can
actually benefit all
stakeholders including local
communities and and neighboring
landowners and a sick is so
rather than compromising the
potential Senate bill nine to do
so much good for so many we
respectfully suggest that the
legislature can do more
thoughtfully and appropriately
guide the use of state funding
for land acquisitions across all
funding sources agencies and
programs in a separate piece of
legislation thank you very much.
Mr Mr chairman committee members
my name is Pam Ryan here
representing the New Mexico food
and agriculture policy council
farm to table and the rocky
mountain farmers union we stand
in full support and look forward
to your support of Senate bill
nine really appreciate the
Sanchez bringing this forward we
believe that in in particular we
need to preserve and and support
our farmers and ranchers into
the future as many of you know
and are supporting our local
food system and thriving local
food system has a lot of
potential to move into the next
generation we believe that these
types of resources will be
helpful to the future of
agriculture and food system in
New Mexico thank you thank you
very much.
Good afternoon chairman small
and members of the committee my
name is that we Parker and I'm
the water associate with
conservation voters New Mexico
first of all we would like to
think chair small and the
members of the committee for
fully endorse the appropriation
at a hundred million dollars and
for the many reasons mentioned
by the sponsors and all of the
other supporters of SB nine we
encourage or support on this
bill today thank you so much
thank you very much.
Hello chairman and members of
the committee this is Anthony
Wagner with Wagner farms we
formed Kerala since the coral
we've been forming the whole
valley for over a hundred years
and we stand in strong support
of this bill for many of the
reasons I've been stated today I
think this will have to help
farming and agriculture thank
you thank you very much.
Mr chairman and members of the
committee my name is Lawrence go
ahead with and I'm I'm here with
the national at uniforms and
ranchers and we're in strong
support of this bill and for
this for the first time New
Mexico is going to be able to
compete with all the neighbors I
wrenched for thirty years in
Colorado and it was a lot easier
to to get the that nonfederal
matching funds in Colorado than
it is here and and maybe we can
keep keep up with them like for
example
Wyoming's had a bit of this type
of a fund for the last sixteen
years or so and they're getting
close to have putting a billion
dollars on the ground and so we
can compete with them now thank
you very much.
Mr Chairman fellow committee
members my name is Bronson corn
I'm here representing the New
Mexico cattle growers and it's a
shame that I have to stand up
here and propose a good bill.
The New Mexico cattle growers
has been in opposition of this
bill for several years and this
is the first time since it's
been brought forward that this
is been a good bill.
And I'm sad to stand up here and
to oppose it due to the fact
that it does have a land
acquisition and it and we would
like to have an amendment put on
it and I'm gonna beat this drum
to one red in the face I guess.
The if we could get a cap on the
amount of land put on for
purchase that would be great if
we had oversight in this bill
that at the end of the year all
the agencies the get this money
have to report to the
legislative finance committee to
the report to them exactly how
they spent that money that would
be great.
But.
We've beat this drum to death
and I don't know that we're
going to get it done but I do
want you to understand something
that Senator Wirth at a interim
committee and Espinola called me
out and asked me if there were
issues that the New Mexico
cattle growers head with this
bill had been resolved and at
that time I said I can't answer
that question I have not seen
the bill.
And I had asked for the bill and
I had not seen the bill the
first time I saw this bill was
when session started and so we
were not brought to the table we
were not asked how is this
affecting us and so I would like
for you guys to understand that
that this may be a collaborative
effort but but this organization
was not collaborated with and
we're the ones that rely and
live off of the.
Thank you thank you very much.
Mr chairman and members of the
committee my name's Taylor
Reagan's on I'm on with New
Mexico will growers and we also
stand opposed to this bill for
reasons previously stated
we do agree that the bills
intent is to provide funding for
on the ground conservation
efforts and that's a very good
thing but we just don't believe
that the bill should include
land purchases it's well known
that when large large parcels of
working lands are purchased in
this manner they never returned
to agricultural production.
Farmers and ranchers are the
original conservationists of New
Mexico and under this bill
private citizens will not be
able to compete with government
agencies backed by large funding
as there's no limit in the bill
to how large the land of
enchantment legacy fund to grow
thank you for your time thank
you very much.
Okay I think that concludes our
the testimony in here thanks
everybody and it's great
particularly to see so many
young people who are here we're
gonna go online we have first
we're going to ask if you could
raise your hand if you wish to
speak in opposition to Senate
bill nine.
Okay don't see anybody we're
going to go now if you wish to
speak in support.
Please raise your hand online.
it looks like we have for folks
I and we'll try to cap with okay
we've got six online I think
we're going to cap it at the six
who are there we're going to go
first to Steffi why spurred
Steffi for one minute whenever
you're ready.
Thank you Mr chairman and
committee I am here representing
three fifteen Mexico we have a
thousand members who believe
very strongly in fighting
climate change and what we love
about this bill is that it not
only by funds to heal the land
from climate change but also to
protect people from it
at Kanata ecology and water said
these are things that are often
hard to quantify
but we've seen this summer with
all the fires and everything how
devastating climate change could
be so this is a great tool that
will help protect all New
Mexicans from the devastation to
come thank you very much thank
you very much next we're going
to go to Scott Wilbur Scott for
one minute whenever you're
ready.
This guy will we're for one
minute whenever you're ready.
Yes good afternoon can you hear
me OK please go ahead.
Yes my name is Scott will run
the executive director of the
New Mexico land Conservancy and
we stand strong supporters of
the line and the conservation
legacy Fund we're statewide land
trusts working with private
landowners community groups and
public partners to conserve
restore private land the
community watershed landscape
jails we know that by conserving
and restoring these working
lands were also protecting the
host of conservation values the
wildlife habitat he took over
the base and cultural and
historic resources
this money would provide much
needed conservation funding on
local public and private land
and if you look at a land
ownership of New Mexico you can
see the roughly half the land
what happens right it but in
many cases the public and
private lands are intermingled
in this checkerboard pattern of
ownership so it's really
important that management needs
land better integrated and
coordinated when we're
considering things like forced
watershed and wildlife
management the funds would
leverage of federal
work thank you.
Thank you very much Mr Wilbur.
Thank you very much Mr Wilbur
next we're going to go to can
Hughes.
Mr Hughes.
Thank you Mr chair can use with
the collision sustainable
communities which is comprised
illustrious is our workers the
Senators tiles and Los Alamos
and other reasons already stated
we strongly support as thank you
thank you very much Mr Hughes
okay next we're gonna go to
Liliana Castillo the the on.
Thank you Mr chairman of the
committee my name is because
you're on the record hi I move
the chance for time advocates
this is not just for all the
reasons reduce the status from
argues thank you so much thank
you so much next we're going to
go to age Riana Nevado eight
three hundred for one minute
whenever you're ready.
Yes.
Okay hi good afternoon Mister
chair members of the committee
my name is Adriana tomorrow and
I operate is Legislative
communications coordinator
Representative strategies based
Albuquerque New Mexico and I
also have the privilege of
working closely with the senior
project I am here to offer my
strong support for SB nine
according to a study conducted
by anchorman and others from the
proceedings of the National
Academy of sciences journals
children who are more exposed to
the outdoors with more green
space for less likely to develop
psychiatric disorders later in
life that includes depression
mood disorder schizophrenia
eating disorders and less likely
to engage.
Not only that but this constant
permanent funds work to promote
and educate argue about the
value of conservation.
And preservation of locating at
creation for agriculture so for
all these reasons listed me as a
value the mental health of our
citizens as well as a community
of New Mexico and want to
preserve lands waters and
wildlife of our state for future
generations to come the search
within your heart of these
customers to support SB nine
thank you for the opportunity to
speak this afternoon on culture
and their men and members of the
committee and I hope you all
have a great day.
Alright thank you so much okay
finally we're going to conclude
with Max Trujillo Mr Trujillo
for one minute whenever you're
ready.
Good afternoon Mister chair and
committee I'm not sure he'll
and senior field coordinator for
actual Hispanics your in camping
hunting and outdoors in New
Mexico
in for all the reasons stated I
stand in strong support of SB
behind and just want to remind
you about it reminded committee
a lot of that position on to
have the opportunity to acquire
land when it's appropriate it is
a huge plus for the state of New
Mexico as we in northern New
Mexico and all across the state
have come across situations
where.
Private landowners coming from
taxes in California or wherever
he might land adjacent to the
Forrester to State Land the
block our roads our access to
our public lands in for that
reason I I don't think the land
acquisition such about being in
this Miller nineteen New Mexico
should have that appropriate
opportunity to secure access
course residents in New Mexico.
Thank you Mr chairman committee
and I appreciate your support
for SB nine thank you so much Mr
Trujillo and we also thank you
thank you online this is our
committee takes great pride in
accepting public comment during
the budget and of course the
legislative process we also want
to recognize others including
the Santa Fe girls school and
others will send another
communications okay members
we're going to go straight to
questions we're gonna go first
to our own Representative
Chatfield.
Thank you Mr chair Mr chair that
this is one of the kind of a
hard one for me.
But.
Most of the folks there in the
front row of known me for many
years when my job was to come up
here and ask for money for
watershed restoration and I
never knew from one year to the
next whether I would have a job
the next year I always some
Medicaid was able to.
Come rolled through it and get
matching funds with that was the
key issue is that these
watershed projects have a hard
time getting matching funds that
you can get those state funds.
You can get a match to the one
by federal funds you can match
federal funds or state bonding
meant federal funds private
funds the match state funds with
private friends.
Federal funds as I the funds.
the year that before I was
elected to this office the for
our project put about eight
million dollars on the ground
Watershed.
Restoration dollars
with thirty three thousand acres
arrive very merry that's over
two thousand miles of riparian
area cleaned up nine thousand
acres of big game habitat
improvement.
I was in the group and started
working on this appropriate on a
bill to appropriate this fund I
think one of the most needed
things in our.
In our state is a is a permanent
funding gives us a matching
funds.
So that we can leverage some of
that federal money.
Immediately when we start
working on this I said I got two
things I'd like to see I don't
see the state of New Mexico who
hasn't you know right now of
almost unlimited amount of
dollars competing with our
farmers and ranchers for the our
little agricultural properties
you know just somehow put it in
there in the wording that this
would not be for the purchase of
property is not for the the
governor's thirty by thirty
program.
I was not successful in getting
that put in there
in any way the second thing that
that I just was that it create
no new programs we have so many
programs I just wanted to fund
the existing programs that we
have and so that was very well I
think everybody thought that was
a good idea so when I showed up
here the first thing I saw was.
House Bill I think forty five
which change in one of the
programs that was funded by this
fund to make it exclusively for
the purchase of property which
did not impress me a lot to get
diving Committee but it was
frustrating that that that took
place not
You know our forests are burning
down.
R. the those that haven't burned
or at a mature stage which
creates very little food for
wildlife to me trees are cover
but they're not food right the
university seen an elk or deer
eating the pine tree the that
goes for the pin down under.
So it's a tough call for me
As I look out there I can see
every face and I know every
organization that you represent
and I work with all of you.
unfortunately when you get
elected to this chair as you all
well know the table maybe.
If you can you can't vote will
see.
Let's just try it for awhile.
So I I appreciate the effort
that's been put into this bill.
I'm gonna come let's say I
usually about a week before I
get to this meeting I know which
way I'm gonna vote I've changed
my mind three times today
already sits us and out in this
chair
I think I know which way I'm
going on a listen and I
appreciate you all all the hard
work that went into this thank
you Mr thank you very much
Representative Chatfield next
we're gonna go to Representative
census.
Thank you Mr chair
So I too am concerned with the
land acquisition affects spoke
to a lot of the groups and
they've swear up and down that
this isn't gonna be used to
To hurt our native New Mexicans
I setting committee for house
bill forty five.
And one of the examples the
sponsor again was
That they purchased land be tied
behind the side twenty all into
my own.
And what he stated was we won't
have to see a mobile home.
Behind the side twenty and I
took offense to that because a
large percentage of the people
that live in northern New Mexico
in the mobile homes because
that's what they can afford.
And that's exactly what I don't
want to see in this bill
But like I said I I just want to
ask the sponsors of do you see
this affecting my main concern
is gentrification forcing in
Santa Fe or seen it in Thomas
it's ready and it's natural but
I don't want to see that
expedited on I don't want to see
this money spent saw forcing
people to move people from Santa
Fe have moved to Rio Rancho
because they can't afford to
live here they're moving on to
different areas I want to ask
the sponsor I heard from a lot
of the groups and they've
committed this will be used to
to space working lands or
whatever I just want to hear you
the Sanchez comments on this
issue.
Our concern.
Mr Chairman representative
This bill is a funding bill
there's not words in there
saying we're gonna go by the
children that isn't now the
agencies have authority some
agencies do have authority to
purchase land that's already in
there statute and what we made
clear is that we would not
change the the.
The qualifying statutes of any
of the agencies involved I think
they're six agencies total.
they have different authorities
different things that they use
the funds for this is for
conservation funding it's a
money bill it has nothing to do
about authorizing game and fish
force or any other agency to buy
land.
it's it's almost a non issue the
game and fish department as far
as I know is may two purchases
of the last thirty years or so
two eagle this lake and help our
rich that's the only two
purchases at the eagle nest was
under our governor I'm a
Republican.
Gary Johnson authorize that and
push that he wanted a honest for
good reason illness is a nice
little lake and it probably is a
good idea to keep that in public
thank you that's could be
debated but help our I haven't
been there till the director I'm
gonna go see it this summer I
get up there I want to find out
whether but it was largely an
issue of the tribal governments
around there they wanted to have
that property available for the
public so thank you.
Not the probably other reasons
but.
It's not like any of these
agencies are going around buying
up the state it's just not
happening so it's become a
really it's a non issue that has
become a big issue and it's
really not the focus of this
bill it's not in there it's not
a part of it it's dollars
dollars and cents setting up
funds so that so in water
conservation district or
whatever can do like
Representative Chatfield is
talking about they can do the
work that needs to be done on
the ground the Secretary might
have other comments and
alternative further our experts
sector approach if you'd like to
so just before the secretary can
I just but it is just as well
because I think it's it's a good
question and again I think when
you look at the programs that
are in here one of them is the
outdoor equity grant programs
Representative Rubio created
that really is designed to
celebrate and enhance our our
environmental cultural resources
for all New Mexicans and again
so I mean I I.
We have the same amendment
proposed handed to us to kind of
add on acquisition
ability under change one of
these statutes we rejected the
amendment and so I just want you
to know Representative and I
appreciate where you're going we
had we have to amendments on
both sides and and basically as
I said up front if we didn't
have agreements.
We we we decided to leave the
statutes as they are and the
vast majority of the statutes
have nothing to do with
acquisition and there's a tiny
window with in game in fishing
we've got council here in the
secretary and they can get into
that window but really the focus
of this bill is to again do I
set up front as we deal with
wildfires floods what happened
up north in those communities
and and I appreciate what
Representative Chatfield was
talking about force management
because it's something and I've
been here long enough to have
watched this legislature finally
sit down together so that we had
different groups that didn't
always talk to each other and
they were willing to sit down
together and that led to the
forest and watershed restoration
act bipartisan
and so I just think that I mean
I appreciate what you're saying
I think what we're trying to do
here is for all New Mexicans
it's not to try and benefit one
side or the other side and Mr
chair I just want to share a
statistic of most people know
this but to the rear of the
county where I'm from Missouri
but it's only twenty four
percent privately owned services
federal state and tribal lands
and
That's an example
There's not that much labs that
people can buy other families
can basically families can live
in the area and I would hate to
and I I love ninety five percent
of this bill and I'm trying to
support and I I probably will on
this I hear something crazy.
But I.
I'm just using that example
that's my concern that very was
beautiful and
They're going to use this fund
to go by Landon that's gonna
drive up prices for people so
they can't buy from property in
the by the families
So I'm just making a point those
are my concerns I've been
assured by a lot of the groups
that's not the intent but there
is the land acquisition part
that Conservancy for like I said
I'm getting assurances from you
of the the people involved the.
That shouldn't have been so
thank you Mr chair thank you
very much Representative
Sweetser ranking member
Armstrong thank you Mr chairman
thank you all for this bill
point that we get a lot of
emails on a lot of different
things but this is one that I've
I've received a lot of emails on
and I really just try to listen
to my constituents and their
their issues with it.
So you know I'm Republican that
has a ranch with the
conservation easement on it.
So I understand.
The the part of of conserving
the ranch for the rest of its
life it will never be subdivided
we bought the ranch when it have
that conservation easement are
already on it the way you can
afford ranchers like that is by
because the previous owner did
that.
And the and you know people
there hackles come up when they
hear that.
But honestly my grandchildren
and my grand children's children
will probably get to enjoy that
ranch.
And so I'm exactly where
Representative Chatfield is I'd
there's and Sanchez there's a
lot of good stuff in this bill
there's a little bit that
worries me of course it's always
the land acquisition
I I see I love that you all gave
us these what's what has
benefited us in our communities
And I'll say it again I know
everybody's tired of hearing it
but I do represent the largest
district in the nation.
House district in the nation.
It's a lot of land.
That's a lot of land.
And
So it's.
It's imperative that I make a
good decision on this it's a lot
of pressure.
because you know the the good
the bad the ugly that's in the
bill but what I one of the
questions I have is.
I understand what.
Introduce this money is going to
where in the bill fort in the
bill anywhere does it say that
they can't expand and still get
that money and be able to expand
in that area.
Mr chairman of Representative.
Everyone of these agencies have
some kind of statutory authority
that's what we didn't touch we
didn't say you can't buy land
you can buy land go by land go
do whatever we didn't say any
that don't change your program
if your program is wildlife
working for wildlife do what you
do but don't here's the money.
How to match it is best you can
the same with salt water
districts of solar conservation
districts the same way with
their forestry all the way
through we didn't change and
that's that's been the issue we
don't change the prevailing
statute for any of these
agencies.
There's there's a lot of
pressure well let's make this
agency do such and such we don't
do that here's some money do
what you do do what you're
trying to do the secretary I'm
gonna let her talk it but I'd
like her to jump in here and up
to keep interrupting her but let
her million and she can tell you
more about what goes on with
agencies.
Mr chair representative
Armstrong thank you
pardon my allergies so this part
we we are looking at six
agencies ten programs across the
state agencies and they they are
the national heritage
conservation arts program at
EMNRD and the force of watershed
restoration act programs
the four of program we could
actually match three one with
disabilities bipartisan
infrastructure dollars that we
have huge opportunities near
term more and and EMNRD we get
twenty two point five percent of
the annual distribution that set
in statute we can't change that.
The agriculture department we
get twenty two and a half
percent of the annual
distribution as we go for the
noxious weeds healthy soil in
the soil and water conservation
district programs at the
environment department the river
stewardship program gets ten
percent of the total department
of cultural affairs get eight
percent cultural property equity
protection act grant funds came
and fetched twenty two percent
economic development outdoor rec
Division outdoor recreation
trails plus grants an outdoor
equity funds with the total of
fifteen percent we worked with
our cabinet colleagues to just
make sure that the agencies had
the track record of getting that
level of money out the door that
they could actually spend it if
it's appropriated by this body
and also that looking at the
history of that applications our
of peas and things again as
senator Neville said we're not
changing any of the governance
of that many of these programs
require annual reports the
legislature about their
activities already they have
boards that are already set up
in statute so it's really it
really is a funding bill to try
to get funding to these good
programs the legislature has
previously authorized thank you
for that I appreciate it and I
feel sorry for you with your
allergies went around everywhere
those darn allergies anyway what
can you tell me Mr chairman
secretary what is the good
neighbor authority.
It's under under impaired.
I just don't recall hearing that
one if anyone could tell me what
that is.
We're sorry we have others.
Mr chair representative that
authority that allows the Feds
to give the state money to do
work on federal land.
Okay thank you thank you so much
for that
I I also am curious Mr chairman.
And and Senators.
Is there a way someone can run a
bill.
one thing that I can see is with
with this I be creating this
fund I can see that it might
take a little bit of pressure
off of the what when you all
come when all the secretaries
come and and and ask for their
money and put in their budgets
it may take a lot of little
pressure off of the general fund
for the if we have this so
that's a plus for all New
Mexicans but I do see that as a
as a really good thing for for
New Mexico
in my specific area one of the
things that's the hi kind of
gripe about all the time Mr
chairman is that the the outdoor
recreation doesn't really
promote hunting and fishing.
And so I know I don't see
secretary keys here so I'll take
that up with her but I'd really
like to see I actually ran a
bill just to bring it to
everyone's attention is that we
you know it is part of the the
recreation in the state of New
Mexico and the economy we bring
people from out of state we
bring we have hunters and and
outfitters and guides and
housing
and it brings economy into the
small rural New Mexico town and
us I'd really like to see that
pushed a little more and
I'm I'm with Representative
Chatfield I've changed my mind
three four times since I've been
sitting here so I'll let someone
else ask more questions but
thank you so much thank you very
much for you member Armstrong
next we're gonna go to
representative elect Cruz and
Representative Santa Cruz thank
you Mr chairman just wanted to
welcome the children the young
people in the room I it just
warms my heart is a former
director of parks and recreation
when I see children involved and
engaged.
Mr chairman and Senators one of
the things that stood out for me
in the bill was that there was
no specificity of land
acquisition.
And I suspect that was very
deliberate and and what it does
is sets sets up fund and then it
allocated to the various
departments within the state's
structures that correct Mr
chairman Mr chair set up two
funds one is a permanent fund
and then the other is the fund
that's going to spend the twelve
five for four year period and
and when the permanent fund gets
to a hundred fifty million
dollar threshold it'll begin
spending money into the spend
fund and ultimately when we get
up to three hundred million it
becomes self sustaining so it's
got that combination but you're
right it's just it's taking
existing programs figure out a
dedicated revenue stream for
those as Representative
Chatfield said I'm gonna keep
working on it because I guess if
I get as well.
You know it's doing exactly what
he was looking for and what
we've all been looking for you
create a great program I think
the forest and watershed is a
great program that
Representative bandy I did you
know what I will tell you the
LFC actually had us at one point
to fund that program they want
to take money from the
firefighters Fund and I will
tell you to be in a room full of
all firefighters opposing you
touching their funds that's kind
of where we work that's how hard
it was to find a recurring
revenue source so what an
amazing opportunity you know in
an environment like this to use
non recurring money to kind of
create a permanent fund it'll do
exactly what representative
Armstrong was looking for is be
able to have those of those
dollars without having to come
back in the house bill two thank
you Mr chairman I don't know if
this question is for you
senators or or for the secretary
but.
Once monies allocated to.
Any specific our department.
I imagine this will be a time
that there may be a desire to do
to acquire property for some
reason us hold that occur what
is what is set up in that
regard.
Mr chair representative
so there to to department out of
the six that have the authority
to acquire lands they're pretty
narrow EMNRD's is extremely
narrow it would be through the
forest conservation act in it
it's only been used three times
in the last eighty years to
acquire a grand total of seven
acres two of them are for
district offices for the
forestry division and then we
also purchased a five acre
parcel near Santa Rosa to
preserve techo sunflower that
requires approval from the
commissioner of public lands and
the board of finance in order to
make an acquisition under that
part of the very thousands
pretty rare but we want to be
honest it exists on the books
the other is the department of
game and fish they have the
Authority to acquire fee
interest in real property for
the conservation of wildlife any
land purchase requires approval
of the the state game commission
in a public meeting federal
funds are would likely be part
of any purchase because again if
this is only getting a
percentage of the total it's
probably not enough to buy every
all of our that comes along and
so a yellow book appraisal would
meet federal standards that
often deters prospective sellers
from working with game and fish
because it's burdensome and the
yellow book appraisal generally
has come in below asking price
and game into this cannot pay
above yellow book they can't get
into a bidding war in other
words so that's my understanding
of the processes thank you thank
you Mr speaker it would it would
be I think are a disservice to
to to the citizenry of New
Mexico if we don't have a way to
acquire a piece of land when the
population really wants to
protect that land you know
Mister Moore the proudest things
that we all have problems in our
lives one of one of my most
proud to actually and the
related I was the director of
parks as I said earlier when the
Berlin.
County commissions to create an
open space fund and the reason
that the county commission did
that at that time was in the
middle nineties was because the
citizenry wanted to protect
certain properties particularly
relocated to small County and so
consequently you have many many
threatened lands that could be
developed into something and
sometimes a reporter for
wildlife to these mountains or
it could be a long in adjacent
to the to the voice to the river
and so the county commissions
set that fund up and I'm proud
that we were able to establish a
solid open space program and
were able to acquire properties
at that time the second one for
me Mr Chairman was when my
constituents in the south valley
wanted to protect a little over
four hundred acres that was in
the cell valley that has been a
very important it was called the
prices there.
And they knew that it was
a perfect plan to put rooftop
order was perfect for that.
But people didn't want that.
So because of that open space
fund that the county commission
created in the nineties we were
able to I was able to convince
my colleagues to invest five
million dollars into about
almost a twenty million dollar
purchase.
Today.
That property in tandem with the
trust for public lands.
The federal government is not a
federal refuges called the via
the order federal refuge of
you're welcome to look it up
it's beautiful and here last
year for the feds built a
beautiful building it has
amenities history alright so
that the population go see this
wonderful property in a variety
of ways.
And so I'm really really happy
that that happened.
If we don't have a way of not
only potentially acquiring some
properties or a way of
protecting or enhancing our
existing properties we're doing
all of this a disfavor and by
the way Mr chairman.
Senators.
You know I know there's a little
bit of a fear that somehow
government has so much money
that is going to go out and buy
all these properties.
You don't have enough money to
do that we don't have enough
money to do that the reality is
probably the requests are always
larger than the funds and they
have to be very specific and
that property has to be the
first for every specific needed
knees and it's not just because
we willing Millie wanted water
just by property everywhere it's
just not like that that's an
unfounded fear but I would like
to Mr chairman if the centers
and this is my last question.
What I'm not quite clear why
there is a fear amongst
ranchers.
Can anybody explain that.
Mr Representative I think you
might as some of the ranchers I
was raised on a cattle ranch
pretty good sized in the
southern part of this county
and if this doesn't concern me
at all in this bill this bill is
not about buying land
it's it's all about to it's all
about conservation and funding
the programs so that we have the
dollars to do it I will sail
never happened but I guarantee
you with all the publicity in
this bill is not going to happen
so I can guarantee that so I
don't think that's a fair that
we need to worry about there's a
bill coming out of the Senate on
the words that we're approval
for purchase of land has to be
approved by the legislature we
have that in some cases we don't
have an all so that's one
protection that uses legislators
can put in place if you want to
you can prohibit
you can change their statutes we
chose not to change in the
statute says what this bill is
about it doesn't change in the
statute it just funds what they
are supposed to do.
I don't know.
But Mr chairman I will close
with this first of all want to
applaud you for this bill I will
be supporting this bill I know
what's value firsthand on the
ground I've seen what it does
for our children not only our
children our families
and so the to have that revenue
available Mr chairman I think is
invaluable but here's what I I
closed in eighteen seventy two
Mr Chairman was the first
federal park Yellowstone.
Can you imagine had had.
Ulysses S. grant and and the all
of the pop all of the folks that
were involved at that time.
Had that vision we wouldn't have
that to do so if so I applaud
you for your vision thank you Mr
chairman thank you.
Thank you very much
Representative in a cruise
we'll go next to Representative
Lujan than Representative
Representative Lujan please
thank you Mr chair of.
And thank you to the Sanchez
actually.
Got to work with some of the
discussions through the
formation of this legislation
And I just appreciate all the
efforts I'm just kind of sad
that someone left out finding
that out today I just want to be
clear about that
because it's not is a feel good
to be left out specially when
we're looking at this this big
of a a huge lift on things so
I'm a big proponent of justice
and.
He equity and equality so if you
could move forward Mr chair
Sanchez making sure that.
The the the cat or the cat over
I'm.
The characters who are here who
are no longer left out.
Of of how these funds are what
programs and and what is to come
forward if you can give me this
insurance as I would I would
feel.
A lot better today to be quite
honest with you because I really
like what what is happening the
formation of all these groups
coming together really having
some great conversations I know
last year they're looking at to
the general obligation funds and
that didn't seem to to work out
I'm going that route so I'm I'm
glad that we got together and
figured something out in this
way
But it's.
We are looking at this through a
scope of climate justice we are
looking at the this is scope of.
Of all those things that one of
the things that we're talking
about climate justice and I'm
glad that it's being spoken
Representative for today is
displacements gentrification.
And I'm going to ask is Mr Mr
chair Senators.
It was also brought up the
oversight so would the oversight
be within those six agencies
that are going where this these
programs the findings will go to
Mr.
Mr chairman and representative
absolutely each one of those
agencies by statute already has
authority to oversee these
programs and so that we'll
certainly continue and I think
it's going to be incumbent upon
all of us as this move.
It's okay no worries you're fine
we have our attendance here that
always sometimes I apologize
leisure
it's a hair trigger
On the box sign that
leprechauns.
Okay when you go there it will
go back later with that
Representative Lujan and then of
you to ask your question leader
with I thank you and
Representative just as I was
saying I think that the beauty
of this bill is that again it's
not new programs it's existing
programs and so that oversight
that already exists is going to
continue and I think what you're
gonna see a whole bunch more of
the which is X. what's so
exciting is partnership with
federal funds coming in that are
going to be used to match and
just again and we and and when
we close I'd really like to go
through again the list of what
we're doing here because when
you realize what's really in
this bill and and the diversity
of that I think it did just
highlights what we've been able
to accomplish with this thank
you Mr chair thank you thank you
senator so I'm I'm just gonna go
and are you looking at the
information that we have at hand
in in talking about talking
through everything
The issue that comes vaccines
are here and so and and House
Appropriations and and dealing
with finances is under the
significant issues on page three
of the eight
FY are
and so the last the first
paragraph last sentence area of
greatest concern as explained by
multiple agencies analysis
remains the sustainability of
the fund without the guarantee
of future appropriations but as
you've outlined Mr chair Senator
because we can have those
matching funds this wouldn't be
a concern is that correct Mr
Mr this so Mr Chairman
representative I think what's
going to be incumbent on us is
to try and get additional
resources into the permanent
fund because the two funds are
here and what we've been able to
do it thanks to this committee
there's a hundred million
dollars in house bill two and
fifty million dollars in the
permanent fund if we don't put
more money into the permanent
fund again the funding in the
other fund the fifty million
will go away after it spent down
so really I think it's going to
be incumbent on us to continue
to use nonrecurring resources as
we have them and I think the
beauty of of being able to get
fifty million into the fund
that's going to be spent over
four years is that gives us what
I see as a four year window to
kind of build up that so we're
so we're gonna need to figure
out how to get two hundred fifty
thousand twenty million dollars
into that permanent I guess once
you get to three hundred million
I think we're good to go in and
just one final thing we to
unlike the early childhood fund
you know we don't have a revenue
stream going in so that's
another piece chair you're
you're reading my mind.
I know my questions so I
appreciate that thank you for
for filling us in with that
because the goal is to get to
that three hundred million and
to to make sure that this is a
we're not dependent on look at
other coffers to fill this fund
great the other than last
question and subject matter get
to are the.
The administrative issues from
the agencies that will be
required to administer programs
and having more funding and
means more programs we will hear
more of everything and we know
right now through the budget
process it's especially NMED is
I think is being tasked with the
the great first percentage but
way over from all the mandate
from all the legislation
everything that that we're
hitting them with and that they
don't they don't have the
bandwidth to do all the things
that were we're asking them to
do Mr speaker chair Secretary I
don't know if you can respond to
that because now you're you're
tell me you know there's gonna
be six and other agencies that
can be affected.
Home secretary responses like to
the.
Shares Representative Lujan we
we that was one of the things
that we really work with a to
the agencies was it can you can
you administer this much money
if it comes your way next year
and the answer is yes they also
I guess so you know even the
environment department and
that's part of why the
percentage is a little bit lower
for them and also the this
appetite for the purpose of I
think I've I feel confident that
the agencies can handle this
with existing staffing.
Thank you and and I I just to
I'll take possible that because
we knew it as I sat here and
many of us and others you know
we're going over the operational
budget it is it is it doesn't
look Vince Moffit from sitting
here looking into working on
this budget advocating specially
for some of these issues is that
that is true and I'm not I
appreciate that they came back
to you and and said that but
it's you know dollars to
positions and so forth are
matching up in my my my head and
and the way I see things but I
appreciate that you want to go I
think that that so thank you
thank you Mr chair thank you
senators.
Right I thank you Representative
Lujan next we're gonna go to
Representative Pettigrew than
representative Allison
representative Ripley's.
Thank you Mr chair and thank you
for the bill
I guess but some context
somewhere I'm gonna go with this
I'm the guy that this somebody
gives me a cornbread muffin I
cut it in half to make sure
somebody is didn't state roughly
in the middle of.
Okay and and this is kind of the
way I'm looking at this bill
because they concern me.
I I heard testimony and I
appreciate the public testimony
I got the opportunity to meet
these kids and and and the staff
that just does such wonderful
things.
I got to here's so many things
to the as true blue my heart.
Over the last couple weeks.
And then again today.
Some of the things that concerns
me yeah I heard a statement
chairman and and Senators with.
One of the public comments is
you know.
Private land owner comes in and
buys private private land blocks
asset access and
You know.
They bought private land and it
already have blocked access and
so I don't get that but.
One of the concerns for me for
the state of New Mexico is we're
one of the worst conservation or
works that exist.
We don't take care of our lands
we don't take care of our force.
And.
Yeah we want to be able to go.
And have the access to be able
to buy more.
Right and and more.
And I think.
Mr chair and Senators we've
proven that the federal
government's not much better at.
With with the disaster that we
funded this year.
To to do all the cleanup from
the burns.
Question.
Four Mr chair with respect to
acquisitions one of the
acquisitions the to my knowledge
was made sometime late twenty
twenty one.
Early twenty twenty two was
significant size ranch into Baca
and Roosevelt County.
And I didn't hear the discussion
on that but I believe that was
purchased chairman senators and
and secretary by game and fish.
But that's not listed.
And I can't find it on a
register anywhere either but I
know the purchase thank you
Representative Senator thank you
Representative I see.
Actor here if there's anything
that the game and fish
department wants to add.
Mr chairman members of the
committee bikes on director
Department game and fish you're
correct that we did by seventy
five hundred acres Divock and
Roosevelt counties that
connected to existing projects
in areas creating a ten thousand
acre but preserve for purchasing
conservation in order to try to.
And further listing the species
and a lot of private landowners.
Any restrictions or.
Thank you thank you very much
director Representative or any
other questions there I'd I know
that's not part of this bill
actually chairman it does apply
to this bill because gaming fish
does have the ability to buy
land.
One of the concerns is I can't
find that on our register
anymore.
Okay director we've heard your
testimony is there any
additional
I don't know what the question
is representative yet we have
the director here are there any
other details that you would
like for that director there any
other details chairman I guess
my point with this is is there
is the the ability with this
money that we're we're we're
talking about allocating.
For the purchase of of land and
and I for one have an issue with
the thirty by thirty.
Side of this and if we're
purchasing this land should be
opened should be seen an open
government and and each of those
purchases should show somewhere
in our state register and I'm
not able to see that and so as
we continue down here and this
is where I'm talking about I'm
the guy that because of peace
corporate open for a reason.
What's really inside this bill
because all the good things that
are going to come from this are
amazing.
And I appreciate that but I'm
not willing to Mr chair and
Senators.
Get funding for yes the national
park Tizer park in Hobbs Hobbs
playground gel were creation
area and Marshall for trolling
Eunice.
When we give up and we purchased
land.
the blocks us from being able to
utilize it.
In the chairman and and then
Senators when we.
That's the the same sure do the
the different people of asked
for with respect to the.
I walked in here today thinking
that I was going to be voting
for this bill.
I have the confidence that in
and the testimony that I've
heard to date concerns me and
the fact that the calibers
walked up here and said they
still have concerns with where
we're at.
Tells me that we should go back
to the drawing board chairman
and senators with respect to
where we're going with this it's
not that the all of this stuff
and all the stuff that we talked
about is a good thing.
But what's there's an old saying
this is even the good even of
that thing that looks good is
still bad.
Chairman senators I appreciate
it I want to listen to the rest
of this but this is a huge
concern for me with respect to
the land purchase ability and
the fact that the state of New
Mexico doesn't do really good
job of conserving the land it
already owns.
Thank you very much
Representative Representative
Allison and representative
Garcia then Representative
turned and
Representative Allison please
thank you Mr.
First of all I want to express
my appreciation to one of our
local leaders to be a part of
this creation of the letter of
intent thank legacy Fund I see
great benefits in the artistic
of some of the entities that
have applied for and received
fund for example the San Juan
soil and water conservation.
And they are tasked with the
management measures for
pollution reduction and water
quality improvements I see a
great benefit on that because
everything west of of
Farmington runs through the
Navajo Nation so they would be
looking forward to pollution
reduction and quality water
improvement so I I appreciate
that and then the other entities
the global opportunity
unlimited they are there to
develop inclusive educational
fishing and watershed
experiences for the
disadvantaged the stable and low
income children I see a lot of
benefits that we're our children
are taken to the like the French
waters under the Navajo them and
such and then the third of what
is the river reach foundation
for years they're going to
maintain the trails some of the
items that I mentioned are not
available of to the expense that
it is off the reservation so I
know it would benefit a lot of
my constituents from the Navajo
Nation to do the training of of
low income children and then the
trails and I just see great
advantage of this and I'm glad
that you're one of the strong
authors for this Senate bill
nine and for that reason I would
support your bill thank you
thank you thank you Mr chair
thank you very much
Representative Allison we're
gonna go to representative
Garcia than Representative
Herndon Representative Brown.
Thank you Mr chairman thank you
Senators I love us Senators
Weston's.
Of I'm not.
You know what what concerns me
Senator Mr Chairman is the lack
of land acquisition in all
really the
not too long ago and given fish
but the laurel bar ranch hoping
is that ranch.
The directors here I don't know
exactly it's it's a sizeable
ranch.
Mr Chairman representative the
total both the upper and the
lower.
Thank you for you the number I
just want the people will know
what to help bigger ranches Mr
chairman of.
Another concern that I had was a
gentleman back there came up in
a position of I think it's a
rancher or cattlemen's
association why what they
invited to the table to discuss
the bill.
For the.
The public to do
Secretary visit that the groups
were met through the summer so
there's been a lot going on for
a long time.
Mr chair representative Garcia I
mean I can tell you nobody who
asked to be part of the effort
was ever the Mike full sorry
Representative Mr chair
representative
We we have we're bringing
together two groups that have
been sort of separate for a
number of years working on
separate efforts to conservation
funding effort and act trust
land effort so we brought
together all of the proponents
from those groups and and as
others I asked to be invited or
included in the meetings we
never turn anybody away I regret
that the calibers feel like they
weren't included that was
certainly an oversight and non
intentional
we did have a lot of land owner
groups who were part of our part
of our coalition and we try to
be as inclusive as possible we
had some calls where we had
maybe fifty people on the calls
I'm talking about what we're
gonna do here so it was it was
big and it did we get it right
perfectly right probably not we
did our best to include
everybody who asked to be
included of the thank you
Your and you know my concern is
what I just said you know by
land people are very surviving
and somebody comes in and takes
the land revise of lot of the
that's a big concern you said
you had bought Malabar lower and
upper and also another next I
think eagle nests along time ago
okay public the peppermint we're
we're is that in order to
connect.
Was that bothers that donate or
what what happened there.
Thank you representative Garcia
I think we're gonna ask our
director of back up again and
director can you please explain
the oil and gas
Private sector involvement in
that.
Purchase Mr chairman that we're
talking about the pecan ranch
they.
Pipeline company donated a
portion of the funding to assist
with the overall purchase.
Thank you thank you Mr chairman
thank Representative was trying
to pass them on the statements I
think about my might be off a
little bit on that I think
that's accurate representative
Garcia why was it not that
mention when this conversation.
Mr Chairman representative.
And I'm not sure how the
miscommunication occurred we we
we did by that in the past.
The Mr chairman thank you for
that because you know as a
committee we really need to
roll.
What.
The state is buying all for the
people could you know I don't
know how big the ranches but
brought to my attention that it
been bought by the fish do you
have an idea of the direction.
Mr Chairman representative is
seventy five hundred acres and
connected to pre existing
project in Paris thank you Mr
chairman you know as I see the
bill is that a lot of good and
it really does.
You know and and my concerns is.
I am land you know I want to
give the patient surfline
everybody out and and I wanted
simple relevant and and then my
whole problem there's a money.
In the city and their money
everybody else around them just
to get rid of the liabilities
presenting uranium and you know
I don't want that to happen in
the communities like well
Representative mentioned earlier
in and with this one but if you
my only the we need to keep that
in fact with that I just my
concern I do like the bill
there's a lot of good into it
but there's a lot of these
questions to be answered thank
you for thank you very much
Representative Garcia gonna go
Representative turned in the
Representative Brown.
Thank you Mr as the chair and
senator I question involves the
creation of the conservation
legacy permanent fund and it
talks about the funding that
goes into that into that fund
and that the amount that comes
out to the land of enchantment
legacy Fund so not exceed a
hundred and fifty million so I'm
asking for clarification of the
hundred million dollars that we
that's in the budget now is that
to go to the Conservancy of
legacy fund initially.
So Mr Chairman representative
this great question the way the
budget came over house bill to
all hundred million dollars
wasn't permanent fund had it
stayed that way there would be
no money that could have been
spun out until that fund reached
a hundred fifty million dollars
what we've done in the Senate
finance committee is split the
the hundred million fifty
million in the permanent fund
and fifty million into the fund
that can be spent over the next
four years so that really we
have a consistency of funding
that starts immediately assuming
this bill would pass but
obviously once we spend down the
other fund if we haven't built
the permanent fund up that money
won't be pouring over which is
how this is designed to work so
we're going to have our work
ahead of us to get that
permanent fund up up and I just
think over the next three years
once we're through this cycle
the goal is to get two hundred
fifty million dollars more money
into the permanent fund which
then we'll make it fully self
sustaining.
This photo a clarification the
money that's gone into the land
of intended legacy fund is that
fun to be expended fully every
year because it doesn't talk
about investing the funds the
way the Conservancy
conservation.
Irma Fund.
It's it's it's with the state
treasurer I believe the fifty
million expendable funds says I
think in the treasury and there
are some earnings but it's
minimal and but that money is
divided over four years.
Twelve and a half per year but
this way I can select of DFA
doesn't usually invest money and
the U. we're headed going fully
to DFA and one final question
with respect to the projects
that affect my did my district
one of the most the exciting one
for them is exploring my
backyard so what I'm looking at
is that you are you for these
simple outdoor recreation
division's with them thinking
this would fall under this
fifteen percent of the fund
would go there but where do we
find out how many other.
Other projects fall under this
month so I would know to tell my
constituents about how much
money they could expect from it
and how you are how you are
devising a formula.
And then my office will go to
each project so Mister chair
representative on page five of
the bill online eleven that
describes the fifteen percent
and it says of that twenty five
percent should be allocated to
Mexico outdoor recreation
division of the economic
development department to carry
out projects under the outdoor
equity grant program so it's an
existing program seventy five
percent should be allocated New
Mexico outdoor recreation
division for special projects an
outdoor recreation
infrastructure so again it's
going to be that's the funding
stream and you can figure out if
you take twelve and a half
million and do the allocation of
fifteen percent of that and then
you divide it up again those
will be the buckets of money
that will be distributed uh by
those specific divisions under
those programs but if it does we
don't get into every single
program it's in there so that's
going to be something that that
specific agency will allocate
with the funding that comes in.
Thank you Mr chair thank you
very much Representative for the
next several several.
Thank you Mr chairman Senators
thank you for this bill.
I've only change my mind once
about it.
And
And that was after talking to
the use of the first because we
have this afternoon she of a
switch some of my concerns.
But at this point in time I you
know just say Mr chairman I am
very much in favor of
conservation projects
I have always enjoyed the
outdoors like just about
everybody who gets a chance to
to be in the outdoors.
But it's hard for me Mr chair
and senators to ignore it what
we heard from the cattle growers
and any opposition the bill
about the concern about access
over lead actor and lead
acquisition and so.
I I I knowledge and I can see
where Mr chair Senator sometimes
there is a project maybe some
additional in need does need to
be required because the project
otherwise maybe couldn't move
forward or just make sense to do
it but I think Mr chairman and
senators it would be very
helpful if this bill emerges
from this committee that there
be a floor amendment do to take
care of the concerns that have
been expressed I don't know why
we wouldn't want to do that
quite frankly
Mr chairman senators I'm I'm
thinking of something like
that any land efforts
acquisition could not exceed for
example let's say five acres and
there would have to be public
hearing and that any project
would not be allowed to prohibit
access to private Webber that
access exists already or
something you'll turn it around
or whatever I think that would
go a long ways in terms of
getting everybody on board with
this bill because Mr Chairman
there is a lot of good in this
bill and I like the percentages
that are that are listed in I
think a lot of good can come
from it but one that we make a
good feel better and I would
hope we could do that thank you
Mr chair thank you very much
Representative Brown okay I
think that concludes we're going
to go there were sent Center
where Centerville with go to you
to sort of wrap up and I know
senator Wirth you mentioned sort
of going back a little bit
through the bill and maybe some
of the programs.
Mr chair I just I I think it's
important just to go over what's
in here and to think through
what the what the but these
programs mean so twenty two
point five percent of the
distribution goes to energy
minerals split equally is for
programs and projects under one
the forest conservation act the
forest watershed restoration act
the prescribed burning Act into
the national heritage
conservation act twenty two and
a half percent to the next
apartment of agriculture to
support programs of the noxious
weed management act that healthy
soil Act and the soil and water
conservation district act a ten
percent to New Mexico
Environment Department for the
river river stewardship program
fifteen percent of the outdoor
recreation department with
twenty five percent of that
amount as we talked about for
outdoor equity seventy five
percent for special projects and
outdoor recreation
infrastructure eight percent of
department of cultural affairs
to support projects and programs
and the cultural properties
protection act and twenty two
percent of the permanent game if
this is support projects and
programs for the propagation of
game and fish and I appreciate
the discussion and debate that's
going on I will tell you and
Representative brown we had an
amendment another committee to
change one of the statues to add
acquisition and we said
absolutely not because if we go
that direction again we're going
to have a complete division and
so we've what we've agreed to do
in this process is again in less
all these folks that work
together were able to agree to
something we said let's leave
the statutes as is and as
senator Neville said it's a
funding bill let's get the money
and but I really appreciate the
questions from the committee
because I think you all
highlighted you know what's in
the bill in the challenges in
the bill but overall I think
it's an extraordinary
opportunity for our state thank
you very much Senator Neville
please I would only is that of
this body has every right to
write a bill that addresses the
statutory authority of any of
these agencies this is bill is
not doing that.
This bill is a Senator Wirth
says it's money it's dollars and
that's what it does is it puts
dollars in the ground where it
needs to be if there's something
about an agency that this
committee doesn't like he can
certainly write legislation to
try to change that and over the
next several years you have a
lot of time to do that before
this money all fully kicks in
that's all I have it's a this is
a hard long fought hard fought
battle I hope you'll see that
it's going to do more good than
than any harm it could've gone
either way we could make it
worse as far as acquisition
made it better but we shows to
go the middle round to make
things a.
As they are and fund existing
programs that's all Mr chairman
thank you thank thank you very
much.
Mike I just want to say I want
to recognize and thank the
extraordinary conservation
legacies of so many who are in
this room on this committee
here today I it really is
something and I think we spend a
good amount of time and well
well time that has been well
spent so with that we're gonna
go to representative Allison and
then Representative de la Cruz
Representative Allison for the
motion please.
Thank you Mr chairman C. any
other I don't see in other
Representative Nelson please
thank you Mr chair I move a do
pass on this Senate bill and I I
thank you and I'm gonna go to
we're gonna Representative Lujan
for the second.
Mr chair.
Thank you very much
Representative Allison thank you
Representative Lujan
but the can you this project is
can you go ahead and please call
the roll.
Yes.
Yes.
Representative talk about.
Yes I'd like to spend level.
It is.
Yes that I would like to
explain.
Thank.
Yes.
Just explain my vote.
Representative yeah.
Yes.
Yes.
Yes.
Yes.
That thank you very much we're
work including the vote we have
several of access to explain
their vote Representative if
you'd like to add anything after
then we'll go to you as well Mr
J. guess please.
Okay.
Okay we're gonna go brief
quickly to explain their votes
starting with Representative
Baca please thank you Mr
chairman
Our job appropriations is this
the is this in house bill the
answer that's to I think the
merits of the bill and any
corrections and or amendments to
the bill will be subject to that
a process.
But there is some concerns
especially from the groups but I
do think that has not good in it
to move forward with that thank
you very much Representative
Baca Representative Brown
please.
Thank you Mr chairman what I I
just want to commend the
senators and all those who
testified today on the bill
sometimes closing arguments can
be pretty persuasive and as I
mentioned I like the percentages
I like the good that will come
out of this and I guess I'm just
going to trust that
That when acquisition will not
become an issue and the as
senator Neville pointed out Mr
chairman there is an opportunity
for us to change statute to
ensure that that makes perfect
sense to me so thank you very
much thank you very much for
percent grounder said Pettigrew.
Chairman before you gavel those
value recalling the rules of our
committee and one of the primary
rules with AJ S. C. is that does
that have a pro doesn't have an
appropriation and if it does it
deserves this chance to pass
through this community with
respect to that a change from
vote back to yes
I thank you for that I I
appreciate that Mr Vegas please
reflect representatives which.
Right thank you very much thank
you very much for percent.
Excellent thank you very much
thank you Representative
Pettigrew we do have two more
worrying a representative Garcia
and then went close with
Representative Lujan
Representative Garcia thank you
Mr chairman you know I'd like
the bill appreciate the bill and
I hope we do you were that is
not intended to buy land that
was my main concern is the land
acquisition was funny thank you
senator Senator bill thank thank
you very much for Senator
Representative and we'll close
with Representative Chatfield
percent behind thank you thank
you Mr thank you again I just
want to say really excited of
how this all came to fruition
and that is just bringing
bringing this all together it
was it was a big lift any of us
Senator Neville you've been on
this for so long and I just want
to congratulate you and
congratulate everybody on all
their efforts in coming together
on this thank you thank you very
much we're going to go now to
finally close with
Representative Chatfield.
Thank you Mr chairman I think
most under has been stolen by
several other folks but I was
just gonna say this is
appropriations committee our job
is to to decide if there's been
provision made for the funding
of this bill is an in house bill
two I know it's in house bill
two
So the that's our job here today
I really appreciated the
discussion there's a lot of good
in this bill and I know there's
a there's another bill out there
that would require legislative
approval before the state park
land I think that would be a
good addition to our the I hope
this thing move forward in a way
that will allow us to restore
watersheds and not drive any of
our little small farms and
farmers and ranchers out of
business thank you Mr chairman
thank you very much
Representative Representative
Chatfield centers secretaries
and thank you very much thank
you again to the public we're
gonna we'll go.
We are we're moving very quickly
we're gonna invite pro ten sewer
we see Representative Borrego.
Please clear the room quickly
we're going to go briefly to
Representative Stuart to explain
her bill we have Representative
but it go sorry pro tem Stewart
I apologize even though we do
acknowledge that too once
resided on this this set out
Senator we're gonna ask you to
go ahead
And explain your bill we're
going to also ask if its in
house bill two so that we can
make up a little bit of time
Madam pro templates go ahead Mr
Chairman we have a great handout
that explains this bill if you
could get it passed out yes five
million is in house bill two to
start this so.
You know in twenty nineteen we
passed the wildlife quarters act
the department of transportation
and game and fish did an
incredible job the last several
years they put together a plan
that will look at wildlife
quarters all over our state
it cost us about twenty million
a year with the crashes with the
killing of wildlife with the
farming of people and damaging
of vehicles and they have
determine where in the state we
have these issues they have
prioritized they have figured
out what to do with each of
those wildlife quarters issues
New York chart before you will
give a explanation of the first
eleven projects the priority
projects so this bill just puts
together a fund one of the most
exciting things that we're
facing is that the federal
government has plenty of money
to help with well live quarters
especially in the western States
and it's a four to one match so
we anticipate if we have this
Fund we're ahead of all the
other states the bill that we
passed was the first of its kind
in the nation we are shovel
ready we know what we want to do
we know where they are and we
have money in the budget to
start to get some of that
federal money I have with me
Michael dax who used to be with
defenders of wildlife and I
always forget where yes now so
he can tell you he has been with
me for four years on this if I
could have him say a few words
thank you yes thank you senator
Mr that thank you Mr chair
members of the committee and
senator
Senator pretty much said it all
but I'll just highlight there's
a lot of discussion of federal
match oftentimes duty projects
match at forty one or even
higher sometimes it's even in
ninety ten match so the this
five million dollars could
leverage hopefully at least
twenty million additional
dollars.
that DOT and game and fish will
put on the ground to not only
save the lives of wildlife but
save drivers as well thank you
very much okay we're gonna go
briefly that public comment
those who wishes to give brief
public comment please line up in
the middle please very much keep
it brief.
Mr Chairman my name is Brian
bird and I am with defenders
wildlife
I am the southwest program
director for defenders well if
we have eight thousand members
and supporters here in New
Mexico and my organization
myself have been working with
the senator and others
department transportation
department game fish on the plan
for building wildlife quarters
and I just wanna say this is a
issue of health and safety for
wildlife in human beings and I
really encourage you all to give
us a to pass thank you very much
thank you very much.
I thank you very much Mr chair
members of the committee Jesse
do bill executive director of
the New Mexico wildlife
federation I also been very
working very closely with the
coalition whose been very
supportive in in working on this
bill and for the sake of time
will be very brief in just say
the New Mexico wildlife
federation strongly supports
this bill thank you very much
thank you very much.
Thank you Mr chair my name is
Keegan came in with the native
lands institute I stand in full
support of SB seventy two this
legislation is crucial in
ensuring that we safeguard
drivers and wildlife these
corridors also protect our
traditional way of life here in
New Mexico I'd like to think
Senator Stewart for fortitude on
this issue and for sponsoring
this legislation again thank
you.
Thank you very much.
Thank you very much members of
the committee Louise Garratt a
with the Sierra Club you're
gonna chapter again representing
a thirty five thousand members I
think what needed to be said
with that so just want to let
you guys know that we strongly
support this bill and Aseel vote
yes thank you thank you very
much.
Good afternoon again Mr chairman
members of the committee my name
is that we Parker and I'm the
water associate with
conservation voters New Mexico
and I would just like to
reiterate what the previous
supporters had said and
encourage you all to vote in
favor of SB seventy two thank
you thank you very much respect
for.
Okay we're gonna go we're look
online is there anybody who
wishes to have comment on as the
seventy two okay there's one
we're going to go to miss
Barbara Calef Barbara for one
minute whenever you're ready.
Thank you Mr chair members of
the committee of our makayla
speaking for the league of women
voters of New Mexico eight
supports the conservation and
protection of wildlife and their
habitats the contribution they
make towards the health and
sustainability of the
environment restaurant in
support of this bill thank you
thank you very much okay we'll
go back thank you madam pro tem
for confirming there is as we
know there's some from the house
congrats to the Senate finance
for you always work as well is
there any questions from the
committee.
Motion from Representative
Trujillo second from since
Sanchez
Mr Jagan is please call the
roll.
Yes.
Representative I yes.
Yes.
Yes.
Yes.
K. five oh twelve the firms here
in the negative you have to pass
thank.
Okay we're going to thank you
very much for percent but I go
we deeply appreciate you taken
the time extra time with us that
you come back up with your
With your expert and.
great and we will we'll make
sure and let Representative
Lujan as your co sponsor and
course our own
Very extraordinary committee
member let's make sure and ask
her to come back up.
Representative seven before I go
we would ask that you sort of
kick us off briefly and then
please introduce your expert and
we'll go from there thank you Mr
chair representative.
I would like to thank my sponsor
my co sponsor Representative
Tara L. Lujan
and I would like to introduce
money expert witness who is
captain Salazar with the
Albuquerque fire rescue unit and
he's also with
the
you and
I am delighted to have him
captain Salazar and Martin
Salazar and I worked together
during the COVID to deliver PPE
kits to small businesses
throughout my district is
counselor and I've worked really
really closely with him and I
and I respect his opinions
and just happy to be here
standing with firefighters and
supporting them
what you're going to hear
tonight as part of a group of
packet of a package that we
brought forward for firefighters
of bills this year some of which
have gone forward some of which
are still a committee and we
hope to it's pretty tough but
we're hoping to get through
you know the house and the
Senate with at least a couple of
these bills as part of this
package what I will tell you is
that the house bill before you
House Bill three forty five and
actually it's really appropriate
for us to be here today because
you guys are talking about
conservation and you know all of
these lands that we're
protecting and that's exactly
who I'm sitting here with is the
people who do do that and and
actually up protect our our
lands in our homes so I'm I'm
honored to be here actually
so the bill before you House
Bill three forty five addresses
shortages in our fire service
and provides a mechanism in
which to recruit firefighter
workforce
the bill creates a dedicated
firefighter recruitment fund
from which to provide newly
hired firefighters five thousand
dollar recruitment disbursements
and with that Mr chair unless my
co chair would like.
To sponsor would like to say
something up we stand for
questions thank you very much
for some but I go Representative
Lujan you Mr chair I just.
Thank you thank my co sponsor
and of our firefighters for all
that they do for us and I was
looking and looking forward to
having this discussion and
answering the questions thank
you great thank you so much.
Representative this house are.
Mr chair small in the
representatives mining as
Representative Briggs said I'm
captain tells Republican the
fire rescue and we're out here
today presenting this.
Bill along with other bills as
ways to recruit and retain our
current firefighters and bring
people in the state House Bill
three forty five is one of the
mechanisms we're looking at to
help bring that in
I'm looking right now at two of
municipalities just north of a
Santa Fe and Taos so tell us
right now for a firefighter it's
fourteen dollars and twenty one
cents an hour is what they're
making inTaos and then as they
come down here to Santa Fe it's
fifteen dollars an hour so that
the pay disparity as far as when
you look at it to police
officers or even my son who
works at Rudy's and he's making
sixteen fifty an hour plus tips
those are the issues that that
it that we're concerned about
right now keeping our our best
and brightest in New Mexico or
attracting other individuals
from around the country to come
to New Mexico with this package
of recruitment options
like house bill three forty five
our peer support health care
funds property tax and other
things like that to help create
an environment where people want
to working continue to live here
and serve their community thank
you.
Thank you very much captain
salsa okay we're gonna go now
thank you as always starts and
it been very busy today for
those who wish to speak on house
bill three forty five please
line up here in the middle and.
Sir could you just all
Representative as my name is
Miguel to Representative
Albuquerque fire rescue and when
account I far as I if if local
two forty four like to thank us
the sponsor the co sponsor for
bring this legislation
recruitment in the fire service
is an issue I think put up.
A lot of people overlook the
fire service and because we have
so many gaps in law enforcement
terms recruitment but nationwide
recruiting in the fire service
has been an issue in any kind of
a creative ways that we can
sponsor legislation is going to
help that it's going to do that
this is this is just one drop in
the bucket we look we're gonna
look at lots of future ways to
have better with proven far
service but we we thank both the
sponsor and co sponsor for
bringing this and we urge your
support for house of two forty
five thank you thank you very
much.
Chairman members of the
committee plans part of
president New Mexico's
firefighters association also
the president of the Los Alamos
firefighters you currently in
Los Alamos about twenty to
thirty percent of our current
staff is getting ready to retire
in the next two to three years
we're about ten short and we
just can't get the recruitment
so we're looking at this bill
help types people to come to our
state our city so I urge you
guys to support this bill thank
you guys thank you very much.
Thank you Mr chair members the
committee John Lipschutz with
that new The New Mexico
federation of labor
weeks very much appreciate the
Sanchez for bringing up this
bill I think you know either you
all here in this committee are
certainly in other committees
we've heard a lot about
vacancies of our state workers
public employees first
responders
you've heard some really good
suggestions from maybe not so
good suggestions I think one
thing is very clear the best way
to in case people to take on
these very important jobs is to
offer them better salaries and
and more money it's just the way
of the world we really hope that
you not only support this bill
but kind of take this into
consideration when looking at
other legislation down the line
about how to recruit and retain
public employees this is a great
example of a way to do that so
for those reasons we strongly
encourage you to support three
forty five thank you very much
okay we're gonna go to the
committee we've got
Representative Brown then we're
going to go to Representative
dot.
Representative Brown.
Thank you Mr chairman
representatives regular Lujan I
I really like this bill I I
think it's a good idea there is
one concern I had about the bill
not covering a certain scenario
and Mr Chairman representative
is it's on page two of the bill.
And starting at line three.
And this is really the heart of
the bill Mr chairman it says
that there would be a.
Five thousand dollar recruitment
disbursement for firefighters
starting employment with the
fire department provided that
the recipient remains employed
as a firefighter with the fire
department for three years so
Mister chairman and
Representative my question is
what if.
Somebody doesn't stay the full
three years of the bill is
silent on what would happen I
think the application is this is
a recruitment agency I'm
assuming that's paid up front if
I'm wrong about that the bill
doesn't really say that and so
would there be pro rations for
the years it doesn't say that
either.
Mr chairman Mr chairman and
Representative Brown the intent
of the bill and it's it's
actually structured much like
the police bill because they
already have this mechanism in
place
they would pay the person up
front when they're hired and
they meet all the requirements
and once they've gone through
you know their training and if
they leave before three years
than they would have to pay it
back.
Mr Chairman representative thank
you the problem I'm having is
that bill doesn't lay that out
and if it's this is a new
material and that maybe there's
something in the in the statute
to which this will be piled into
that covers that but I don't see
it in this Mr chair and and
Representative Brown our goal
was to put that into the rules.
Okay Mr Chairman representative
Another
part of the bill that I'm a
little unsure about is if a
firefighter does stay the full
three years.
It sounds like that person could
then go to another fire
department and get another bonus
and I base that on
of page three of the bill it
talks about recruitment
dispersed and a little bit about
that but it doesn't limited to
one time.
So again I I do have a concern
about that Mr chair
representative then respond Mr
chair
Madam I'm sorry Mr chair and
Madam representative ground
basically that individual I mean
would get a one time three
thousand dollars if they were
jumping around I think that
would be in the rules and this
particular bill is really only
just to set up a mechanism for
this actual fund and that's
that's the intent of this bill.
Okay.
Mr chairman I I must be honest
I'm a little bit.
I'm sorry five thousand hi I'm
still a little bit concerned
because I'd like it to be
actually in the language of the
bill just to ensure that what we
think will happen does happen so
other than that I really like
the bill and Mr chairman madam
Representative if you would like
to make a friendly amendment
we'd be happy to take that right
at this point.
Mr Chairman representative I I
would be happy to do that but
perhaps four then it would would
be conserving some time I'd like
to see the bill move forward
thank you so much thank you very
much Representative Brown we're
gonna go next to resume Baca
than rivers remember I'm so
thank you Mr chairman and thank
you Representative for bringing
this forward.
My questions are going to be
kind of straightforward is this
is our appropriation house bill
two is or or funding or is it
just junior money's and that
that have been a allocated for
this fund first question.
Thank you Mr chair and
representative Baca at this
point in time we do not have an
appropriation we would come back
next year.
At this point we're just setting
up the fund and the mechanism
and then we would come back next
year for an appropriation that
is our intent second question Mr
chairman at a Representative is
the question about who
qualifies.
Talking about
the recruitment retention but
are we talking firefighters we
talking as far as the command
staff who then qualifies for
this retention recruitment bonus
I will go to my expert witness
Mister chair Mister chair
representative Baca
representatives this would this
is an entry level firefighter
coming into the department it
wouldn't allow for
command staff for as myself a
captain who.
Gets promoted would receive that
as a bonus it's an entry level
firefighter.
Lee that's.
talked about that on page two.
Mr then we can find that out
because yes what we can of.
Mr chairman and Representative.
The question and it's kind of
been asked about us differently.
What if somebody is in the
career fire fighting for three
years I'm I'm in Albuquerque I
go to Bernalillo county that I
may go to Sandoval County is it
three years consecutive years
with the same agency.
That is not an issue chair and
and Representative Baca that is
the intent that it would be
three years with the same agency
again I I think Mr chairman the
those are things we pointed to
clarify this
the other thing I'm gonna make a
statement and then I'm gonna
tell you
You know one of the things.
That Mr chairman and
Representative as far as this
kind of course are you
negotiations and kind of that
stuff and it it really is.
It is somewhat a little bit of
heartache I'll be honest but on
the same hand I remember
Representative Vincent in here
and I will say this that are I
cannot sit there and say that I
represent and support first
responders and not support this
legislation I do you know I know
with the set of some of funds
for our police and our law
enforcement partners.
I agree that we need to do
something because if we're going
to have them then we need to
fund it.
I just think Mr chairman that
there may be some some tweaking
that needs to happen before this
goes before the full house thank
you Mr chairman thank you very
much for percent bucket ranking
member Armstrong and I served
with.
Thank you Mr chairman.
Who doesn't support firefighters
come on all of this but the
problem I have is it's it this
is salaried firefighters only.
Guess what rural New Mexico is
all volunteer.
So I you know I I have a little
bit of an issue with that the
other issue that I have I not
that I don't support you guys of
course I do I mean.
Friends and family for sure.
But I do have a problem creating
a fund with no money in it.
I voted no on that before.
And I I'm gonna vote no again
and not because I don't respect.
Everything about this bill but I
did what I don't like is
creating a fund with no money in
it I think we're asking for.
Trouble doing that the other
question I thought that I had
seen on here Mr chairman and
representative.
Does any of this come out of
the.
Firefighter Fund.
I will go to my experts okay
fire protection fund excuse me
the fire protection fund
Chair of representatives
representative Armstrong it does
not it was the the purpose of
creating the fund initially was
to have a separate mechanism so
they're two separate line items
within a budget against creating
parity in similarity to how law
enforcement officers created
there's last session the created
the fund and then this year
they're asking for money to fund
it that way it doesn't go into a
monies that are earmarked
because part of how volunteer
fire departments are funded or
through that fire fund so we
wanted to keep it away from that
and try to create other
mechanisms and put in place to
eventually get in the rural
areas in those departments that
don't have career to get at that
and get members into the state
thank you Mr chairman thank you
for that answer
that fire protection fund I'm
pretty up.
Of all that pretty high and
mighty so for all its actually
for all fire departments and all
EMS they can apply for that fund
and they never have enough money
for the ASX so and and Mr
Chairman just as a as a note I
was the one that carried out
legislation to keep that money
in that fund and not let that
for whatever wasn't used to go
to the general fund we should be
using it for what it was
intended for but Mr chairman and
and Representative I I still I'm
still going to be and all
because maybe we need to expand
that fund maybe there's already
a fund there maybe maybe there's
other ways we can go about it
but I I've just against creating
a fund where there's no money in
it so thank you Mr chairman.
That will go to you to close
Representative thank you very
much ranking member Armstrong
we're gonna go to Representative
Dixon and representative Garcia
than of a couple of questions.
Thank you Mr chair thank you
Representative
One of a question about future
funding streams
Have are there plans for where
the funds will come from.
I'm Mr chair and Representative
Dixon
I think that one of the things
that we intended when we came
forward with this this to have
parity with what the police are
doing because they are they have
had their Fund in place for
quite a long time and I think
that the rules will set a lot of
that discussion but the the
intent would be to would be to
come back and ask for an
appropriation and we would hope
that there would be some funding
there for public safety
reappropriation.
Thank you thank you Mr chair.
Thank you for by physics and
representative Garcia please
thank you Mr chairman.
This fund cover all fire
department.
You know like in my district
your volunteers so they don't
you get paid so how is it going
to affect smaller departments
from state.
Mr chair representative
representative Garcia this fund
is designated right now for
career firefighters how it's
written there's not a mechanism
for disbursement within that
when you start looking at that
sixteen hundred and forty two
retired volunteers and the other
seven thousand paid volunteers
prepares number right now that
are reporting that a combination
apartments we've reached out for
with some of our other built in
trying to contact and a
centralized location there is
they do have representation but
a mechanism to identify each
individual wanting to get it to
me as is the issue because
they're not
as far as our organization goes
so at this point this is just
earmarked for the two thousand
four hundred paid fire fighters
in New Mexico our goal if we can
expand it is to do that the
initial purpose again is just to
create a fund we have to have
somewhere where we can start
putting things and then within
the rule section one that's
added that was one of the
adjustments we made prior when
it was revised was to remove
those rules so we can work on
that and getting the
stakeholders like yourself in
the smaller rural communities
involved in how we can get them
and get them funding again
without having to touch a
current
funding source which is the fire
fund so as of right now we don't
have that in place but what will
work on that on the rural
section we're just trying to
create that first to put the
money in Mr chairman and captain
I respect what you're doing.
Looking on is a career
firefighters how many long tears
are career firefighters.
That's all we have out there so
they do it every day and much as
everybody else does and in all.
I respect what you're doing but
I also have the same problem of.
Doing a fund with no money and
you know it's it's just hard to
do that you know we've had a lot
of people come up with the same
issue and we voted against it
for the simple reason that
there's no funding.
And you know it's hard to create
something.
The going to the back door
enrollment open up a savings
account but I'm of the money
into the next few that's just my
thoughts and you know just pick
what you're doing but the bottom
line is you know funding it's
awful hard to do with thank you
Mr chairman thank you very much
of Madam Garcia thank you thank
you Mr chair if I could just
respond quickly to to some of
the conversations happening
around the funding there there
is a there's ten a hundred I
think it's under ten million
dollars is going to fire for
fire fund and then goes into.
In a bit of it goes into the the
grant funding and so there is
already funding there that's
going to our volunteer for a
fire first recruitment and
having some
of the conversations with the
fire marshal State Farm Marshall
that could be an opportunity for
this if we're looking
down the road to for more
funding and we've been having
those conversations with him and
others Mr chair thank you thank
you very much Representative
Lujan I have a couple of quick
questions and then we'll go for
you to close Representative
Borrego but I go Representative
Lujan capped and set a one it
sounds like you are open to
working with some of the
suggestions that committee
members have made for for some
fine tuning is that accurate Mr
chair absolutely great thank you
for that and
representatives I think that's
my main question I think we've
had this committee has really
good conversations I think the.
The concerns about volunteers
while challenging to address I
think they're important concerns
have been raised in the state
really all of the different
flags and concerns I would also
flag right now
Sort of that entry level could
that isn't necessarily I don't
see that that definition is
contained for firefighters so
that might be something to look
at and appreciate that
suggestion as well
we go to you to close and and
also note that are FIR says that
this could have from a zero to
up at this sort of it the most
potentially a hundred thousand
dollar impact.
Thank you Mr chair and members
and I do want to address some of
the issues that came up with
regard to our volunteer
firefighters in this is really
an important issue and it's not
addressed in the FIR the
volunteer firefighters the part
of the reasoning behind this is
to kind of recruit some of those
individuals and a lot of those
people have other jobs is to
recruit them to become full time
firefighters and I just also
want to mention that our peril
is assessed very differently for
volunteer firefighters that it
is four full time firefighters
so there are issues that need to
be discussed in the rules
committee before we move forward
forward and say everybody should
get three or five thousand
dollars because not everybody
would be assessed at the same
rate
a volunteer firefighter who
probably does the same amount of
work in at times not all the
time
they they probably you know they
have another job and so this is
really designed to recruit
people into and insure that they
are looking at this as a full
time job and so that's part of
the reasoning and the intent
behind this is that in the rules
committee when we come back with
this we would have to look at
all of those differentials
before we could say you know
maybe a volunteer firefighter
would get
you know two thousand or three
thousand dollars in a full time
would get five thousand and so
that is sort of those are
differentials that we really
need to address as we're
creating the rules for this
particular fund.
Right thank you very much
thank you very much
Representative but I go
Representative Lujan anything to
add thank you Mr chair and thank
I hope that you.
Support this so that we can be
impaired you just mentioned
before with our our police
officers and created this fund
and.
There's more to discuss and I
really appreciate what
Representative Armstrong it it
said maybe maybe creating more
funding there but right now that
funds brought into my.
Yes the previous insurance at
rates and so maybe we.
There is opportunity for this to
and intense and.
I think that
With all the do with all the
respect we have for our first
responders and firefighters that
it looks like it could even grow
but right now this is this is
the scope of what this set this
is the Senate bill does and we
really appreciate your but
office thank you Mr chair great
thank you very much
Representative Lujan okay I
don't see any of are there any
other questions I don't see any
other questions Representative
excuse me miss Rodriguez.
Just come and go our staff is
the constant
I yes I and and I apologize for
that thank you very much for
percent that accrues vice chair
Dixon for the motion.
Sorry yes they're contagious.
It is the
I move it to pass on House Bill.
Three.
Forty five.
Great to move I. by production
saying by Representative Oct
Cruz this Rodriguez can you
please call the vote.
Representative Allison.
Yes.
Respectfully no.
Yes.
Garcia yes.
No I'd like to explain explain
my vote.
Just.
At the time yes.
Yes and I'd like to explain my
but.
Shares small yes.
Okay thank you for those to
explain their both please.
Senator thank you Mr chair if it
is if amendments are done I
would support it on the floor
but there's not an appropriation
associate in the enactment
closet there's appropriation it
just needs some work so I hope
that they can be worked on and
then I will fully support it
thank you very much of Senator
others to explain their vote.
by thirtieth.
Thank you Mr chair and
representative and
I I think there are some really
good points brought up and I I
think that there are some
Changes that could make this
into a a much better bill
particularly prior to getting
hurt on the floor and so you
know would love to continue to
work on that.
Thanks thank you very much thank
you very much representative
thank you captain that concludes
our work for today thank you
committee for great that.
