The Dixon are you on.
We lose our.
Okay.
Representative Anderson will you
introduce yourself.
Representative brown will you
introduce yourself.
Thank you madam madam chair I'm
Catherine brown Representative
much of Eddy County.
Okay.
Representative Chatfield.
Representative Chatfield.
Representative Garcia.
Representative Garcia.
Representative Lotta.
Thank you madam chair.
Thank you well you introduce
yourself.
Yes ma'am my name is ray Lotta I
represent I represent house
district thirty four in southern
Dona Ana County and I believe
that representative Garcia is
having some technical issues.
Okay.
Representative Lundstrom.
She I know that you bounces into
different Canadian so she'll
probably be here in a bit
Representative sat in Gnagna.
Thank you madam chair I am
Debbie Syriana I represent house
district twenty one and that's a
Bernalillo county Albuquerque
the international district in
the central corridor and madam
chair I know I it's you keep
cutting in and out so it's
probably money but
it's it's the body.
I don't know what you just said
but okay thank you.
And raising the volume does that
help and.
In now it must be just the
internet okay.
Thank you I'm sorry about that.
Several people are having a
problem with their internet
connections right now so that's
not a good thing I would like to
just share with you again if you
are not.
scheduled to speak right now
please everyone for housekeeping
purposes mute your microphone
number one
I'm doing this my first time
doing this online with you also
please you can do this if you
want to speak about our make a
list all right your name are you
the
From the bottom where it says
chat.
Or part I'm sorry which is
participants should be a place
where you can raise your hand
and if you want to speak okay.
We'll try and I know we'll have
some errors but will live.
Harry Garcia.
Would you introduce yourself I
decide to go in.
Thank you sure my name is Jerry
Garcia our districts sixty nine
Representative are to small
someone McKinley scored really
of counties of certain related
madam chair of the computers not
cooperate with me I look forward
to all we do this committee
today thank you madam chair.
Okay thank you I'm.
Gonna go ahead and get started
and the list that I'm using is
the list that I got from bill
about this the other day and the
people that were scheduled that
are scheduled in this order are
the military affairs department
homeland security emergency
management for all board
juvenile public safety advisory
board crime victims reparation
commission and The New Mexico's
sentencing commission will go
the way we usually do that we
have the analysts president and
then we'll go to the the
directors of those departments
to give us a presentation
followed by
Audience participation and then
we have a questions from the
committee is everyone clear on
that.
Go ahead and go to the military
affairs department we have
missed.
Right and then he menace.
Thank you madam chair good
afternoon madam chair members of
the committee I'm Ellery been
LFC fiscal analyst.
For reference the department of
military affairs agency number
seven zero five and additional
information on the legislative
recommendation is on pages two
ninety two to ninety four other
LFC is falling into also joined
this afternoon by Diego Jimenez
who is the executive budget
analyst and Kenneth novices the
adjutant general of the New
Mexico National Guard and the
head of the department of
military affairs.
I'll be going over both
recommendations briefly and then
Diego will comment on the
executive recommendation before
we handed over to general his
comments.
Looking at the different she
between executive and
legislative recommendation in
light of the COVID nineteen
pandemic impact on state
revenues military affairs
submitted a budget request for
FY twenty two that
represented a five percent
decrease in its general fund
revenue compared with the
previous year provided
recommendations supports that
requested decrease while the
executive recommendation keeps
the agency's budget but so it's
about three hundred and sixty
point five thousand dollars
higher than provided
recommendations.
The HSD is removing six
positions and it's historically
had a pretty high vacancy rates
of both recommendations reduce
funding for personnel at the
executive recommendation of work
include still more funding for
personnel the legislative.
I'll just note for your
reference that in FY twenty the
HSD averaged a twenty six
percent you can see right and it
did transfer one point two
million dollars from person to
the contractual services and
other categories in FY twenty as
well.
Provided recommendations
supports agencies requested the
contractual services category
which is closer to FY twenty
actual expenditures all the
executive recommendation is flat
with the FY twenty one operating
budget.
On the other hand the
legislative recommendation is
slightly higher than the
executive in the other category
that's partially offset
decreases for tuition assistance
tuition assistance program and
employee training while the
executive recommendation reads
these items more in line with FY
twenty actual expenditures.
We've come to consensus on all
the performance measures and
targets and if you would like to
look at them they should be on
page three of your packet on
now turn it over to Diego for
his comments.
Madam chair thank you this is
right and explained the primary
difference between the two
recommendations the general fund
amount
The agency requests a five
percent decrease to do.
S. coherent in accordance with
both the LFC and that Executive
recommendations at the time but
since then the economic
situation has changed and so the
executive brought most of our
recommendations back to an
amount that is flat with FY
twenty one and so once I got
that news consulted with general
mama and his staff.
And put some.
Funds back into the contractual
category and that a little bit
back into the person category.
And that the money in the the
additional funds and personnel
services category will help the
agency address to address
appropriate salary placement
which is an issue that they are
facing right now.
At two other things.
Is that the HSD is historically
high agency right is most likely
largely attributable to the
hiring freeze imposed by the
executive and the other thing is
that the executive asked
agencies to be very selective
about contracts in the last
quarter of FY twenty due to that
you know forcing economic
situation at the time and so
aligning to the FY twenty actual
contract expenditures is.
Quite a bit lower than it
probably otherwise would have
been.
Okay.
Thank you madam chair.
Thank you very much I'm anything
else Ellen.
No madam chair I think I think
to turn it over to general not
opened his comments.
Good afternoon general not are
you ready.
Yes madam chair members of the
committee thank you so much for
the opportunity to present to
you.
Madam chair I share my screen
right now that's okay.
Thank.
And you should be seeing a
presentation that you all should
have provided to you for your
reference and I'll go through
this very quickly and hopefully
be able to answer any questions
that you all may have so again
thank you very much for the
opportunity to present to you in
the room with me I have my
deputy adjutant general Miguel
Aguilar I have my director of
state programs mystery so
Martinez I have our CFO Mr every
one time you and I have the the
lady behind all the numbers Mr
chairman you on with us as well
so if there are any specific
questions that you may have we
should be able to answer them I
would also like to.
Stop before I start madam chair
thank both Allen and Diego for
being incredible teammates they
are always working with this
very closely and getting out of
you know our insider are input
to the various questions so I I
very much like to thank both of
our analysts for their work and
they provide.
Members of the committee on this
screen you'll see some things of
that are important to us is the
New Mexico National Guard in the
department of military affairs
you'll see on the left hand side
so my soldiers that were in
Poland this past year they
returned from hole in this year
and on the right hand side
you'll see a young man returning
from Djibouti Africa and the
return this year as well in the
middle you'll see a of rather
old general hanging out the side
of a C. one thirty and I was
working with our special
operations are international
guard we were dropping some
things on a drop some
it's a it's one of my great
privileges as the adjutant
general to be out and be able to
see our airmen and soldiers
doing things very often that
Intel's we.
Thank you madam airplanes or
other things like that so that
that's that was a great thing
that was able to do you
go to the next slide here.
I'm sure members of the
committee well what I would like
to do first is to give you a
very quick updated the New
Mexico National Guard as you
know this last year has been
very very difficult for the
entire state of New Mexico New
York New Mexico National Guard
is being.
Right in the middle of the COVID
response for the state of New
Mexico
we have done this while still
maintaining are very high cost
posture and position within the
other national guards of the
United States we remain the top
ten in the nation we look at our
medical positions filled
something very critical during
this time right now in the COVID
response we remain the fifteenth
in the nation right now as far
as having our soldiers and
airmen medically ready missions
they are called upon.
Well during the COVID response
there's been almost a thousand
national guardsmen and women of
our four thousand it involved in
the response at some point
we have ninety nine Air National
Guard personnel that are still
on orders as of today and two
hundred forty seven Army
National Guard persons that are
orders as of today helping the
department of health the
department of homeland security
emergency management and our
other state agency partners with
the COVID response.
In a military affairs the part
would come to the state their
job is to help facilitate these
national guardsmen and women in
this response and they do an
incredible job.
as you know we just had the.
Presidential inauguration fifty
nine presidential inauguration
New Mexico provided two hundred
fifty two person it's part of
that in operation event as well
as providing personnel to secure
the ball for cap and the
governor's mansion some of those
folks you'll continue to see
throughout the rest remainder
this legislative session they're
providing security to ensure
that our lawmakers to do the
things that you all need to do
during this legislative session.
We have deployed six hundred
forty five person in support of
contingency operations in Europe
Africa and Asia we have an
additional ninety three person
getting ready to deploy down
February and another eighty
person getting ready to deploy
it in April time frame.
Our New Mexico National Guard
counter drug task force help say
thirty five point seven million
dollars of drugs guns and other
formal things off the streets of
New Mexico this past year.
Are you challenge program which
I know all the legislators
except for maybe some of our
newest legislators are very
familiar with unfortunately had
to shut down last calendar year
because of the COVID we are
anticipating or we're very
hopeful to get that you
challenge academy going again
this year and in fact the
announcement yesterday by the
governor we're seeing how that
might play into us starting are
you challenge academy sooner
than later.
Are you Mr National Guard
funeral honors team provided
eight hundred eighty seven
funerals calendar year twenty
twenty honoring veterans and
their families for their
sacrifices innocent service of
our nation we've got state
active duty to includes a search
and rescue fire budget missions
as well as the things that I
just mentioned with the COVID
and with the security around the
capital and the governor's
mansion.
This past year only has proven
to be a great opportunity for us
to collaborate with again the
department of homeland security
members you management EPS
department of health and are
General Services Division.
Again are you challenge academy
something that we're very proud
of again we cannot do without
the legislators your support and
your funding again this is
seventy five percent funded by
the federal government twenty
five percent funded by the state
of New Mexico it's a it's a
small dollar amount when we look
at what it costs cost to
incarcerated young man or woman
or you know the the other costs
if they go on a different path
this really is a great second
chance for many of our young New
Mexicans again we were unable to
finish the cycle that started
early in calendar year twenty we
did not run out of space summer
fall session nor do we start a
session now in the winter time
frame so again if it's going to
be up under control and we can
get this thing going again we
want to start it again this is
John R. year.
Okay so as was mentioned by our
analysts are FY twenty two
general fund request was six
eighty forty eight point seven
thousand dollars
this six million eight six point
eight million dollars request
was again reflective of a five
percent decrease again you all
have these very difficult
decisions to make reference you
know funding and but the the the
department of military affairs
we did our part and we came in
with that request that is what
is reflected by the LFC
recommendation.
Our priorities again as was
touched on by Diego a little bit
is a proper placement of
employees are all very small
department here we have some
some of placement of employees
it needs to be fixed and we've
been working closely with the
director Coleman was slow as
well as the governor to try to
make sure this happens are you
challenge of.
Program as well as our other
cooperative agreements we need
to be able to continue to fund
these so again this is the
method by which the federal
government helps the state of
New Mexico and helps me do our
missions with these master
property funding agreements we
all have a portion of state
match must be made in order to
get the federal dollars to come
into the state.
You know we all have experienced
in the fact we've been
experiencing some of it here on
this meeting right now we're up
the internet has become
something that is much more
important to all of us working
in this distributed part of
environments wireless services
at our armories are always do
not have or the services so we
would like to make that a
reality so again some of the
general fund priorities and we
have if we are given the general
fund dollars that we request we
would make worms services
available at our arms.
if you working in the
distributed environment like
this we know that automation is
some of our activities to
include using digital signatures
things like that are a within
future state government must
continue to progress in that in
that matter some of the
contracts that we're looking at.
Program is a great benefit the
soldiers and airmen of the New
Mexico National Guard yet is
begin because of our generous
legislators in the money that
you appropriate for that want to
continue doing that it's a very
difficult time right now to
recruit
it's even more difficult because
you are unable to go to high
schools and the schools because
kids are not in session so any
of the benefits that we can
provide like a tuition
assistance program and our
SQLite service life insurance
reimbursement so we provide our
things that give the New Mexico
National Guard image overseas
for example the Army Reserve for
the Air Force reserve and
national guards men or women has
a benefit to join the New Mexico
National Guard.
Similar control we help pay for
the proficiency of for their
pilots again this is a.
Now see if they were using
heavily now during the COVID
similar control is very involved
in taking vaccines from
Albuquerque to the very outlined
in rural rural areas of New
Mexico and we're using our
planes and pilots some of the
money that we receive general
fund dollars helps ensure the
proficiency of those parts all
these things are critical in
order for us to continue doing
the things we're doing right now
as we go forward.
Again our FY twenty two request
was based on a five percent
reduction of our FY twenty one
numbers which are typically
percent decrease because of
COVID again I don't want anybody
this is the fiscal reality that
you'll have to do it I'm glad
madam chair and members of the
committee that it's you I'm
working these difficult
situations but I can't tell you
that of the executive
recommendation allows me to do
some of those things that are.
Help us pass for we are right
now with food to a higher level
reading is for your New Mexico
National Guard and the
department of military affairs.
Well I would like to note that
decision to what we are present
two years we have requested the
general fund supplemental
for the groundwater monitoring
and site remediation at the
bland armor this was the old
National Guard armory it has
been occupied by the city of
land in the been using it.
It's a great asset for the city
of Milan there were some wells
monitoring wells that were there
that we're unfortunately they
don't work with the city
occupied that needs the the
parking lot.
we all know how precious water
is in the state of New Mexico
and report it is so this forty
five thousand dollar general
fund supplemental that we're
asking for is necessary to
reinstate those monitoring wells
and ensure that we have seen all
water there in the bullpen arm
chair again we have some some
pictures you're showing your New
Mexico National Guard in action
doing things during the COVID
response and of.
One of our nation's
requirements and I'm so very
proud to be a member of the New
Mexico National Guard and for
the great work that our soldiers
have done on behalf of our
nation and our state madam chair
members of the committee of I'm
ready for any questions that you
may have.
Thank you very much general Baca
that we check my participant
list and see if I have people
with their hands up.
I'm yes Representative Brown.
Thank you madam chair we should
very much and I have a couple of
questions for the general the
first is regarding
it's noted here in our materials
that there's in anticipation of
a reduction in federal revenues
could you explain Sir
at what's happening there at the
federal level that strictly down
to the state funding.
Where is page one of our
difference works.
Madam chair representative of
brown's so there is a there is
an anticipated federal funding
increase so there's a couple of
things why up first of all is
that some of the full time
employee positions they were de
activated and so that there
there was a state and a federal
match for some of those some of
those because they have been
long term vacancies there are
deactivated so that's going to
necessitate federal match
decrease in that part
we also have.
Three hundred category a
decrease of four hundred thirty
six thousand a due to
unanticipated
So our master cooperative
funding agreements contractual
services again it it's a it's a
gas that we have to do between
both state and federal match and
the timing of between the state
fiscal year the federal fiscal
year sometimes catches and in a
weird place when we have a
continuing resolution on the
federal government when the we
don't get a budget to begin the
beginning of the fiscal year and
we have this mad dash to spend
the last two quarters of the
federal fiscal year well those
that's the beginning of the
state fiscal year or the close
of the state fiscal year so that
because of that no
Do you think that we have to
deal with we were able to
decrease that federal amount in
in not anticipate any major
issues to the to the New Mexico
National Guard in the state and
state of New Mexico
are the last one really is
around are you challenge academy
so are you challenge academy of
Representative we've been wanted
to grow that that program I
think it's one of the best seek
best known secrets best kept
secrets in.
the the.
The funding for the cadets is
based on a formula so seven two
thousand five hundred dollars
per ticket and so that the
number that was used to
seventeen of five times two
hundred twenty five cadets would
equal three million nine hundred
thirty seven thousand five
hundred.
We haven't had two hundred
twenty five cadets graduate yet
not to that I have you know that
makes me very sad that we
haven't been able to do that of
course.
Will you please up house for a
minute.
Sen Nichols will you mute your.
Computer thank you.
Chair representative round so
the reduction in the four
hundred category was mostly
around are you challenge program
and because we are not getting
the numbers of cadets in the
program we forecasted what we
thought was a realistic number
to get and we're able to reduce
that further.
Are you had another question
though Representative yes Sir
madam chair and and general nada
I want to just sing the praises
of the the youth challenge
academy as well I I became
familiar with it about ten years
ago when I started serving in
office and they were kind enough
to invite me up to us some of
their events and I haven't
actually been on the in the in
the campus area where the whole
classes or anything but we met
in our in a particular multi
purpose room and I was just
really impressed with the folks
who run the program and the
cadets themselves I think it's a
really great investments in our
use the graduation rate is
really very high and I receive
letters from the students
as they're getting ready to
transition out of the program
and it's always very moving to
to read what they have to say
and I I think these letters are
from students for from my my
district so I I really
appreciate that and I hope we
can get back to having students
there at at that campus I noted
in volume to the.
Madam chair and and general
knowledge that you're you're
paying one hundred percent me
see where I found that yeah it's
on the actually page three of
the worksheet
for fiscal year twenty to excuse
me
This is regarding an outcome of
the percent of our cadets
enrolled
to graduate and for our FY
twenty one it's marked at a
hundred percent even though
I'm just wondering with why a
hundred percent because in the
previous year we had an eighty
percent right and then
anticipating ninety percent and
that's
agreed to by the executive LFC
so why the hundred percent that
just struck me as a little bit
strange.
Madam chair representative round
of you know these performance
measures are very difficult for
us to come up with things that
really make sense that you
walking greatest on our
education I will tell you that
it's it is not realistic for us
to have a hundred percent of the
cadets that show up on the first
day of the program to graduate
the program we we we always have
some attrition it very sometimes
it's higher than than we would
like but it's very sticky go up
a size thirty percent attrition
so then when you look at who
stays in the program and
graduates program
then you have to look at again
who has who's able to attain
their high set equivalency and
so that number is been always
very hard but it's not a hundred
percent of those kids don't get
their I said either up.
Madam chair representative brown
I would love to go re look at
the that performance measures
again and work with our analysts
to come up with a better
recommendation for you all it
makes more sense okay thank you
madam chair and in general the
my last question I'd like a
little more information about
the Civil Air Patrol I heard you
say that the CAP is delivering
vaccines right now but what in a
non COVID year what does the
Civil Air Patrol to
in service to New Mexico.
Madam chair representative brown
again the Civil Air Patrol is
another one of those best kept
secrets so at a larger level it
is an auxiliary of the United
States Air Force so the Civil
Air Patrol is a recognized
auxiliary of the United States
Air Force they can be missions
to provide support for search
and rescue missions are they
very often will support provide
support along the border you
know to our customs and border
protection of federal status
they can thank you all a
multitude of things again using
very small airplanes that's one
small part of what they do and
that's what they're doing right
now for us in COVID they're
helping us with the logistical
challenges when you take the
five year vaccine from
Albuquerque New Mexico you break
it down from the large nine
hundred those box into a small
box we have to be able to
quickly deliver it to get it to
a freezer let's say in quite New
Mexico the Civil Air Patrol as a
way that we're traveling that I
our distance that would be by
grounding we're safely getting
the vaccines locations in rural
New Mexico where where it can be
then further distributed to the
people there that need it
so the biggest thing though that
that I think that you would like
a lot if you really like are you
challenge academy what the Civil
Air Patrol does with middle
school children and so the the
Civil Air Patrol has a
curriculum of the date implement
throughout middle schools
throughout the state of New
Mexico and and they are helping
our young men and women with
discipline with with focus on
stem related type of training
activities to help your them
towards those type of hi tech
Future careers or aviation and
so the Civil Air Patrol is very
involved with our with our young
men and women throughout the
state doing training again the
money that we receive in the
department of military affairs
Civil Air Patrol doesn't belong
to me but we supported in these
efforts and so that general fund
of money that comes in house pay
for an employee a state employee
that helps take care of the
Civil Air Patrol helps take care
of their proficiency training
and on a on the axillary kind of
a way it also supports those
efforts that are happening in
the middle schools.
Thank you general thank you
madam chair I I know a young
lady from my district who was
she and her brothers I believe
were involved in the Civil Air
Patrol it was really a game
changer for them and she went on
to attend that airforce academy
in Colorado springs so I I've
heard a little bit about her
experience but I I wasn't sure
of the of the the more the
details of the program so
sometimes the smaller groups are
really some of our stars in
state government so madam chair
thank you so much for the time
General number thank you as well
for those answers.
Thank you are there any other
questions yes Representative
Harry Garcia.
Thank you madam chair a thank
you general model for the
presentation of.
We have a question.
It's more of a comment would not
comment it's a free for you Sir
no on behalf of the state of New
Mexico.
You for what you do for the
state of New Mexico you know if
you choose a what you doing on
that challenge for the kids and
you said a general of madam
chair if you put if you if we
want kids to go to jail that is
priced as we can get it back.
And what you're doing.
If you have one kid we had it is
again I don't want to develop
thank you very much for what
you're doing Sir very much
appreciated and the committee
members you know I work with the
general since you came up that
in general and he is all of our
New Mexico is all about helping
everybody in the state of New
Mexico and you are really really
appreciate it thank you general.
Madam chair representative
Garcia thank you very much and I
would like to thank you and and
again the other elected leaders
here they're just doing this
great work on behalf of the
state of New Mexico and
representative Garcia I know
that as a Vietnam veteran
yourself you always have the the
veteran in the servicemen and
women up in your in the
forefront and and I can share
many stories where I get phone
calls late at night were you
trying to take care of one of
his constituents it and it and
it's it's it's just a great
thing to see so thank you very
much Madam chair representative
Garcia.
Representative Sariñana and
after Representative Sariñana my
apologies to those public
attendees I skipped you and I
know I have one person that I'll
call in afterwards.
Thank you madam chair hello
General nah it's good to see you
I just first want to thank you
and all your members for all of
your work important work you're
doing in New Mexico and around
the world you you make New
Mexico proud I'm.
What I wanted to talk about was
your I. T. problems you said
that I. T. problems and can you
expand on that and will the
solutions be covered in your
budget thank you.
Madam chair representative sorry
not thank you so much for up for
asking that question so.
Again the New Mexico National
Guard we have this this up
strange dance that we must do
with the federal government so
the facilities that I have that
I house my national guardsmen
and women out of our state
buildings they belong to the
state armory board and they are
funded the initial military
construction is funded by the
federal government but the our
state buildings and so we have
to we have our share that we
have to use to maintain that the
federal government does provide
us with some of the
infrastructure that's required
in those buildings but it's
always with a deal be specific
requirement in mind so for
example the physical security
requirements that are ready to
centers are funded one hundred
percent by the federal
government date will put
requirements for blast protected
windows intrusion devices maybe
perimeter fencing things of that
nature that will be funded by
the federal government typically
what we'll do is we'll take care
of it on the state procurement
side to stable from the money
that further will be reimbursed
by the federal government so
that's the typical model but
more than three forces might
Ehrman and soldiers are not full
time employees and the way that
the OAG looks at funding when we
look at things like computers or
infrastructure for internet it's
for the full time force so.
Three fourths of my folks are
traditional they have a job
somewhere else or a teacher for
example or do something else in
this is that this is what they
need well I can tell you that
COVID has been incredible up to
show the weak spots to show the
scenes that exist within our
infrastructure in the state and
so very simple things like being
able to have my airmen and
soldiers do training online
because I'm trying to create
physical distancing they can't
do it because we don't have the
infrastructure in place and all
by the way the federal
government is not going to fund
it because they're not full time
employees there part time
employees and so really what I'm
asking for is no if the answer
is this will not take care of it
if this budget it comes to me it
will not take care of it for the
entire state but what we're
going to look at is taking care
of the largest readiness centers
were the largest impact so for
example Rio Rancho Los crucis
our two locations another one in
Albuquerque the Wyoming armory
these are locations where they
are we over loaded I have a lot
more soldiers and airmen in
these locations and so those are
the ones we're targeting first
so we're gonna try to take care
the largest number soldiers and
airmen that we can with that
limited budget.
Now does that answer your
question.
A mentor yes thank you general
thank you for everything.
Representative.
Yes madam chair thank you and
then I don't see any other
legislators with their hands up
but I do see an audience member
we're going to go to the
audience now Ellen raven.
Thank you madam chair I I just
wanted to clarify something with
regard to the performance
measure goals for the youth
challenge academy graduation
rates the one hundred percent
target is the FY twenty one
target that's what was requested
by the department that year and
I believe it was the target the
previous year but obviously it
is a little high maybe a little
overly aspirational so that's
why it for the FY twenty two
request and and both
recommendations at target has
been reduced to ninety percent
thank you.
Thank you I don't see any others
wishing to speak Mister you
menace did you have any input.
No ma'am I think agency rated.
Explained it he did not go to
vice chair
Meredith Dixon for the motion.
Thank you madam chair I move the
LFC budget recommendation.
Thank you and as you all know
what we do in and these
committees as we always do
The lower recommendation unless
there's something really really
unusual and then what happens at
the end when everything gets
recommended to the full
committee of the analyst and
and all the folks involved with
the financial component of it
Deal with the with the requests
made by the or for changes by
the the presenters so I have a
motion and a second.
Harry are you raising your hand
are you waiting at me.
Harry Garcia.
Madam chair I just had a I'm
gonna add some do but away for
the motion to go through it and
I'll speak if I would if you let
me page you're gonna
Talk about why you made that
both.
Yes about okay.
Okay so there is a motion is
there anyone against this
recommendation.
Everyone for this recommendation
I don't see any opposition.
I'm again I'm looking at the
participant list for and I don't
see anything.
Okay all those in favor say aye.
All those opposed.
Motion carries to the except
that would see recommendation
and Harry Garcia would you
explain your vote.
Madam chair all
but concerns are to do the three
hundred six thousand dollar
difference from the LFC to all.
The executive and legislature to
because this budget is of
more National Guard and the
National Guard for state it just
concerns me that there is that
much of a difference and like
you said earlier Madam chair of
is not written in stone go to
the I budget we can talk about
it and maybe help model of it
and that's just an opinion whose
you know I am of Iran and some
of our veterans are lower people
serving in the garden stuff for
struggling soul just like in my
concern madam chair thank you
thank you and I'm sure that the
analysts who are involved are
duly noting it so that they can
have that discussion we.
Work with the large committee.
Okay the next item on the agenda
is the homeland security and
emergency management
madam chair.
My apologies did we receive a
second our do we have someone
recorded as seconding my motion.
Madam.
Representative seven on and did.
Thank you.
Thank you
the next.
The next department is the
homeland security and emergency
management and I believe it is
the honorable of the honorable.
And awesome Bianca or tease
words on.
You're on mute okay.
Diego you go first how do thank
you madam chair yes I you know
what I I was so impressed that
you were there that I forgot to
go to the analyst first my
apologies.
Go ahead Liz Ray been a Mister
humanness.
Thank you madam chair obviously
you Secretary teas were time
does not need introduction but
the department of homeland
security and emergency
management is agency number is
seven nine five and additional
information on the legislative
budget requirement
recommendation excuse me can be
found on pages three hundred and
seventeen through three hundred
and twenty one of the LFC is
going to.
On the first thing I want to
know probably the most
significant thing happening in
this agencies budget is that her
twenty twenty is House Bill
three eighty six the state fire
marshal's office will transition
from PRC to the homeland
security and emergency
management department at the
beginning of FY twenty two so
this agency it was previously a
one program agency but it's not
gonna have to programs homeland
security and emergency
management and the state fire
marshal's office and if you'll
see that you have a different
sheet for each of those
departments as well as the HSD
overall.
This is similar to the
department of military affairs
of the legislative
recommendation supports the
requested five percent reduction
in general fund revenue while
the executive recommendation is
flat reflective of you know the.
Revenue situation in the state
and changes in what we know
about the revenue situation that
have you know happened to us
over the all.
The executive recommendation for
revenue from the fire protection
fund which is all where the fire
marshal's office and that's the
only source of funding
recommended for the fire
marshal's office is higher than
legislative recommendation by
six hundred twenty one thousand
dollars which primarily supports
the addition of six positions
that program.
And we have come to consensus on
all performance measures and
targets for both programs those
can be found on pages four and
five of your packet.
In the homeland security and
emergency management program
which is page two of your
packet.
Recommendation for general fund
revenue is one hundred and sixty
four point arms I one hundred
sixty four thousand dollars
higher than the legislative
recommendation and it's flat
with the operating budget as
noted previously provided
recommendation is supporting the
requested five percent decrease.
I also know there's a difference
in the other transfers based on
expected funding for the
department's contract with the
energy minerals natural
resources department the web
transportation safety program
legislative recommendation is
based on the department's budget
request while the executive is
lower which is based on an
assessment of its expected
payment.
Security and emergency
management program have a high
vacancy rate so both
recommendation support decreased
funding for person but the
executive recommendation is
almost a hundred thousand higher
dollars higher than provided in
person.
The agency requests significant
increases in funding for
contractual services both
organizations support this but
the legislative recommendation I
just not a hundred thousand
dollars in to fund staffing
contracts but also recommended a
hundred thousand dollars less in
the other categories and agency
requests and the executive
recommendation doesn't make this
shift.
I'll now turn it over to Diego
to discuss the differences in
the recommendations for the
state fire marshal's office
program and on that that can be
found on page three of your
packet.
Thank you all and I really
appreciate that you're directing
people to the page numbers in
the codes go ahead mystery
equipment thank you miss madam
chair
So.
In FY twenty two budget request.
The program only requested
funding from the fire protection
fund.
That DFA guidance the fire
protection fund is budgeted
budgeted as other transfers in
FY twenty one but as other
revenues and FY twenty two
recommendations so if you look
at your different city it looks
like there's large like almost
eighty million dollar
differences or drops of one.
Large seventy five million
dollar increase in the other.
That does not necessarily the
case is that the shifting of of
where that's reflected.
And I'm.
The executive recommendation
from the fire protection fund
revenue exceeds the legislative
recommendation by six hundred
and twenty eight point one
thousand.
One thing to note is that almost
sixty percent of the balance
remaining and the fire
protection fund at the end of
the fiscal year will revert to
the general fund.
And.
The executive recommendation for
person exceeds the legislative
recommendation by six hundred
twenty one point one thousand
the agency raided noted earlier
this this difference is to
support six new staff members
for the state fire marshal's
office the six new staff members
will provide administrative
services at the end.
The the fire marshal's office is
currently relying on P. Garcia
to provide much of those
services and the without these
sixty staff members at the fire
marshal's office will have to
rely on the department of
homeland security.
To provide the same services and
the legislative recommendation
does not support the request for
additional staff members and
notes that in FY twenty P.
program averaged a vacancy rate
of about twenty two percent.
At those recommendations include
language specifying the a
certain portion of the fire
protection fund revenue
appropriated to the per student
appropriated to the program may
be used for operational costs
rather than the pass through
funding for fire departments the
executive recommends four point
two million be used for
operational costs well the
legislative recommendation
specifies five point one million
be used for operations and as Mr
Abbey noted earlier we have come
to consensus on the performance
measures and targets and with
that I'd now prepared to hand
over presentation to secretary
Ortiz person.
Good afternoon secretary madam
secretary are you ready I am
thank you so much madam chair
the idols share my screen that
is okay that is all right.
I'm.
Madam chair can you see this
okay yes if you can live to
little bit for mild eyes that
would be great anything for you
let's see if I can do that.
Better.
Right right.
Eight.
Thank you so much as Ellen and
Diego for your presentation but
also as general now that
mentioned earlier your
partnership throughout the year
in preparing our budgets and
also your feedback
I much appreciated as does the
rest of our department madam
chair is the members of the
committee thank you for your
service first of all and for
your time today my name is
Bianca or tease worth time and I
am the secretary designate of
the homeland security and
emergency management I am joined
today by several members of my
team and it's that you don't
mind indulging me I'd like to
take a minute and introduced
them.
Okay yes ma'am okay great great
thank you we have with us Dr
Kelly Hamilton who is the deputy
secretary for our department Mr
run Stillman our chief financial
officer Mr Peterson our
administrative services bureau
chief.
Mr Matthew staff all our general
counsel and Mr John contracting
with New Mexico state fire
marshal as well as Mr Randi but
Ella New Mexico's deputy state
fire marshal.
Okay thank.
Thank you.
I'm gonna comment security
and emergency management
coordinates the state's response
to all hazard type events and
supports local response
including the COVID nineteen
crises emergencies and disasters
are defined as either natural or
human made events or any other
circumstances recognized as such
by our governor.
The HSD em assist local
jurisdictions in their
preparedness efforts and in
their response to emergencies
when their capabilities are
overwhelmed as well as serving
as the conduit for assistance
from the federal government
department coordinates around
the mission areas of the
National Guard to school of the
prevention protection mitigation
response and recovery.
In the past year during the
COVID nineteen crises our agency
has had the privilege to serve
our communities through the
coordination of statewide PPE
distribution and something I'm
particularly proud of during
this crises was our agencies
incredible response to our
tribal communities and the
coordination there and the that
tribal consultation and
coordination role to date this
allowed our team to respond
quickly to the needs of our
communities with expertise and
compassion and that again was
part of our we're needing effort
of distributing PPE water and
supplies.
I'm.
Some of the other
accomplishments that we can
point on is that
we have dramatically improved
our financial management and
grant oversight over the last
year and this is something that
we are proud of and one of the
one of the pieces that we want
to talk about a little bit is
that FEMA the Federal Emergency
Management is and.
Administration rescinded the
December twenty fifteen
restricted draw on seven million
dollar annual grant the homeland
security.
Requests.
And why this is important is
because came up puts you on
restricted dropped when they
don't like they don't have
confidence in what you're doing
and just recently this past fall
our agency was actually that was
rescinded so are granted finance
team have been working very hard
of.
To make sure that these these
these positive.
Efforts are happening in
addition to that we of course
submitted our annual audit on
time which is important but we
also had twenty four percent
fewer findings and that is
something that appraise we're we
are going to work towards
eliminating findings as best we
can come the next on it.
I'm we have also of course gone
through many activations
throughout this year
particularly with the COVID
nineteen pandemic our emergency
operations center coordinated
very closely continues to with
our with our other agencies our
sister agencies like D. O. H. of
course CYFD and our a the
National Guard and that is been
something that we've been
working on throughout.
We also activated the EOC most
recently to coordinate and
support GPS and National Guard
with the mission at the state
capitol with regards to the
security.
I'm last year as noted by Diego
and Alan is that the New Mexico
legislature passed in the
governor signed into law
legislation that transitions the
state fire marshal over to DHS
ma'am and we are very excited
about this and believe that the
two organizations compliment one
another greatly and with that I
will move to my next slide here.
This is our combined operating
budget and as as you can see
that
The executive budget is is
slightly higher than what LFC is
recommending and this is due to
mostly due to the creation of
six new administrative services
bureau positions
These are marshal's office is
not coming over with ADS B.
positions which we feel are very
important in order to keep the
trains running on time we have
of the you know everything from
H. R. two I. T. those are
exceptionally important
especially with the transition
of to to agencies are
appropriations so we are very
much as supportive of the
executive.
Recommendation here.
And breaking them up into just a
of programs we have the DHS yes
are agencies operating budget
and as you can see
what we have here is again the
slight just representing the
slight increase in the executive
budget versus the LFC budget and
yes we do have a a vacancy rate
but we are also working very
closely with DFA and
spoke to make sure that those
vacancies are filled and in fact
in the next couple of weeks we
are going to be I'm closing the
gap where I'm pretty
significantly it's just you know
things are are taking time to
fill and we also
you know some folks have had to
make tough decisions and advisor
moved out of state your family
or they've been hired off by
other Emergency Management
groups so we we do have
incredibly talented staff and
and they shine and when you
shine your noticed.
And so but we are working very
hard to close that close that
gap.
And as you see with the state
fire marshal's operating budget
this too has a increases with
the fiscal year twenty twenty
two executive budget and we are
in strong support of the
executive budget and this is of
course as we merge to
appropriations those A. S. B. R.
admin positions will be
incredibly important to make
sure that our departments around
the state are provided to
customer service that the should
be
are you know yeah I given and
because this is grant.
And that type of interaction
with our with our partners out
in the state Colin Care fire
departments as well as non
volunteer is that's what it's
going to be is we're gonna have
to have hands on deck.
This next slide gives a little
bit of an idea of of how we are
how we operate.
We are as mentioned earlier we
are a conduit for federal
assistance
federal grants and you know
provide for a lot of
reimbursement for his
municipalities whether it's a
disaster or that we're having to
work with the local community
you recover but mostly what
we're doing is is the federal
government will help with grants
that are at the homeland
security grants or ENTG.
And and one thing to keep in
mind when making a decision with
regards to the salaries and
benefits increased is that a lot
of our requests are funded by
federally and we have to provide
a match so when you provide that
that general fund dollar we are
able to leverage it to create
you know to to bring in a little
bit more federal dollars so it's
a fifty fifty match for some of
our requests and so that's
really important so we've helped
us that yes land grants of
course our tribal communities
these in towns and over the
course of the years you'll see
that it just kind of ebbs and
flows a little bit with regards
to
What is is happening in a given
year and so this year the six
year average and about forty two
million dollars.
This is our State Farm
marshal's office and
Again it's a very similar in in
court nations are complementary
with our organizations that we
are they too are conduits for
the systems and this is not
necessarily federal that say and
so the they provide last year
they provided about a little
over ten million dollars in
grants to local departments and
reverted about fourteen million
dollars back to the general.
And you know as you all will
receive this year we are
introducing legislation that
will allow for that
the reversion to cease and that
the local departments would be
able to compete for that extra
dollars.
And so that is that is our
presentation and I'd like to
call upon John can drag our
state fire marshal's office too
deliver some very quick remarks
and that and then we'll stand
for questions thank you so much
madam chair thank you go ahead
John.
Thank you madam madam secretary
thank you madam chair of the
committee members my name's John
contract and the acting state
fire marshal and also W. over
the fire investigation bureau
with me today is deputy fire
marshal Randy for all of the
fire service support bureau
hopefully if you have any
questions.
Together we be able to answer
any questions you may have.
State fire marshal's office
transition the department of
homeland security is developing
into a successful venture is
both agencies have found that
they are complementary to each
other through delivery of
financial support and training
services both agencies are able
to provide improved support to
the state emergency responders
specifically to the S. of a mile
our partnership will allow the
agency to expand delivery of
services and better execute our
mission in coordination with the
goals of the New Mexico fire
service.
During this transition period
yes of a mobile has been focused
on three primary areas
modernization obtaining
electronic data programs in an
effort to better process fire
protection fund grant Fund
applications as well as internal
inspection data to training and
certification obtaining training
and certification for staff in
an effort to improve application
of nationally accepted standards
in each discipline three
outreach increased availability
to our fire service partners and
the general public through
personal service utilizing
assigned geographic territories
electronic communications as
well as person to person contact
when feasible.
Yes if the mall will continue to
provide improved fire prevention
services as the agency received
additional resources and support
the HSD looks forward to the
collaborative relationship with
the department of homeland
security and appreciates the
support and guidance provided by
the public regulation commission
in the past.
And I can stand for questions.
Thank you I apologize for that I
thought that was off
the the I don't have any other
folks
Madam secretary do have any
closing comments.
well I'm one of the the I don't
know is the.
Ron do did I miss anything that
you can think of Mr Stillman.
Do you have any owning a friend.
No.
Madam secretary designate you
could cut you covered everything
perfectly.
Thank you so much I'm going to
go ahead and go to the audience
I don't see any hands up there
so if.
One of the staff people C..
Audience Hanson please let me
know.
I don't okay so I'm gonna go on
to committee members I have a
Harry Garcia followed by
petty Lundstrom.
Thanks thank you madam chair
all.
Of madam secretary said that you
had a twenty four percent fewer
ought.
Can you explain that a little
bit to me twenty four percent of
what they did you have yes I'm
thank you
and
Care.
Thank you madam chair and
Representative Garcia thank you
so much for that question Mr
Spellman would you mind of going
into detail with regards to that
question.
Yes ma'am.
The trouble.
Yes ma'am.
Madam chair Representative
Representative Garcia we had
twenty five audit findings in
the two thousand nineteen all
at.
And us some of the some of the
findings were relatively quick
fixes that we could could
address such as submitting an
audit on time
And some some more of those at
types of administrative type of
activities cleaning up our
balance sheet so we still have
nineteen findings out there they
are the more difficult ones so
I don't know I answered your
question or not on that but the
the the ones that we we did
address and I should have them
in front of me but I don't have
a right now
what were they have more easy
ones to to address Madam chair
of the secretary of.
No did not my question really
are you sure you want for
percent of your you should you
still have ninety dollars
expanding the new fix one of the
Madam no we we for work excuse
me we we we actually fix to.
Six six findings.
Turning in our audit in on time
Having a CPA a certified
purchased scene agent.
Of our purchasing there's a a
requirement within statute that
you have a certified purchasing
agent and we we we actually
certified one for the for the
period that was under audit so
that finding went away so there
were some of those
administrative findings that we
were able to clean up to clean
up six out of the twenty five so
we have nineteen left.
madam chair and
You know for the for the
committee of let us know what
the nineteen offer and how long
will absolutely your these
audits.
Sounds to me madam chair that
they claim to want to really
simple to do and I want to know.
What these other findings are
why the nineteen are still there
and do you have any previous
audits from our mmhm the past
years that are still standing.
The fund and the findings that
we do have our repeat findings
so that there are many that are
the same one thing about the
nineteen audit findings some of
the findings that our financial
findings are also
Federal findings as an example
we have a finding that our
balance sheet our balance sheet
amounts have not changed from
year to year and therefore the
auditors could not make an
attestation of the validity of
balances that actually is one
finding for financial and one
finding for federal.
And if you take a look at the
findings I'll get you a
comprehensive list of the
findings and in fact I believe
that in a day or two our audit
should be released and available
on the state auditor's website
that you'll see that there is a
duplication of the findings one
for financial and one for
federal because when they come
in the audit the the department
of homeland security they're
doing what's called a single
audit and that covers both the
financial aspect and the federal
grant acts aspect so when they
perform that audit.
They will look at the federal
requirements and when they
identify financial it goes on
the federal so we'll have things
such as.
We did not.
Look at every procurement to
make sure that the procurement
the entity were using was not on
the Desportos the bard or
suspension list that's one of
the findings and that's a
financial funding and a federal
funding.
South that that's what we have
have out there.
but I'm I'm.
More than happy to provide a
list of that yes Sir you madam
chair representative Garcia
that you're absolutely right we
did go after the the low hanging
fruit as as we should have and
we are working hard at at trying
to respond to the more difficult
ones and we will make sure and
provide a copy to you so that
you have the line I apologize
for not having that ready for
you today but we'll make sure
you that madam chair madam
secretary I think the committee
and and then the whole should
get a copy of that so we're by
no one pager on.
And the question one never
answered how old are these
findings that's of the back in
two thousand eighteen two
don seventeen or they're just
current all these are current
Matt madam chair and
representative Garcia some of
these are are old findings yes
Sir and I as far as actual years
we will have to I'll have to
look at that to make sure I'm
accurate in in in what I when I
respond unless Mr Stillman you
have I'm off the top of your
head our if I miss miss Peters
and if you have any our top of
your head knowledge of the
number the date the date back.
I do not have that the date
backs on all I do know that a
lot of them are the findings.
I.
Mr.
Representative Garcia.
maybe what they can do is a
visit with you after this is
over with to connect with you
about getting that information
to you we have four other.
In patients and so we'd like not
to linger on just this one.
Thank you madam chair I'm sorry
for that I apologize for that
but I would like to touch base
offline and all I have other
questions but of the of the
gender of time thank you madam
chair.
Thank you Representative Garcia
thank you
cabinet.
secretary.
Yes Bianca what.
Ortiz.
So I have the next our question
there is Representative
Lundstrom or chair strong
followed by Representative
Meredith Dixon.
I thank you Mr chair madam chair
I have a couple of questions the
first is regarded the fire
protection fund I'm looking at
the cash balance right now as of
November twenty twenty and what
I see is eleven million nine
hundred seventy one thousand
dollars so I need to be clear
that what of the department is
going to be asking for is a non
reverting fund.
Madam chair and chair Lundstrom
thank you so much for that
question
let's see if I can ask the John
or Randy to of.
With that in yes ma'am we we
will be asking for non reversion
yes thank you.
Thank you.
Representative Lundstrom I like
to defer that question to deputy
fire marshal Perella.
Representative good afternoon
yes the eleven million nine
hundred seventy one I believe is
the money's gonna be reverted
back to general fund.
Are you know that the numbers of
seed in the last few days
working with the find that is
going to be our reverted if they
show up here.
But
well I'm gonna have the analysts
to send me a memo on about the
Appropriations Committee doesn't
generally do not reverting funds
we see appropriations process
when we allow for that so I need
to have a better explanation of
why especially when there's a
cash balance sitting here.
Question I have for this
department yes I'm looking at.
The November twenty twenty cash
balance.
For the homeland security
emergency managers mounted Fund
governor's disaster declaration
there's thirty seven million
dollars in that fund.
Yes madam chair and chair
Lundstrom let's see.
Mistrust.
Do you have access to that.
Yes madam the secretary and
madam chair up.
A lot of the executive orders
are matching monies for federal
activities and we we see those
those matching funds up front
and they're held in reserve and
it and eight show up in that
cash balance and they're all
waiting the
the local organizations the
tribal entities to submit their
sub grant invoices and we get
the money up front when it is a
the declared disaster from the
governor so that's the money
you're seeing there.
Is adequate for twenty nineteen
of thirty nine million.
That.
That number sounds correct is so
it should be at within the
thirty thirty million dollar
range of funds that we had
associated with declared
disasters.
Thank you madam chair.
Is that it chairwoman.
I just want to know why we would
be doing and non reverting fund
when we have these kind of cash
balances so I'll get some kind
of a memo from the analysts on
this and we just don't do not
reverting funds unless we know
it's going to be spent and then
what isn't spent to get sent
back into the general fund
because we lose the
probation ability on these
funds.
And sometimes of Warren tied in
a tight situation with tight
budget situations we can't get
access.
Thank you so much for your your
comments thank thanks everybody.
Thank you the next person is
representative Dixon.
Thank you madam chair I'm
actually my questions have been
answered
so but I just wanted to say
appreciate The presentation at
very informative and I look
forward to seeing sounds like
you guys are making good
progress on the are findings but
look forward to learning more
about the outstanding issues
thank you very much that was on
that.
Thank you Representative I don't
see any other hands up so will
you go for the motion
Representative Dixon.
Madam chair I move the LFC
budget recommendation.
I'm.
Second to that motion also in
the.
Harry Garcia Representative
Harry Garcia second.
And.
Madam chair.
At.
Madam chair you're on mute.
On my end.
Thank you that was how you can
hear me all those opposed raise
your hands.
Okay so the motion carries I
didn't see any others
Thank you very much madam
secretary for your help thank
you analysts for your help and
then any questions or concerns
regarding the budget differences
as we said earlier will go back
to the main committee for
discussion and possible other
resolution thank you for being
here today.
Thank you very much madam chair
and members of the committee and
we'll be sure to follow up with
the Representative Garcia and
share Lundstrom for the
questions insurance.
Thank you very much I want to
thank you to all the next person
or next department on my list of
the parole board.
And I don't have the director's
name in front of me does anyone
know who that is.
Yes madam chair director
systemic sorely no that oh my
god thank you but when director
McSorley.
First of all before you start
let's go ahead and and start
with the analysts.
And those who I don't have that
either.
Madam chair that's myself Ellen
Rubin and Diego Jimenez again.
thank you for.
The HSD number seven six zero
and additional information on
the LFC budget can be found on
pages two hundred ninety five to
two ninety six of volume to.
Seven six zero.
Yes ma'am.
Raul.
State fire marshal's office.
He.
Seven nine five program code
seven six zero the state fire
marshal's office agency code
seven six zero is the parole
board I.
Doing them back to back is just
a little bit confusing madam
chair.
Thank you well it doesn't help
that I'm.
Thank you.
I'm actually going to hand it
over to Diego to review the
differences between the LFC and
Executive recommendations for
this agency I will be available
for any questions you might have
about the legislative
recommendation.
Thank you the echo down it's
been that way all day I got some
I. T. help the other fellow
cracked me up it sounds so thank
you Elon and madam chair and
members of the committee the
executive recommendation for
revenue from the general fund
exceeds the legislative
recommendation by twenty nine
thousand seven hundred dollars
and it's flat with the agency's
FY twenty one operating budget
at the legislative
recommendation supports the
agencies requested five percent
decrease in the general fund
revenues and S. as in the case
of the but the previous two
agencies that executive at.
This the executive
recommendation is flat with the
FY twenty one budget both
recommendations recognize an
anticipated reduction in
personnel costs compared with FY
twenty one due to the expiration
of the temporary salary increase
for one employee.
The executive recommendation and
the other categories exceeds the
legislative recommendation by
thirty point five thousand four
board member per diem
And the analysts have come to
consensus on all performance
measures and targets but before
I give it over to director make
sort of the I would just like to
note that.
On the next page of your packet
that performance measures at the
consensus that was going to be
doing the Alice asks for a flat
level to maintain the current
level of that.
Raul hearings and so that the
additional revenue provided the
board member per diem and
executive recommendation may be
the difference between them
being able to meet that or not.
Thank you madam chair
with that I'm ready to and that
is the two director Mike
certainly if if the committee is
ready yes director sorry.
Please.
Thank you madam chair if I may
I'd like to defer to my board
chair
the chairman of the parole board
to Abram and I if that's okay
with committee madam chair
that's fine our.
You'll recognize him he says
security for the house on usual
years but I still away when
you're not in session and the on
this year so you you all know it
from.
Madam chair members of the
committee thank you for allowing
me to be here this afternoon my
name is April ninth and curly
interim chair The New Mexico
adult proboards and what we're
here to show you that what the.
Measurement performance measures
that we have are currently right
now we have five full time
employees and thirteen board
members board members are
volunteer board therefore we
only are the per diem for the
days that we actually performed
hearings the calendar year of
twenty twenty The New Mexico del
for four handled one thousand
one hundred and thirteen regular
parole hearings and yes that is
done by the five actual full
time employees that that
facilitate the Syrians in
addition to that the parole
board conductive one hundred I'm
sorry nine hundred and one roll
by elation parents.
Eighty nine geriatric medical
parole hearings thirty three
hearings involving persons that
are serving life or
indeterminate sentences.
Twenty six sex offenders review
hearings.
I'm on top of that personally as
a.
Job of the chair person
I conducted eighty one executive
clemency application
investigations and submitted
recommendations to the
governor's office as well as
seventeen additional pardon
applications we have seen a
dramatic increase in our numbers
pursuant to the executive
clemency applications as well as
the geriatric medical parole
hearings and that is largely due
to the COVID pandemic we have
had to change our operations as
most every agency in the state
has because of the pandemic.
What that means for us is we
cannot go to the individual
facilities and do face to face
Syrians as we normally would in
normal times most of these have
been strictly online virtual
hearings because the facilities
obviously had to close their
doors to any outside person to
stop the spread of the virus.
with that I will stand for
questions.
A director forty do you have
anything else yes madam chair.
But the doctoral board to.
Is a vital agency for the state
government and the public
safety.
We conduct parole board hearings
for every single in the coming
out of the institutions and I
know that my chaired said that
that was one thousand but that's
over four thousand hearings just
for people coming out of the
institution and then as he said
we almost another thousand of
parole violators.
This agency critical for public
health we have very very kinds
of hearings after parole board
members have to go through for
sex offenders are people really
eating.
if you remember three years ago
before I came into this agency.
The correct department was
spending fifty million dollars a
year on people who were serving
their parole time in the
penitentiary for very.
And so we have worked with the
corrections department and
various agencies making sure we
have these hearings the numbers
of which have increased
dramatically to save that fifty
million dollars so one are
slender budget we're saving tens
of millions of dollars to the
state I also like to thank god
DFA inspo and D. O. C..
LFC we were working last year on
trying to get money in our
budget so that we could have a
chief financial officer and the.
Various kinds of expertise but
we've done something extremely
creative in that we are
borrowing expertise and paying
other departments and entering
into M. O. use with other
departments including CPO
including DFA including the
department of corrections to try
to get that kind of expertise
that we don't really need on a
full time basis and which is
also going to say.
The state tens of millions of
dollars.
What we have now is a budget and
we want to I want to thank the
legislature for last year's
budget because finally this
year's budget is bringing
stability to the court to the
parole board for over a decade
to parole board was totally
ignored and it was a poor
stepchild of state government
and
we there were statistics showing
how bad things were getting in
the recidivism rate because of
it.
When I walked into this agency
two years ago or a year and a
half ago we had of the six FTEs
we were supposed to have there
were only three.
Morale was extremely low our pay
scales are low to begin with
anyway but by the money that you
all have providers we're
starting to bring some stability
to this office so that we can
provide all the duties
constitutional and statutory
duties that were supposed to be
doing.
But even with that we haven't
been able to add that six
employee because we hesitated
when it look last summer like
the
budget was gonna be slam we
didn't immediately go about
hiring the six the employee but
now we're in the middle of doing
that and
We pray that you'll keep our
budget stable so we can do that.
The other thing I want to
mention is we are meeting our
performance measures.
And we had a clean audit
delivered on time.
The other thing that you should
know is the.
Parole board is in the middle of
instituting the biggest.
Change in its procedures in
probably thirty years in
response to the US Supreme Court
decisions that have come down a
series of home which is going to
require that we change our
procedures and we're doing this
now an effort to avoid
The court cases because we were
on the verge of being sued if we
didn't do this appropriately and
so we're in the middle of that
process and we hope to have that
wrapped up here.
Very soon we have issues that
we're facing
Rightfully so because of the
prior to.
Chaos at the parole board we are
facing lots of paper requests.
and those requests could require
thousands of hours of FTEs just
to try to sort those out.
And this administration of
starting it with the governor
and myself and my board we want
the public to have that
information if so how we can
figure out the thousands of
hours of FTEs to to get that
information out the legislature
needs that information the
public these information we want
to do that the other big problem
that we're facing is we have
hundreds literally hundreds of
boxes with tens of files in each
of those boxes of old cases that
need to be sent to the records
office and we haven't been able
to and this is a backlog it's
built up over the decade in we
haven't been able to
approach fixing that but if
you'll.
I just pray to god you give us
the governor's budget and that
has to do with our.
Diego quit laughing near a.
That has to do with keeping our
board together so that they can
conduct the hearings that were
required to hear thank you madam
chair and thank you members of
the committee.
Thank you director Mike sorry
Are there any other presenters
for you.
Madam chair.
Okay I will go to the audience
does is there anyone that wishes
to ask a question in the
audience I don't see anyone.
I'm here.
So I'll go to the committee.
Will I have Representative Dixon
followed by Representative
Anderson Representative Dixon.
Thank you very much.
Is that thank you madam chair I
really appreciate this
presentation secretary and
your team.
I was looking at the performance
measures summaries and was
interested to see it looks like
you're adding a couple of new
areas that will be able to
monitor progress moving forward
is that correct.
Yes that's correct.
One of the other questions that
I had is relating to cancel
hearings hearings hearing
cancellations and I was
wondering if you can sure just a
little bit about that when you
talk about inmates being
transferred without the board's
knowledge.
I'm just curious about that.
Madam chair representative Dixon
what happens is about the up to
six months before release date
an inmate is allowed to come in
from the board so that we can
review the parole plan.
All we know is the location of
the in may while they are in
front of us.
After we have the parole hearing
and accept the parole plan.
The inmates still.
Is incarcerated for awhile after
that while of the department of
corrections figures have good
time calculations and all the
other things.
And sometimes when those inmates
get sick and especially with
COVID they are transferred to
special units to treat them but
we still haven't gotten it down
up it we're we know for sure
which institution there at and
they can't be released finally
unless there's the certificate
of parole which we are
responsible for follows and to
the institution to which they're
going.
So COVID is and a lot of levels
of complexity to keeping track
of
inmates in prison.
Thank you very much at thank you
madam chair.
I hope I didn't talk too long
you know the former chair of
this committee said the more you
talk the less you get so I'm
trying to keep an assistant as
possible what you need to snap
it up.
What I used to like them and
that really.
The next person is
Phelps Anderson Representative
about Anderson.
Thank you thank you madam chair
madam chair Senator a director
director makes what relief up I
wanted to
talk to two short questions
please one is I'm late to the
meeting and I was curious how
the pandemic has affected your
parole hearings and I assume
you're doing those virtually and
has that worked well if you had
a magic wand would you go back
to the where stick with the new
way or what do you what is your
thinking on that Sir madam chair
and Representative that's a
great question doing these
hearings.
Tell us.
The.
Who was electronically is not
best practices if I had my way
we would go back we should be
able to see that in may we we
should be able have interaction
with that in may just knowing
his demeanor as he walks into
the room as he leaves the room
what he or she is saying under
their breath those kinds of
things you just don't pick up in
this cold medium of of the.
Zoom and and those kinds of
meetings so I would go back to
it but again madam chair that
would require more money in our
budget for travel right now
our.
Proofed word members travel a
minimum amount of time they we
can only do these hearings on a
secured internet Network and
that's provided by the
department of corrections so we
go to prove probation and parole
officers but they have the
secure so all of our.
Role board members virtually
travel less than fifty or sixty
miles for hearing if we go to in
person hearings will be going
out to Clayton and will be going
to Hobbs and that'll cost a lot
more money but believe me what
what we know nationally from the
statistics is this is not best
practices.
Thank you for that answer of we
too were struggling with the
virtual meeting locked inside
the roundhouse year and I
understand a great deal of of
the point you made our director
makes Farley following up on
Representative Dixon talking
about performance or a in really
my question is this.
And I missed your part of this
meeting I am most interested in
recidivism.
And are we doing better we doing
worst how do you measure that do
you is it is it something that
gets measured under your purview
or not but I noticed in your
performance measures summary
that somehow getting a
measurement on recidivism would
be
Useful to me
and we share the the hope that
it's as low as as possible but
I just curious what your
responses and that's all I have
madam chair okay madam chair
that is the fifty million dollar
question right now in New Mexico
of recidivism we have about a
fifty percent food recidivism
rate if you go to Kansas there
are about twelve percent
if the or again is eight percent
it's dramatic and the cost to
the not just to the state of of
re institutionalizing folks but
the cost to the individual
services if there was a violent
felony of the insurance costs it
is dramatic and our partners to
DO see I think are doing
everything they can to reduce it
the the way you reduce it is
programs programs programs
programs and until the
department of correction is
given the resources it needs to
to to do those kinds of programs
everything from teaching
somebody how to go to a job
interview you know these are
many people that were
incarcerated eighteen they are
they they didn't finish high
school hardly they didn't they
never went to a job interview
they never wrote a resume many
of these folks haven't even
owned a cell phone.
All of these kinds of soft
things on top of that they need
to provide housing and not
housing with their former drug
dealer housing that's good for
them and it's good for the
community we need to get
programs.
Almost all of these phones these
days are affected by drugs and
alcohol and till we.
We put them it gives corrections
department the money to
institute these programs.
This is a result we're gonna
have.
Thank you thank you director for
that yeah and will look forward
to the corrections budget and
hearing hopefully requests that
can New Mexico's fifty percent
recidivism rate in sometime when
a different form I'd be curious
if there's any measurement of
New Mexico against these lower
lower recidivism states of
whether we're may actually
measuring apples to apples in
terms of the time away from
release to finding out whether
you get to come back to the to
the big house madam chair thank
you very much I I want to make
sure madam chair and
representative the corrections
department is doing everything
it can it is doing a great job
with what it has when you
compare our corrections
department budget to other
states that's the difference
it's not the corrections
department full they've really
been doing great things in the
last couple years and they're
doing their best so I don't I
hope you don't feel that I in
any way was disparaging them
that they're not the problem.
And they do know how to fix it
if if they had the resources.
Thank you very much our director
mixolydian Representative
Anderson please remember took
neutral button sometimes you
forget.
Thank you thank you Sir thank
you.
The next
The next so.
Action is for the.
There is anyone else on my list
so the next section is for the
vice chair to make promotion.
Chair.
The LFC budget recommendations.
Thank you is there a second.
Thank you madam chair thank you
Representative Sariñana not done
yet I never get it right sorry I
apologize do I have any
opposition.
There is no opposition I don't
see anyone on anyone's hands.
The motion carries of what we'll
do is work towards making sure
that any resolutions to your
issues are resolved at the at
the big meeting as you know
director sorry thank you so much
for a great presentation thank
you very much to.
Good to see you.
The next item on our agenda is
the juvenile public safety
advisory board and this time
it's agency but teacher followed
by a budget sheet sorry that's
okay I'm trying to I'm trying to
Hispanicize U..
He fought and Mister humanness
thank you.
Yes my name is Carla the khaki
and I am the LFC analyst for
that I do know public safety an
advisory board IDA go ahead
minutes who doesn't get off the
hook yet is the FAA analyst for
the safety board and hammer
mercantile is the administer
support for CYFD she is the
deputy to facilities director at
CYFD.
I am the board has only one
budgeted line item and that is
for board travel and per diem of
the executive recommendation is
four hundred dollars more than
the LFC recommendation at seven
thousand six hundred the LFC
recommendation was in line with
the agency's original request
and which as you all know was
Executive mandated five percent
below the FY twenty one budget
and the executive recommendation
has brought that up eight
thousand just flat with their FY
twenty one budget.
So with that I'll turn it over
to a go if he has anything to
add.
Diego.
Thank you madam chair and I
think this is the gatekeeper
Billy explained the difference
it's about four hundred dollars
and
The executive recommendation was
flat with the FY twenty one
budget.
With that and if the committee
is ready because handed over to
the to the board.
Madam chair members of the
committee I'm sorry I'm perhaps
this mercantile would like to
say something.
Thank you very much Mr but thank
you.
But he.
Thank you Becky State I
apologize
Let's go ahead and go to the
director of the juvenile.
Public safety advisory board
thank you.
More content.
Good afternoon madam chair and
members of the committee again
my name is Tamera markings
health I'm the deputy director
for the children youth and
families department for our
secure facilities
and also support as.
Our general public safety
advisory board this board was
created by the legislature in
two thousand and nine their
duties are to advise the
children youth and families
department on release decisions
of the educated Grace you've
committed to we look the at
CYFD.
At the board meets with the
secretary of CYFD or his
designate to review the
activities of the department.
They make recommendations to the
secretary and the director of
juvenile justice concerning
programs at our facilities.
At four are you judicata
delinquent children.
They also visit the facilities
each year and submit a written
report to the governor or the
secretary.
The governor and the secretary
regarding conditions of
confinement and also conditions
of the care and treatment that
the youth receive.
This can have no more than seven
members who were appointed by
the governor to serve a term of
six years.
Currently we have two board
members Gregoria que rubro who
has served on the board since
twenty fifteen and I don't know.
I don't know if they're in the
hearing or not that
Anyway our other board member is
Michael heights and he has
served on the board since twenty
seventeen.
I Hugo Gomez who was our longest
serving board member resigned
last year and so we've been
working to try to find an
additional board member to
replace.
I have.
The board is administratively
attached to CYFD it is supported
by two facility transition
coordinators there really our
heroes and that is Victor
Ferreira and actually Trujillo
again I'm not sure if they're on
the meeting or not.
Our budget is eight thousand
dollars as was mentioning these
funds are strictly to support
the party and then travel costs
associated with the board.
And I think you so much for your
time today will stand for any
questions that you have.
Thank you very much do the
analysts have anything further
to add.
Okay
me audience members that would
like to speak.
I don't see any hands up at all.
And
Committee members only see
Representative Dixon.
Thank you madam chair and thank
you ms mark Intel on I was
wondering if you mentioned the
number of board members and that
you could have up to seven right
now only have to and I see that
historically
I have never had more than four
why is that and.
It seems to me that that could
be a hindrance to.
Efficiency and you know sort of
good governance and discount.
Madam chair representative Dixon
I'm.
In the sixty years I think.
He potentially be difficult for
for some persons additionally
were required to have hearings
at least monthly as sometimes
those hearings can take multiple
days and
it can just be as you know a
time constraint on and and the
service of our our board members
as well.
At and then also our our
juvenile facilities we have to
in Albuquerque and one in Los
crucis so there is travel
considerations as well that
takes that additional amounts of
their time.
And and those are some of the
reasons I would offer why it
it's sometimes difficult to
recruit those members.
Thank you very much thank you
madam.
Thank you I I still don't see
any other questions so I will go
to you
Representative Dixon for a
motion.
Thank you I thank you madam
chair I moved
The LFC recommendation.
And
A second I've gone ahead who's
saying something.
Anderson.
Thank you are Representative
Anderson T. seconds
is there any opposition.
I don't see any opposition the
motion carries thank you so much
miss more can tell for your kind
presentation we appreciate it
very much thank you for your
time today provide thank you.
The next item on the agenda is
the crime victims reparation.
And again we have the same to
analysts.
No we don't we have miss raven
and miss Travis.
My apologies.
Thank you madam chair I'll be
presenting alongside Brian
Chavez the executive budget
analyst and Frank Zubia the
director of the crime victims
reparations commission.
We are reference that this is
agency number seven eight zero
and there should be additional
information on the legislative
budget recommendation on pages
three a six to three oh seven of
volume two I know you god bless
you for giving us that direction
thank you.
Madam chair I know we can be
confusing and I'm afraid it
might just be about can do is
just a little bit more because I
just wanted to make sure our I
discovered an error in this
different sheet shortly before
the meeting began today which I
believe we have resolved and I
believe corrected copies have
been
provided to you all however if
they haven't been I would be
more than welcome to share my
are more than happy to share my
screen a with the corrected she
so thank I think some aides are
distributed them if there isn't
anyone that doesn't have that
copy please raise your hand will
have somebody send them to you
thank you go ahead.
Thank you madam chair all right
so diving right in then
The executive recommendation for
general fund revenue is flat
with agencies FY twenty one
operating budget provided
recommendation is very slightly
lower than the agencies
requested decrease.
The executive recommendation and
contractual services the
contractual services category of
the victim compensation program
is higher than the legislative
recommendations that both
maintains agencies contracts
with it and services providers
at FY twenty one operating
levels and in fact increases
funding for sexual assault
victims services.
The executive recommendation
recommendation does not include
any recommended language but the
legislative recommendation does
include language specifying that
the amount appropriated from
general fund revenue and crime
victims reparation fund for
direct victim payments may only
be used for that purpose and
we're going to talk about that
in a little more detail later
and I will note that Brian
myself I've come to consensus on
all performance measures and
targets those should be on pages
six to seven of your packets.
Compensation program which is on
page.
Three of your packets
the executive recommendation for
for revenue from the general
fund this program is highly
legislative recommendation by
two hundred forty six point
three thousand dollars again
that slot with the agency's FY
twenty one operating budget
provided recommendation is of.
Eight thousand seven hundred
dollars less than the agencies
requested three point six
percent decrease.
recommendations support the
agency's request from all other
revenue sources and this
includes in increasing uses of
the crime victims reparation
fund balance on this is
requested by the commission in
order to make up for some
reductions in general fund
but because the executive
recommendation both.
Supports this additional fund
balance usage and keeps them
flat the.
The general fund budget flat
there's actually even additional
funding available which the
executive recommendation has put
into contractual services
category to increase funding for
sexual assault victim services.
To discuss the recommended
language
Executive in recommending
language of this is but the
legislative recommendations
specifies that certain the
amount appropriated from general
fund revenue and the crime
victims reparation fund balance
for direct victim payments which
is included and all items here
and support the only be used for
this purpose and the amounts
that are specified language or
equal to what the agency
requests in this line item.
Now the purpose of the language
is to prevent the funding from
this line item from being
transferred to the contractual
services category and expended
on contracts with victim
services providers which LFC
staff do not believe it is a
statue for relief allowable use
of the crime victims reparations
on already HSD feels very
strongly that the flexibility to
use assignments for either
purpose is essential to
successfully repelling expansion
and after I'm almost done so all
it directors very expand on the
reasons for it for this in his
comments but I'll just note
that.
I think this is really a a
policy decision that should be
left to the committee if the
committee wishes to allow the
flexibility I the existing
language should be removed but
not withstanding language should
be added to clarify this as an
allowable use of the funding
source the committee terms they
don't want to allow this
flexibility the existing
language should be is I'll now
turn it over to Brian to review
the federal grant administration
for thank you.
Good afternoon madam chair and
members of the committee our
offices P. code seven zero seven
federal grant administration our
mission is pretty
straightforward very easy so
there no differences between
legislative and executive
recommendations revenue
in the base or no differences.
And we both came to an agreement
for the.
The performance
Report.
If you like to add anything if
not we could turn it over to
the director of
Thank you.
Thank you thank you Mr Chavis
and go ahead Frank.
Good afternoon madam chair
members of the committee if I
could share my screen I I I I
promise my slide your there's
only four okay go ahead.
Madam chair members of the
committee so go back.
I'm just again I just want to
reiterate thank you for allowing
us to present our FY twenty two
budget and thank you for your
working your support I I also
want to just do a quick
introduction are.
With me today our CFO Cindy
mark.
To reiterate our primary mission
is to provide compensation to
victims of violent crime for
expenses they have incurred as a
result of their victimization
the state of New Mexico in
addition we're kind of an
anomaly is that we also
administer both federal and
state money two hundred fifty
nine projects both governmental
and nonprofit organizations
throughout the state some data
worth sharing with the committee
is just to give you some
statistical information with
regards to the amount of
compensation applications that
are agency received even though
we received less compensation
applications this last state
fiscal year in twenty we
actually paid up significantly
more there was a fourteen
percent decrease our
compensation applications but a
fifteen fifty one percent
increase what we were paying too
are victims
One of the other things are is
that for four years in a row our
agency is actually expended
close to two point six million
dollars on funeral for homicide
victims that is been our primary
expense for four years now our
second expenses are typically
between it's it's a combination
between either loss of wages or
medical expenses for crime
victims.
As of July first in two thousand
nineteen we we had passed
legislation which enabled.
Our statute changes for victims
to access our compensation what
we were finding out from our
service organizations is that
victims of domestic violence
victims of sexual assault we're
not reporting to law enforcement
and we wanted to create an
environment that was more
victims Senator so ultimately
July first two thousand nineteen
now victims of crime are able to
report to a licensed medical
provider a license then mental
health provider or also tribal
health provider I'm.
That's just with our great our
compensation department with
regards to our grants department
I I have an amazing team of five
grants administrators one grant
bureau chief our name is burial
and Garcia and she does an
amazing job
say we've been working
diligently with all of our
hundred fifty nine projects I
want a president provide some
additional information to this
committee we were able to give
it and also augmented adjust
these hundred fifty nine budgets
for these projects in the state
in the amount of one point four
million dollars.
So these service organizations
were able to provide services in
a different way and what I mean
by that is as opposed to just
doing a lot of face to face
there was a lot there's various
ways in which our service
organizations were providing
those services to victims I'm.
I know that are LFC analyst Mr
being and our DFA analyst we we
had some conversations with
regards to the proposed
legislative language I I do want
to let this committee know that
during the FY twenty fiscal year
there were is junior bill
appropriations in the amount of
a hundred and fifty thousand
dollars but due to the health
pandemic in state budget crisis
the HSD us your C. was unable to
add the appropriation to HSD
budget but the contracts to the
service organizations were
already done.
In order to ensure points of
accessibility to victims we
funded these projects to
continue to provide those
projects ultimately tapping it
into our crime victim Fund to
ensure that our service
providers we're we're able to
provide those services to those
victims I'm.
Again I want to thank this
committee and I.
to to speak with you today with
regards to FY twenty two budget
and I stand for questions.
Thank you so much Frank
I have.
Let me just double check this to
make sure I do have
Representative chairwoman
Lundstrom.
I don't see any other hands up
so go ahead before we do that I
apologize Representative is
there anyone in the audience
that wishes to speak.
I don't see I don't see that at
all so the next
Is to go to the committee
Representative.
Lundstrom thank you madam chair
just one quick question I wanted
to ask the department what
you're to part a which your
department required to to take
the five percent mandatory cut
as everyone else was so.
prior to the special session.
Madam chair representative
chairwoman Lundstrom that is
correct we did we already did a
five percent cut.
All right thank you very much
thank you.
I don't see any other questions.
Representative Dixon is here's a
question.
Yes sorry yes I have just we are
madam chair I wanted to confirm
that one of the reasons that the
executive budget as higher is so
that we can
sort of fully support are sexual
assault victims services is that
correct.
Our Frank.
Madam chair representative Dixon
so that's that's one of the
categories so it's with regards
to what DFA is proposing it
would affect not just sexual
assault it would also to human
trafficking victims in addition
R. C. will our civil legal
services that we provide with
our state funding and then also
there is a team that's actually
supported which is intimate
partner death review team that's
not a U. N. M. that's actually
out of that appropriation as
well.
So I'm Meredith are you I'm
Representative Dixon are you
done with the questions.
Yes thank you madam.
I have a question Mr Zubia so
based on Representative Dixon
question if you and the.
Representative Lundstrom
question.
If we go with the executive
budget does that
at least clarify some of the
concerns.
Your frozen.
Frank Zubia.
We lost.
Madam chair Brian might be able
to speak to that okay is out
okay thank you.
The city park down to the
question of that.
Well maybe I can ask one of you
since you're gonna answer.
Madam chair of the commission of
Representative Trujillo can you
repeat your question please I
was just asking based on
Representative Lundstrom and
Representative Dixon's comments
does get going to the executive
recommendation how.
Six the issue that was of
concern regarding the funding.
Madam chair yes.
Okay and we're ready for a
motion
Representative Representative
disks of Dixon co chair.
Go ahead.
Madam chair I just wanted to to
make sure to requested if
Did you make a motion
including what you would like to
do regarding language.
Yes I think we can do that go
ahead Representative Dixon.
Thank you madam chair I'm I
would like to move that the
committee adopt except the
executive recommendation using
the LFC language.
The second that.
Representative seven onion is
there discussion.
Their opposition.
Okay we have a
Of recommendation to go the full
committee there any questions or
concerns of course come back to
us so we'll try to.
Work with you on those things
thank you so much for for a pre
your presentation give our
regards to Mr rubia.
The next item on the agenda.
Is The New Mexico sentencing
commission.
And that is with the miss raven
and Mr Chavis.
Thank you madam chair the
sentencing commission is agency
number three five four and
additional information on its
budget recommendations the
legislative budget
recommendation that is is on
pages ninety four to ninety five
of volume to.
as right and I for this
presentation are joined by it
Linda Freeman the director of
the commission and former
justice at Chavez who is the
chair of the commission and
Brian will actually be reviewing
the differences between these
the recommendations for this
budget I will be available for
any questions that you might
have about the legislative
recommendation.
Madam chair members of the
committee three five for New
Mexico's sentencing commission.
the executive recommendation.
From the general fund exceeds
the legislative recommendation
by fifty nine thousand or five
percent.
And is flat with the agency's FY
twenty one operating budget the
executive recommendation in the
other categories fifty nine
thousand higher than the
legislative recommendation is
what with Agency FY twenty one
operating budget and if these
funds are to support the crime
reduction grants administered by
the agency.
And what analysts have.
Come to consensus on all
performance measures and targets
and now I would like to turn it
over to director Linda Freeman.
Good afternoon if it's the right
madam chair I share my screen
absolutely madam
chairwoman director queen.
It.
Good afternoon I think I shared
can you see a presentation that
says New Mexico's sentencing
commission House Appropriations
correct okay it's always tricky
you're never quite sure if
you're seeing what I'm seeing or
not in the right I'm very
pleased to join to be here this
afternoon for those of you who
are not familiar with the
sentencing commission the
sentencing commission is a
twenty seven member commission
that serves
as a resource a criminal and
juvenile justice resource for
the three branches of government
and the public we have members
divided among three primary
committees they are a
legislative committee reform
juvenile we also support a
justice information sharing
group it is really more focused
at the CIO level of the criminal
justice and juvenile justice I'm
agencies
in FY twenty.
See if I can get.
We received
additional expanded statutory
authority and with regards to
statewide data integration as
well as possibilities
regarding the crime reduction
grant acts so FY twenty I just
highlighted a couple of things
that we that we had and that we
continue to do we are partnering
with New Mexico I Costa in the
primary focus of that is really
establishing
the integration of the statewide
identification number.
The the there's always been a
statewide identification number
it's five oh metrically assigned
by the department of public
safety at the point of arrests
so everybody who's arrested in
the state it's their finger
prints done and they get one of
the state identification numbers
it's unique and it's confirmed
to through the fingerprint as
well as it has a relationship
with the federal FBI number so
it
defendants basically have one
FBI number no matter where
you're rested in the United
States if your fingerprint that
will confirm to the FBI number
but each state is responsible
for I having a state
identification number so for
example different it could have
like three state identification
numbers of they've been arrested
in New Mexico it would have one
specific New Mexico if they were
arrested in Arizona they would
have won that specific Arizona
and they would have won the it
if they were arrested in
Colorado that would be specific
Colorado what would you know I
am is that they would all have
the same FBI number we are
working to get that statewide
that say identification number
integrated throughout the
criminal justice system at
present issues primarily in the
department of public safety as I
mentioned however once
integrated it would allow us to
better track offenders
throughout the system.
Secondarily we are working on
page trying to tie detention
center data together statewide
often it's a frustrating process
each detention center has their
own case management system and
it's very difficult to identify
where an offender is throughout
the state if they're in
detention and that's one of our
secondary goal.
Moving on to our next slide I
want to talk about our work
regarding the crime reduction
grant act.
In
we've had two administrations
out in our first year we were
focused primarily on data
integration requests due to our
budget language
that kind of restricted our
ability to award grants
specifically the integration
initiatives.
now with reduced funds so in a
year one you'll see that we
awarded a number of requests
to a number of different
different districts for
different local.
Data integration efforts the
moving on.
In your cue what we did is we
awarded grants we have less
money in your to then your one
because we did have one time
money that was allocated in our
FY twenty budget but we awarded
a hundred and seventy eight
thousand five hundred dollars in
grants to five programs these
programs are offer supervision
and alternatives to detention
additionally the act would allow
us to fund things like pre
prosecution diversion specialty
courts primarily given the small
amount of money that we have
available is grants that support
whole programs and president and
really are on designed to
support programs that were
already established or newly
formed.
Over the last year are you
Mexicos sentencing commission
members have been energized and
have had increased activity.
The result of some of the
increased activity has included
are the fact that the New Mexico
sentencing commission has
endorsed for specific types of
legislation the first is medical
and geriatric parole bill that
was not not prepared and not
ready in time for us the of
course corrections and Justice
endorsement however Senator
o'neill has agreed to enter into
just the bill and it's Senate
bill one fourteen.
Also the second area is adults
find adults fines and fees and
that one was endorsed by the CCJ
and the sponsor will be selected
serve on to us.
The third bill is it is around
the issue of juvenile fines and
fees and the sponsor will be
Representative Montoya and the
last bill at present we don't
have a sponsor for so I'm not
sure if it will be introduced
although it was endorsed by CCJ
and that is about the abolition
of this accident management
board which is currently
administer attached to the fact
the sentencing commission but
we've not been able to have a
meeting for quite some time as
all the members the property
members did not been appointed
and we feel that we could assume
the responsibilities within our
broader mandate.
I have I do want to
to say a couple of things
with regard to some initiatives
that we're currently working on
we are starting an educational
series economic are for criminal
justice coordinating councils
and others on things like
evidence based practices
programs
how to prepare successful crime
reduction grant application as
well as
best practices in terms of
alternatives to detention
programs it.
Finally we would ask that you
consider the executive
recommendation as that it would
allow us to provide additional
and more detailed
research to the legislature as
well as the public some priority
areas that we are working on
this year that will go into the
next fiscal year are are that
we're still doing the sentencing
patterns that includes both
sentencing outcomes so that you
individuals are there cases
dismissed are they convicted do
they get go to jail or prison as
well as that state would also
consider this complaint and
whether or not we have
differences in and I when we
control for things like no
history
geographic region things like
that.
We are the additionally we are
trying to assess the accuracy
and completeness of race and
ethnicity data collection
throughout the criminal justice
system.
And finally we are we want to
study and understand individuals
that cycle is frequently
throughout the criminal justice
system and this is related to
recidivism I think we have done
some very broad reports on
recidivism in the past more
actually in progress on one with
With a partner at the university
of New Mexico and what we wanna
do is understand and and slice
and dice the recidivism data
much more completely right now
we're choose very broad
definition of recidivism that is
returned to the present system
for any reason we want to begin
to understand more completely
what are the factors that lead
to certain individuals coming
back and what what they come
back for as well as those
individuals that cycle
frequently through the criminal
justice system with that I'll
stand for questions.
Thank you very much my finger is
hitting the wrong button
What I'd like to do is go now to
the analyst to see if they have
any additional information they
want that.
No.
But is there anyone in the
audience that would like to add.
Or are rather ask questions.
No.
Okay I'll go to the committee
the only person I see on the
committee is Representative
Dixon.
Thank you madam chair
and thank you for that wonderful
presentation
and director Freeman I'm I just
wanted to sort of compliments
you on the progress and that you
guys have made with regard to
casa I know that was a big push
a few years ago to have that
I unique identifier just because
it would help
Help our criminal justice system
be more efficient and effective
and so I really wanted to
commend you for that I'm I was
also wondering sorry I'm looking
at my notes I'm for the crime
reduction requests is that you
guys use general fund money for
And then you distributed I'm
just a little curious about that
that thank you and.
Madam chair and members of the
committee on the issue of the
the grant funds so we have kept
the amount in that it's actually
appears with our general fund
budget because at the time of
the crime reduction grant act
was passed a separate fund was
not put in place so we have
reserved the amount of recurring
appropriation from the FY twenty
appropriation we're reserving
that amount and honoring that
amount going forward but at some
point I think that we do need to
do a clean up where we create a
fund so that money will go into
a specialized Fund.
I hope that answers your
question.
Yes very much thank you thank.
The next person on my list is a
Representative setting on your.
Thank you madam chair I was
gonna ask the same thing if if
this is hurting them where they
can't complete or they can't
complete their timeline to
finish some of these requests
I think every non reverting fund
would be great in the end is
needed so thank you madam chair.
Thank you very much I don't see
any other questions
before I go to you are
Representative Dixon for a
motion I see our judges Chavis
do you wish to say anything.
I am by two two if you would
like.
Thank you madam chair I was
appointed recently to the to
chair the sentencing commission
looking forward to strengthening
the relationship that we have
with the legislators and I would
hope to provide more information
regarding data and research from
other states I was involved in
Senate bill to sixty seven that
mentions it and and also to the
requests and so I'm looking
forward to trying to major role
in its implementation.
Thank you I appreciate your
comments and you're always
welcome to interact with this
judge Thomas okay our
Representative Dixon do you have
a motion.
I do thank you madam chair I
move that to the committee
adopts the LFC ripping.
Is there a second.
On.
Okay is there discussion.
All is there opposition.
The motion carries and you have
this on to the full committee.
I don't seem to see anything
else on the agenda thank you all
for presenting today thank you
Linda thank you child Dr judge
Thomas and that for everyone
else on the committee the
analyst thank you so much for
your your good work and
I will
Move to recess until tomorrow.
Thank you all have a good good
evening thank you for your hard
work.
Thank you madam chair thank you.
