Act for this purpose up to three
percent of the funds may be used
for administration up to seventy
percent of the remaining funds
may be used for law enforcement
agencies and probation and
parole division and the
remainder is available for
courts district attorneys and
public defenders based on the
discussion yesterday.
This substitute incorporates a
number of changes number one no
County is singled out number two
the committee must notify
eligible entities and number
three it includes tribal law
enforcement agencies and with
that Mr chair my expert again
today is Mr Allen raven from LFC
and we would stand for questions
thank you very much by surtax
and raven is there anybody who'd
like to comment on house bill
has appropriation of finance
committee substitute for House
Bill five fifty.
Saying nobody there anybody
online.
Mr yes because did you ever wish
to offer comment on house bill
five fifteen.
Hello Mr I'm sorry and I'm
that's okay that's okay thank
you very much okay we'll go to
the committee Representative
Sweetser please.
are there any okay
Representative Sweetser for the
motion.
Okay Representative Sweetser
made the motion second.
Okay let's we'll go to represent
percent of thank you Mr chair of
the center.
How are we going to make sure
the rural communities get.
The budget.
You mentioned that they would
that I everybody V. up north I
how we gonna do that.
Mr chair and representative
Garcia so at every county and
all of the relevant entities all
law enforcement and Judiciary as
well as jails in every county
are eligible to apply to DFA for
this money the bill creates a
committee made up of one
representative from each of
these types of agencies and it
passed the committee with
notifying all of the eligible
entities so hopefully by having
a representative from each of
those types of agencies they
they will be able to to aid in
helping that helping DFA notify
all the eligible entities with
regard to how the money will be
distributed the grant criteria
the bill instructs the committee
to determine a to develop grant
criteria that include that they
consider the number of
outstanding warrants in the type
of outstanding warrants an area
so if there are a lot of
outstanding felony warrants for
violent crimes in a rural
community that rural communities
hopefully hopefully the
committee will come up with
grant criteria that will
appropriately distribute funding
based on those those types of
factors to that community Mr
chairman you know tweet about
the money going out to.
What my concern is to make sure
that these communities no it's
available that's my.
Thank you Mr chairman thank you
representative Garcia and based
on that feedback we did
clarified that the committee is
responsible for disseminating
the information thank you Mr
thank you very much of the
Garcia back to Representative
such as for the motion.
Good to be fast on the second
week every second for second
it's been moved by
Representative seconded by
Representative daylight Cruz is
there any opposition.
yes thank you very much thank
you for Christmas Mr about this
can you do a do not pass for
House Bill five fifty and a do
pass on house appropriations and
finance committee substitute.
There you.
Second by Representative
daylight Cruz
We'll go ahead this retreat is
can you please call the roll.
Representative across it's we're
on of of the yes.
George destructive thank you
thank you please continue.
Garcia yes.
Yes.
Yes.
Representative Rubio yes.
If.
Yes.
Very small yes I do okay thank
you very much by her Dixon
that's gonna adjourned House
Appropriations finance committee
for today thank you members.
