Here.
Here.
There's.
Compares your.
Thank you very much thank you
members hi it's great to see our
own Representative Herndon here
we're on the committee
substitute for house bill fifty
one this is a so
This is our committee substitute
is that not Representative that
is correct that Mr chair Kate so
we'll need a motion for the
house appropriations and finance
committee substitute for House
health and Human Services
Committee substitute for House
Bill fifty one for discussion
it's excuse me Mr chair it.
Maybe I misunderstood to
question I think you you
understood well Representative
for you are here right on this
that we have in front of us a
house appropriations and finance
committee substitute for the
house health and Human Services
thank so it is a program.
For discussion purposes
Representative Trujillo
their second.
Second okay it's been second by
vice chair Dixon for discussion
purposes pres Representative
turn and go ahead and take us
through the committees your
bill's thank you Mr chair
members of the committee would
you happen to you.
Is that is a piece of
legislation that will help every
single new Mexican be able to
have access to affordable
prescriptions and some of the
key issues of points that I was
to bring to your attention but
that right now New Mexicans are
struggling to afford their
medications and are being forced
to choose between their
prescriptions and the subsidies
like grant or groceries I don't
know how many of you know this
but forty four percent of New
Mexico it's reported in a recent
survey that they have skipped
all that they do not fill their
prescriptions due to costs well
higher than the national average
so the prices for four hundred
and sixty parks prescription
drugs increased in this state by
an average of five point two
percent in twenty twenty more
than triple the rate of
inflation thirty five drug
manufacturers brought in eight
point six trillion in profits
from two thousand to twenty
eighteen but we have people in
the state suffering because they
can't afford their
prescriptions.
Profit over people the current
system.
Thanks to the privilege many
factors and others in the supply
chain to make unchecked profits
at the expense of the health of
New Mexicans and other families
we are presenting this bill with
a pharmacy
board that will be looking over
prescriptions and working out
ways to make sure that that some
of the most common prescription
drugs.
Are able to be affordable by the
people in this state and thank
you Mr chair thank you very much
Representative please feel free
to introduce your experts if
there's anything that like that
briefly then we'll do what we do
is go to a for public comment
before we go to committee
questions I thank you Mr chair
would you please introduce
yourself miss Webber sure Mr
chair members of the committee
my name is Barbara Webber
executive director Health Action
New Mexico health advocacy
statewide organization that
operated in New Mexico since
nineteen ninety five working to
make sure that everyone has
equitable accountable and access
to quality affordable
Health Care.
We are here before you today
because of the.
This has.
Am I doing to yes I did please
go ahead.
And go ahead yes ma'am thank you
Mr good afternoon chairman
members of the committee my name
is Melissa Bernardin and
coalition manager for New Mexico
consumers for affordable
prescriptions thank you very
much.
Okay so now we're going to go to
is there anybody who wishes to
speak in support who which is
this yes speak in support of
house bill fifty one please go
ahead I have here in the middle
are excellent staff will take.
Thank you Mr chair members the
committee John lips youth with
The New Mexico federation of
labor as you heard in
introductory testimony are at
one of our major tenants of
organized labor is having access
to quality affordable healthcare
certainly prescription drugs we
have a tremendous number of
members retiree and active
members that rely on these
medications and we truly
appreciate the sponsor for
trying to come up with any
solution to control the costs of
these vital these these vital
medication so thank you very
much we urge your support for
this measure.
Thank you.
Good afternoon Mister chair
members of the committee my name
is Nicholas court of a I'm gonna
turn in the healthcare director
The New Mexico Center on
poverty.
We stand in strong support of HB
fifty one because we believe
that healthcare is a human
right.
We need a board that can develop
strategies to lower prescription
drug costs so everyone has
access to the equipment they
need.
These past this bill increase
this innovative policy thank you
thank you very much.
Thank you Mr chair members of
the committee my name is Sharon
arching right I've been nurse
for forty five years passing
medications for forty five years
retired Air Force nurse we can
look at this better please pass
this bill to study how
medications are distributed and
costs for our over people thank
you thank you very much.
Good afternoon Mister chair
members of the committee on the
river nollie Beaumont order I
organizing director of
interfaith worker justice New
Mexico very quickly in one
minute I want to break down
we're all those profits go and I
gave you a handout entitled
vaccine capitalism I ways big
pharma make so much money the
first thing I want to do is to
bonk the whole notion that big
pharma spending vast amounts of
money on research and therefore
are entitled to their profits
the truth is the American
taxpayer is kind is covering the
cost of much about reserves I
would compare it to diamond
mining.
Where the miners we do the hard
work of actually doing the
research to create those new
medications and then we handed
those rough diamonds over to big
pharma and they spend their time
refining them polishing up and
developing them and part of the
way they develop them is with
lobbying it's estimated that in
the last two years big pharma
spent six hundred forty five
million dollars to lobby just
with federal politicians that
doesn't include you that's an
issue in addition to that.
Also
Development includes advertising
and this is where we are really
unique the United States is one
of only two countries on the
face of the planet that are
permits direct advertising to
consumers in our case a lot of
it is on television that's why
you see all of those big pharma
ads this particularly with
nightly news because that's the
targeted.
Market six point eighty eight
billion dollars in twenty twenty
one spent on advertising.
And again only in the United
States is it permitted and it's
permitted for our for reasons
that are incomprehensible to us
but it accomplishes by creating
a new market for vaccines and
medications that otherwise would
not be appealing and then the
last thing is
the fact that we are
take within after we have
invested all this money in
reserves and also in doing
everything to provide big pharma
with medications they create
prices that don't even allow the
taxpayers of the United States
who have paid for this research
to even be able to afford these
medications thank you thank you
very much.
Thank you Mr chair members of
the committee Josh Anderson with
us Council eighteen we represent
about ten thousand of state city
county employees and higher
education employees here in New
Mexico and many more retirees
and I think you know one of the
number one issue that comes up
every single year is especially
for our current workers as
healthcare premium costs but
especially with our retirees the
cost of prescriptions so again
I'm not an expert on this issue
but anything that we can do to
help look at addressing the
lowering costs of health care
whether your premiums or your
prescription drugs we are
definitely in support of up and
we want to thank the sponsor and
the experts for bringing this
forward thank you Mr chair thank
you very much Mr mannerisms the
else we're gonna go online we do
have a hands raised online we're
going to try to go through this
quickly because we have a very
tight schedule today
we're gonna go first to Kerr
right Reger Kirk uh please be
brief no more than one minute go
ahead whenever you're ready
certainly good afternoon Mister
chairman or somebody this is
current contract with the
ministry Mexico would also be
the next prime ministers
Representative
smartly the one all the shared
whatever the parsing from an
effort by all parties in our
society is the ability for you
seeks to racial and religious
Health Care the cost of
prescription drugs.
The disagreement the
prescription drugs are far too
high in many cases for New
Mexicans this back to the most
critically all our community
members with low incomes cost
major reason for New Mexicans
are not taking any prescriptions
as manages phase number three
days a support levels or
healthcare system in this way
and we leave it at a three one
as an example to the proposal
would address our Costa
systematic approach we were just
working with the ones up thank
you for doing this because.
Okay next we're gonna go to
Susan Lawson Suzanne please be
brief no more than one minute
whenever you're ready.
Thank you Mr chair the
representatives of the committee
my name is Alex and I'm a
constituent Representative Dixon
my company consolation
consulting is a small women
owned businesses here in New
Mexico families of our
establishing a prescription drug
affordability or as a small
state New Mexico has a unique
ability to have prescription
drug affordability work three
years at the table for the
radiation incidences he can be
on
ladies expertise ample time
dedication of a particular of
of the lady or to the flooring
amendment right if at ease and
Health Asian that our state
across at.
Sorry that will help patients
interstate access medications
they need to leave all their
lives my company works with
individuals around the statement
impacted by heart disease
diabetes and other tobacco and
nicotine related illnesses and I
only reference that an effective
hierarchies IDT's little to
residents to gather in the cost
of some of these medications a
staggering I've only this is
there requires a full solution
production anymore thank you
very much.
Fees and taxes issues Madam the
and early Mexicans losses.
The joys thank thank you very
much for your testimony we're
gonna go the now to
the whomever is that and I I and
I am I and I am them please go
ahead for one minute.
This was in Mr chairman and
members of the committee my name
is Gabrielle Dietrich I am the
executive director of calming
New Mexico on behalf of the New
Mexico residents are also able
to still and I'd like to also
say that the
heated of at the beginning of
pharmacy benefit managers
addition to start up companies
that added to this bill is going
to really strengthen it so thank
you very much.
Thank you very much Gabrielle
next we're going to go to Linda
brown miss brown for one minute
or less whenever you're ready.
Go ahead okay go ahead please.
Thank you Mr chairman members of
the committee my name isn't
around I live in the suburbs of
New Mexico has a fifty nine I'm
very thankful for all your work
especially to my own
representatives of
representative Armstrong for
your service I have insurance
through Medicare as of January
with
excellent S. and and it's still
costly more than four hundred
dollars a month and then just
like me or diabetic you have
four honest we ration them we
need to hangout this Italy we
get sick for some medication
needs their illness may worsen
permanently some believe me
we're going to end up on
disability which cost all of us
most people with such a common
illnesses can function well as
long as they don't have to go
without that's reasonable drug
prices will surely less than six
days increase in the number of
people disability and a
prescription drug affordability
or does it is really needed in
our state of the support HB
fifty one thank you thank you
Mystras dean for one minute or
less whenever you're ready
please.
Go to Mr chair.
Committee my name is Jean amor I
am a volunteer advocate with a a
RP New Mexico and a constituent
representative Sarinana I live
with multiple sclerosis.
Early childhood education I need
it is ninety three thousand
dollars a year that same road is
around twenty three thousand
dollars in Canada
and the signs of cost or fifty
or sixty years or more it is
time to have a prescription drug
affordability ward to help make
drug costs more affordable sadly
many seniors have to choose
between putting food on the
table taking their medications
please support just leave it if
you on because medications don't
work if you can afford them.
Thank you very much miss Lawson
next we're gonna go to refer to
Griego revert to for one minute
or less whenever you're ready.
Thank you members of the
committee Mr Chairman is
regarding the Bernalillo county
hired you all to support each of
the fifty one I have asthma and
we and I was between jobs like
out of Orlando Medicine which is
deadly I also work at clinic in
the south values association to
not have insurance and all of
them all of those struggle with
paying for medications these are
located in sicker and sicker and
we all need help drug
portability please have a need
to be if you what.
Thank you very much next we're
gonna go to Rick Madden.
Mr settlement for one minute or
less whenever you're ready.
This chair members of the
committee and Representative
earned and thank you very much
for on the CD Representative The
New Mexico Academy of Family
positions Rizzo from support of
this bill anything we can do to
help our patients and we see the
kinds of things that happened to
the previous speakers happening
everyday in our practices
appreciate discussed reinforces
thank you Mr thank you very
much.
Next we're going to we have two
more speakers we're going to go
to a contact for one minute a
kind of for one more last
whenever you're ready.
Mr chair members of the
committee.
Actually making for the league
of women voters in New Mexico we
have an opportunity to see the
committees of those support the
original health we believe that
healthcare needs to be
affordable for all New Mexicans
and also the cost and pricing
data should be transparent we
believe the statewide drug but
anyone would help us counts
which you'll have to support
middle thank you thank you very
much.
Next we're going to go to we're
going to.
We're gonna go to Divya Shiv
Divya for one minute and then
one final person give you a go
ahead for one minute.
You Mr chairman and members of
the committee my name is
division New Mexico releases for
Children support house bill
fifty on no family should have
to choose between paying for
like the the prescription
medication and other necessities
limiting rosaries examines us
our children well for the
session between nine thousand
children in New Mexico who don't
have health insurance even
families whose children have
insurance agency our goal to pay
for essential description
Medicine due to different
costsharing structures family
should not have to forego I see
Medicaid patients are children
John regulated prescription
rates it's the whole description
drug industry council and
improve outcomes for New
Mexicans by passing house bill
fifty one thank you for your
time thank you very much finally
we have Lauren's yes this
Lawrence or if you wish to speak
on this please go ahead for one
minute.
My name is just about cell phone
number Senator Ortiz and was
able to to meet the high cost of
the medication right now the
list of the medications with the
basis but I just cannot afford
it so every month is a.
It is difficult for me little
money as far as it is and I and
We would like to purchase some
of the medications so please
please please has this email
thank you.
Thank you very much miss yes
this okay that concludes our
public comment we're gonna now
look to
Thank you very much bye Sir
is there anybody who wishes to
speak in opposition to house
bill fifty one.
K. to go ahead please.
Madam chair members of the
committee my name is art hall
I'm a registered lobbyist for
GSK clock.
We respectfully stand in
opposition to this legislation
we think there are a lot of
uncertainties about the cost how
it's going to be assessed how
it's going.
There are a number of entities
and the drug pricing supply
chain that are responsible for
those different cost in this
legislation doesn't take all of
them and to.
Account
and we've actually been working
with governor Lujan Grisham's
prescription drug task force
throughout the interim that's
being led by Dr Barbara mac and
Amy.
To do what we believe is achieve
real meaning for costs that
actually make it to the patients
pocketbooks at the pharmacy
counter.
So we think this is a redundant
effort unnecessary in is going
to delay the actual reduction.
Thank you the next please.
The religious.
Good afternoon Mister chairman
members of the committee my name
is TJ Trujillo I'm a registered
lobbyist for the biotechnology
innovation organization
in order and the minute that I
have I'm not going to repeat the
comments Mr of whole talk about
we're in complete concurrence
with that all right do think
there's a very specific legal
issue needed to take a look at I
would encourage you to look at
page seven section seven of the
substitute bill
and it talks about an assessment
in this case this assessment is
what we call it an illegal Tax
disguised as a fee or or another
course called in this case
assessment I think it's telling
that it's addressed as an
assessment not iffy and that
there's a big difference between
what we call a tax and fee in
this case this is not a fee
because the tech the V. pay war
if it's truly is considered a
fee is supposed to go for a
specific advantage to the to the
PPA or in this case that does no
such thing was called in
assessment because this is what
we call a taxed if it's a tax we
have a tax administration act
that has certain rights and
privileges for taxpayers include
such things as hearings there's
a taxpayer bill of rights and
any toxin New Mexico should be
placed under the taxpayer
ministration Act assessment like
this is incorrect this is not an
assessment it's not a fees if an
illegal tax so I would encourage
the committee
due to the way that the funding
structures created in this
particular mechanism it's an
illegal tax and that would occur
as a committee to to vote
against this particular measure
thank you thank you.
Okay we have to focus on line of
excuse me we have three of are
online first we have Caitlyn
Caitlyn
of the Correo Caitlyn I
apologize please go ahead for
one minute whenever you're
ready.
Thank you chairman and members
of the committee my name is
Sheila Morello and the senior
director of the policy of the
pharmaceutical research and
manufacturers of America or
pharma we are here today in
opposition to eighteen fifty one
and we have three primary
concerns.
This is a lack of details in
administering the assessment or
the tax of the bill and what is
being funded as part of that
assessment which is not clear
from the fiscal analysis we're
also concerned about a broader
in order to get the board to
developing and employment
programs without balances like
legislative approval.
And then finally we do believe
this order to the existing
efforts including an interagency
pharmaceutical purchasing
committee which was established
in twenty nineteen and continues
to meet regularly and honors
were prescription drug task
force members actually offer
your nose today thank you for
your time thank you very much
next we're gonna go to revert to
excuse me I apologize we're
gonna go to Rick van ness and
then we'll conclude with will
deign recommend that for one
minute please.
Thank you Mr chairman thank you
for the opportunity my name is
just I am the president of the
New Mexico I was in college.
Medical association we represent
over eighty five via tech
companies from silos difficulty
down to small enough that are
actively seeking venture funding
to continue their drug
development for things like
Alzheimer's and stroke it is
only when a PTAB as fast
investment are offline thirty
percent and how many ladies
effective immediately yes.
Members of this committee levels
you Mr to consider Santo
fourteen which is aimed at
addressing the PBMs the pharmacy
benefit manufacturers these are
the ones responsible for not
handing recreates and I'll
passing on the discounts to the
patients who need them thank you
for your time we thought we
strongly disapprove of this bill
thank you thank you and we're
going to conclude with well
Dane.
Will deign.
Thank you Mr chair members of
the committee my name is
William today and reserve this
for the healthcare distribution
alliance representing will still
distributors across the country
and I will echo what my
colleagues in opposition to this
bill specifically are concerns
around the opposition of house
the fifty one system from the
assessment at arguably tax on
areas seating holders in the
supply chain
We also believe that there are
other intrinsically including
the governor's present ask force
and.
I don't wish to see if you look
at our that the house is likely
to take much longer and not
reproducing the results going
back to the assessment
it should be focused on the
reporting entities are the
entities reporting to as a
superintendent of insurance
PBMs and manufacturers are
clearly not wholesalers or not
on the side recently
distributing the wrong thank you
to the product's thank you Sir
thank you thank you for the okay
now we're gonna go to Committee
for any questions I'll have a
few.
I don't
Representative Chatfield please
go ahead thank you Mr chair.
Mr chair.
good.
Quality cheap affordable drugs
for everybody how many up there
against that raise up your hands
and.
Nobody's a gifts that that that
is an awesome thing to to drain
for missing off it's a worthy
goal.
as I read to the bill you know
the ultimate question I always
ask.
And I said I see the original
bill is is funded by
fees from these companies that
manufacture the drugs to sell
the drugs whatever.
And
Plus a seven hundred and fifty
thousand dollar contribution
from the state.
Then when I see the the revised
bill the committee substitute it
is funded by fees from these
different corporations that are
involved in the drug business
but it no longer has a seven
hundred fifty thousand dollars
appropriation from the state.
So what did we give up.
Between the first built in the
second bill the cost seven
hundred fifty thousand dollars.
Mr chair members of the
committee representative Ted
field what we have done is the
late the implementation of the
board so what you will see is
that the fees will be collected
and beginning on July one twenty
twenty three there will be no
expenditures and no operations
until July one twenty twenty
four so we're we're having time
to work through what's actually
here would not rushing into
anything so what we're giving up
is patience and time to make
sure that what we're doing is
absolutely correct so Mister
chair of.
Representative
What is the fiscal impact to the
state of this bill Mr chair
members of the committee
representative Ted bill there is
no school impact so so Mr chair
representative it almost almost
seems to me like that the seven
hundred fifty thousand was just
pulled out so this bill could go
ahead and go through and
I'm not sure if it's if the
decision was made on the basis
of of that or that that's the
best format for the bill so
I thank you for your efforts and
your time I want to think about
it a little bit.
Thank you Mr chair it's for this
effort thank you Representative
Chatfield next we're gonna go.
Thank you Mr chair can you just
clarify my committee substitute
doesn't show a removal of the
appropriation arching thank you
reserve your I think right
before it is there is there
should be another one before
then maybe is.
Our.
Yeah I think that okay thank you
very much for that clarification
of one question did you work
with the prescription drug task
force the doctor.
The seating for the governor and
doing the bill.
His I'm just wondering if
there's peril Development or how
it interacts Mr chair members of
the committee Representative
Garrett I'm gonna S. my experts
to answer that.
Yes thank you Mr chairman.
Representative Garrett
we have been meeting for three
years what.
Issue we also meet with sept
fifteen deaths across the state
the states is learning community
and I should note that many of
the others are funded by
assessments equal to what we're
doing but in terms of the task
force we were not invited to be
part of the task force we did
speak with doctor recommend in
several occasions her major
objection was that it was drug
pricing and our bill is not a
drug pricing regulatory bill it
is a bill to really look at
innovative solutions that can be
done on a consensus basis with
all the stakeholders and their
many actually right now the
market is an exciting time
generics for the first time
biologics are coming off fans so
the biosimilars and generic
opportunities are great we would
like to see a state budget
manager PVM without all the bad
practices of the PBMs and
without the rebate so that
really negotiating with groups
of purchasers so that we can get
the best price this is there's
gonna be a lot of opportunity.
Those of you who are fans of
sports no more Cuban but he also
has done a very exciting thing
in setting up cost plus and
that's a pharmacy that anyone
can go to online but what's
interesting you take a drug like
Lipitor generic and if you go to
buy your pharmacy or whatever
it's fifty eight dollars you go
to his a cost plus it's three
dollars and fifty eight cents
major difference we know there's
a lot to be had in the market to
bring down costs for consumers
thank you thank you very much
thank you Representative Garrett
we're gonna go to ranking member
on no Sir I apologize
Representative Garcia the
numbers and fix thank you Mr.
Representative on page one on
nine thirteen is is establishing
powers and duties of the
prescription drug of food in the
for the right below this is
creating a prescription of
portability border Fund how we
create a board or a fund will
move funds in that.
Mr chair members of the
committee the way this is been
set up is the fund is being
created first the licensees the
licenses will be
Will be requested to provide
dues those dues will go into
the.
And then it will be in twenty
twenty four that the funds from
the.
Representative of money from the
fund will then be spent so what
we're doing forces creating the
fund that's what's happening
with respect to this piece of
legislation in the and also the
opportunity to make sure that
we're getting do some the
licenses to go into the fund.
thank you Mr chairman and.
Representative.
You know I just have a hard time
on creating boards and funds for
new funding in the budget at all
you know Mr Chairman were
expected to vote on this piece
of legislation today.
There is no funds there is no
board is nothing how well how do
we what we voting on what are we
trying to do here Mr chair
members of the committee you're
doing three things today the way
this is set up number one you
are creating the board number
two you are creating the fund
and number three you're creating
the opportunity for the for the
board to the and assess the the
licenses and those species that
are coming from the licenses
will go into the fund.
Gentleman to me it sounds you
looking first to check into the
ache you don't know what you
included in the year you're
assuming that we're gonna be
collecting money and Mr chairman
you don't have to answer this
one you know when I create a
fund at the bank I put money in
there and then like we but what
I gotta do I don't want to the
bank so move into savings
account another putting money
from next year.
That's **** up thank you thank
you very much Representative
Garcia we're gonna go to rank
vice chair Dixon and then
Representative.
Thank you Representative and
member and all miss Webber I
have a couple questions going
through the substitute thank you
very much
I want to go back to the
difference Mr chair and
representative Herndon between
of.
The prescription drug
affordability board and the
existing task force that has
been set up can you.
provide me with.
The biggest they were can you
just tell me about the
distinctions between the two
Mr chair members of the
committee vice chair Dixon I'm
gonna send a.
Expert answer that yes and
Mister chair and Representative
Dixon could you tell me the last
group I didn't hear it of the
thank you Mr chair and is
whether the disk the difference
between this board and the
governor's prescription drug
task force.
Of course of the.
Drug task force was called by
the governor and we certainly
applaud that because we
recognize this is an issue we
have gone through the interim
committees with our legislation
we've had two days devoted
specifically to drug pricing
thanks to the LFC so that FCC
I think the difference is that
you had a small group of people
who just met for two months and
looked at specifically mostly
PBM reform.
Pharmacy benefit manager reform
and we applaud that her bills
coming down as we fourteen we
think that there are
it's not income competition are
built it's very complementary to
our bill.
Thank you Mr chair and thank you
miss Webber
Has the.
In.
To clarify so the task force is
only dealing with
the pharmacy benefit managers.
Not drug prices not the task
force I would I'm sorry Mr chair
and representative not just the
the the task force focused a
little bit more broadly and you
look at their test report the
legislation that was put forth
this year is primarily PPM
reform.
Pharmacy benefit manager reform
we think there's some excellent
things in there if you could
just do two or three of those
things that would be a great
step forward but we don't think
it's comprehensive in the way
that we're looking at trying to
do various state initiatives
that are outside of the the
pharmacy benefit managers.
Thank you Mr chair and miss
Webber the seven hundred and
fifty thousand that was in the
original bill
What was that money being used
for.
Mr chair Representative that
money was that the estimated
start up cost it would take for
the first year and I should note
that we are administrative to
fully tied in this bill to order
to the superintendent of
insurance so they will be
determining again what they
project the estimated start up
cost our to start off the
assessment.
Thank you Mr chair and
Representative Herndon so
without that.
The initial start of money which
I understand by.
The substitute allows for a
delay in implementation.
So are there any costs to the
OSI or other state agencies to
set this up and administer it.
Mr speaker Representative I
think they'll be some cost to
this the the OSI and we would
cover those costs to do the
assessment these.
Thank you Mr chair and thank you
miss Webber and so when are the
assessment fees when did those
begin to be levied as opposed to
me
Functioning of the board would
begin and the the
responsibilities of the OSI sure
there would be a twelve month
delay.
I mean Representative and Mr
chair.
Mr chair and miss Webber so the
the the two thousand dollars
would kick in first and then OSI
would start staffing or how it
is.
Or did I get that flat that
would be flipped so and I want
to be clear the maximum that you
could charge a license would be
two thousand dollars we don't
anticipate that but you never
know what the future is so with
the seven hundred fifty thousand
dollar estimate for the first
year appropriations that would
come out to five hundred sixty
dollars
a flat fee across the board for
the license.
Mr chair and Miss robbers so
then who sits that five hundred
and fifty dollars I didn't see
it because I did see the two
thousand just as sort of the
limit but it wasn't clear to me
who determines the amount for
the fifty well initially the
superintendent of insurance for
the first year start up fees Mr
chair and Representative Dixon
but after that it'll be the
board itself the board itself
and its plan of operations will
have their annual budget and the
annual budget will then
determine the fees that are
necessary for that budget.
Thank you Mr chair and thank you
for that
I will say that sort of my next
big question and all sort of and
it I think with this question
because I know there are others
who have questions is with
regard to section five.
Subsection you know Hey
And this is not a new concern
for me but I am reluctant to
delegate what I think are clear
provided
responsibilities to unelected
and executive agencies and so.
The giving the board.
Instructing them to examine
develop and implement programs
is not something that I'm
comfortable with as a practice
for the legislature to see it so
I would say between that and my
concern with what happens Mr
chair and representative if we
pass this bill but then next
year don't provide any funding
to the OSI for this.
We're sorry you know that would
that would be an unfunded
mandate to get them started so
so I do have some hesitation and
concerns about this but
appreciate the substitute thank
you thank thank you very much
vice chair Dixon we're gonna go
to Representative Trujillo and
then Representative Pettigrew.
Thank you Mr chairman thank you
for bringing this bill forward
I.
Some folks at that they hadn't
heard that this was a a bill
that they had been briefed on
during this year but as chair of
the health and Human Services
Committee we dedicated a week to
pretty much a week three three
four days of of nothing but
study for for.
Prescription drug programs and
The the pharmacy benefits
managers at all all of the
things that are involved in
trying to figure out how why of
drug rates are so high.
These folks did present and
we listed it Mr chair on our
list of concerns at the end that
we submitted to have up to LFC
as part of our issues that we
wanted more focus on and this
bill I think it is addressing a
lot of the needs and concerns
that members of that committee
had wasn't in terms of getting
more information finding out how
we can at least.
A stem the cost of rising
pharmaceutical costs and clearly
we although we didn't have a
final a final decision about how
to address those concerns we did
come to the conclusion that a
study would be the best way to
address it so I support this
bill thank you.
Thank you very much
Representative Trujillo next we
have Representative.
Thank you Mr chairman thank you
Representative for bringing this
legislation hi.
I must say I'm a bit perplexed.
We're talking Mr chair and
representative about building a
prescription drug affordability
board.
Inside the office of the
superintendent which would
ultimately report to the
governor.
But we already have the
governor's drug task force.
Mr chair representative.
Are the opportunity over thirty
seven years my career outside of
college to travel and live in
from the east coast to the west
coast.
What I've always found
interesting Mr chair
representative.
This is ever counted up move to.
Has at least two Baptist
churches has at least two
Nazarene churches and the reason
is is because somebody didn't
get a seat at the table Mr chair
and representative just like was
discussed today your efforts
testimony we didn't get a seat
at the table.
So we're going to create our
own.
Mr chair representative I
understand what you're trying to
do here but at the end of the
day we have a drug task force
get your seat at the table.
And do it through the system we
already have thank you Mr the
representative group we're gonna
go to the next Representative
Cruz thank you Mr chairman I
think frankly like the intent of
this bill I do I think it's time
that we find a way to curb the
average something the average of
big pharma I don't know that we
can do it this year only because
of timing and funding but I'm I
am in support.
Thank you Mr chairman.
Thank you Representative Cruz
okay I'm gonna thank you
Representative for and and thank
you to our experts have a couple
of quick questions first
Representative Herndon and
especially to experts because
this happened before percent
permanent you were in the body
there's a
a drug in an interagency drug
task force at the General
Services Division happen does
that related this is that that
is focused on prescription drugs
cost is it not.
Mr chair and members of the
committee it is it was one of
our bills that we really
supported with Senator Steinborn
but the failings of the I. P.
B.C have been that they don't
have enough dedicated staff they
didn't have they had data but
without the expertise and they
never were able to move forward
with joint purchasing joint
purchasing my come up in some of
the other bills that I think the
governor's looking at but right
now the I. P. B.C simply
couldn't function because it was
understaffed under missions and
without the expertise.
Thank you Representative Mr
thank you very much and very
clear answer and I appreciate
that and that really helps
explain sort of why we're also
here today the representative
for
Also I guess we should note that
we're working on generic drug
importation for the first time
also based upon legislation that
this body has passed
so so the sort of thank you for
that
It I think we had great
questions we've had a great
conversation Representative
Herndon I I I do have to ask for
a table I am going to ask for a
table in motion I think we've
sort of we have a I appreciate
very much I think we appreciate
the approach to sort of after.
One route is closed providers it
to look at the other piece I
think is is totally fair on the
other hand given the F. when we
would go into effect and also
our ability to work on this as
we look into next year's budget
and perhaps and hopefully build
off of recommendations that come
out of the task force I I I'm
gonna ask for a table in motion
but I think we want to have a
very good clear fair hearings
and we have an opportunity with
our budget as we move into the
future to look at providing the
necessary support an agency
where resource illustrated that
information and expertise
without the ability to sort act
upon that
we we need those thank you
Representative I will go to you
obviously and your experts for
any closing comments thank you
thank you Mr chair I appreciate
having the opportunity to make
those closing comments because
what happened far too often here
is that there were statements
and at that we've made but
without a question and without
the ability for the the expert
or anybody to make a response
and the three things that I
think are incredibly important
first of all I would like to
address Mr chair members of the
committee the statement made by
Representative Pettigrew about
we weren't invited to the table
we want invited to the table to
the task force with that we
didn't have a seat at the table
it is important to understand
that this work of this Weber has
been going on for three years
the work of the task force has
been less than a year so really
who is not been invited to the
table so I just need to look at
that in addition to the other
item you you and I direct this
to madam vice chair Mister chair
and so the the the question that
was raised to examine develop
and implement programs this is
not the duty and responsibility
of the of the legislature the
legislature creates of creates
introduce.
And they create high level
policy but they don't create
programs that's for the internal
operations of entities and then
I I present to you the third
item and this item I I am
directly answering to I think it
was too Mr chair to
representative Garcia so the
question was where are you going
to get the money so there are
thirteen hundred and eighty
licenses in this that would
operate in this state if they
are if they license be is a
collected from them and placed
in the fund as the as this
operational aspect gets ready to
operate on July twenty twenty
twenty four July first twenty
twenty four the funds that
they're that does not have to be
any taxing in the aspect
anything coming from the budget
whatsoever they give you we
heard testimony I want to say
from miss Webber who talked
about what was going on a dental
services they were they would
disruption they were moving it's
not working we're putting a fund
in place the ability to provide
a fees from licenses in place in
the in the operational aspect so
it's not been Russ is been
absolutely thought out in a
great manner so that it will be
workable and is nothing more
effective than making sure that
we can work together to talk
with drug companies to come up
with the lowest prices because
we working as a group with
whomever we go to work with and
then I just bring to you one
more item if you listen to the
conversations of the people who
objected whole objected it was
the people with the money those
who will make an eight point six
million those who are in support
of this with the people who are
in the state of New Mexico who
are having to pay these high
drug prices and could not afford
it I'm just asking you to think
about the practicality of what
is being proposed here this is
not something that should be
table is something that should
be move forward thank you for
giving me the opportunity to
provide the closing statement
thank you very much for percent
of Herndon okay that thank you
were going to go now.
Now in the I have asked for the
tabling motion and I'll go to by
to addicts and for that motion.
Thank you Mr chair I would move
To table House Appropriations
and finance committee substitute
for House health and Human
Services Committee substitute
for House Bill fifty one thank
the there's a motion please call
the roll.
Representative Armstrong yes to
table with an explanation
please.
Senator Baca yes table.
Yes.
Yes.
Representative per no.
Yes.
Care small yes.
According to.
Thank you members thank you Mr
chairman
We all know what's needed my
explanation is this is the house
appropriations and finance
committee substitute for the
house human health and Human sub
Services Committee substitute
this is the third bill that this
form of this bill in the second
committee and so and we
ultimately
a license is not a tax and this
is going to be a tax and it
should be going through the
correct
programs to be if you want to do
that thank you madam chair Mr
chair thank you.
Next to explain their vote.
Thank you.
one more to explain about
Representative.
Please.
Thank you Mr chairman I I really
want to see this bill come back.
I I'd I'd like Representative
Garcia feel that.
We are our hands are almost tied
when it comes to the lack of
funding we have to have the
funding I know that we would
like to put a program forward
with the policy and then later
get the funding but.
We can't do that and that's been
one of my complaints and other
with other bills are we've had
that want to pass the
legislation the policy without
the funding and that will be
real the system so if we can get
that funding in place
Representative turned in which I
don't think is it'll I think
it's very very doable I think
this can very likely sell
through thank you Mr.
Okay that thank you very much
experts thank you for your
continued work thank you
Representative funded.
We're on house bill two two
seven.
Okay we're gonna I'm sorry thank
you Mr Johnson thank you
Representative for New.
We don't have an amendment that
was put on and in the previous
committee I was just informed
we're gonna hold on this bill
and we're going to continue
through the through our agenda
please please stick by and stand
with us there's no go go ahead
I'm sorry I'm not sure I
understand right Representative
Hernan there is an amendment
that was placed in the previous
committee which is not and we we
don't have a full package
basically we're gonna try to fix
that and come back to this
during today's hearing.
Thank you Mr chair because the
amendment was put on over a
month you know I it is thank
you.
what we're gonna do is.
we're actually in.
Okay so okay thank you all we're
gonna go.
Members I'd like to go to have a
committee substitute for house
bill four eighty one.
This is leader lane.
minority leader lane please come
up and will.
We're gonna go to.
Committee sets for House Bill
for anyone that house bill two
ninety seven.
And then we'll kind of see where
we are from the.
The.
Representative good to see you
again we'll see if the Lecco.
It's great to see you please go
ahead thank you Mr chair and
good afternoon to my long lost
favour Committee.
Oh seven back in this committee
so we have here today is house
bill four eighty one and this is
a language change so we're
seeking to modernize existing
reading materials fund that are
that already exists within
statute.
so this bill will help districts
put the best instructional
materials available in front of
our earliest year learners
targeting really came through
three and it goes beyond that as
well but helping them become
successful readers and the fund
will allow local New Mexico
districts to purchase high
quality literacy materials a
line of the science of reading
of cyclic no cost to the
district and we know that we
have reading proficiency
problems in the state
unfortunately and so this would
add another layer of support so
that we could purchase
supplemental materials at the
district level to align with the
science of reading
and there's no appropriation
monetary obligation the state or
local districts with me at at
the council table is amended to
own my expert and with that Mr
stand for questions.
Great thank you very much great
to see you is there is there any
comment on this bill today.
Please go ahead.
Where we're.
we have an exit go yes we'll
have our our excellent staff is
there please go ahead Mr chair
members of the committee my name
is Chelsea Canada and I'm the
director of public policy at the
New Mexico chamber of commerce
we support HB four eighty one
and thank the sponsors for
bringing it forward our members
understand like you all do the
importance of third grade
reading readiness and
intervention we applaud the
legislature's work and
supporting teacher training
based on the science of reading
giving teachers access
instructional to instructional
materials aligned with the
science of reading will give
teachers the tools to use the
skills they learned translated
into the classroom this is the
next necessary step to improve
our reading proficiency rates
ensuring that teachers and
students have the tools they
need to succeed our membership
is extremely concerned with the
twenty twenty to state and
national reading proficiency
rates coming out of two
different yes.
Only thirty five percent were
reading at a fourth grade level
on the state yes and twenty one
percent were reading at a fourth
grade level on the national yes
as you all know at third grade
students which from learning to
read to reading to learn
additionally studies have shown
that lack of third grade
proficiency is linked to high
school graduation drop out as
employers in the state we want
to see our students and future
workers succeed for these
reasons and more we support HB
forty four eighty one and thank
the sponsors for bringing it
forward thank you thank you very
much.
Okay we do have one person
online.
that Serra fits bureau.
Sir one minute.
Mr chair answer to several
senior vice president to be made
all the cooking chamber of
commerce we're in sasa port
Isabel the success of a child in
school and in life is highly
dependent upon our ability to
read from a young age every time
you just now committee
determines the work it is an
investment in our future
workforce and investment in the
fighting is intergenerational
poverty we have lots to see from
the so decisively and
interaction of stronger literacy
instruction but we need to
finish the job by ensuring that
every school in our community
he can quickly update our
curriculum to the very best
reading materials available we
strongly urge your support for
this thank you Mr.
Thank you very much.
Okay that takes care I also see
the doctor today of Warniment
and CJ John here yeah if there
is there anything you'd like to
add.
Not that you don't feel like you
have to.
Great thank you expert anything
to add.
and thank you to by two Dicks
and is there anybody who wishes
to speak in opposition.
Sydne okay.
I don't see anybody there
will go then to the committee
for any questions Representative
Brown.
Thank you Mr chairman and that
leader lane could you tell us
please how we know.
Which are the best instructional
materials for pre.
Mr chair that's a great question
of pass up to miss out on Mr
chair representative thank you
for the question so that is
actually the primary purpose of
the bill in front of you the way
that those best in class reading
materials were regulated before
when this fund was originally
created was using data from both
Florida and Oregon which is now
out of date this funds as one of
the best resources we have now
to make sure that that programs
are aligned to the science of
reading and that is our very own
public education departments
review of instructional
materials and ensuring that the
instructional materials that
would be paid for out of this
fund have the structured
literacy designation as reviewed
by the Public Education
Department.
Mr Chairman representative and
expert.
So we we are going to be looking
at the results of actual New
Mexico children in the classroom
and how they are progressing in
their reading is that what we we
talk about dad is that we're
talking about Mr chair.
Mr chair representative so the
PED's processes that they pull
together teams of educators from
New Mexico to evaluate the
resources that have been
submitted by publishers to the
public education department for
review those teams use a rubric
that has been designs with
national best practice standards
for structured literacy to your
point about what data do we have
we can look at other states that
are a little bit ahead of ours
in their structured literacy
journey Mississippi is one that
everyone has seen on the front
of the Albuquerque journal and
in tons of headlines they're
explosive growth in early
literacy results has been
because they have trained their
teachers and structured literacy
which New Mexico is currently in
the process of doing and then
incentivize districts to adopt
resources aligns to those best
practices which is what this
bill proposes to do.
Mr Chairman and we're lane and
and experts my observation has
been that every publishing
company claims to have the best
material.
And getting to the truth of the
matter and how it really plays
out in the classroom to me is
very important and so I'm glad
to hear the work rubric so looks
to me like looking at multiple
factors to determine what we
think is going to be most
effective for students Mr chair
the lady response on that.
Mr chair representative the only
thing that I would add is we
have a pretty extensive language
in the bill that says aligned
with explicit systematic
diagnostic cumulative
instruction and phonological and
phonemic awareness phonics
syllable types morphologies
semantics and syntax there is an
easier way to say that but we
chose not to say that because we
were afraid that publishing
companies would stick a sticker
on the front of the book that
said structured literacy aligned
without any of those components
so we chose to list those
components explicitly so that we
can ensure that we're evaluating
the materials against those
components Mr Chairman leader in
this reserve is very wise on
your part and I appreciate all
that and then just finally a
question Mr chair
Is is are we seeing the return
of phonics hi I believe I'm
seeing that I'm reading articles
that literacy is very very
important subject to me and I've
done what I can to push early
childhood literacy and adult
literacy in my community and I'm
hearing phonics is back
I know that's just one word out
of a list of all the words you
just gave us but Mr chair
related expert what would you
sing.
Mr chair representative yes
phonics is a critical component
of structured literacy but not
all of structured literacy so
structured literacy emphasizes
phonics instruction and all the
other components that we know
need to be added to phonics
instruction to make sure that
children can not only read the
words but I understand their
meeting and apply it to the
context of whatever it is that
reading.
Mr chair and and leader and an
expert so my my experiences and
a child is learning to read it's
important that that child.
Learn to read and spell and
understand the meaning of the
word if we don't do all three
we're not doing the job well so
anyway thank you for the chance
to comment Mr chair thank you
Representative Brown thanks for
in order to Chattfield.
Thank you Mr chair Mr chair my
question is the same old
standard
question what provision has been
made in house bill two for the
implementation of this bill.
Mr chair so this is an existing
fund within the statute and so
all we're doing is doing some
language changes and not seeking
appropriation Mr chair the
money's there.
Mr chair so.
The fund itself is is not being
touch one where the other we're
just trying to make a language
align with pushing structure
letters.
Thank you very much
Representative Chatfield okay
we're gonna.
Representative Chatfield please
all right sorry representative
Garcia.
of the G. that was.
The the.
moving up and I think we I I the
the must that sort of blinded me
as.
Thank you Mr chairman presenter
a raise you know I I support
this feature that station for
one real good reason
my granddaughter when what to
school into a dyslexia.
And she slipped through the
cracks until she got to eleventh
grade.
In the door you don't have to go
like to a special it kind of
deal with.
You know because at that age
Okay there's kids Mr chair and
you know if you want to go
through the hassle of being we
know that or whatever and the
more people than that old looks
good.
And then I respect that you know
because it was hard for my
granddaughter to quit.
A total quit school and she says
I'm not going back of.
The one of the specialists with
that Mr Chairman that.
Thank you very much thank you
very much for some person okay I
don't see any other questions
we're gonna go to Representative
Garrett FOR a motion and
Representative Baca for a
second.
Mr chair I do pass.
Mr Chairman a second a we have a
due pass for committee
substitute health
Education substitute for house
bill four eighty one there's a
second thirty opposition to that
motion.
Thing
thank you very much
Representative Eli.
okay members I guess a we're
going to go if folks who will
recall we're going to to House
Bill to ninety seven.
this was a bill that we've heard
previously
that we
there is a tie vote at the time
when after we heard that bill
we've asked Representative
because then it to come back up
we don't need any action to take
this off of the table because
there was no action taken and
simply sort of their with our
bills Representative because
then at there anything you'd
like to add briefly will do some
brief public comment and then
we'll go to the committee.
no Mr chair thank you committee
thank you for indulging us and
another go around I look forward
to public comment and
potentially will offer a quick
remark than Mr chair after that
sounds great thank you very much
Representative for them okay
we'll go now is there anybody
who wishes to speak on house
bill
House Judiciary Committee
substitute for House Bill to
ninety seven madam secretary.
Good afternoon Mister chair
members of the committee it's
great to see you all again in
the same week
just want to first start off by
saying that I very much
appreciated the opportunity that
I had to work with
Representative come in and of
course her expert Mr Barron
Jones on some of the revisions
my primary concern is that those
revisions really just didn't go
far enough I very much to
appreciate some of the changes
that they made though one of the
I want to just bring to your
attention very briefly three
very quick items that that I
would like to continue to work
on with the sponsor but one of
them is the make up of the board
and out while I do appreciate
that they did add a victims
advocate to the bill that person
they're very limited in in who
they can be and so it really
would eliminate participation
from a person who had a love one
that was murdered or any person
who was a rape victim from being
a participant on the board and
ultimately we believe that the
victim's advocates are still
under represented on this board
there are also multiple security
concerns that I'd like to go
over in detail with the sponsor
as this bill moves forward and
we also believe that there is
still must be language that
excludes individuals with real
or potential financial interest
from membership on the board or
in the office of the ombudsman I
do recognize that they made some
changes to include the
governmental conduct act in the
gets act but it really doesn't
directly address the primary
concerns that we had so again I
really appreciate working with
the sponsor and and and we'll
look forward to doing so but
with that I do stand in
respectful opposition of the
bill thank you very much thank
you very much Secretary.
Okay I don't see any other we do
have somebody online we have
Diane the cash Diane for
for one minute whenever you're
ready please.
Thank you for your committee I
was so glad to see eighty to
ninety seven.
On the highly anticipated impact
legislation that would allow
transparency into the workings
of the DLC legislative
mechanisms the staff to see.
Representative there are place
for everyone involved each of
these.
I know I like that is so
desperately needed please
support this legislation thank
you thank you very much then
next we're going to go to the
Saba Saba.
For one minute whenever you're
ready please.
Yes.
I was.
I think that hi Mr chair and the
members of the community thank
you so much for you have a
comment on this money already
I'm gonna give me a thumbs up as
ACLU
myself today in my role as a lot
of times be with you members.
Fire I have returned from our
region or have a lot of really.
and be a better struggle is
often the lack of transparency
or abilities to to have the
concerns are I think this one
would provide Brandon he's able
to be heard and for levels on
outside to see a doctor Segura
the dollars are going on on the
inside.
Finally I I do think just as a
contact air we do deserve to
have a little transparency and
understand exactly what's going
on inside of our corrections
Department yes on this I really
do appreciate it thank you.
Thank you very much.
Okay the thing that I think
concludes our public comment is
there anybody else who was to
speak.
I don't see anybody there
yes go ahead please no not at
all.
Others simply suggestions to
thousand jobs which.
And
we you know it was kind of
surprising representative
Stacey.
Come forward and say that they
like
some of the things in this bill
and we want to create a sponsor
for including us on the board as
well you know safe staffing and
safety in our on our facilities
is our number one priority and
if this is the will of the
committee and this is something
that we're looking at doing I
know many departments have
enough but person we just want
to make sure that we have a seat
at the table continue to be part
of the discussions a source or
to see what the committee does
but I do know a lot of our CEOs
find a lot of value in something
like this thank you Mr chair
thank you very much Mr Anderson
okay
I don't see any other comments
members briefly just as a
reminder we've adopted an
amendment that struck the
appropriation from this
legislation Representative David
M. briefly you there is in
junior funding how much can you
remind us of how much is in
junior please.
Mr chair members of the
committee it was two hundred
thousand for the onset and
establishment in this first year
it was our expectation
especially looking at the ethics
committee as a model that
sending that money to DFA would
allow them to contract for
services to announce and make a
public notice that these board
positions were open and then
coordinate with the appointing
bodies to make sure the board
was appointed moving forward and
and on going here is there would
be additional costs and that is
real that this is a policy
decision to make it was
estimated.
In our FY are included that
potentially the corrections
department would incur costs as
part of being responsive and
ready for their interaction and
collaboration within eight
percent and that there would be
of of also costs for the board
to hire that own budgets person
ready to receive complaints and
do into.
Kate thank you very much okay
are there any questions from the
committee.
We're gonna go to Representative
Chatfield and representative of
something on.
That thank you Mr chair but my
question is on the anchor costs
the corrections department
estimated it would cost four
hundred twenty thousand dollars
annually.
You know I just have the old FY
are so has that changed or has
that been taken care of where do
we stand on that.
Mr.
Chair Representative Chatfield
that continues to be the
estimate that was garnered in
the FIR from the initiatives
from the corrections department
so as it stands I I think
they've made an important point
that should legislation like
this go into effect that
potentially they would want to
have different staffing
considerations or dedicated
staff people ready to build that
engagement so the corrections
department does have their own
internal grievance process
spurred needs identified in
front of the LFC reports
outcomes performance measures it
seems that this is an agency
that would be well served with a
partner that was outside an
objective but they're they're
they're naming and I want to
respect that that to have a
staff person ready to be at that
point of engagement there
estimating that this is what it
would cost the corrections
department so Mister chair I
guess my question exactly as is
their money and house bill two
no need to pay for this and to
pay for the extra cost to the
corrections department.
Mr Chairman representative it's
our assessment that that cost
would not be necessary that it
could be something taken up by
people that already work in
victims rights people that
already handle grievances people
that already communicate with
other state agencies but no if
that proved to be substantial an
accurate there is not money in
house bill two to account for
additional staffing at the
corrections department Mr chair
is it possible that we could
hear from the corrections
department we just did
Representative feel we heard
from the secretary she's going
to take discussed a.
We heard the testimony from the
secretary Representative.
Secretary if there's anything
else you'd like to add in
addition to what you said both
times please feel free.
Mr chair representative
Chatfield thank you yes we do
believe that that would be the
cost to hire people that were
experts in the area of things
like records collection data
collection one of the things
that we did not put a number on
was what we estimate to be staff
over time when the the folks
from the that are mentioned in
this bill are on site at our
facilities thank you.
A anything else Representative.
Sorry.
Go ahead please.
Mr chair thank I guess my
question was does she have the
money or do we need to give her
more money.
No that's that's the kind of
elusive question that we're
gonna get into here do we have
to come up with more money or
does she have the ability to
carry out within our existing.
Thank you.
Okay.
Thank you we're gonna go to
Representative setting on a
Representative Pettigrew.
Thank Representative so I just
have questions on the
significant issues.
Was anything done for those who
are
was on page a for this the fire.
You Representative met Matt Mr
chair and representative setting
you up
We feel that we did address in a
pretty substantial committee so
with the house Judiciary
Committee the significant issues
name tier
At the end of the day there is a
policy question about whether
this is an over reach into
executive authority that has
been with are fantastic
secretary has named out loud a
potentially it concerning
consideration for the governor
to weigh in on if this bill made
it to the governor's desk but
that is one that we have I mean
we either find is as our body is
the legislature as our own
independent branch of government
that this is an appropriate area
for independent review and
oversight for we don't so that
was not addressed but otherwise
after extensive work and
openness with the committee we
did come out of House Judiciary
with the unanimous vote
bipartisan vote after are
Republican
leader ranking member Nibert and
others waited and and make sure
that those other concerns are
addressed at the end of the day
it's a question about whether or
not it's appropriate for our
branch of government to have
this capacity to weigh in on
some objective review of this
agency.
The representative Sarinana next
we're gonna go to Representative
Pettigrew.
Thank you chairman.
Yeah chairman yesterday I sat
through committee and actually
present in the bill where we
were I was told by
But.
Pretty much the entire committee
the we don't deserve the
oversight over.
Some of these departments and we
shouldn't be doing that our job
is to legislate let them just
run this so
while I disagree with that I
also have problems Mr Chairman
representative with the fact
that the secretary of the
department still in conflict
with the bill.
Mr chair my question I.
Which is specific if this
legislation was to pass.
In its current form with two
hundred.
Thousand dollars in junior money
and the junior money.
For whatever reason was vetoed.
Because that's happened.
What happens to this legislation
thank you.
Thank you very much
Representative Pettigrew that is
the funding that's dedicated
here.
We you know that's not our
decision to make obviously in
terms of that be to vote so is
thank you for raising the
question that means that the
money would not be there to
support the intended purpose but
that is not something that we
can control and.
Representative PO on a different
scale that can play out.
Thank you Representative we're
we're gonna go to Representative
Montoya then to vice chair
Dixon.
Thank you Mr chair.
I do believe the legislature has
a role in oversight.
but I don't believe that's what
this does Mr chair and
representative I think what this
does is we are farming out
oversight to
Committee not us.
so I I completely believe that
if there is a departments that
were funding that we have a roll
in for gonna give money to that
I think we have a roll and
having some say.
I don't think this is it Mr
chair so we we don't farm that
out within FAA.
Mr chair I think
this is the wrong approach.
I think if if we want to have
oversight let's have oversight.
But creating Blue Ribbon panel.
For any sort of panel
I think is
Quite frankly a little bit of a
director should you are alright
if we believe that there needs
to be oversight thank you Mr
chair.
Thank you very much
Representative Montoya we're
gonna vice chair Dixon and then
Representative Brown vice chair
Dixon.
Thank you representative Cadena
I actually have a question that
sort of goes back to the
concerns that Representative
Chatfield brought up
As to whether or not the
department of corrections has
funding to absorb four hundred
and twenty thousand dollars and
I noted in volume three.
Of our but that the corrections
department reverted in twenty
twenty one hundred and thirty
one million dollars and then in
fiscal year twenty twenty to
forty five million dollars and
that this might be a question
for Mr Abbey but thank it seems
to me that there's probably some
capacity for the corrections
department to absorb four
hundred and twenty thousand
dollars but I don't know if they
need to make a more request or
exactly how that would work so I
was wondering if perhaps of the
director may be able to answer
that.
Thank you Mr ivory I believe
the secretary and I will ask for
so what will ask for additional
comment and in given additional
opportunity right now thank you
madam secretary.
Any other questions.
Great we're gonna go to
Representative Brown.
So I am going to explain my vote
now.
Rather than after the vote is
taken Mr Chairman representative
I'm I'm really kind of concerned
that the correction secretary
doesn't think this bill is quite
ready at and I I looked at the
FIR and on pages three and four
is still a listing of things
that may or may not have been
adequately addressed in the
committee substitute and so I
just really reluctant to go
against a cabinet secretary I
think really wants to do things
right and wells and I also think
Mr Chairman representative of
the given what I've read here.
There may be a executive veto on
this because the executive
doesn't have enough pointing
power in the ratios were used to
sing but I just I tell you what
the secretary said Mr chair and
for that reason I will not be
voting in favor of the bill
thank you thank you
Representative Brown
Representative Garrett and
Representative Lujan.
Thank you.
Thank you representative of ca
Kenya I am actually supportive
of this and I'm gonna present
section for the advisory board I
feel like there's a balance of
people who've been incarcerated
people who have served for the
behavior health Medical Center.
there are major party minority
party appointees Legislative
Council appointees the
sentencing commission appoints
the governor of the ministry of
office of the courts the public
defender the labor unions they
choose Spence then and what we
call it now owns but.
Whatever.
I feel like there's a balance
there
So so I just from the
qualifications in the categories
of people coming I feel there's
a kind of.
Comprehensive overview and
experience
that would make the fair a group
of as well as considering their
geographic gender sexual
orientation ethnic and racial
diversity which is important in
listening and being fair to the
corrections department as well
as incarcerated people so thank
you for producing that balance
it looks to me like the judicial
a committee substitute did
address many of the concerns
thank you for doing that the
representative here
Representative Lujan thank you
madam Mr chair House.
I just I'm sorry I wasn't here
for the entire conversation but
I coming back to it I was here
for the previous I just wanna
make sure can you can you remind
me of the madam to new fund
that's been put in.
Thank you madam Mr chair thank
you for that that's on my only
questions or check thank you
great thank you very much
Representative Lujan
Representative I guess I'll.
What I I guess I'd like to do
now I'm gonna explain a couple
of of of sort of my thought
process and madam secretary on
by to back up if you wanna offer
any additional comments and then
Representative because then
we'll go to.
Representative thank you for
bringing this back thank you for
the work I really appreciate the
conversations that we're having
here.
The reason that I'm gonna
support this or I guess really
sort of three full one
representative the fact that we
have junior funding that's
allocated to something I think
is important this is a long time
effort that you spearheaded you
have expertise and your the
folks that you're working with
an appreciate Representative
Garrett noting with the board
number two.
With with deep respect and
appreciation for secretary
during the LESC process and I
think here in this room earlier
this year rude for apses at the
end of last year.
I asked the question about do
you know do we need more
oversight with the corrections
department the answer was no
and.
That deeply concerns me given
there are a number of challenges
and the number of opportunities
for our state to sort of get
criminal justice as right as we
can third that there are
constituents who my
representative to work at the
southern New Mexico correctional
facility and I think a deeper
look and deeper collaboration
upon things like staffing and
others that are at absolutely
critical levels right now where
with insufficient staffing the
danger to inmates the danger
especially to corrections
officers the inability to
provide the services
is it is systemic and
challenging and I know the
secretary is deeply focused on
that but Representative because
then a even though you're not
fully there in a lot this fully
things are there I think the
fact that you're working closely
and that there is a continued
collaboration speaks to getting
a very tough balance right with
that thank you for allowing me
that thanks committee go to the
secretary and then
Representative because then it
to close Mr chair of committee
members thank you very much I
just wanted to give a
clarification to Representative
Dixon on that so the numbers
that you mentioned about that
were reverted the vast majority
of those high dollar numbers it
was federal funds that was if
the impacting with COVID and so
when we didn't use all of those
COVID funds for those reasons it
was requirement federally to
return the funds I just wanted
to clarify.
Thank you very much madam
secretary and I'll just wrap Mr
chair by expressing my deep
appreciation for our current
secretary I've admired her
leadership and seeing her grow
over years
I appreciated the you all as LFC
in the interim as our important
HHC Committee in real time have
been the body to hear the most
pressing concerns considerations
including the settlement and
risk management money that goes
to pay out for when things don't
go as they should again it's
just a reminder one key piece of
this is to compel the
corrections department to go to
a rulemaking process I think
that's an important piece of
public transparency and process
and the way that we as
policymakers should expect our
agencies to engage with them the
public so thank you met Mr chair
committee for your time today
thank you very much for present
because thank committee we're
gonna go to representative
Garcia for the motion.
Okay it's been moved by
Representative Garcia second by
Representative Cruz so yes they
can you please call the roll.
Representative Armstrong now.
Representative Bob out though.
Representative cap.
Yes Representative Lujan yes
Representative.
I think that yes.
Care small yes.
Eleven.
And six of the next okay thank
you very much thank you
Representative kind then and
thank you secretary and.
With that that telehealth bill
to ninety seven
okay members were what we're
looking closely on some budget
issues as it relates to house
bill two twenty seven
What I'd like to go to.
Perhaps Representative della
Cruz would you go to the house
could you give us is the a brief
sort of presentation on house
bill four seventy three.
absolutely.
Okay.
Okay we're gonna members we're
jumping around a little bit just
in order to sort of maximize our
time we're gonna go to house
bill three fifty seven we're
gonna ask vice chair Dixon and
Representative and ranking
member Armstrong I'll feel very
lonely up here.
But if both lesson to present
House Bill three fifty seven
please.
It's it's that.
Thanks
for.
And members we have our house
bill three fifty seven here in
front of us.
It it's members again it's it's
right in front of you yeah it
it's lose different from usually
have
by your Dixon ranking member
Armstrong was raving great to
see you.
Thank you Mr chair and members
of the committee this afternoon
we would like to present to you.
house approved woods that
surround one I'm sorry house
appropriations and finance
committee substitute for House
Judiciary Committee substitute
for House Bill three fifty seven
and I can tell you right off the
bat that one of the reasons we
have opted to substitutes as
opposed amendments is because of
the number of times and like in
places that we may have to
change one wording in multiple
places so.
House Bill three fifty seven is
something that was discussed in
the public safety working group
from LESC over the interim.
And it is a
Bill to address workforce
capacity throughout the criminal
justice system it sets up three
funds one is the law enforcement
workforce capacity building
fund.
The second is the public
attorney workforce capacity
building fund and then the
third.
Is the detention and corrections
workforce capacity building fund
the money for these funds is in
the budget with the exception of
the detention and corrections
and that is because it was a
late addition so it is not
funded this year however we are
setting it up a similar to the
construction of the other two
funds.
with that
I don't know if my co sponsor
the ranking member would like to
add anything or if you'd like
adicional details from our
expert witness but thank you
remember anything please go
ahead nine Mr chairman I think
Representative Dixon did an
excellent job the only part I
would add is that this is really
needed for recruitment retention
across New Mexico right thank
thank you very much and great to
see miss raven I analyst what if
we have any questions let's go
to the audience is there any
comment on House Bill three
fifty seven.
Please go ahead that will give.
I'm grace Phillips general
counsel for New Mexico counties
creating a detention retention
reimbursement fund is a priority
for New Mexico counties are
detention facilities are
experiencing a crisis in
staffing and we really
appreciate the Sanchez adding us
to this bill and we hope to be
back asking you to fund it and
that in the coming year thank
you thank you.
Thank you Mr members of the
committee Bennett Baur chief
public defender really
appreciate the Sanchez
understanding the need to
support the public defenders in
the district attorney's together
in this from and so we support
that part of the bill and we
really appreciated and ask you
to pass thank you.
Thank you.
Thank you Mr chairman of the
committee Jason Weaks registered
lobbyists from Bernalillo county
obviously we I have the
sheriff's office's Bernalillo
county they're experiencing
pretty critical staffing issues
this will help that beyond that
I appreciate the Sanchez adding
corrections and detention the
Bernalillo county metropolitan
detention center is the largest
detention center in the state in
fact I think it's a large
correctional or detention
facility in the state huge
number of services come out of
that we are experiencing about a
forty five percent vacancy rate
in terms of staffing is a
critical need we need to figure
this out and this is a holistic
approach that allowed to do
recruitment retention for all
critical staff and then the
criminal justice system
including the detention center
thank you.
Thank you very much.
Mr chair members of the
committee Josh Anderson again
with asked me we represent a lot
of folks in this fun state
corrections county Kerr
detention law enforcement public
defender so again anything we
can do to re uh recruit retain
we definitely support to
committee support and thank the
sponsors thank you very much Mr
Anderson we're gonna look online
we have to folks I see to our
district attorney's we're gonna
go to first Rep Ted Rowe and
then to Marcus Montoya right Mr
Tetreault please go ahead.
Everyone thank you Mr Mr speaker
This thank the sponsors MLC
working group or.
In the US.
Around this we stand in support
of this and we appreciate the
willingness of all the groups to
look at all of us
along with the
so
if any questions come up radio
the eight work for the district
attorney's thank you thank you
very much Mr federal.
Okay next we're going I I don't
see Mr Montoya is here noting of
course that he's at the the
district attorney's association
okay let's go to the committee
Representative Trujillo please
yes in the FIR and the on the
bottom of page to where it says
fiscal implications it doesn't
contain an appropriation but
there are three it's
appropriations it's as of
totaling thirty six point five
million is that where the
money's going to come from Mr
chair.
Thank you Mr chair thank you
Representative Trujillo yes
there is funding in the budget.
It specifically Mr chair from
that.
Appreciation.
Yes although if miss right and
might add to that.
thank you Mr chair and
representative you know there is
thirty two point five million
dollars appropriated in the
current version of house bill
two for the law enforcement
workforce capacity building
funding contingent on passage of
house bill three fifty seven is
also to other appropriations of
two million dollars each the
public defender's Department in
the administrative office of the
district attorney's for the
public Attorney workforce
capacity building fund again
both of those are contingent on
a document of house bill three
fifty seven thank you Mr chair
thank you.
Thank you very much
Representative Trujillo.
Yeah Representative Brown
please.
Thank you Mr chairman thank you
Representative.
So I have a fiscal impact report
dated March third continues
March fourth I believe is there
a more updated version then this
Mr chair for.
Is rated.
Mr Chairman representative
ground I believe the March third
version is the most up to date
version you'll see that in the
bill title referenced the two oh
two number it's two two five
eight seven five point three
which matches should match the
proposed substitute you have
before you so if that number
does match the substitute and
yes this you have the most up to
date version of the FIR thank
you Mr chairman and.
Representative is right and so
I'm a little confused because
there's a a note here at the top
of the FIR in capital letters.
This says
This is incomplete agencies have
not responded that I see a list
of apparently they have
responded or on the page I take
it we've heard from everybody we
need to Mr chair.
Representative Mr Chairman
representative so just to
clarify because the two two five
eight seven five point three is
a proposed substitute that has
not yet been adopted by the
committee it does not have an
official posted FIR there is an
official posted FIR for the
house Judiciary Committee
substitute that was adopted but
not for this this is a draft F.
I. R. because this substitute
was not provided to the agencies
they did not have input on this
specific substitute at least not
through the formal process we
have had ongoing conversations
with them and the agencies
listed are those who responded
to the introduce bill since the
bill's introduction hearings
institutions have been so fast
that we have not had really
tying for refills agencies to
respond to the most recent
substitute and they'll probably
respond to the previous
substitute maybe sometime today
and if this committee adopts
this version of substitute built
up responses will still be
helpful but within will be out
of date.
Mr chair this is a lesson in
provided logistics I I
appreciate that and I do have
one final Justin we have a
common Mr chairman and
Representative so
I saw the phrase Pueblo attorney
workforce and I just want to
commend you for including both
prosecutors and defense counsel
and public defenders and that we
really need to keep that that
balance good and sometimes I
think in years past we.
More funded one of one of those
and the other so thank you for
doing that I appreciate so part
of our justice system thank you
Mr chair thank you very much for
percent from any I'd are there
any other comments Mr chair
the ranking member did note that
we neglected to move the
substitute I think great.
Thank you for that let's that
will last Representative
Chatfield for that motion for
adoption and then we'll go to
Representative Garrett for the
second.
I move to pass on the files
appropriations and finance
committee substitute for House
Judiciary Committee substitute
for House Bill.
Yeah so and we will need to yes
let me let me back up here what
thank you we're gonna have the
motion last for is to adopt a
discussion house appropriations
and finance committee substitute
for house Judiciary Committee
substitute for House Bill three
fifty seven from.
Hey it's been so moved and
seconded by Representative
Chatfield.
Second by Representative Lujan
Is there any objection to
adopting the substitute.
Okay St we without to the
substance to that next we're
going to go last four do not
pass on the house Judiciary
Committee substitute for House
Bill three fifty seven and a do
pass on house appropriations and
finance committee substitute for
House Bill three fifty seven Mr.
It's been moved I Representative
Chatfield sang back
Representative Lujan is there
any objection to that motion.
Okay I don't see anybody and
opposition thank you very much
for.
Okay we're gonna go.
we're gonna go now members to
house bill three skews to house
bill four hundred as amended.
And as with the Penske so come
on up.
And we will learn our lesson
here we're gonna ask for will
ask
and vice chair Dixon the move
the house appropriations and
finance committee substitute for
house bill four hundred.
The second second great it's
been moved by Representative
Dixon second by Representative
how to meal
this is the house appropriations
and finance committee substitute
what's the Penske it's great to
see you here please go ahead on
the substitute we have of this
thank you Mr chairman and
members of the committee
This bill this bill deals with
it looking for a solution for
the gap in health care coverage
that we see currently two
hundred thousand New Mexicans
lack health care coverage of any
kind
and what this bill proposes to
do is leverage federal federal
funding through the Medicaid
program.
Lifting the eligibility on
Medicaid.
We do have confirmation from the
center for Medicare and Medicaid
services at the federal level
that the federal match would
apply
and so what this bill proposes
to do is create a plan for
implementing a program that
would expand Medicaid
eligibility with new sources of
revenue that could include is a
sliding scale premium it could
include offering this program to
state employees or other groups
the substitute before you as a
result of conversations I've had
with many of you and I hope it
reflects some of your concerns I
don't know that it reflects all
of them but I I really have been
working hard to incorporate
the and it suggestions from our
committee with members as well
as from at the Human Services
department in the executive
I but I wanted to note a couple
of differences in the substitute
so
At first Mr chairman and members
we are making at the providing
the secretary with the option to
implement the plan
subject to I think this is very
important for this committee it
is.
Subject to and upon the
appropriation and availability
of both federal and state funds
so this allows for a timeline
over several years to do the
study and the planning have the
secretary come back with a
complete plan present that to
both the LFC and the interim
Legislative Health and Human
Services Committee and then for
appropriators to make those
decisions about whether this
plan is right for New Mexico
whether that this should be
invested in through through that
funding we also remove the date
to allow the previous version of
the bill allowed set a date that
this program needed to be
implemented by and with that
date has been removed again to
add some flexibility and then we
did add a number of details for
the plan so in the substitute
you'll see that the the plan to
be presented to LFC and LHS is
is more details so that there is
all of the information there
before the committee I have my
experts here Nicholas court of
us who as leader legal director
at the center for a lot of
poverty Mr chairman if
appropriate it might defer to
him to make please thank your
comments Representative this
report of a
go ahead please with any pre
from thank you Mr chair members
of the committee my name is
Nicolas Cordoba I'm an attorney
in the healthcare director at
the center on poverty the center
is a member of the New Mexico
together for health care
campaign which is a statewide
community led movement seeking
quality affordable healthcare
for everyone in our state for
the sake of concision your time
I will really just want to
emphasize one piece in this
really exciting initiative
Medicaid forward is an
initiative in which New Mexico
would leverage existing federal
law I really do want to
emphasize that this is state.
In existing federal law to
increase Medicaid income limit
so that families can choose to
provide affordable plan at a
sliding scale through the
program which would draw down
that federal match and so I'd
the reason I'm reiterating right
excuse me reiterating that is
because to achieve the core of
Medicaid forward again to
achieve that I draw down federal
match for New Mexico that's
about seventy three percent we
would not need to seek federal
waivers this is achievable
through the state plan amendment
process
with that in mind house bill
four hundred and Medicaid for do
presents a unique opportunity
for state to lead the nation in
health care affordability thank
you thank you very much okay
let's go to the audience is
there anybody here who wishes to
speak on house bill four
hundred.
Please we'll go ahead and grab
as the microbe what will first
go those in opposition.
That Mr chair members the
committee my name is Roy Moore
I'm a registered lobbyist for
America's health insurance plans
and we stand respect for
opposition to the bill the
reasons why we stand in
opposition to the bill is our
understanding is that house bill
two already contains the funds
necessary to study this and we
realize that this bill has
stripped out the appropriation
but when you look to the bill
can you look to section three of
the bill and you look to section
four of the bill you will see
provisions that.
Vied for the implementation of
the Medicaid forward plan and
you will also see provisions in
section four that relate to the
enrollment related to the
Medicaid for her plan it's our
it's our.
I thought that you should go
ahead and complete the study do
what's necessary for the study
and then talk about enrollment
in implementation and simply
this bill is not necessary
because the funds to do to
conduct the study of already
move forward and house bill two
so we believe that the
provisions in this bill are
premature and they are for the
debate out into the future thank
you.
Thank you very much.
Mr chair members of the
committee my name is Chelsea
Canada and I'm the director of
public policy at the New Mexico
chamber of commerce the chamber
respectfully opposes H. B. four
hundred we appreciate the work
from the Sanchez I to make
changes to the bill but we have
similar concerns about were
addressed by the previous
speaker there's many questions
that emerged with expanding
Medicaid that will affect
business such as what will be
the impact on our already tax
health care provider workforce
what will be the impact on
employers who work for who's
workforce maybe over four
hundred percent of the federal
poverty line and how will this
affect current insurance
premiums we believe the study
can help answer these questions
but we are concerned that the
bill still includes
implementation and enrollment
language which we believe is
premature thank you thank you
very much for scam okay now
let's move to
Will move
line is there anybody in
opposition please raise your
hands.
Okay
Yes Sanchez.
Leo sun.
Please go ahead
ET in support what will come.
The only other hand the.
Our hands disappeared okay then
we'll go to support here in the
room please please go ahead line
up and thank you again to our.
excellent.
Okay sorry.
Miss such as we're gonna we're
gonna do we're doing support in
the in the room first and all
announce when we go online sorry
about that.
Thank I'm thank you chair and
members of the committee my name
is Adrian but what I am the
policy director for for together
and part of the New Mexico
together for health care I think
all of you have heard from
health care leaders from your
district people who are every
single one of your districts
suffers with the inequities of
how we accept access health care
this is the opportunity of a
lifetime to really take off the
cap and and meet with equity the
needs of our health care across
our rural communities across
every single one of your
districts who have people that
are suffering without the health
care the building in access we
ask for your support for this HB
four hundred thank thank you
very.
But thank you Mr chair at
members of the committee I'm
Kerry are me ho acting secretary
of the Human Services Department
we we strongly support the study
that's in the bill and it is in
the budget and we look forward
to the results of the study so
fully committed to doing that
and really seeing what a plan
could look like for New Mexico I
just want to say you know I
think the Sanchez for working
with us on the language in the
bill we feel well we're neutral
on the bill over all we feel
like that language is acceptable
to the Department and really
sort of gives us the flexibility
to implement the Medicaid for
plant based on the results of
the study thank you thank you
very much for some.
Kate
Then we're gonna go online we're
gonna go the last Sweetser lay
up for one minute whenever
you're ready please.
Thank you members of the
committee meeting and the public
never occurred of the New Mexico
public probably need a that we
represent over three hundred in
the public health orders all
across the state of New Mexico
and I need wrongly from the
forty four hundred of our
numbers it's really I mean it's
brilliant
answered right after I
administrative costs in our
office.
All of us and I'm we need to do
that you know you and I that are
Act.
The point of care more
affordable the so many acts as
well as you know really
allowance you could be more
provided to be replaced so it.
On.
Three
million one hundred and forty.
Thank you very much next we're
going to go to a con a tech.
Mr chair members of the
committee.
Actually the thing for the
league of women voters of New
Mexico we.
We strongly support HB five
hundred based on our position
that all New Mexicans should
have access to affordable
healthcare urbanization in
favors a single payer healthcare
plan to allow health coverage we
need to fall into the gap
between exchange plans and
edited and I was on the line at
all seven hundred and I got
myself in lowincome years we
might be able to at least ending
the already existing Medicaid
program and allowing people to I
had we hope you'll for hundred
thank you.
Thank you very much next we're
going to go to Monday at
Burciaga money for one minute
whenever you're ready.
Thank you this is a we need a
bill that we need to introduce a
couple minutes or if thank you.
Great thank you very much.
and we're members we're gonna a
lot another five minutes for
public comment there's a number
of fans we know that time is
quite short we're gonna go next
to bill Wagner Mr Wagner please
go ahead.
Mr chair members of the
committee my name is Dr Akram a
clinical social worker in the
founder and director of centers
on a community rated nonprofit
that provides wraparound
behavioral health care and
social services.
I services to community
residents regardless of their
ability to pay.
During the financial burden of
medical that uninsured New
Mexicans suffering from mental
illness self select out of the
behavioral health care
currently four out of five our
physicians and respond to do not
have access to affordable health
insurance at the same time our
clients have above normal needs
the averages for our clients is
more indicating that our
patients carry a high from a
load then adverse childhood
experience and hi this is Laurie
significantly raises the risk of
other serious health problems as
an adult thank you.
It's great thank thank you very
much I apologize but we need to
keep going where at on how the
and they have.
Go ahead unholy.
Thank you the chair and members
of the committee my name is Dr
Anjali Tatum executive director
of the primary care clinic in
Albuquerque and I wanted to
speak on behalf of many primary
care physicians and strong
support of this bill like into
visit before it's creative it's
really and it will create a lot
of legislative action to know
that our patients have access to
affordable care is a huge
frustration for many of us and
for him are working for
minorities and all of those fees
could be really simplified and
to work with the vehicle that we
you know is efficient effective
and works well and and find ways
to increase reimbursements an
inmate is released as a single
so we stand strongly in favor of
this bill and I are excited
about submitted idea that that
was the New Mexico and will need
to in the country thank you
thank you very much to have
affirmative to go we're gonna go
next to Kerr.
Kirk please go ahead for one
minute or less.
Good afternoon Mister chairman
of the meeting was right with
you have to second street in
Mexico City of yours educators
or just four hundred we've made
great strides in recent years
reasonable connectedness for
health insurers individual
opportunity Mexicans remain
uninsured we believe that the
Medicaid or proposals Allah
option there were support this
Representative official
invitations such program
abortion almost all my life to
be covered by health insurers
are going back in the next
couple years ago you are trying
to was only partially employed
or not for health insurance so I
went.
I do also the leaders or the
officer is here no thank you so
much okay next we're going to go
to other hand throughout the set
up of a hundred please go ahead.
Many many of them are are
yesterday celebrated my son's
first birthday but we are local
or even got to meet my Santo who
was born in commission I'm gonna
hospital case manager but I'm
trying to figure out how we were
going to pay my son's extended
communities today our income at
the time exited the Medicaid but
what I less than two hundred
dollars and we have to make a
choice for them to be treated
with the Knicks Department
insurance plan it's awful or
unimaginable is required or
requested unpaid leave and meet
and deal with financial
consequences of a dramatically
reduce our income what would you
do if you had to choose between
a child's life and financial
stability the choice is obvious
but the repercussions are
available our family is covering
and I financial hardship caused
are using to save our life
please interior of eighty four
hundred because no handed over
have to make that choice thank
you very much okay we have a cut
just about two minutes left
we're going to go next to
Hannah
Hannah and then also the Yazzie
Hannah go ahead please.
I have cable.
Of let's try it with of the
because the.
Hannah's okay had a please go
ahead for one.
This is a Representative
Menendez Committee helpful
listening legislation center
I get to help people in my
community provide the resources
needed to access the site maybe
looking at an employment law
housing just recently I don't
minority for COVID nineteen and
House lawn affect.
Actually he's not forty five
hundred eighty income and able
to lease it the specialist what.
The New Mexico may and last on
hospital medical news all of the
information first you
feeding it at my questions maybe
we should have he even actually
this is important because there
are few getting worse
the single person who cannot
walk cannot it cannot be that
some of our New Mexico we have
opportunity to accidental can I
just ask you eighty eight please
support issued for thank you
thank you very much and finally
we're going to conclude with of
the Yazzie of the whenever
you're ready for one minute
please.
Yes we can hear you.
Okay.
Members of the committee my name
is only a hundred or something
like to Mexico which is a
mechanic how many I'm a leader
but healthcare.
But.
He is I have been fighting for
affordable healthcare for New
Mexico families.
This.
There was
mean
for the rest of my life.
So are I
can't even afford to pay for my
healthcare so the board.
Four hundred thank you thank you
very much okay that's going to
conclude our public comment I do
want to note there were three
hands that were remaining I
apologize and we want to wrap up
some okay thank you we're gonna
now go to our committee we're
going to go first to ranking
member Armstrong next
to Representative Sanchez or Sam
remember option thank you Mr
chairman and and thank you for.
For the work that you that you
did to do something with some
fixes my my biggest problem is
still that we're implementing a
process before we see the
results of the study and so I
just kinda wanted to know
where you think of the the the
gaps are because we've got the
health care affordability fund
the supplements people on the
exchange we've got Medicaid
we've got Medicare and so
I'm just I am for the study I
want to study but I am really
still upset that we're going to
implement rules and things to do
before the studies even out what
if the study says something
completely different and then we
have this in law.
Thank you madam chair and thank
you ranking member Mister chair
raking over Armstrong it's been
a little long day
that it and I appreciate all the
conversation that we have had
about this
one of the.
There are several gaps one of
the gaps that we see is people
who are currently out eligible
for Medicaid and then maybe get
an increase in pay so Medicaid
currently if you're on minimum
wage you do not qualify for
Medicaid so say you get go from
part time to full time at your
position if you're single person
maybe that you're facing that
loss of coverage.
One of the places where a plan
like this could be really
helpful is creating that sliding
scale premium fee it also the
other pieces really around
leveraging the federal resources
because we see enormous
potential to lift our
reimbursement rates and bolster
the entire Medicaid program
which as you know too well it
covers a significant proportion
of our population already
but by allowing for those
federal funds to come in we see
that opportunity and you know I
think we one of the reasons that
at this implementation is
subject to appropriation is
because we want to specific role
for the LFC for HFC Senate
finance to look at that plan and
make a determination about the
probation and that would then
trigger this process to go
forward but it cannot move
forward unless that those
policymakers have made that and
just finally I would say you
know
I.
We have all participated in a
lot of studies that that
sometimes don't go anywhere or
sometimes sit on a shelf and and
and yeah I'm working on another
bill that ten years later we're
bringing a piece of legislation
forward so I really wanted this
to be action oriented and also
have that piece so that when the
that professionals are looking
at the plant creating the plan
and doing the study that they
would understand the goal we had
in mind which is to the
implementation thank you Mr
chairman and thank you so much
Representative I still.
Have a problem with implementing
law before we have the study.
It's a real issue with week for
me we have a lot of we've just
expanded
Medicaid this year and and we're
not we're keeping everyone that
we that went off on it keeping
up on the plan and I just have a
real problem with putting the
cart before the horse thank you
Mr chairman thank.
Thank you very much thank you
member Armstrong next person
senses thank you Mr
I guess I've had several
conversations with.
Thanks for them
I guess my issue is a.
I love matching funds in Iraq
putting money to matching funds
it's a win win
The same concerns
I I've talked about funding the
study and
We'll come back and we'll
approve the law and the the
budget but then I'll let you
look at the FIR in it too this
is indeterminate but substantial
like what is this going to cost
we don't even know what it's
going to cost and we're putting
in laws that are.
I'm gonna allow for it to be
implemented without.
This committee knowing what that
cost is like our job to me as a
committee is we got approved the
budget for for the following
year it's and to me this is a
this is kind of like we have the
talk we're approving the
language and we'll get the money
next year like we keep saying
that and this is potential
billion dollar a cost in three
years or two years whenever a
the date is on the substitute so
that's my big concern I I fully
support putting money for the
program you're talking about but
my concern is a.
How much is it going to be
driving and and I have this talk
with you guys Mr chair
I I'm not against this I I
supported but I I don't know how
this committee can support
something that could potentially
be a billion dollars in two
years and
That's that's my
thank you Mr thank you
Representative sciences next
we're gonna Representative
Chatfield and Representative
Lujan.
Thank you Mr chairman.
I guess my.
What concerns are very similar
to the ones we just.
Heard I look here at the FIR and
it says Human Services
Department portion bill would
require Human Services
Department to advocate Kate
implement the Medicaid for plan
regardless of the results of the
study so I looked it up I looked
on page seven.
Learn to.
the secretary the superintendent
of insurance in New Mexico
health insurance exchange make
coordinate efforts to cooperate
to make Medicaid for plan
available for direct purchase
for New Mexico health insurance
platform and I understood it
says may but that means they may
move forward without consulting
us
so.
Representative Mr chair
representative what is the
purpose of Medicaid pay what's
it intended to do.
Mr Chairman representative
Chatfield that the program is
intended to increase the Cup of
the level of health care
coverage in the state and reduce
the gap I think I think Mr
chairman and representative we
that.
Keys I think was removed in the
committee set up so I I but but
if I may ask my
Mr part of I to just comment on
the on that fiscal impact in.
Please Mr Cordoba and
Representative Chatfield the
grant from the cell phone please
Mr chair members of the
committee representative
Chatfield to address the concern
that we've we've heard
repeatedly today about whether
we are putting the cart before
the horse I can I can
definitively say that this this
committee substitute should
address that concern that this
committee so was drafted because
of the concerns noted by HSD in
the F. I. R. and so the prior
drafted did have Mr chair
mandatory implementation but
that language was it was read
revised in this committee
substitute and in section three
A. in them says.
Upon the secretary submission of
the report described in section
two.
Ends The appropriation and
availability of federal and
state funds the secretary may
and so right there that's I want
to identify that because it's
making sure that HSD does have
to come back to this committee
and save this was what our
report found and so now
you know if if the study and the
program designed to show that
this is feasible then they would
move forward with presenting
this this committee with the a
request.
So Mr chair.
That alleviate some of my
concerns the question of what
what the is Medicaid for Mr I've
always thought of Medicare is
something that.
Medicaid I'm sorry chair for
people who can't afford
insurance Medicaid for people
that can't afford insurance.
This is a bill applies to
people.
Making four hundred percent of
poverty level which somebody
gave me a number I'm not sure if
they computed it right up with
as a Honda said it was a hundred
twenty thousand dollars.
So that sounds a lot like
universal.
Thank you.
I'm Mr chairman and and
Representative I wish I could I
would I I wish I would get this
is universal health this is not
this is simply an act the
creation of an option for that
would be available for purchase
so this would be leveraging our
existing Medicaid health care
provider network our existing am
seo provider contracts
and allowing that eligibility to
increase but you could be
charging previous so currently
the Medicaid program
individuals do not pay premiums
there's very little costsharing
with this expand Medicaid
forward
you the I premiums are
contemplated on a sliding scale
based on income so that you're
sort of some moving that curve
and not having that cliff a
factor drop off the fact right
when you you know get that
second job or or get a raise
that makes you an eligible for
Medicaid the.
Mr chair I think that's a good
idea to like a lot of the things
that have came through here I
see a lot of good fortune if
and I apologize for those of us
that have got so
addicted to the Senator us that
run the numbers force you know
it's just yeah in the end so
when I get this and then I'm
looking in FY are the on the
previous bill the the previous
bill it says that if considering
that the possible the people
that they think might take and
it would be a hundred and save a
seventy million dollar.
Cost.
To the state to add them in but
I I was looking at this
I guess it's just.
And all the on page eight the
very last page.
section B. as as a secretary the
superintendent of insurance and
the New Mexico health insurance
exchange make ordinated efforts
and cooperate to make Medicaid
for plan available to for direct
purchases New Mexico health
insurance marketing exchange
platform and in those that only
a plate of the study.
Mr chairman and Representative
Chatfield if you look at the
class that starts that section.
Page seven lines twelve through
fourteen.
It's it says upon
implementation of the Medicaid
for play and so so.
That so that
it rulemaking would only occur.
If this plan was implemented and
that basically laying out the
structure of the enrollment
rulemaking.
So Mr chair I guess to get right
down to the base and what
causes that to happen what
causes the implementation of the
plan and does it have to come
back before this committee
before.
Yes Mr Chairman representative
so in section three.
Which is on page five it lays
out the conditions through which
this plan would be implemented
and so
starting online eight it starts
with the submission of the
report which is a report to LFC
and LHS.
And appropriation and
availability of federal and
state funds.
And so at that point the
secretary may and then to the
state plan and that is what is
the implementation of Medicaid
forward.
Thank you Mr probably and
totally in favor of the study of
a little
sure whether this thing only.
Thank you very much for fintech
feel Representative Lujan please
Mr chair thank you Sanchez for
of this bill emerging four I've
had I too have had a few calls
conversations with with those
the sponsor of this and I guess
right one question Mr chair if
you.
Answer again just how does this.
Compared to the Health Security
Act because I think you're
trying to accomplish the same
goals with this piece of
legislation and having worked on
Health Security Act myself in
understanding the burden and.
And the costs and the you know
all those those of the issues
around the cost of of bring
something of this for can you
can you indulge us a little bit
on that Mr chair.
yes madam chair and
Representative Lujan yeah I
think one of the two plans share
this similar goal of total X.
the expansion of health care
coverage
and making sure that everyone
has access to health care
coverage there these are
Medicaid Ford is totally
separate from the house security
planted if I may ask Mr court of
it to go further into detail on
that.
Is this court of a Mr chair
Representative Lujan I think the
the biggest distinction with
Medicaid for is that.
This this path of pursuing
affordable coverage for all New
Mexicans is laid out in for an
existing federal law and so this
is a matter of leveraging that
existing federal law which in
turn guarantees us that federal
match at the traditional rate of
about seventy three percent so I
think that's the biggest
distinction that I really do
want to emphasize to a two Mr
chair.
Thank you Mr thank you for that
answers it within that the
The law right now where were
that where was it to.
Failing with Health Security Act
as opposed to this Mr chair.
madam Mr.
This Mr chair representative
Lujan so I'm not an expert in
health securities campaign or
their policy but it's my
understanding is right now there
is not clear language in the
federal social security act that
allows something to the extent
they need they I think they're
pursuit does require waivers to
achieve a quart of Health
Security thank you Mr chair
thank you and I and so that's
been one of the big studies that
we have already contemplated and
and and looked at and found the
gaps were you looking at some of
that what you were putting this
piece of legislation together
madam chair Mr chair.
Mr chairman if I can Mr Cordoba.
Enter.
Mr chair representative Lujan so
yes that looking at the gaps
exist is exactly why Medicaid
Ford is an ideal policy for this
state New Mexico is uniquely
positioned to get something like
this done we have a high
proportion of residents enrolled
in Medicaid right now I in any
public insurance really Medicare
Medicaid and military we also
have a high traditional federal
match again about seventy three
percent were the Feds chip in
close to three one but also one
thing I do want to highlight is
we have over a hundred thousand
public employees public school
employees who are enrolled in
the GST or PSI who you know
we've heard of are dissatisfied
many times with their plans but
also on those plans to run a
deficit and they are entirely
self insured by the state no
federal match and so if if folks
like these public employees in
public school employees make the
informed decision to move over
the kind of way these two
options and say you know what
this is actually a better option
for my family's budget then we
drove down the federal match so
that's one of the gaps to but
also the current options that
exist whether for commercial
carriers or on the exchange you
know we hear from providers that
there's a districts coverage of
services and hi administrative
burdens for the providers
Medicaid you know what you're
getting and it's it's really
really good coverage and
administratively easier for
providers and so I think with
all that in mind that's why
Medicaid for again is really
something that New Mexico is
uniquely positioned to get done
thank you Mr chair thank thank
you for the information
I mean just somebody that has
really done a deep dive into to
what.
You knew that the house Security
Act is about I've I mean
just full disclosure Mr chair my
mother actually was one of the
initial.
Sanchez
we had worked on on that piece
of policy and that was over
twenty years ago and we are here
today we're trying to figure
this out and I would I would
just commend you on really
finding that balance and and
that federal the federal
legislation that the the.
Has a directed us to put you in
and the position we are today
and it's hard it's hard but
again we're gonna keep going
back to the the dollar amounts
was that.
Can you I mean in comparison
again I guess to the house to
that's my base of information.
How how is that a comparable to
what this does Mr chair.
Mr courtesan I may Mr chair
please Mr chair representative
Lujan
again I can't really do a
good comparison between the two
because I don't I'm not an
expert in health and Health
Security Act what I can save a
Medicaid forward is that's under
federal law under section
nineteen oh three of the social
security act that defines the
federal financial participation.
It sets out the traditional
federal rates in section
nineteen oh five and it says
that traditional rate applies
unless there is an exception.
This pandemic expanding Medicaid
for Medicaid forward there is no
exception for in so that
traditional right does apply
thank you Mr mixer that's makes
clear sense to me thank you and
that's all I have Mister thank
thank you very much for from the
Han at next we are going to go
to.
This.
we're gonna go to person one
player and then Representative
Garrett and then vice chair
Dicks.
Representative Montoya please
thank you Mr chairman.
Of.
And what are you doing today.
Very well how are you
Representative Montoya
So.
Mr chairman and representative
This is being described as
Medicaid forward.
But
Even in the title.
I'm not finding that.
what I'm finding is.
Wiring a study for the
feasibility of implementing a
state administered health
coverage plan.
It seems different.
Then just expanding Medicaid.
Explain to me where I'm getting
that wrong sure Mr Chairman
representative Montoya Medicaid
for plate is defined on page
two.
lines twelve through fourteen.
and then it.
Mr chairman and.
Visited Montoya
the elements that will be played
and in this Medicaid forward
study are listed on page three
in page for.
Mr speaker and.
And Representative I I did read
that but I'm still continuing to
read the.
Just a title here.
On line fourteen.
An act to allow the secretary of
Human Services to amend the New
Mexico state Medicaid plan to
create and implement a state
administered health coverage
plan.
Still it appears as if.
This goes way beyond Medicaid.
So I mean that's just for for me
that just appears.
That we're we're we're we're
talking apples but we're really
meaning more and.
So Mister speaker and and and Mr
Chairman.
And representative.
There's a little bit of
discussion of the.
Federal Medicaid match.
If we are to.
And then our Medicaid coverage
to as far from what I understand
four hundred percent of the
poverty level.
Does the.
Did does the federal government
continue to match that at that
level.
And as I've understood Medicaid
funding.
Was that the federal match over
time was going to be decreasing
and so maybe you could explain
that to me just a bit.
Mr chairman and Representative
Montoya yes we have confirmed
actually directly with the
center for Medicaid and Medicare
services that the federal match
rate does apply this
it statute this bill does not
require that people be offered
coverage up to four hundred but
it allows for a plan to be
developed that would cover up to
four hundred percent and I would
ask Mr court of a to cut to
address your that question is
also your question about match
rates reducing because I think
very knowledgeable about those.
Mr chair Representative Montoya
I want to let two different
things here that the affordable
Care Act provided again under
the social security act the
first path expanding Medicaid
that's what New Mexico and so
many other states have done up
to one hundred thirty three
percent poverty at the time it
did have a one hundred percent
federal match but there's a
phase down to right now ninety
percent so that's where it's at
right now but there's a second
half of expanding Medicaid which
is an option that so far to
jurisdictions have have
benefited from
this is in again section
nineteen oh two.
Eight ten.
Eight twenty so it's called
group twenty for short group
twenty says states have the
option of expanding Medicaid for
folks under sixty five years of
age and whose income exceeds one
thirty three percent populous
what's above where we're
currently at under this path of
expanding Medicaid entirely
optional again that traditional
federal match does apply because
the general definition of
federal financial participation
doesn't provide an exception for
this again CMS has confirmed
that regardless of where the
state says the income threshold
under this path of expanding
Medicaid that traditional
federal match would still apply
Mr chair so Mister chair
representative at.
Ninety percent or a different
that's a different path so was
it for our once again I won't be
talking apples and apples not
apples and.
Please.
Yes Mr chair of Representative
Montoya so for what we've
already done that said it ninety
percent what Medicaid for cease
to do through the second half of
expanding Medicaid that's the
traditional federal match which
for New Mexico is about seventy
three percent.
So Mister chair and and
Representative I do see YA the
study would be necessary.
Because it seems like there's a
that's a pretty big variable we
go above one thirty three
percent and we go from one
thirty three as high as four
hundred is which been six
suggested as potential.
And then we have to cover.
Twenty seven percent of that
instead of ten percent
that could be a dramatic
increase.
I think I'm hearing across the
board the study.
Is needed.
But.
This still feels like we're
committing to something
specially Mr chair there's a lot
of Macy's.
That the substitute have but
they're still one major shelves.
And that's on the last page on
page eight.
In section C. which begins on
seven seven.
Just as a secretary and the
superintendent of insurance in
consultation with the New Mexico
health insurance exchange shell.
Promulgate rules consistent and
just with that necessary to
carry out the provisions of
this.
section.
That's.
That's still problematic.
Chair I.
Mr chair representative into a
at that section is
of the gun on page seven it
begins with upon implementation
of the Medicaid or plan it and
Mr chairman and and
Representative to your larger
question I I think.
What this bill seeking to do is
actually give some definition to
what is to be planned and
studied.
With this future vision and what
are the steps that need to
happen at a bare minimum to make
this plan a reality
in part because.
I think everyone who has been
working on this didn't want to
theoretical study they wanted a
how do we actually make this
program work I'm not a legal
framework study or a you know
what populations might be served
as sort of a real
implementation plan and study
and so this larger package kind
of walks you through okay if
this study is favorable if
appropriations are made and the
funding is there and these are
the next steps that would need
to be taken so that we can when
we do the plan the study over
the next year
we're looking at all of this
rather than ending up with
something that is not ready for
prime time.
So Mister chairman.
And representative.
The reality is it really is kind
of putting the cart before the
horse it the way I see a study
is they come back and say here's
our recommendations first off
being.
Here's what it would cost to do
this here's what it would cost
to do this if we decided to go
up to two hundred percent of the
poverty level we decided to go
up to three hundred percent of
the poverty level but.
If it's.
That.
For promulgating rules for
having potentially promulgate
rules and we're asking for a.
It seems like we're really
directing the study towards one
outcome.
And I think that's the problem
instead of just having a study
that's a little more open ended
and bringing back us the
information.
Necessary to.
I purposely.
Appropriate.
What we're doing is we're doing
what Mr chair and what I've been
really grabbing about since I've
been on the Appropriations
Committee.
The options we're giving given
our okay here's what we have and
here's option.
A.
And you can vote up or down.
That that that's the problem I I
think it removes the
appropriating.
The ability of this committee
and even LFC because now we're
not just talking about us but
we're kind of committing the
Senate.
To this.
So Mr chair I I just I have a
hard time with that I think
the more information we have we
can actually make a proactive
decision.
This I don't believe allows us
and as as as.
Those who push the budget
forward I don't believe that's
what it does I think it takes
away options and it directs us
towards.
A preferred option and I and I
think that's that's going a
little too far if that's the
case we should be voting on the
whole thing no not not the study
I think this really what we're
taught this what this really is
not a study.
To tell to give us suggestions
this is an implementation study.
This is a study to make it
happen.
Not a study to guide us in a
decision as to whether or not we
want to pursue this thank you Mr
thank you Representative Montoya
next we're gonna go to
Representative Garrett and then
by started.
Thank you Mr chairman thank you
everybody for all your comments
and for being here so long Mr
chairman my first question is
how many states have opted in to
I'm totally losing my language
now.
The kid forward plan.
Mr Chairman representative
Garrett right now to to
jurisdictions have opted and the
district of COVID Columbia and
the state of Oregon.
And we're Oregon okay.
We have studies or anything yet
for those recent or other
studies available Mr chairman if
I could defer to Mister court of
on that.
Mr chair representative Garrett
so of the district of Columbia
again so the this past expanding
Medicaid is for folks above one
thirty three percent poverty the
district of Columbia has
expanded their Medicaid program
to two hundred ten percent
poverty I believe that was back
in twenty sixteen but I can
definitely look into that
what's working is currently
doing is using this to expand
their Medicaid eligibility to
two hundred percent poverty as a
bridge to what's called the
basic health program Mr chair.
Thank you Mr chair and
representative
The FIR is point zero and one
thing that I haven't heard is it
says below fiscal implications
OSI reports it is currently
conducting a study of the
Medicaid forward plan as part of
the appropriations included SB
one pastor in the twenty two.
Three twenty two special
legislative session that
included seven hundred ninety
thousand dollars to conduct
research on increasing public
law do we have that report is it
still happening because we're
asking for a study but it looks
like there's a study happening
right now so I'd like to know Mr
Chairman what happened in that
report.
Mr chair at the chair and
representative Gary.
Mr chair representative Garrett
so size currently doing really a
high level analysis of what's on
potential costs but also put it
potential federal revenue could
be for something like this the
benefit of house bill four
hundred is that it requires HSD
to do a much deeper dive into
really the nuts and bolts of us
seeing this the scene this
through and so again size right
now is very high level.
And and more directly to your
your first question Mr chair
Representative Garrett I I
believe they are currently still
Finishing the results of that
study but do not have the
results just yet.
Okay thank you
Mr chair it's like I understand
what people are saying about the
sense that we're starting
something but we've already
decided the outcome because
there's another bill I saw this
session like that it's like what
were you doing a study when
you've already determine the
outcome without the study so I'm
concerned about that also and
then my only other C..
I think everybody here Mister
chair wants to see everybody
covered I don't think that's the
issue it's just the who what why
how when cost so I just don't
want our questions and concerns
to be interpreted as not wanting
something powerful reaching the
lives of people who needed to be
done but on the other hand we
have questions only other thing
I want to say is.
The on page four Mr chair
it's just see at the bottom it
says by October first twenty
twenty for the secretary will
have this report so I'm correct
in understanding we're really
talking about an eighteen month
study that would start at this
legislation passes is that
correct madam chair and and
Representative yes although that
report will also include a
complete overview of the plan
so if you'll
at Mr chairman and and
Representative Garrett I would
It will direct you to the part
of the bill that that
those through all of the
requirements for the report and
those requirements include a
full plan that will be presented
to both appropriations and
health and Human Services
Committee.
You know I I know folks are I
have referred to the cart before
the horse into the and I I I
don't know what the right way to
take this analogy is but I would
say we have a lot of confidence
in this our really good part
whether the order is that right
madam chair and representative I
appreciate all the feedback on
that but the the structure laid
out of federal law
and we believe this is that it
truly viable option to start
moving toward and and not do it
a study that potentially met
then takes years to sort of.
Get going.
Mr chair.
Sorry
So some of this is already laid
out in federal regulations is
that correct Mr chairman and
Representative yes okay thank
you very much so my question
thank you very much
Representative Garrett I think
we have
Vice chair Dixon and then
Representative Brown.
Thank you Mr chair thank you
madam with
I just I have a couple of
questions
And.
Sorry I feel like my questions
were in my head now they're gone
but I think we can come back to
you by to let's check that.
let's go to you please.
Yes thank you very much.
so my first question is
Is this not giving the secretary
the power to pull the trigger on
this Medicaid or Medicaid
forward plan.
At Mr Chairman representative Mr
chairman and may I ask Mr
Cordoba to respond.
Senator.
Mr chair Representative Brown so
again there two conditions
precedent set in in the
legislation before any
implementation can begin that is
number one HSD needs to conduct
the study do this proposed
program design and then submit
that report to LFC and LESC just
that's the first recommendation
the second recommendation is
based on that report again we
have to submit that to LFC and
LHS and then LFC House
Appropriations Senate finance
has to appropriate money to that
to that effort if neither if one
of those conditions is not met
the implementation cannot begin
under any of these sections.
Mr Chairman representative and
Mr Cordoba so
the way I see this it's like
passing out parades before you
even given the test.
And we've heard the phrase cart
before the horse I read this to
be a fate accompli that this is
going to happen because.
No matter what that study is
going to come back favorable
because that's the tenor of of
this administration so I don't
see it as even being a question
of the city will be favorable
that will be but my concern Mr
Chairman representative is that
I don't know that the people in
our districts are even aware
that this is coming and coming
so quickly and that this could
very well take over their health
care here and and make it
government run and I think.
A lot of people in my district
would be very concerned about
that it's the speed at which
this apparently is happening is
very
discomforting I think.
And Mr Chairman representative
of I know you know the federal
match is very generous for New
Mexico I understand that but.
There's a there are other issues
besides just being federal money
for this yeah Mr Chairman
representative I don't really
like the the name of Medicaid
forward planned
This is really something even a
little bit different than the
medic.
He's expansion whatever I think
they're they're parts to this
that that just haven't been
fleshed out and so
very concerned I I will I will
acknowledge there's been a lot
of finesse in the drafting of
the committee substitute but it
really is something that.
It's bound to happen and I think
the legislature's being robbed
of its authority to decide or if
this happens at all so I do do
have great concern Mr chairman
thank you.
Representative Brown I have a
few questions of the person by
students in New Mexico.
Representative okay I did not
see your hands go ahead please
thank you Mr chairman and thank
you Representative for this I
guess so the question and and
piggy backing off of the
questions is really Mr chairman
and representative
Who's doing the study when you
say H. as I've heard that HSD
HSD but a look at some of the
participants here but
who's actually to be conducting
the study what is the make up of
the committee who's going to be
Basically gathers information I
I do think that there's some
groups missing in the group than
the actual study end of.
Mr chairman and and
Representative how will this be
reported in the through the
intercession to the LFC and so
Mr Chairman representative if I
could get those questions please
thank you thank you Mr chairman
and Representative Baca
state we expect it with the
funding that is in house bill
two for the study of plan that
the Human Services department
would put this out for
procurement for competitive RFP
and that to perform the study in
the plan and then you will see
the reporting requirements at
the bottom of page for.
and the top of page five
that section see that by October
first twenty twenty four the
secretary is required to submit
a report
detailing the study and the
proposed design to both LFC and
LHS.
Thank you Mr chairman thank you
Representative it's a said
before can you just address as
far as people that are missing
from the sexual study I mean.
I'll be honest Mr Chairman
representative would come up
procurement Russian have folks
said submit an art of you said
are responded our fees are
correct
there is
Is there anyone Mr chairman and
representative of the in New
Mexico that would be conducting
this are we looking or we be
hearing from someone from
outside New Mexico Mr Chairman
representative.
Mr Chairman representative aka
that would be
that would that would be part of
the RFP process so there are
some incredible health care
consultants within the state but
they're they're almost those
resources also exist outside the
state.
Thank you Mr Chairman
representative
So I see appear the Cornish
superintendent of insurance
Medicaid advisable
Representative Representative
representatives of Indian
nations tribes or pueblos.
Do we have anyone for the
medical field we have doctors
hospitals and others and we also
as far as Mr of Chairman
representative as far as the the
unintended in again aside you're
probably upside here because the
more more I I I've read and read
through it.
It looks like this plan is are
going to be in place and we're
just gonna move fourth it and
the study is.
Is really just kind of a it's
lip service and I think what
we're really looking is how
we're going to implement that so
Mr Chairman representative of my
my question really is.
Are there health care providers
that will be part of both this
this panel this committee to
study and the impact for on the
private healthcare insurance or
for myself that has
you know like a public insurance
through school entrance impact
B. two to those insurances Mr
Chairman.
Mr Chairman representative Baca
Mr Cordova is very knowledgeable
about the Medicaid advisory
committee.
Mr chair representative Bachus
of the Medicaid advisory
committee every state is
required to have one we have one
hospitals insurers providers
they have representation on this
committee so certainly they have
a seat at the table of this
study and planning process
died Representative Mr chair
also to the question about what
would the impact be on providers
insurance companies that's
squarely noted in the study as
an issue that they do need to a
study page three line nineteen
they need to look at the effects
on providers and facilities
including needed reimbursement
rates thank you Mr chairman and
thank you Representative and
thank you for your for answers
now we also have legislation
that's currently working its way
through this legislator talking
about reimbursement rates but a
lot of these scenes are
contingent upon.
Current legislation moving
forward because one of the
questions Mr chairman
representatives we've had it's
been through both the interim
and to other committees.
The amount the number of doctors
and health care providers that
are leaving the state.
And Mr Chairman representative I
think that I don't want to see
that compounded.
Bye bye what we're trying to
help with your as it is Mr
Chairman representative
We have a
An outflow of our doctors even
those a graduate from a college.
Yeah and Mr chairman I I really
do think that.
You know that that needs to be
considered is how this aligns
and and maybe.
The impact it may have to you
know the health care I agree
with health care for people
people need medical they need to
have access to health care so I
will say that Mr Chairman but if
we don't have the doctors
because are leaving our state
because of medical malpractice
in because of the Medicaid
reimbursement rates we're
actually just compounding the
the problem Mr Chairman
representative.
Thanks thank you vice chair
Dixon.
Thank you Mr Mr chair before
where we're we'll go to.
Can go to you for a second time.
By Terry Dixon go ahead please
thank you Mr chair the questions
repaired so that's.
So.
So thank you Mr chair for
allowing me to remember
And representative question for
you the report goes to.
LFC and LHS but is there an
approval mechanism.
It has.
It.
What happens.
Once their part is given
Representative.
Mr chair and vice chair Dicks
and
We would expect that the way
that the LFC HFC Exeter finance
and the legislature itself will
give approval would be in the
budget request and so the the
plan and the detail would be
presented to the LFC analogy to
us
and if if that
funding is put forward by the
legislature executive and then
that would be to mechanism for
it to be considered
it actually the authorization is
not required in state law so if
this truly is just laying out
the entire system but the
authorization laid out here that
the secretary may is not
required in state law for HSD to
move forward with this program
said this actually brings more
scrutiny is sort of more
openness to that process and
then is would typically happen
with some kind of expansion
program.
Thank you Mr chairman thank you
Representative that that's
actually very helpful and I was
not aware of that I think
one of the.
The things that have it has sort
of.
That I've been thinking about
through this debate which you
know this discussion is that
It reduces the role of the
Legisla- the of the health
policy.
Aspect so you know for HFC our
role is really the budget and
looking at the money side of
things and so for this it would
be is there money in the budget
to do the study but if the next
step is.
Implementation and LFC and
there's not a veto power from
the Legislative Health and Human
Services interim committee.
Their ability to weigh in is
fairly limited because if the
funding is put in to.
HB two.
Then the debate happens.
In the finance side.
As opposed to the health policy
side and so that's something
that through this debate I've
been I've been thinking about
you know I think that I don't
know that I have made a final
decision on my perspective on
this because I think it's very
good I think we're.
Attempting to do something new
and different Mr chair
representative
and I see pros and cons both
ways but I did want to flag that
is something that.
You know for me is that.
Counterbalance all right you
know the trade off present
concert thing with that Mr chair
thank you thank you very much by
Dixon Representative Montoya for
second time.
Thank you Mr chair and
representative.
I think one of the things that I
that I hope is in.
The the study.
Is even the availability of.
Of
doctors to be able to take on
more Medicaid patients that is
something that we heard over and
over and over is that the number
of Medicaid patients that pay
the pay out as much less than
what insurance pays.
And or poor people who are
paying for themselves that the
the the the the reimbursement
even as and if we're going to
change that that means we have
to increase the budget on our
end to increase which is what
we're doing this year increase.
The amount on the other end that
goes in to make sure the
Medicaid reimbursement rate is
going up so it so it I guess I'm
I'm seeing right now the
potential.
Of not only having to pay above
a hundred thirty three percent
paying twenty seven percent on
whatever we go above that but if
we're going to convince doctors
to take more Medicaid patients.
We likely would have to come
back in and increase.
The our front end side going
into Medicaid.
I'm really concerned about this
I I I would be much much more
comfortable if this were a
standalone.
study can cause all of these
things that have to be asked and
I believe it was stated just now
by by Representative Dixon that
doesn't appear as if there's any
any final questions so thank so
which I guess I'm asking any.
Any temperament on your side to
just make this a straight out
study
and Mr chairman and
Representative Montoya again I
think.
The the section that modifies
the state law is not actually
required for the implementation
of this plan so hard again part
of the lay out of this bill is
so that we are bringing this
forward into the light having
this critical conversation
but if we strip this down to
standalone study that could be
done and Human Services
department would have the
discretion to move forward with
this plan and present the budget
request you this increases the
reporting and and honestly the
the larger conversation around
health care coverage so that you
know I think it's it's sort of
Six of one half dozen the other
item on that point.
Thank you very much for someone
to thank you very much for the
Penske thank you to rex for I
want to just reiterate with a
couple of quick questions so
Representative.
Currently this is based upon
federal law and the Human
Services department in the state
of New Mexico has the authority
to implement this is that
correct yes Mr chairman.
Yes Mr chair that's correct
through their state plan process
they can pursue this path okay
and and justice and that state
plan process roughly every
thirty three years they submit
waiver requests and other sorts
of things sort of on a regular
time frame if I get the every
three years wrong that day I I
think the the point that they
have the authority to pursue
this it and I think I
appreciated being brought up
appreciate very much by her
Dixon and others and
Representative sort of the the
back and forth I don't know that
that point was clear at the
beginning I appreciated being
clear now secondly
Representative an expert there
are a number of pieces here
where there is regular reporting
back to the legislative finance
committee
Third if.
If if we choose not to fund
anything after the at this five
hundred thousand dollars that
exists now this your legislation
really become sort of move is
that right Representative that's
correct Mr chairman thank you
Representative so even though
the department made maintain
authority to operate however
they might operate in some
member future time your study
gives a great deal more clarity
and answers and I think
addresses many of the questions
that we're at raising now
correct Representative that's
correct Mr chairman okay I think
it's been a very good
conversation members I
appreciate you taking extra time
any final questions.
Anything to close with
Representative Mr chairman I
just want to thank the committee
for the conversation okay and
members were absent two things
really quick fast first we're
going to ask for adoption of the
substitute I'd like to do that
is easily as we can and then
we'll go to the vote recourse
members are free to vote however
they choose upon substitutes
with that option okay there's a
motion to adopt the house
appropriations and finance
committee substitute for house
bill four hundred by
Representative tex and seconded
by Representative a cruise there
any opposition to that motion.
I don't see any we have
Ducted substitute will now go to
the bill this would be a state.
Skip as going a little too fast
vice chair Dixon can we have a
motion to it
to not approved house bill four
hundred but and do not pass on
house bill four hundred and a do
pass on house appropriations and
finance committee substitute for
House Bill.
Thank you Mr chair I move a do
not pass on house bill four
hundred and a do pass on House
Appropriations finance committee
substitute for house bill four
hundred.
Okay it's been moved I
Representative Dixon second by
Representative they are Cruz now
this would be a state can you
please call about.
Representative Armstrong now.
Representative.
So.
Representative.
Captive.
Representative Care Act.
Representative brought me all
yes.
Yes.
Care Act.
And then please.
Okay.
yes and I'd like to explain my
vote.
Care small yes.
Please briefly about.
Representative Chatfield yes
Sir.
How will it affect our.
Thank you very much for
subjected representative Garcia.
Thank you Mr chairman the reason
I've already test is because of
my district is about the rule or
list and of course people out
there in the bill meet insurance
somewhere another you know you
had mentioned Mr chair a couple
times the wagon before before
the horse welcome visitor saying
don't worry about the mutual to
wagons of the mule deer to pull
the wagon in those days because
you know what I want to be
having this conversation next
year saying well we know we
should have really thought about
that I don't think there's
really thought out that will
that's my personal opinion and
like I said the regional morning
is is because my constituents
need health insurance out there
thank you Mr the representative
Garcia Representative Garrett
please me.
I think Leicester to compete
thank you Mr chair
I found the conversation very
informative and as a few of my
colleagues commented to me this
is really worthy of a floor
debate and I one hundred percent
agree I feel strongly that our
role in appropriations is to
make our decisions based on the
money I find that challenging
sometimes in particularly so in
this case it my vote today does
not guarantee my vote on the
floor because I think that this
is I think that a number of
issues have been brought forward
that I think warrant substantial
debate but there is funding in
the budget and I I value that
so I just want to thank everyone
for sticking around
because I do think that this is
a really important conversation
so thank you thank you very much
by to Dixon there was sent thank
you Representative thank you Mr
thank you very much Mr chairman
thank you everybody thank you to
our staff especially apologies
for keeping you late have a
great night with.
