Policy and regulation program.
at the LFC and Executive
recommendations for revenue and
expenditures for the program are
identical both recommendations
increase federal and other
revenues it related to the
consolidation of the public
safety program.
both recommendations also
support an increased salary for
commissioners who are now paid a
little bit higher to attract
competitive in qualified
candidates
one other thing worth noting is
the executive recommendation
supports the agency requests for
FTE well the LFC recommendation
eliminates to political
administrative positions in
relation to the newly structured
commission the LFC recommends
funding
More specialized technical staff
over administrative positions
and analyst reach consensus on
all performance measures and
targets and I would like Diego
make any comments on this
program if you'd like to.
thanks Amanda madam chair the
amended adequately it describe
the differences but that
executive.
I agree with that with the
agency's request requests number
F. T. E. state voluntarily
reduce the number.
Of FTE that they requested with
changing number of commissioners
and they to the executive
support.
Thanks.
All right madam chair moving on
to the next program of program
support P. code six one three.
So for revenue at the LFC
recommendation increases general
fund to the agency by about nine
percent well the executive
supports the agency request to
increase general fund by just
over four hundred thousand of
both recommendations support
reducing a budget pipeline
safety fees for administrative
purposes which the fund was not
intended to be used for.
Of the LFC recommendation
includes an additional a hundred
thousand to support person rate
increases it slightly increases
contractual services and other
costs
in the LFC recommendation does
not support expanding program
support in light of uncertain
size sorry in light of
uncertainty for the newly
structured commission the
executive recommendation
supports the agency request and
provides more funding to fill
some of those speaking positions
again analyst reach consensus on
all performance measures and
targets Diego is there anything
you'd like to add.
Thanks Amanda madam chair.
Rather than.
Doing this program as a.
In light of uncertainty the
executive recommendation has
taken the perspective of
providing the new commissions
some flexibility as they
transition into their new body
thank you.
Madam chair that is the and if
you're different sheets so if
it's alright with you I can let
miss Perry galing make some
additional comments on behalf
the.
Good morning madam chair members
of the committee I want to start
off and thank Diego and Amanda
for the work that they put into
the executive and the LESC
recommendation I started out
twenty years ago New Mexico
state government working for the
legislative finance committee
and I respect and appreciate the
work that goes into the
budgetary process
I am here today to present PRC's
fiscal year twenty twenty four
budget request on behalf of our
acting chief of staff makes
makes Michael.
He is in attendance.
as you may have heard our former
chief of staff has gone over as
cabinet secretary to DFA so when
props has moved on and Michael
Smith is our acting at this time
I'm gonna start off on slide to
our presentation you should have
that and hand and there is a
list on page two of our newly
appointed commissioners
they are awaiting Senate
confirmation commissioner
Deborah Aguilar wrote was not
able to attend today but I know
he's watching by webcast think
commissioner GI James Ellison
isn't intendants along with our
commissioner chair of our
commission Patrick o'connell.
So they are in attendance today
for the budget hearing.
In the interest of time because
I know we have other agencies
behind us I'm gonna move forward
to page five of the presentation
and just go over briefly are
requests for fiscal year twenty
four in the four hundred
category in other expenses of we
were flat to our operating
budget in fiscal year twenty
three operating budget so we
didn't ask for any increase in
the four hundred category that
category takes care the
operations of the agency and
also or do it GSD services and
fees in the three hundred
contractual service category
you're gonna see a reduction
there but I kind of have to
explain that we in the last
session received a Senate
amendment for two hundred
thousand and it was placed in
the three hundred category for
contractual services it was
intended for our personal
service employee benefits so at
the beginning of this fiscal
year we did move that two
hundred thousand up to personal
services employee benefits so
you'll see a decrease in
contractual service but the
majority that stems from that
two hundred thousand needing to
be placed in personal service
simply budget I do want to know
here we did make sure that we
added some additional
contractual support for utility
division we have to they rate
cases that came in from S. P. S.
and from PNM that are currently
on going and we want to make
sure that that support is in
place in our two hundred
category for personal services
employee benefits this is the
area that had the biggest
increase in impact over the
fiscal year twenty three
operating budget going to track
requests for twenty four I do
want to note that when we do our
budget request we submitted
September first it's kind of
point in time so basically when
you look at our personal
services employee benefits
somewhat we requested it was
point in time where we weren't
salary budget in August of
twenty twenty two.
I do want to know that there are
some concerns in regards to the
LFC recommendation with the
policy and regulation program P.
six eleven I know that the LFC
did recommend elimination of the
administrative positions for the
commissioners but we are
currently recruiting actively
recruiting those positions right
now for the commissioners I do
want to know while they were
created to be more
administrative positions they
really have taken on more of a
technical role in supporting the
commissioners in programs
support our peas six thirteen
program our personal service
employee benefit category.
In our budget request we
included a budget a vacancy rate
of five percent that equated to
a hundred fifty nine thousand
two hundred the LFC
recommendation from what we
requested is looking to reduce
personal service employee
benefits by two hundred seven
thousand two hundred so that
would add on top of what we are
we put in a request for a
budgeted vacancy currently we
only have three vacant positions
and program support and one of
them is the chief of staff
position which were actively
recruiting the other two
positions one is an H. R. and I.
T. and we planned to fill those
positions by the end of the
fiscal year.
the other area of concern I have
a program support is the
operating costs program support
in the four hundred category we
support the agency's IT
equipment needs their office
supplies the building police the
parking because as we're
downtown we have to deal with
parking parking costs where
we're located I have seen in
this past month with employees
coming back to the building to
work I mean we are ordering
supplies we are ordering paper
we are seeing more and travel
natural parking costs that I
expect are going to continue on
into fiscal year twenty twenty
four so I am respectfully asking
if the LFC recommendation is
selected that consideration be
given to adding two hundred
thousand back to personal
service employee benefits and
fifty thousand back to the other
category and program support.
one other thing that's kind of
unique to our request for fiscal
year twenty four we did reduce
the other revenue which was our
pipeline safety P. fund
and we asked for four hundred
ninety four thousand two hundred
to be reduced and revenue that
was it prior funding
towards the budget to be
replaced with general fund and
I'm gonna move us on to slide
fix to kind of explain that
So there are a couple reasons
why we were reduced in the
pipeline safety fund him and us
to increase the general fund one
of them being as we needed to
align with the amount budgeted
with what we're collecting and
revenue for that fund so in
twenty three we collected one
point three million in fees but
in the past two fiscal years we
had been budgeting one point
seven million and one point six
million from that fund so we're
trying to get it to lying to
match with what we're collecting
as well for budgeting the second
part was declined comply with
the statutory purpose of the
fund and that is to enhance the
staff in the training of the
pipeline safety bureau we try to
make sure that the funding from
the tightly CTT Fund is for
pipeline safety and we use only
a little that point personal
services employee benefits for
program support that supports
pipeline safety.
On slide seven we are seeking a
special request a federal
revenues of two or forty
thousand for vehicles to replace
for pipeline safety.
We also have a request for FY
twenty for four more language
and we're requesting to be able
to do a budget increase up to
two hundred eighty three
thousand four hundred and this
is and other state funds this is
from the community solar fee
fund and it's from collections
of one time application fees for
community solar and we're
requesting this amount to cover
the contract with the incline
Inc which is then that the
administrator for the community
solar program and you must New
Mexico.
The final slide conclusion I
just want to know.
There was a two thousand
seventeen report commissioned by
Legislative Council Service and
the main thing about this report
was talking about adequate
resources for the commissioners
one thing we have done to
address this is we have added
three analyst positions and we
are actively recruiting for
those positions to support the
commissioners
the last what I'm going to read
The New Mexico PRC can at and
should can and should be a model
regulatory agency that protects
consumers well engaging and
smart regulation that supports
economic development in New
Mexico's clean energy future the
NM PRC's FY twenty four requests
builds on investment made by the
legislature in fiscal year
twenty three I will stand for
any questions with Diego and
Amanda.
That any questions for the.
Go ahead.
Thank you madam chair you
mentioned salary increases for
commissioners I believe can you
expand on that please.
Madam chair Representative.
In a cruise.
When the nominating committee
was in place in the fall there
was direction asked.
regarding the appointments of
what salary range we should be
looking for for the
commissioners coming honor that
we're going to be appointed as
commissioners
we had received of a salary
range from the governor's office
by letter of a hundred eighty
thousand to two hundred thousand
I'm at that time it was right
before we had submitted our
budget request for fiscal year
twenty four and we had added
like I think I was two days from
presenting the budget request to
the current commission at that
time we had ingested are
appropriation request for fiscal
year twenty four to reflect a
hundred ninety thousand we took
an average of that range and
added into our request.
Thank you thank you madam chair.
Representative Representative.
Thank you Madam I'm going to
continue on that thing of
questioning with the the new
commission coming in with three
commissioners as opposed to the
I and staff and what what is the
difference between those two
budgets madam chair.
Madam chair representative Lujan
we basically had five
commissioners and I executive
assistant so we've already
started the process of deleting
to commissioner positions into
executive commissioner positions
the the salary of the prior
commissioners were around ninety
thousand.
Okay so what is what is that
difference chair
it's a difference about a
hundred thousand.
So we are now incurring more
costs
Budget for the for the new
commission that we did for the
the prior yes so madam chair
representative Lujan
I.
Because we need your help this
transition in those positions
had dropped off we did have some
savings so that has helped make
up the difference I will say
that we are sufficient in our
personal services employee
benefits to get through the
fiscal year twenty three.
Thank you so what I'm trying to
get what what we their savings
what was the.
Have Madam chair representative
did Lujan I would need to give
you I don't have those exact
numbers on me but that's
something I can find.
Thank you match I I appreciate
that.
Answered I look forward to
getting some of that
information team
it's great.
So.
See
if.
Madam no way for that
information because that would
help us madam chair and and
looking at some of the asked to
kind of drive thank you Madam
create the time Representative
Trujillo.
Madam chair based on the
information that we've received
I move a to pass with the lower
recommendations.
Okay.
Well hold my top.
Representative small thank you
very much madam chair thanks to
the analysts thank you to the
agency madam chair
Can you talk us through a little
bit more on the administrative
positions are you seek are are
you is there consideration for
re classification into more
technical into state maybe of
more technical approach that you
describe their sort of beginning
to serve.
Madam chair Representative small
Those positions I think we were
developed to be more
administrative support for the
commissioners but even with the
prior commissioners those
positions were moving towards
being more technical there were
attorneys that were being hired
into those positions to provide
analysis
you know.
I think each commissioner is
looking at this position really
deciding kind of what they need
from that position and I will
say they're not looking just for
administrative support and there
have been some discussion from
some commissioners of whether
those positions need to be
reclassified to be more.
More and clinical and technical
in nature
I think that the commissioners
are are feeling out the agency
and determining what their needs
are at this point.
With that thank you very much
mentor thank you for that
totally fair and I think really
it seems like an exciting time
with with a whole lot of
responsibility but the
opportunity to sort of build a
new is that sort of what you're
saying madam chair and and what
the what the commissioners and
what the the team at the PRC is
seen.
Madam chair representative a
small it's a new era moving from
elected to appointed
commissioners not only that but
the transition of you know
acting chief of staff all.
More bodies in the building
people coming back
it's an exciting time period and
a lot of transition going on.
There's a lot of work to do on
the work is very important to do
it's getting more technical it's
getting more complicated and
obviously it's really important
you know to have a budget that
can support this new commission
to achieve the mission that they
have set out before them
absolutely thank you madam chair
and
with you sort of outline which I
deeply appreciate so that kind
of a you knowing that that are
we're working to stay within a
framework even as we look at
sort of adjustments that can be
made based upon recommendation
from the committee and work on
the staff that can you detail a
bit more on the fifth the fifty
thousand dollars within the
other category madam chair and
sort of explain that just a at
one more time please I would
appreciate it.
Madam chair representative small
and program support the other
category there's certain things
within other at that is for the
whole agency IT equipment office
supply one of the challenging
things is we are in a leased
building downtown but we don't
have enough.
Parking space that comes with
that lease so we have to
purchase parking and we even do
sticker validation for staff
that comes in infrequently are
if we're dealing with the public
coming into our open meetings so
there are costs there at that I
do have concerns seen people
come back to the building I do
think our parking expenses are
going to be going up even this
year into next year and it tends
to be are smaller program it
tends to be more tight so I
believe and I want to make sure
I'm giving you the correct
number the LFC have recommended
from what we requested in the
other category reduction of a
hundred thirty eight thousand
seven hundred it's I'm just
worried about it being too tight
and that's why I'm recommending
it possible at the LFC
recommendation is the one
selected to add that fifty
thousand dollar back thank you
very much madam chair thank you
for that and I will I appreciate
very much explanation just sort
of the nuts and bolts I think it
is worth noting and and
apologize for coming a little
bit late the the LFC
recommendation did increase over
the previous year operating
budget but I think as you as you
sort of said this is a new era
and we have to be prepared to
sort of treated separately and
and make sure that we're
supporting the this incredibly
important entity
here it right at the get go.
Mexico okay
madam chair I think.
That those are the sort of wraps
up my question.
Thank you thank you Mr chair
in and I just thank you all so I
do have a huge job commissioners
we need to get the great going
there so much to do you must be
an exciting time for you because
that New Mexico is primed for
this and that I'm glad to see we
have three great commissioners
and your help support that we
can move that we need to with
renewables and everything else
so thank you and no more
questions right.
After two.
Okay.
I I move from the LFC
recommendation at this point in
time for the profession okay.
Any opposition.
Right LFC recommendation thank
you thank you very much.
Thank you.
Next up will be
the office of the superintendent
of insurance.
The protect.
Right.
All right thank you madam chair
members of the committee
again Amanda Dick Peddie
legislative finance committee
were on HSD for four zero the
office of the superintendent of
insurance we're joined by DFA
analyst ana Rivera and are
interim superintendent and I'll
let her introduce her name.
So if for the differences of
much if this is a non general
fund agency so revenue flows to
this agency from various fees
and insurance collections and
the agency uses that money for
their operations and then the
left over revenue flows to the
general fund so the HSD supports
all of its own operations and
that's the budget that we're
looking at today.
the difference between the LESC
and the executive looks very
very big but with the LFC
recommending about a hundred
eleven million more than the
executive but the majority of
that difference is just due to
different budgeting mechanisms
so the LFC recommendation
budgets the health care
affordability fund for recurring
health care costs in this
operating budget the executive
on the other hand budgets it in
the special appropriation
section of the bill as one time
expenditures which is where we
up both budgeted it last year.
The other key difference between
the recommendations are some
positions that were reckoned are
that were requested by the
agency so that being said in
your packet on page nine you
have a high level that looks
like this the recommendations
are pretty different so I would
direct you to look at the high
level it might help kind of
understand where some of those
big differences are.
Also in your packet on page ten
so right behind your high level
you have this and this is the
health care affordability
funding sources and uses sheet
this tracks that health care
affordability fund to the you
all established
couple years ago now and it
tracks the sources and uses in
both the executive and the LESC
recommendation you can see on
this page of the executive is
actually budgeting to health
care affordability fund at a
similar level to the LFC you're
just not seeing it in your
different chic this in a
different part of the bill.
That being said I can go ahead
and like Donna cover the first
agent or the first program this
special revenues programs.
Or you could do the other ones
and.
Okay so you.
So your your first program in
your different she packet is the
special revenues program it's
really just uses an accounting
mechanism so we typically skip
it the agency brings in their
revenue through this program and
then transfers it to other
programs so it's sort of that
accounting.
Chair members of the committee
if you turn to the program seven
ninety five that is where the
insurance policy.
program is and as a matter was
saying the LFC has recommended a
hundred and thirteen point five
million more than the executive
which is basically budgeting the
health care portability funded
the executive recommends the
agency request that the ninety
two point one zero one million
dollars of the health care
affordability fund as a special.
Appropriation.
in particular that this
the agency did not request
thirty four point three million
going to a recurring cost at
medic for Medicaid HSD.
At and so
that's one of the major
differences the other difference
is that the executive supported
OS the agency's request for
twenty two point eight million
for the uninsured New Mexicans
where is the LFC recommended ten
million to support that.
As far as language both
see the the ex the internal
service funds interagency
transfers to the insurance
policy the program is for thirty
four million this is language
requested by the LFC to allow
them to make the transfer to
HSD.
As far as expansions in this
particular P. code the agency
requests sixteen new FTP the LFC
supports I would be
prioritizing pharmacists
actuaries and the compliance
officer for the managed health
care bureau we're see executive
supports nine expansion of TV
this also in the executive
recommendation included all of
the number one priority requests
of the agency which also does
include a pharmacist the
executive did not recommend an
actuary because that is
something that the agency
manages through Khan contractual
services both recommendations
supported expansion position for
the health care affordability
fund manager.
All right thank you that we were
heading move on to our next P.
code Pico seven ninety seven
this is the patients
compensation fund is here the
executive in LFC recommendations
are identical both supported the
agency's request for increased
funding to the fund for to cover
some increasing settlements and
again analyst reach consensus on
all performance measures and
targets one other note on our
last program that we looked at
for insurance policy the agency
requests consolidators sorry not
consolidating breaking out one
of its purpose the insurance an
auto theft program insurance
brought in auto theft program in
both recommendations supported
that so that's the next program
you'll see.
And that new program is the
seven ninety eight.
And the agency requests both the
LFC and exec supported moving
the fifteen point one positions
to this new program the
executive recommends or
supported the agency requests
three.
Additionally the LFC supported
one the new FTE for this
program.
Leave that.
Rises.
Both the executive and the LFC
and the interim superintendent
is here Jennifer can't she's
attention sectors sorry.
I married the great that.
Thank you for had madam chair
members of the committee thank
you for having me this afternoon
forget the mask I had a stomach
but this week and I didn't want
to put anyone else at risk I did
want to and to reduce birth
admin dot that our budget and
finance director and called in
by or director of coverage
affordability and expansion and
all things health care
affordability and I'm gonna go
through this quickly I know how
valuable your time is there are
a few things they do want to
highlight on that very second
slide because I'm very proud of
the staff that I work for when
you get to the to the third
bullet I talk about two point
four million dollars recovered
for over a thousand consumers
right below that is a marker
that says wildfire outreach
performs daily to Los Vegas more
resources eight hundred
inquiries twenty one thousand
miles that was a staff of thirty
three people did all that work
that's Health phenomenal the
less I staff is and so you know
as of last week the OSI had a
seven point nine percent vacancy
rate we have a staff that goes
out they recruit they help they
work hard and they stay with us
and I'm very proud of that but I
wanted to make sure that they
have credit for all the work
that they've done on the road in
this past year the next slide
slide three is just our revenue
what we collect what we did
dissipate to collect through
licensing fees fines some of
these collections go straight
into the program that they go to
title goes into the title I.
After that is our focus I. fund
distribution in rural version
which amended discussed about
anything over our budget goes
back into the state general fund
and so that's what our reversion
really is it's any collections
we have our budget.
The fifth slide does show the
differences between our ask the
LFC and the executive
and then give some kind of
explanation for the difference I
do want to highlight that the
LFC is higher because they do
put their health care
affordability into a reoccurring
fund for us with the do you do
it at a lower rate than the
agency requested in the disk
without another thirty four
million to be reoccurring fund
to HSD for Medicaid and and
eight which is not an agency
request so yes that
It's like to here is just a
little bit of will forget that
you're not the specials will go
into the health care
affordability fund and what it's
done in its very first year of
actions it's reduced premiums
for individuals and families up
to four hundred percent of
federal poverty letter level it
reduces deductibles maximum out
of pocket limit copays and co
insurance for individuals and
families up to three hundred
percent it provides no cost
options for members of federally
recognized prices up to three
hundred percent it provides
assistance for market place
eligible.
No longer qualify for Medicaid
after the federal government
require states to begin Medicaid
redetermination so it's going
this is people come on the roll
off we will part of the program
will provide a month's coverage
to get them from the roll off
into the health care
affordability fund on the New
Mexico state so
so the R. ninety two million
dollar budget request is based
upon continuing that programming
and the services by the way part
of that program was a really
robust small business sign up in
the team that we're asking for
an additional two point three
million to cover those costs
because so many small businesses
took advantage of those
opportunities.
on this last slide or the
importance of maintaining it I
really want to highlight the
ported to maintain.
The health care affordability
resources to meet its statutory
requirements to implement
coverage affordability program
specified in state law OSI
cautions against I. thirty
friends tip for it's not
included in statute
and then finally in summary
those I. requesting creation of
the health care affordability
fund is ninety two million it
will request with no carve out
for HSD Medicaid also I would
like to request the ninety two
million to be reoccurring
eventually
and in the plan in addition we
request approval of the left
side a supplemental request
which you'll think of later on
down the road and we do ask for
those additional pre positions I
believe we've shown that we take
what you've given us he gave us
ninety positions or twelve new
positions last year we filled
them within three months we've
kept them and and the attrition
we've had we've pre-filled the
Max I think we've proven that we
can take those positions we we
can we can keep them we take
seriously what to get us on with
that I stand for questions.
Presentation first of all on the
first yes Representative.
Thank you madam chair so this is
interesting this budget
I'm not real clear as to whether
you're concurring with the LFC
recommendations and activity
changes so you can kind of
explain that a little bit more
so.
If I'm considering will F. with
the LFC changes I I don't have
difference with produced the the
H. calf as reoccurring and split
out I I concurred with the
executive recommendation of it
as a supplemental at the full
amount requested.
But I would eventually like to
become a recurring fund without
a car about so for the most part
there there
executive is more favorable to
us as they do give us the full
ninety two million in the
supplemental and they give us
more positions that we
requested.
Madam chair so.
Remind everyone in the audience
the differences between the
executive and the LESC because
it was fairly significant so the
differences are Madam chair
representative to look for this
the differences are about a
hundred eleven million but it's
basically based upon an account
the differences the LFC is
pretty reoccurring funds into
our budget
For the health care
affordability fund and that too
in about seventy two million for
the fund itself and another
thirty four million to be passed
through HSD to Medicaid but and
the four of the mechanism the
executive is using is giving the
ninety two million story to the
fund the rest supplemental not
as a reoccurring so next year
when we do our budget we would
have to put the ninety two
million into our our standard
budget for inference thank you
madam chair.
Representative Cruz exes
Representative Lujan thank you
madam chair thank you
presenters.
So.
I want to thank you for your
efficiency and running this
agency as you stated that the
seven seven point five percent
vacancy is really
Really it's a good place to be
in state and use of the funding
that we've given you or that you
have
To recruit and hire and within
three months of those positions
that's that's really impressive
that's one of the things we
don't really hear across the
board you do have a unique of.
A unique budget because you are
creating the revenues to create
your budget and then once you
have that set budget whatever's
left over comes back to our
general fund so.
I just wanted to three state
that because that we are in a
unique case right here I want to
know that with all the things
that you're tasked with
specially when we're looking at
the roll off.
Numbers do you know how many of
like what those numbers are
going to look like approximately
Madam chair representative on I
don't want to give an exact
amount I'll defer to call in but
I think it's about eighty to a
hundred thousand people that
would be affected by the roll
off of Medicaid into this
continued program that we're
looking at is offering them and
assistance to get on to the
exchange with by one month of
their premiums to the system
thank you madam chair so do you
so with that in addition to all
the other things that you did
the this agency does in creating
this revenue stream for state do
you have do you feel like you
have the.
Your have the fission of
coverage through through your
request for those those FTEs
that are going to just along for
this this this function hunter
Madam chair representative one I
do not the program does require
a lot of support it does require
additional expertise into
figuring out how to hit these
markets held to outreach to how
to actuarially but what's needed
from the fund into place and
then to actually manage those
funds through the well because
we do a rate that to them for
some of these programs thank you
madam chair and I think that
this is something that we really
you know I'm I'm focused on a
little here because.
We're coming we're coming to the
state madam chair we need to
really address what that looks
like for state and those numbers
so that we have of.
We have we execute this well so
I just wanted to I thank you for
all that because I know you are
going to do everything and get
this accomplished but I just
want to make sure we give the
tools out that we need to for
this thank you madam chair I
appreciate the time on.
Thank you Representative for the
victims chairman thank you very
much madam chair thank you very
much to the Alice thank you for
the incredible work that the
office of the superintendent of
insurance does madam chair
Analysts I think one of the that
we've seen one of the core
differences sort of the one time
special approach verses of a
recurring approach that the LFC
is taking.
Mystic valley preps you can
detail why the LFC approach
considers this to be recurring.
Madam chair members of
Representative small.
The programs are recurring their
recovering faster as you can see
in your high level we
appropriated money for them last
year last year DFA actually did
them as recurring LFC did them
as one time and we came together
and decided in its first year is
sort of a pilot we would do this
one time appropriation of but it
is part of the LFC guidelines to
pay close attention to not use
the nonrecurring section of the
bill section five and six to
fund recurring programs it's
easier for the agency budget
it's easier for us to track that
these are these are recurring
expenses these are recurring
programs which is great to cut
health care costs for
individuals in New Mexico on a
recurring basis but it is a
recurring program madam chair
thank you and really I I think
that's it's incredibly important
also giving are sort of ability
through really monumental
efforts starting with the office
and many within the legislation
so many advocates.
To be looking at both expanding
health care coverage to all
workers within the community and
to be taking on the incredibly
important task of the folks who
will be no longer eligible for
Medicaid.
That is a is the recurring
responsibility is a man's sort
of increasing now and that will
stay steady all the way through
So madam chair I I think as we
sort of look at this
recommendation there may need to
be adjustments in terms of of
actual amounts on the other
hand.
Adopting the cool adopting LESC
recommendations today with its
recurring approach is
fundamental toward the sort of
ensuring that were yes it is
fundamental to the structure so
thank you for that and I I is
there any
any feedback perhaps from the
executive as far as to the
approach of one time.
Thank you madam chair send
Representative small the only
thing that I would point out is
that the executive of
recommendations supports the
agency requests that actually
does go into this providing for
health care affordability it
does not provide the money going
to another state agency HSD so
are the executive recommendation
actually does of more of what
the agency needs to ensure that
the insurance is well funded and
taken care of as we start
building up these these funds
and providing for long term for
long term health health
insurance needs did you want to
add to that
Madam chair and Janet small
at I think that would you like
me to find my the two yeah.
Identify yourself and then to.
Thank you.
Madam chair and achieve a small
cone bio coverage affordability
director at the agency I do
think that because of the
differences between.
Where the dollars are going in
the the levels of funding the
executive approach does give us
the resources that we need to
carry out those programs and
make sure that long term we have
a more stable footing because
that a version to the Medicaid
program being recurring would
really be a challenge for us
move forward as the distribution
from the fund changes next
fiscal year so it looking ahead
into this upcoming year I do
think that the executive budget
as better supports our needs but
in the future absolutely these
these funds should be recurring
and and I think in future years
will certainly requests as such
thank you very much madam chair
thing just about it so I I think
the the looking to adopt the LFC
recommendation today well us
that this sort of
the adjust that staff look more
closely at adjustments seems
very appropriate and
acknowledging madam chair that
that the work over the interim
with the LFC has brought things
closer together they they're not
fully in alignment yet
especially in terms of some of
the amounts but there's a great
deal more crossover than when we
saw this agency last year for
instance
so I'm sure that we can continue
that work given that this is
only preliminary action in sort
of the first the first first
preliminary action during this
budget season and that the
committee will be addressing
this again here within the next
couple weeks.
I.
Yes thank you Mr I have a
question do we so with all these
changes will we health plan for
New Mexico's really important
population immigrant population
gimmick at rest of pheasants you
can't afford the exchange
program or Medicaid do any of.
All the.
Madam chair madam chair it's.
Call it has it covered.
madam chair and the
Representative Trujillo of for
our exams are the Representative
that it does that is.
My apologies
Four the the LFC is budget it
doesn't fully funds the
exchange program includes the
funds for those who are coming
up Medicaid the executive does
as well I think the the core
difference between the two is
that our program for uninsured
New Mexicans it is significantly
lower and and the LESC request.
So the immigrant population what
about.
That's that's we're madam chair
we we would have some issues and
if we were funded at the ten
million that the LFC is
requested we probably would need
to look at things like
restricting enrollment and and
things like that and that's
certainly not how we want to
start this program off because
we've seen the waiver and other
programs have wait lists and
given that the surtax is
continuing to generate
significant revenue we want to
make sure we're not only in
those communities out and so
that's why we're asking for that
full twenty two two million so
hopefully we can find a way to
ensure that that is the budget
is included in the final.
Thank I'm sure can make a quick
comment on that so the LFC
recommendation does include ten
million dollars for those
uninsured immigrant populations
the LFC recommendation
recommended it at a lower rate
because from our view at the
agency requests it at the
highest uptake as a brand new
program we know and we've had
discussions that it will take a
lot of
Relationship building with those
communities a lot of trust
building to get that to a high
uptake so part of the reason
that the LFC request is at ten
million instead of the twenty
two million is to consider that
for the first year uptake might
not be as high as twenty two
million thank you thank you for
your presentation we'll go to
the.
Reckoning that thank you very
much madam chair I would move
the LFC but asked that staff
madam chair look closely at
finding a middle ground in
important areas for coverage
between the exact.
So.
We have a policy recommendation
thank you for your presentation.
Thank you madam chair at this
point a privilege I just wanted
to do so the chair of the
Burleigh county commissioners
Adrienne Barboa she along with
other elected officials had a
very interesting venture not too
long ago to say the least
welcome chairwoman.
Thank you madam chair.
All right.
I'm sorry yes thank you.
I think in the next will be the
last word.
Whenever you guys are ready
thank you for being so patient.
We have a.
Yeah.
All right.
In a research
at.
Madam chair members the
committee my name is Scott
Sanchez of the fiscal analyst
for natural resources of the
legislative finance committee
with me today as executive
director New Mexico livestock
board Belinda garland and left
our esteemed colleague from
DFA and I'm sorry done
everything are a better I'm
sorry
The New Mexico livestock board
in for fiscal year twenty forty
four I requested a budget ten
million dollars which
represented a six point six
percent increase over the FY
twenty three budget of this
included a one point eight
million dollar increase in
general fund for fifty percent
more than the previous year
the LFC recommendations just see
includes an increase of eight
hundred and four thousand
dollars or twenty two percent
the general fund appropriations
for the inspection programs are
included in this also budgets
four hundred thousand dollars
from the agencies fund balance
the New Mexico livestock's
boards operating budget is
historically been funded by
revenue from inspection fees
brand recording fees attacks on
livestock value and other
licenses and permits property
tax on livestock is the agencies
the single largest source of
revenue excluding general fund
appropriations
analysts have reached consensus
all the performance targets and
so for a little bit more I will
hand it off to my colleague
would be a good.
Hello again madam chair we would
like to kind of break down for
the committee to Pico the two
divisions for the lives four
differences the first is the
livestock inspection P. six
eighty five the LFC
recommendation includesd an
increase of nine hundred and
eleven thousand point four
thousand or twenty two percent
twenty four percent in general
fund and four hundred thousand
of fund balance the LFC
recommends recommendation
included a higher revenue for
inspections fees branding
recording fees attacks on
livestock value and other
licenses and permits and overall
recommends a hundred and eight
thousand less of general fund
transfers and the executive the
executive
I would like to add that the
executive supported the agency
anticipated amount of revenues
their expecting a slight
decrease and that is why the
executive supported their
written recommendation for less
revenues and an increase in
general fund
the LFC recommendations supports
the addition of two law
enforcement positions in the
livestock inspection programs
which corresponds to the
increase in personal services
employee benefits category of a
hundred sixty two point two
thousand where is executive
supports one new law enforcement
position for this Division
keycode.
The other Pico that would like
to discuss is the meat
inspection which supports the
meat and poultry inspection
programs that you assisted the
agency in creating last year
this program that the executive
recommendation supports one
additional position where is the
LFC recommendation does not
support the expansion of
currently the meat inspection
division has a funded vacancy
rate of eighty nine percent
however the they are working to
get the.
Statutory authority they need in
order to meet the federal
requirements of the food safety
inspection program and so
they're hopeful that that will
be accomplished during the
session.
We will leave the specials loan
for this given our guidance but
I will have enough to executive
director Carl about to make a
few comments.
Thank you madam chair members of
the committee I especially want
to thank on in order for working
with us on this budget proposal
we think this is very important
to the livestock industry so we
do appreciate all their support
chair if you would give me the
honor of introducing some of my
team members here I would really
appreciate that first of all I
have Mister Shawn Davis he is
our deputy director who's in
charge of all of our field
activities we have doctor rob
Simmons he is your state
veterinarian he does a lot of
work for the health Dr Tim
Hennessey he came on board in
September as our new director
for the meat and poultry
inspection division and also
Intersil he's our CFO.
Thank you for that.
So some of you of the I
presented to you before some I
have not so I'm going to give
this a little bit of overview of
our agency and what we do
we are very proud of the fact
that we are the oldest law
enforcement agency in the state
we existed as a cattle sanitary
board in the sheep cemetery
board actually before New Mexico
with the state so they did
combine to create the now known
livestock for.
So we regulate him protect New
Mexico's livestock industry
which comes to about four
billion dollars a year.
We have the strongest
traceability program in the
nation with our hot brands
Center traceability laws most of
the states in building the laws
that we have in order to protect
our livestock industry
when we go to conferences and we
talked other states they're very
envious of what we have
so we have.
Small amount of larceny in the
state due to the fact of our
strong laws.
So some an important fact is
that we regulate the world's
largest land for cattle crossing
Senator recent.
all of those cattle crossing
there are expected on the
Mexican side by the USDA and
they are controlled and tracked
by us on the United States side
so through the work of our field
staff in our state veterinarian
that is very important down
there to control any type of
outbreak of diseases in our
livestock industry.
So what another fact is that we
have been charged with
reestablishing the in state meat
and poultry inspection program
I'll give you a little update on
that and that.
So some of the accomplishments
that we have achieved through
beginning in FY twenty we begin
diligently working to fulfill
all of our vacant positions
currently we are feeling F.
every position that we have
under us with the exception of
one inspector due to our budget
constraints so with Wirth thank
you with this new budget that
we're hoping to achieve we can
be able to fill all the
positions plus the new positions
that we're requesting.
So under the direction of our
deputy director Mister John
Davis were now consistently
rotating at least ten vehicles
each fiscal year a few couple
years ago we came to you in a
crisis mode that our fleet was
in terrible shape and we needed
some special appropriations to
improve that we have taken those
special appropriations that you
graciously gave us along with
some of our fund balance and now
we believe that we are being
better
have fiscal agents with our
assets and rolling consistently
every every to every year with
our vehicles.
Another thing that our field
staff is is that our law
enforcement agency is very very
good about providing inspection
services for industries but we
also work in cruelty cases
across the state we are charged
with responding to pro to
complaints and working through
any process that that requires
of us so when your hand out in
the back of and on the back page
there are some pictures of some
cases that we worked on their
before and after pictures those
are the cases that we are really
proud of those forces you some
of them you can't even believe
they're the same our after we
seize them and taking control of
on
and I can and a lot of those
forces actually went to rescues
the pigs at the bottom they were
in extremely bad shape when we
seize them of a little over a
year ago they are now happily
living that a rescue facility
so.
Let's see so for the state
veterinarian's office under
doctors and women we took one of
our inspector positions we re
classified that into an
emergency manager for the
livestock industry to work with
an MBA and the USDA they do
require that we have emergency
plans for any type of disease
outbreaks we are currently
trying to fill that position
because it does require
veterinary license so as you
probably all know veterinarians
are short to come by these that
case
So some of the some of the
diseases that doctors enrollment
has worked on he also does a
strong first ability of course
at the borders but he's had to
work through hemorrhagic fever
with both domestic and wild
rabbits you work through the
Abyan in influenza of bird flu
this year the state here so when
I was in in the horses and of
course TV and and the dairy
livestock industry.
So
the board actually and for the
new meat and poultry inspection
program this last July we did
promulgate rules for that
purpose they are in place and
that was under the authority of
seventy seven to seven
Dr Hannes has been hired he's
establish working relationships
with FSI us and he is currently
working with the auditor to
begin the set up of the program
and to going to an agreement on
this program we have introduced
a bill that gives us the first
step we are required to have
statutory authority so that bill
is being proposed during the
session.
So the next page kind of talks
about our budget needs the
livestock inspection programs we
are asking an increase of three
hundred fifteen thousand two
hundred dollars.
That is to fund the two new
investigator positions the two
positions that were given to us
and twenty nineteen are
providing a lot of really good
feedback for the producers no
not only for larceny cases we
have recovered some stolen
livestock but also the cruelty
cases and working through the
court systems on the prosecuting
of.
the other part of the budget
need is last year on the salary
increases I want to thank
everybody out there for giving
these much needed salary
increases to our staff members
however we did have to rely a
lot on our fund balance in order
to cover them are fun the rate
increases costs the state agency
six hundred fifty thousand and
we were given fifty thousand to
cover the.
So that is a great depletion in
our fund balance.
the other part that we're asking
for this year is to cover some
extra costs for TV testing at
the dairy facilities we're still
testing in the southeast part of
the state of three dairy
facilities one of only believe
we're not gonna need to go back
to but one that we currently
picked up not too long ago have
they have interaction between
New Mexico and Texas so it is
really crucial that we control
this movement of these cattle
between the states and we are
working with Texas and the USDA
so that does require more travel
and more expensive those
testing.
For the meat inspection program
we are projecting the we will
increase that program by three
new positions currently we have
not fill those a lot of
positions in that program
because it has to really
essentially be built from the
top down we have to be into this
agreement with FSIS before we
can begin operation and
inspections I do I I I
personally feel is a waste of
public funds to have employees
sitting and doing nothing so we
we are working with CPO they are
going to do a class study in
April in order to get our
positions ready for the
inspectors and some.
Let's see it's basically
compliance officers that we have
to have in place according to
FSIS so all of that and we hope
to have a stab at least by the
end of this fiscal year.
So if the funding needs of
course we have agency funding
through our inspections fees and
we have our fund balance which
is depleting and the general
fund our agency generated
revenues have decreased on
average of about twenty percent
over the past six years that
decrease actually of the mill
levy amounts that we are
receiving from the county
assessors is decreasing.
We think that is also our
inspection amounts are
decreasing which we think is due
to the large drought situation
that the state is coming out of
hopefully also last summer with
our force on fire so it will
take time for all of that to
come back and all of the
infrastructure to control the
movement of livestock in the
forest is going to take time so
that is contributing to a
decrease HSD funds.
So for the fund balance to
just does a quick note in FY
twenty two we used to million
dollars out of that that was to
cover some rate increases and
also to improve our fleet and
just cover some operating costs
do the decrease in our agency
revenues.
So this year we are budgeted to
utilize eight hundred nine
thousand one hundred dollars of
that and that includes covering
that six hundred thousand
dollars extra for the pay
increases and we project our
fund balance to be about four
hundred thirty thousand at the
end of this year.
So we are in a requesting of an
increase in general funds for
the livestock inspection program
of one million four hundred
sixty four thousand eight
hundred dollars to stabilize our
fund balance and to discover our
operating costs.
So with that I do stand for
questions thank you.
Thank you for your presentation
first will be Representative the
thank you madam chair.
Thank you for The presentation I
just want to require findings as
I'm sitting to the presentation.
the.
You talk about positions I'm
sorry my through it's really bad
arguing for if he said that we
have to be fulfilled for
compliancy reasons a request
talk about this working with CPO
Madam chair.
So Madam chair representative on
I think so in the meat and
poultry inspection program they
do FSS requires that we have a
compliance officer.
So it doesn't necessarily have
to be law enforcement but he
does have to be have the
authority to regulate the
processing plants so that that's
what I was referring to does
that answer your question I'm I
guess my question is is that to
feel compliancy with any like
grant money any funding or any
entering into
some of the federal obligations
you might have Madam chair Madam
chair representative Lujan
really it's to ensure compliance
with the processing plants they
visit the processing plants and
also it's to help our director
ensure that we're meeting
training and auditing
requirements.
For FSIS I appreciate that so
yes and no yes hello thank you I
appreciate that answer and I
just want to say madam chair I
just have a really soft place
where our our veterinarians my
mom watches a show on PBS it's
it.
So one of the things and and
then to get to serious issue at
the TV testing so I learned a
whole.
Home you information please on
livestock and and testing it
with TV of testing that's given
the historical view on this and
so my question to that is how we
found any cases of TB in our
state madam chair.
So madam chair Representative
Lujan yes we have active TV in
our state two years two large
dairies so Representative
remains if you want to expand on
that.
So let me help you that much
okay.
We've been actively fighting to
be in the state since early
twenty seventeen we had a break
for a few years from the
previous brick building a border
state a lot of Mexican cattle
moving through the state which
isn't such an issue now because
the requirements for them to
bring Katelin to New Mexico
Texas Arizona they're they're
much more stringent so we're not
seeing importation where we
believe a lot of the TV is
coming from this on two legs in
until we get a comprehensive.
Plan for migration and
immigration we're never going to
get ahead of we at one point
last year had almost a quarter
of our dairy elation how why is
under quarantine and we're
fortunate enough to sit to then
out the numbers but we still
have a couple of there is that
one we're coming to the tail end
we've been out there every
ninety days for the last four
years
Come may if all goes well when
we come up clean there then
we'll cut him loose quarantine
Weiss of and and we still follow
up once a year for five years to
make sure we didn't miss
anything in the process.
We've got to get some of these
folks tested before they come
into the country or before they
go to work on the dare is
because.
M. T. B. which is different
David M. bovis that those are
the two different strains of TB
humans through the M. T. B. M.
bovis cattle and other animal
species they can be passed
interchangeably from people the
cattle cattle the people so it's
a threat to the folks on there
is it's a threat to our food
supply fortunately
pasteurization takes care of it
so we're not gonna go belly up
on the farms that are infected
as long as the milk is being
shipped for for process.
So we're still working on it but
we have surely we started in
March last year with Google
hurts in Clovis I don't think
they're anywhere severity as the
ones down south with the been on
for four years but we've got
another year year and a half
there to get that cleaned up and
it it's constant process.
Appreciate the response madam
chair just understand that
process and with that you know
how long it takes and what it
means and I do mean identifying
I appreciate that answer thank
you so much I thought
Representative.
Representative Cruz.
Thank you madam chair I I'm
curious what relationship that
you all have contractual or or
otherwise with local
jurisdictions and their animal
care efforts are are there some
arrangements or could you expand
on that please.
Madam chair representative Dana
Cruz we actually work side by
side with a lot of the local law
enforcement agencies state
police County esos
municipalities they call our
inspectors of there's livestock
on the highways are the roads we
actually.
I don't know if you remember the
episode where they caught the
van that was transporting
immigrants and it will stop down
close to the forterra county
area one of our inspectors
actually was involved in that he
was close by and he went in the
system without so we we are our
officers are fully law
enforcement certified and we
help what with whatever
situation that were charged
with.
Thank you Madam so they're
commissioned officers and in
tandem with their mothers of
activities and job duties Madam
chair representative data proves
yes we have a approximately
thirty five on the ground right
now fully certified commission
law enforcement officers that go
through the same Academy of the
state police so officers yes.
Thank you madam chair appreciate
that thank you are there any
more questions
so I'm gonna pass me by your
promotion.
Madam chair.
I move that we.
Except the of the we're looking
at.
The executive recommendation.
Then can I ask a question.
Secretary thank thank you madam
chair
Madam chair to our allies with
songes there are some slight
differences
is there a general fund
difference in the sort of what
we're looking at with the
recommendations.
Madam chair chairman small yes
the LFC recommendation
Comes in about a hundred two
thousand or I'm sorry a hundred
thousand dollars under the
executive recommendation
for general fund but you know
again are our biggest difference
that is in the use of other
revenues we budgeted that at a
higher revenue levels than the
request I'm more consistent with
the revenue levels in previous
years.
Things such as and madam chair
director garland I might ask
what
in terms of sort of the revenues
the the revenues that you all
bring in as an agency are those
therefore sort of day to day
operations are there also some
emergency and sort of disaster
functions that are there for
those revenues as purpose wise
madam chair terms small actually
our fund balance is what we
tried to maintain at a million
at least a million dollars us
being at four hundred thirty
thousand is kind of a prices for
us
we try to at least maintain that
million dollars to give us
response money and in the event
of an outbreak of some type we
we know that there the
governor's office has emergency
funding for any type of outbreak
but we need to have be able to
respond immediately in the type
of an outbreak and.
Some of you know the livestock
industry some of you don't but
I'll give you an example of how
easily heard from mouse could be
that presented into our state.
A cattle loaded trucks at that a
demi truckstop somebody walks in
and they spread easily into the
open little holes in the pot
what we call a counterpart.
And those cattle are sick and
within two or three days they
have hope and now they're
standing in a feed yard drinking
out of the same trough that some
other cat we're drinking out of
pretty soon that entire feed
Mr house that hoping mouth but
during the time that we're
trying to figure out that they
have the hoof and mouth those
cattle are actually being
shipped for processing.
So a feed yard is being shipped
to an out and out of every
single day that's how easily an
outbreak could happen so we need
that emergency funding to get
our people activated we also
have an alert team was state
veterinarians and NMDA in order
to be able to respond.
Madam chair director garland
thank you said that you sort of
detail the real world example
there and something that our
inspectors in madam chair Dr
garland R. even with the drought
how are our our livestock
numbers
we're we're consistently fairly
strong both with beef cattle and
with dairy cattle not to mention
other livestock is that
accurate.
So madam chair chairman small in
two twenty twenty two I believe
we have we inspected about three
million head we're projecting
that to be about two million
five hundred thousand now okay.
Thank you madam chair thank you
for that director garland.
Madam chair like to restate
motion to like to move that we
accept the LFC recommendation.
A second house.
Thank you any opposition.
Representative we taking at
this.
Right okay thank you have a
recommendation thank you thank
you all.
Except as the game and fish.
I see.
For.
Whenever you're ready thank good
afternoon I'm Helen goes well
the LFC analysts of the game and
fish department with me today is
Michael some game and fish
director and Brian Chavis from
the DFA
the HSD game and fish's agency I
wanna six on page two twelve a
volume two and there is a fund
balance table on page sixty
three of volume three the game
and fish department is supported
primarily from hunting and
fishing fees of federal matching
dollars and receives no revenue
from the general fund the LFC
and executive recommendation
support department's request for
flat budget of forty eight point
two million the department
request includes some small
amounts of money spending
categories those like ships are
reflected the different sheets
for field operations and
conservation services and with
that I'll turn it over to bring.
Madam chair members of the
committee going over the.
Of the seven one six
deliberations.
It's pretty easy
also recommendations support
agency request which was filed
with the FY twenty three
operating budget.
both it.
Analysts came to consensus on
performance measures and targets
and with that I'll pass it back
over to.
In the twenty.
All this Passover Michael okay
yeah you want to run through all
the programs first or.
All programs are flat flat.
Right.
Madam chair representative so I
I appreciate the opportunity
come before you today I'd also
like to point out that in the
audience are vice chair of the
state game commission to review
of this is.
Here with us today as you heard
our budget is flat both the on
scene DFA match the reason for
the flat budget is our account
balance our fund balance our
primary game protection fund
balances at about eighteen point
four million we have thirteen
point two million in outstanding
capital outlay record for part
appropriations so once that
movie money moves out we would
have sufficient money to operate
so we've been working to sort of
delay those projects and
implement them as revenues
allow.
And so that's the primary
motivation for a bill that
senator Neville and Campos has
sponsored in the Senate for fee
increase which once it gets to
your committee I hope you'll
support it would address our
revenue concerns and get us on a
stable trajectory for at least
the next ten years
And without no I use up too much
your time on a pretty
straightforward budget thank you
we're gonna start with questions
from Representative Lujan just
one quick question madam chair
you just mentioned your key
increases can you go over those
fee increases with us I'm not
sure what thank you I can I get
I can give you the highlights of
the money I don't have them
spray here in front of me but
the the the increase includes an
average increase of between
seven and eight dollars for
Representative resident licenses
eleven of the twenty license
types will be remain unchanged
the maximum increase I think
it's about twenty dollars for
residents non residents is about
eighty one dollar increase on
average I think we didn't change
six of the twenty seven license
types for non residents and the
maximum increases two hundred
fifty five there's also a
provision in the.
Bill to allow of twenty five
percent discount for recipients
of snap benefits thank you madam
chair so with the fund balance
of eighteen million dollars
madam chair what is what is
Representative would revenues
like this using these type of
increases a big to me our
expectation is that the the
revenue the increases would
generate ten to eleven million
dollars annually of new revenue
on top of what we receive which
as I mentioned would put us on a
trajectory to not have to ask
for a few increase for minimum
of ten years or last increase
was in two thousand six.
Thank you madam chair I just
feel like you're sitting in a
very good place or an item that
we need to I mean it's just my
opinion.
Families that use get the game
in fishing just interested in
knowing how that you.
How that came about but from two
thousand six until now and with
the amount of money that you see
in your fund balances I don't
know that it's completely
unnecessary but that's just my
opinion madam chair appreciate
the time thank you.
Representative Lujan it'll be
Representative had a career.
Thank you madam chair.
I chair believe a first question
would be.
The percentage of.
Of revenue created from your
hunting and fishing license that
occurs on state land versus
private land or federal lands
that what are those percentages.
Madam chair representative I
don't have the specific
percentages in front of me I
apologize they're asking the
difference between sort of
public land versus private land.
Actually I was that of chair
differentiate between state
federal and private.
and and.
Ballpark at fifty percent state
forty percent federal ten
percent.
By that.
I'm gonna ask my achieve a lot
of our food program has a better
idea Stewart I like.
Madam chairman members of the
committee representatives thank
you for letting me so most of
our hunting licenses are
revenues generated about sixty
percent from hunting licenses
fifty forty percent from fishing
licenses roughly on that so so a
lot of the fishing is occurring
on public waters throughout the
whole state of New Mexico in
terms of hunting Revenue when
someone purchases a license for
the majority of our licenses
that allows them to hunt on
state federal or private land
with written permission so we
don't differentiate between this
license per se is hunting on
federal land verses this is on
private we do have one provision
in there where I'd say it's a
little are are three species for
it's a little different that's
pronghorn elk and deer where we
do X. have exclusive private
land only licenses that revenue
is probably in the.
It's five to six million range
of the twenty two million in
license sales.
Thank you.
So madam chair presenters I
appreciate the presentations I
curious
I'm just throwing food out for
thought not for discussion right
now that right now our hunters
and fishermen pay the majority
of the.
Well obviously all of that the
site some federal grants and
with respect to what's happening
up
And the expansion into
public and private public and
federal land state and federal
lands I do think madam chair
instead of raising the fees on
hunter's and fisherman's we
should start looking very
seriously about annual fees for
total access to state and
federal land that for for hikers
and stuff like that obviously we
have.
You know we had with day trips
we have different stuff like
that.
With we have fees that we pay
for campgrounds there are no
fees for access to state.
N. or federal land.
Hunting and fishing.
I'm not sure besides the animal
I'm not sure what the difference
in the US service.
So.
Think about something for the
kids committee to consider maybe
something that would madam chair
presenters to you guys
Consider having a discussion
with your senators on the Senate
bill.
In lieu of raising the fees for
hunters and fishermen which been
carrying the load.
From the beginning.
Thank you madam chair thank you.
Okay Representative collector if
I could.
Federal land is public land if
you have access State Land is.
State trust lands without a
hunting license you have no
access.
Thank you Mr.
Representative any more
questions.
You are here and if they can see
right are you forty three
is that is that is that a
problem or or what are we
looking at as far as finna be
can see.
So right now we have a vacancy
rate of between ten and fifteen
percent depending on where we
are in the hiring process pretty
comfortable with that obviously
I'd like to be fully staffed we
have an issue with our field
officers we did I'm thankful
thanks to you for our budget
last year we're able to pay
peace officers better and I I
we're a stabilizing that group
and recruiting so I hope that
we'll be able to grow that I
think from a personal
perspective our request is is
probably right now.
Thank you on.
Questions.
Okay.
Was it from.
Right madam chair I move that we
move the policy budget
recommendations thank that
second any opposition.
You have no.
Thank you thank you.
Right and our last one
youth conservation corps.
If you're ready.
Madam chair of the committee
again my name is Scott Sanchez
on the fiscal.
Resources.
with me today is YCC executive
director Belinda garland and my
colleague I'm sorry Sir what the
second time today sorry only and
my colleague from DFA we have
right Chavis
these conservation corps budget
request came in at five point
eight million which represented
a thirteen percent increase over
FY twenty three this
includes the LFC and executive
budget recommendations fully
fund this request is there are
no differences
right I'll let you take the
access.
I'm madam chair members of the
committee.
Mexico said earlier both of
recommendations party agencies
request and we both came to
consensus on affirmative
measures and targets with that
and with your permission turn it
over to director what for Madam.
Thank you and thank you for your
time and for your
recommendations I am Sir would
the executive director of YCC
today I have with me are CFO
Matthew Liberato.
And also
Mike Thompson who is with the
abandoned mine lands.
Program out of mining and
minerals out of EMNRD we have a
cooperative agreement with them
and Craig Johnson is with the
State Land Office he's the
director about to recreation and
these two gentlemen oversee R.
Y. C. C. projects in their
respective agencies so
I'll just add I think it's three
minutes of your time and I'll
give you a little background
about why CC every we were
established in nineteen ninety
two by statute and every year we
issue an RFP to local
governments and tribes and
nonprofits who can all apply to
hire use and do projects in
their community and there's
great latitude of the kinds of
projects they want to do we do
require a robust training
programs that includes job
career and life skills as well
as natural and cultural
conservation they can also
provide GED classes but it
really is up to them the kind of
project with you know within
certain parameters that they
want to initiate and the
training programs they want to
do
the feedback from users who
participate in YCC is
overwhelmingly positive we do a
survey with them every year and
anonymous survey that they do
themselves so I have good
confidence in the results but a
lot of them comment on how the
YCC has given them a sense of
teamwork and leadership
satisfaction of hard work and
empathy for others
And by statute we also must
provide a returning core members
those who work between thirty
two and forty eight weeks we'll
come back here after here for
YCC program they can get a
fifteen hundred dollar
educational voucher for in state
of schools are education beyond
high school and that includes of
occasional and trade schools or
five hundred dollar cash bonus
and we that's a new performance
measures and the first year we
did pretty well in the second
this last year not so well I
have to work on getting in
contact with these corps members
we now have a process to for
them to fill out the paperwork
online so I'm I'm hoping that
will increase and another thing
I wanted to address is just some
of the low numbers with
employment
the seventy percent of the beach
project must go to court member
wages and since about twenty
sixteen that average went down
to about eight hundred eight per
year to about six hundred and
four hundred and twenty twenty
and twenty twenty one and now
it's going back up to six
hundred so some of that is use
our money higher wages we this
year especially I think the
average wage was probably around
fifteen dollars and those who
offered that had less problems
as recruitment
YCC has also
for the first time this year we
are I've been able to issue our
our P. ourselves instead of
going through state purchasing
and that will also that
streamlines our process and gets
the contracts out in time for
these entities to advertise
starting now and in fact in your
handout the last.
The pages are the contracts that
we are getting out to the
entities who applied and I'm
really happy to say we had a
nearly one hundred percent
acceptance rate we only turned
down one entity and that is all
I hope and without all stand for
any questions.
You have a but I'm sorry madam
chair the the one of the things
we do this we highlight is that
the agency has been stepping up
and that working on cooperative
service remains with several
state agencies so in the last
year that's been an exciting new
development that's going to
allow them to expand the scope
of projects that are you through
eligible to participate in and I
think this year you said the the
looking at the bonding between
forty five and fifty projects of
getting back to some of those
pre pandemic numbers.
Madam chair and
Members of the committee it's
got thank you that that's a big
deal that's why Thompson and
Craig Thompson are here we do
have a cooperative agreement
with EMNRD and with the State
land office and I've been
reaching out to other state
agencies who might be able to
use a YCC program using the
cooperative agreement which is
available to us through
statutes.
Thank you thank you and we have
with a question from
Representative Lujan.
Hi madam chair I move the.
The LFC recommendations.
Thank thank there any
opposition.
Thank you have a.
It is a great job thank you for
being here today.
