Representative Dow,
Representative Duncan.
Representative Duncan,
Representative Garrett.
Here.
Representative Hernandez.
Representative Hernandez.
Representative Herndon present.
Representative Herrera.
Representative Little.
Here.
Representative Luhan.
Representative Lujan,
Representative Pettigrew.
Representative Pettigrew.
Representative Sanchez.
Representative Sareana here.
Representative Silva.
Representative Vincent.
Representative Vincent.
Vice Chair Dixon.
Chair.
We have a quorum, thank you very
much. Uh, we're gonna go
straight to director Sale.
Good morning, Mr. Chairman. I
believe you're set to take
action on budget adjustment
requests authority.
Which we went over last week.
I have had conversations with
the DFA secretary about uh an
alternative scenario for the
general authority that uh last
week we had thrown out for
discussion purposes of removing
from
Um
House Bill 2, and that general
authority is that every agency
can move money between
categories.
And if they have other revenue
sources besides federal funds
can increase it up to 5%.
The discussions I've had with
the TFA secretary, uh or an
agreement that
He would send out direction to
agencies.
Uh, to basically at the start of
the fiscal year, not do budget
adjustments between categories
unless there was a clear
Uh, error in House Bill 2 that
needed an adjustment.
For the 1st quarter of the
fiscal year.
And agencies shouldn't be
increasing their other state
funds or or transfers by more
than 2.5 for the beginning of
the fiscal year.
And we would agree that if LFC
objected, they would withdraw
the bar as opposed to current
law would let it just go into
place.
So that's what I'm recommending
this morning, Mr. Chairman, uh,
is, is putting that general
authority into the bill and we
would work with DFA through an
administrative process like
we've done uh on other things
like uh the, the budget
guidelines, uh, developing those
in, in BFM and then the bar
language that you have before
you has an HAFC scenario, which
starts with
The LFC recommendation, and
there's one adjustment that
Miss Hilla will, will talk
about, um, that's different from
LFC that's very technical in
nature. Great, thank you,
Director Selee, Ms. Hilla, if
you could point us to that
quickly.
It's terrible.
That is going to be uh in your
FY 26 budget adjustment
Authority and it's going to be
for the vocational
rehabilitation division, uh, the
technical change, it was just
that, uh, the language needed to
say vocational rehabbilitation
division rather than the
division of vocational rehab was
the technical adjustment.
Yes, um.
Chair members, that's going to
be on page 17 line 70.
And we'd stand for any
questions, Mr. Chairman.
Great. Thank you both. Are there
any questions from the
committee?
OK OK. I don't see any
questions. I wanna thank you,
Director Sali for working with
uh Secretary Props, I think this
will be the strongest guidance
that we've had during my tenure
in the legislature disallowing
bars in that first quarter, I
think we'll expect uh a great
deal more collaboration, which
is great and it's brought
forward by the recommendation
that got us to, I think, a more
collaborative process. So thank
you for that. Um, we're gonna
ask the vice chair for a motion
to adopt the HAS.
see proposal for
Um, budget adjustment request.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Um, I'm
with the committee adopt the
HAFC uh proposal for budget
adjustment requests.
OK, it's been moved by vice
chair Dixon, seconded by
Representative Sanchez. Is there
any opposition to that motion
saying no, we've adopted that
motion.
Uh, OK, um,
We're
very close, uh, um, director, if
you can come on up for
legislative building services.
We've got 2 or 3 minutes before
we lose quorum. So if we can
accomplish things in that time.
Although maybe now we'll be in a
little bit better spot. OK.
We'll be very quick so that we
can hope for them and go from
there.
Good morning, Mr. Chairman,
members of the committee. My
name is Janae Ledger. Oops,
sorry, I forgot about this. My
name is Janay Leger, the analyst
for the, uh, legislative
building services. Sorry, I'm a
little out of breath, I
literally just walked up the
stairs. Um.
So the executive recommendation
is flat with the operating
budget for FY 25, the LSC
recommendation is $28,000 over
and that's primarily for the
increase in the workers'
compensation rate. Um, with
that, Mr. Chair, we'll stand for
any questions.
Street.
Uh, thank you for that
exceptionally brief
presentation. Um, let's see if
any members
Have questions. Let me give yes.
OK. Uh, Representative Herrera.
I'm assuming this, this, uh,
Shana, this is everything that
you have to cover as legislative
council to take care of all the
services we have in the
building, is that correct?
Madam Chair, members of the
committee, so the LBS budget uh
really is the day to day
operations of the capital. So
this would be the personnel
security, maintenance, uh,
toilet paper, uh, soap, uh, etc.
and just kind of those day to
day, uh, maintenance routine
maintenance activities. Um, any
of the larger ticket big
projects, um, those are covered
in House Bill 1 through the um
capital upgrades. OK. Um,
Well, I know we've given a lot
of money, but this probably in
help be one for furniture and
stuff like that over the years.
I is that true? That doesn't
come out of this budget.
Ma I'm sure, that is correct.
That is in the House Bill 1
legislative budget. OK, well, I
have a long list of suggestions
and for the other side, so I'll,
I'll stop with that.
Man.
Thank you. Uh, any other
questions from members?
Uh, do I have a motion to accept
the LFC budget. Oh wait,
Charlotte, yes, LLC. Great.
Good morning, madam,
everyone, I so move.
That we accept the LLC.
Recommendation, thank you. Thank
you. So, uh, just for uh uh
record keeping, uh,
representative, uh, Little has
made the motion, seconded by
Representative Chatfield. Is
there any opposition?
I see no opposition, so, uh,
looks good. Thank you.
All right, um, let me just
confirm with our staff here, but
I believe we're gonna head into.
Working groups, is that correct?
That's right. Charles is a madam
vice chair and as you move into
working groups, uh, staff also
are gonna be handing out the
reauthorization.
Uh, recommendations for
appropriations that you've made
in the past that agencies are
asking for additional time to
spend. There's highlighted rows
for what are the changes from
LFC, um, some of them are
changing the agency, uh, from
the healthcare authority for
some healthcare spending for uh
local hospitals to DFA which
normally works with local
governments, um, but there's
very minor changes uh that are
recommended in a couple of new
ones that
flipped through the craps were
agencies didn't ask for it, uh,
through the normal process. Uh,
but those will be highlighted so
you can see that the changes
from what you had before you
last week.
Great. Thank you. No action on
that today, but action on
Monday. OK, thank you, director,
so we'll wait for everyone to
get their copies.
Directorssuli.
My apologies for um um uh
asking.
This repeat question. Uh, are
you gonna be walking us through
the highlights here. No, ma'am,
they're highlighted for you,
that's informational for you to
take a look at before a vote on
Monday.
Thank you. So we don't need to
go through it now. Folks can
take this and read it for Sunday
morning.
Instead of the New York Times.
Correct.
print. All right. Thank you. Um,
director Bri?
Yep, you're exactly right, Madam
Chair, um, you can go ahead and
adjourn the full committee
meeting. Uh, we are going to go
into work groups first is the uh
health and aging work group. So
health and aging work group
members, uh, we'll get you a
list. I sent one out last night.
Stick around and we'll try to
keep you texting, uh, I'll try
to text you when the next work
group is ready. I know there's a
lot going on today.
Uh, and direct, we're gonna be
meeting here, is that correct?
Yep, all the work groups, Madam
Chair, are going to be in here
because all of you are on a
bunch of them, so we can't do
two at once. So everything's
gonna be in here, just don't
wander off too far, and I'll
send you a text.
Great. Thank you.
Right. So we are, um, our full
committee is adjourned.
