Has to R. for in Santa Ana
outlook you may have to regroup
now that it's which is been
fixed so you might pass that
along with the staff thank you.
All right.
Okay let's let's don't shut shut
down let's see if we can't get
things fired up we'll just wait
just a few minutes.
Just.
Do you have a question for
Representative Anderson and
before we start.
Did everybody get payday bars
are just me.
Representative Anderson can you
hear the question.
Madam chairman of there was a
share concept in that package
okay.
Thought I was going to get to
keep this whole package of
payday bars.
We'll make sure everybody gets
one at that's here I get all the
rest.
Thank you Anderson he did pay
out.
Madam chair I have a question.
Before we start going.
I just wondered if those folks
in Santa Fe have had a chance to
actually eat out at a restaurant
now that things have opened up a
little bit you have rental I
mean Representative Crowder
where do you go.
Across the street from where I'm
staying called pelos seus.
One they just want the people
magazine breakfast.
Let's see what was the word.
Breakfast in the state of New
Mexico.
For people magazine that they
surveyed all fifty states in
Victor breakfast from each state
plus a one.
Was the breakfast of huevos
rancheros well of course yes yes
I'm very good just wondering
finna be gets it has a chance to
eat out at all anymore they are.
So some of the restaurants I
think most all restaurants
started opened now.
Madam chair yes.
Yes Representative Trujillo
there is another restaurant
that's going to be open and up
tomorrow afternoon.
Friday afternoon.
I've heard it's really good.
All the market steer steakhouse.
Where at.
Here and there in Santa Fe yes
is the site Francis my hat with
the shift very well.
A
chair.
Yes.
You madam chair that
Representative is out they have
the on the burger at the.
There.
Yes okay.
If you want to eat that you
might as well eat dirt.
I told
the guy.
Everybody I'm just get the word
from bill that we're ready to
fire up here so I'm gonna go
ahead and call the house
appropriations and finance
committee to order and I like
the staff to take the role
please.
Representative Allison here.
Representative Anderson I was.
Representative Armstrong.
Here.
Representative Brown here.
Representative Castellano.
Present.
Representative Chatfield here
Representative Crowder here.
Representative Dixon here.
Representative is out here
Representative Garcia notices
marine corps Harry Garcia
president.
Representative headed up.
Representative Hochman Vigil
here.
There.
Representative Lara.
Here Representative Sarinana
here.
Representative Sweetser here.
By Representative Trujillo.
Here.
Vice chair small.
Here Madam
Care we've got a quorum all
righty thank you we we just one
item that is a carryover from
yesterday that Senate bill two
to three you may have noticed
yesterday that we didn't read
out the committee report.
because there is a problem with
the way we have done the
amendment so I'm gonna ask
Representative Hochman Vigil to
explain it to us thank you very
much madam chair members of the
committee so it was brought to
our attention that the amendment
is made yesterday by the drafter
did not take care of the problem
I which we originally set out to
fix allowing subsection II of
the bill to stay and it's
problematic from a drafting
perspective because it's
superfluous language what we
needed to do is we needed to and
page five instead so I'm going
to read out the amendment number
madam chair now that's okay for
you the new amendment go ahead
that's going to be eight point
two two zero eight eight five
I'm sorry eight point two two
zero eight eight five point one.
Madam chair.
I move the amendment for
discussion.
Right we have a motion to have a
second for discussion.
Second from Representative
Crowder okay go ahead and so
what we're doing instead madam
chair we're leaving subsection
E. on page four at stricken and
we're changing the lack the
language starting on page five
lines one we're taking all of
I'm sorry page.
For.
Beginning I understand section
one subparagraph B. we are
striking all of that language
and in lieu of were putting in
language that basically allows
upon certification by the NMFA
that to be
that this chart of all bond
applications has occurred any
revenue from the cigarette tax
will then be relegated back to
the general fund and I believe
that will take care of the issue
identified madam chair.
Here call my issue was the
sunset issue so by default the
sunset will work them is that
correct correct madam chair
already okay everybody thank you
this is there any questions on
the amendment from the
committee.
Is there any opposition to the
amendment.
Saying on the amendment has been
adopted.
so let me ask bills since we had
a an amendment added to the bill
yesterday does that have to be
stripped or what's the what's
the issue.
Share my eight I believe all you
have to do is read present
Senate bill two twenty three.
And rebuild any prior
amendments.
And then attach this amendment
to it.
Would be to just bring it back
up up to able to do it with that
strip any amendments that
prior measurements and.
Then do the best with the
current amendment.
Right Representative small for
the motion.
You're going to bring this you
madam chair go ahead.
Thank you madam chair I move
that we bring Senate bill two to
three back from the table and
make it the next order of
business.
Representative felt is out to
second any opposition saying non
okay we're dealing with the
bill.
Now we need to make the motion
to strip any marriages go ahead.
Go ahead.
Thank you madam chair then I
move that we strip all previous
amendments to Senate bill two to
three.
Thank you madam chair all right
the motion as we're stripping
all house appropriations and
finance committee amendments to
Senate bill two to three is
there any opposition to that
motion.
Saying not so everything we did
yesterday's off okay
now we are on the current
amendment.
And we did not have any
opposition to that current
amendment so now I need a motion
that adapts the bill with the
current amendment.
I make a motion madam chair that
we adopt the bill but the
current amount okay we have a
second that could set second
representative mall so we have
Representative Castellano and
Representative small what it is
is a do pass to Senate bill two
to three as amended.
Okay is there any opposition to
that motion.
Seeing none we have a due pass
Representative Hochman Vigil for
this bill and I'm glad we we
caught that yesterday thank you
madam chair already we have no
more bills sent to us for today.
But the we may have now yes.
I just want to apologize for not
seeing a do pass on the bill I'm
sorry.
No problem that's I just can't
wait until next year when we're
all in the committee room for
all sitting there and we all
have our marks in front of us
and we have all of our paper in
front of us so everybody's track
along the same way so we don't
have anything else so we'll go
ahead and adjourn for now and if
we do get some more bills we
will certainly call the
committee back together so thank
you thanks everybody.
Thank you madam chair thanks
for.
