The reserves so.
With that I think that we're
able to go ahead and do roll
call and then get started thank
you.
Okay.
Representative Allison here.
Representative Armstrong here.
Representative Castellano.
Representative Crowder.
Representative Hochman regained.
Here.
Representative Chatfield.
But.
Representative laying.
Director.
Representative small.
Here.
Vice chair edit out.
Shares would stir.
Hearing an echo on my and all
state you very much more to also
remind everyone that are job
today is to to forward a
recommendation to the full house
appropriations and finance
committee so what we do here is
is simply put together a
recommendation on these agencies
and what that will go in order
of the list we don't which means
we start with HSD three forty
three the retiree health care of
forty.
And Connor if you will kick it
off the introduce your
counterpart and introduce our
agency representative as well I
appreciate thank you.
Thank you madam chair I'm gonna
Jorgensen the LFC analyst for
the retiree health care forty
this is agency code three forty
three.
With me from the department of
finance and administration as Mr
Simon Miller.
And to be executive director of
the authority Mr David
Archuleta.
I'm just going to go through the
different sheets very briefly
and I'll turn it over to Mr
Miller for additional comments
when we go to instruction letter
for the agency presentation.
The retiree health care
authority receives the majority
of its revenue from employer and
employee contributions
distribution from the tax
suspense Fund as well as retiree
contributions for health care.
The request of the retiree
health care of forty is a
request for expenditure of
storage the only any revenues a
program receives beyond what is
needed to pay for the cost of
care is directed to the retiree
healthcare authority trust fund.
The balance of which is around
eight hundred million dollars
now that's a significant
increase from a hundred fifty
six million dollar balance we
saw about a decade ago.
Neither the LESC nor the
executive budget
recommendations.
Increases or assumes an increase
in assessments on state
employees or alters the
distribution from a tax expense
permanent fund nor does it make
any changes to our member
premiums the retiree health care
or authority board has the sole
authority for exciting Perkins.
Okay and then moving on to the
health benefits administration
program.
This is the is the largest
program in the agency and that's
where all of the costs of health
care paid out.
You can see there is one
difference there it's a twenty
five thousand two hundred dollar
difference and you'll also
notice that that is in the five
hundred category that difference
is.
The LFC recommends a lesser
amount be transferred to program
support for agency operations.
For FY twenty two the HSD
anticipated about one point
seven million dollar reduction
in expenditures.
And that is due to a rate
reduction in Medicare advantage
plans of both the LESC and the
executive fully funded the
agency requests for health care
expenditures.
Moving on to program support
again there is one difference
better it's that twenty five
thousand dollars it's entirely
in the person category and that
difference is attributable to
the LFC recommendation holding
the personal person category
flat while the executive
recommended fully funding the
request.
Both of the our recommendations
include language that allows
funds to report from program
support back to the health care
benefits administration program.
And LFC and executive staff
reached consensus on performance
measures and targets with that
I'll turn it over to Mr Miller
for additional comments.
Thanks Connor good morning madam
chair members of the committee
again my name is Simon Miller
and I am an analyst with DFA I
don't have any additional
comments these are two very
similar recommendations like
Connor said the only difference
is that twenty five thousand
dollars in the person category
program support to the executive
is is slightly higher there
other than that the
recommendations are the same so
I will turn it over to director
Archuleta.
Thank you good morning director
to letter okay good morning
madam chair members of the
committee.
As David Abbey who who was on
earlier mentioned at the good
fortune privilege of having
worked for the legislative
finance committee many years ago
in prior just prior to that I
also worked over the department
of finance and administration so
I wasn't Simon's position at one
time and then Connors position
and another time now I've got
the good fortune of working here
for the New Mexico retiree
health care thirty and one other
comment that I would add to that
is Mr Abbey mention my father
was a long time employee having
retired from the capitol the
what he forgot to mention was
that my grandfather on my
mother's side was also a very
long time employee of the of the
capitol with that said I will
keep my comments short and we
have a long day and what to do
but I I'll just make you guys
aware of a couple of key items
that I think are important
there's a presentation that I
hope everyone has a copy of a
presentation it's very short but
I will just make a few remarks
one is that I think it's very
important but that the committee
be aware of couple things our
operations continue I'm happy to
announce that we have colocated
or Albuquerque office with the
folks at parent so soon as our
operations resume when we open
our doors people have the added
convenience of being able to
walk across the hall and get
their other chairman committees
done it doesn't quite serve all
are you E. R. B. members but at
least half of our population
will have that one stop shopping
opportunity another pointing to
it to make mention of as many of
you are hopefully aware you may
remember this from last year our
rule changes are getting ready
to take a fact and it's
important for for members to
recognize what those are the
first of which increases the
minimum years of service that
are required to receive the full
subsidy from the retiree health
care toward basically our
contribution toward their health
care costs the other a change
that is going to occur is that
after July first of this year in
order to receive a subsidy at
all outside of those folks
retire from an enhanced program
you have to be a minimum.
Age of fifty five so we did
implement those changes there
there codified in rural and
they're expected to take effect
so there may be some
you may have some your
constituents are counties
folks in your community who who
may expressed concern about it
the rules been changed three
times was originally scheduled
to take effect in January of
twenty twenty then we moved into
January twenty twenty one a
hearing concerns expressed from
school teachers and other folks
last year about the time
associated with that will change
it was delayed one last time but
it is sort of a key foundation
containing sometimes some of our
long term liabilities as
reported according to our guests
be statements.
A couple of other quick things
that I'll make mention is that
recently our board is and
they're gone sort of a revamping
of its participation our long
standing for president Tom
Sullivan who some of you may
know I retired from the board
last July our former vice
president Mr German Tanya one of
the longest serving board
members I think that part of the
agency in one form or another
since the creation of the HSD
retire last year I am happy to
announce that their replacements
are are well qualified including
the superintendent from the and
the school district Mr law
enforcement a classified state
employee Leanne Madrid from the
state personnel office along
with former representative
Tomaso side who's representing
the retired
educational association of
school teachers with that part
of the organization includes and
you board president Mr Doug
Crandall who we who represents
retired public employees of New
Mexico as well in the packet the
guy's got just a quick financial
you an update on page for that
packet I'm happy to report that
as of December we have over nine
hundred and twenty four million
dollars in our trust fund that
doesn't include the overnight
monies we have in our accounts
of the state treasurer's office
to pair recurring bills but
we've been under the fortunate
and of some pretty good
investment returns along with
contributions that we've been
able to make to that fund so we
pushed our our solvency the ways
out there were not stand in the
Dyer street sort of the
situation that we were a number
of years ago so we've improved
our are funded ratio if you look
at that in terms of how we
report that with our our
government account government
accounting standards
requirements.
Similar to the pension plans
though we still have over five
billion dollars in liabilities
so happy to report one and our
our our trust and bounces have
grown from a low of you know
what as Mr Jorgensen said a
hundred fifty six million
dollars a little over ten years
ago to nearly a billion dollars
today unfortunately there there
isn't any real way for us to
invest our way out of our our
situation so there will be a
number of changes over the years
and need to take a fact to the
program in order to continue to
maintain the solvency of that
unfortunately there was a slight
dip in our overall funded ratio
this year because of the
interest rates applied toward
long term liabilities when when
when interest rates dropped us
so to the calculation of that
which cause them to to bounce up
a little bit so we went from
about nineteen percent funded
this last year to about sixteen
percent this year but those are
sort of the two key measures
that are used to gauge the
overall well being of the
program and then the last item
that I would mention to to
members of the this committee is
that we are seeking legislation
this year and the good news is
we're not coming ask for any
money for the first time in
several years we're not asking
for an increase in employee
employer contributions but we
are asking for some technical
cleanup language in our in the
retiree health care sortie Act
it does a couple things one is
it doesn't a does away with a
program there is no longer a
basically an obsolete program
we're changing some language in
reference to dependent children
that references the term mental
retardation and intending to
change that to intellectual
disability and then the last
thing we're doing is we're
cleaning up some of the language
associated with when the agency
was first created in a reference
the director of the public
schools insurance authority
being the director this agency
and this goes back to nineteen
ninety when the agency was first
created that language is now
obsolete and we're requesting
that that be removed
and.
Madam chair members of committee
I would stand for any questions
that you guys have thank you for
that Mr Gillette and I do not
have your presentation I don't
know with other members to or
not I'm going to ask staff to
get us that if possible I just
pull that share file and I'm not
finding it there either
so I don't think any of us have
it but hopefully we will get it
before we have your your
recommendation in the thank.
Hearing in case we have any
other questions so with that I
will turn to the committee for
questions and
see if I see any hands going up.
Members of the committee here.
You must have done a thorough
presentation because I'm not
seeing any it is refreshing to
have a report where you short up
some of the concerns that we've
been facing in recent years and
and I appreciate that because.
When I first came in I know that
when this really one of our
biggest concerns is is
the liability that we might be
facing here and so I I commend
you and and everyone working
there for the great job that
they've done thank you.
I see no questions so I will go
to our vice chair headed up for
a motion on this.
Madam chair thank you and thank
you Mr to that and I moved the
LFC recommendation.
We have a motion for the LFC is
their second.
Thank you.
Thank you representative Allison
so we have a motion and a second
to accept the LFC
recommendation.
Is there any objection to that
motion.
All right I think I think we
have the a solid Gen LFC
recommendation moving forward
director to lead and we
appreciate you and all of your
family and it was nice to hear
of your legacy of service that
you come from our state so thank
you so much thank you madam
chair members the committee have
a great day you as well thank
you all right that takes us to
the educational retirement board
and Connor I will ask you to
start again the.
Thank you madam chair and this
is E. R. B. their agency code
three five two with me is still
Mr Simon Miller of DFA and ms
Jen Goodwin is the executive
director of of the educational
retirement board I also like to
point out that in your all in
your volume three is we have
several charts both parents and
the R. B.
in terms of their funded status
and what the benefit actually
looks like so those start on
page thirty four of your ball
you can freeze with that the but
FY twenty two budget request is
pretty straightforward you'll
see one of one big difference
the LFC is three hundred sixty
seven thousand dollars higher
than the executive.
the reason for that is the LFC
fully funded agency requests
for.
Person while the executive how
the category flat relative to FY
twenty one you'll also note that
overall there's an eleven point
four percent reduction in the
yard the budget and the majority
of that you can see on your
sheets is four point one million
dollars in the contractual
services category most of that
is related to.
Investment fees that are being
reduced and the agency requests.
Part of the reason for the
increase in person was to bring
in
more.
In house investment management
services are LFC and executive
staff reached consensus on the
performance measures and targets
and I would also just like to
note but there is no general
fund in this budget the entirety
of the DRB budget comes out of
your be trust funds I would now
like to turn it over to Mr
Miller for additional comments.
Thank you Connor good morning
again madam chair members of the
committee
as Connor mention both
recommendations are
substantially lower than the
current year largely due to this
continued reduction in
investment management fees this
is largely because of the
continued increase of in house
management of investment assets
and ERP like Connor said
again the only difference
between the two recommendations
is that the executive applied
and I'm funded vacancy rate of a
little less than five percent to
account for the natural rate of
turnover well the LFC
recommendation fully funds all
seventy six F. T. E..
And so with that I will turn it
over to director given.
Thank you very much madam chair
members of the committee I'd
like to share my screen.
Good to see you can good to see
you madam chair.
We're not seeing a shared
screen.
There goes okay.
Okay here's some brief
highlights of ERP as you can see
our retiree payroll continues to
grow and I'm very proud that
we've been able to get even
though everyone is working from
home with been able to get all
of our monthly budget out to our
retirees and their beneficiaries
without interruption.
and as you can see this is that
the number of the matter our
request we are requesting an
increase in person services.
so that we can be one hot one
hundred percent staff we're well
on our way to building that and
S. Connor said all of our
funding is from our trust fund
fully funding our request will
not take money away from any
other agency.
we are assets reached a new high
as of December thirty one were
at fourteen point two billion
dollars however we do have a
lower funded ratio because of
our new actuarial assumptions
are boards constantly strives to
have conservative yet realistic
actuarial assumptions.
And that and because of that we
now have have.
are are funded ratio is lower
and we no longer are on the path
to one hundred percent funding
Senator Stewart has introduced
Senate bill forty two to
increase the employer
contribution rates so on like
David R. to let it we will be
asking for money this year
because we need to be on the
path to one hundred percent
funding and we're continuing to
work on our new headquarters we
close on a piece of land a
couple of weeks ago and we've
also issued an RFP for
architectural and engineering
services.
And I would request that you
give us the LFC recommendations
please let me know if you have
any questions you'd like me to
address.
Thank you Janet if you'd stop
sharing your screen
will be able to see everybody
again.
We appreciate the.
Presentation and the information
and with that we will go to the
committee and I will start with
the vice chair need small.
Thank you very much madam chair
thank you doctor good when and
and analysts miss good when
Are are different sheets show a
pre low funded vacancy that
you're with E. R. B.
is that accurate do you have you
guys kept that pretty low we
show a funded vacancy rate of
only five point eight percent.
Yes we've been we've we hired
two new people this week we're
in the process of interviewing I
other staff positions and are
about to extend an offer on one
of those positions we are
aggressively trying to fulfill
all of our vacancies.
Thank you madam chair thank you
director good once I think
knowing that these different
sheets would have been produced
a little while back the vacant
the funded vacancy rate is
likely lower than what we see
now madam chair miss good when
our analysts mentioned that the
increased
person funding the LFC
recommends which of course does
not come from general fund
that's intended to bring some of
these investments services in
house is that it can you explain
that and madam chair miss good
one is that meant to overall cut
costs on these for these
investments services even as you
return a.
Substantial return to the state.
yes that is our intention let me
just give you a brief
description of what we're
currently doing in house we do
an S. and P. five hundred index
and house and S. and P. four
hundred index so those are both
passive investments in contrast
we also do core bonds plus in
house and that is an actively
managed bond portfolio.
What we're also doing is
increasing our hiring in the
alternative investments area so
that we can do more what's
called clue investing which
allows us to have lower
management fees on alternative
investments.
Thank you director given thank
you madam chair
it's the positive track record
and the close working
relationship that that we've
seen over the past few years
suggests to me that maybe the
LFC recommendation since it does
not affect general fund may be
appropriate here but I very much
appreciate your questions thank
you very much madam chair thank
you representative will go to
Representative Crowder.
Thank you madam chair and and
thank you for your presentation
was given this current out of
state you're
Assumption of your right to
return to seven percent.
When we reviewed the state
investment council they kind of
gave a look out I had for the
next seven to ten years.
What are you anticipating will
happen in the next seven to ten
years you take the seven percent
will be
The correct.
Look forward for the long term
or will that be adjusted.
Madam chair representative
Crowder when our actuary
recommends and investment
assumption it's for a long
period of time thirty fifty one
hundred years rather than over a
shorter period of time and what
drives each different either
retirement plan or permanent
find it return assumption is the
asset allocation that's in that
fund and our funding is.
Has a very relatively high.
Allocation to alternative
investments private equity real
estate infrastructure and so
that just applies what is most
likely our higher investment
return assumptions and errors
just you know as you probably
noted over the past six months
equities have done incredibly
well our investment return for
the first six months of this
fiscal year is thirteen percent.
And I've asked our chief
investment officer to guarantee
that thirteen percent for the
next six months unfortunately
he's not willing to do that.
But I would assume you have a
man who helped as a matter of
wisdom is not going to help you
is not going to guarantee that
some I I was just curious that
they are looking in the next
seven to ten years for all a
down turn in their returns on
their investments wonder if your
track the same it sounds like
your best answer a little bit
different in there so just
curious thank you for your
presentation thank you madam
chair.
Thank you Representative do we
have any other questions from
the committee.
Not that I will go to vice chair
of Representative headed up for
motion.
Thank you madam chair I move we
adopt the LFC recommendation.
Thank you Mr secretary.
Thank.
Thank you so we have a motion
and a second is there any
objection to the LFC
recommendation again remembering
this is not a general fund hit.
This is not a general fund Kim.
I see no objections so thank you
again and director good when we
get to see you and and we will
recommend the LFC as we move
forward in this process thank
you thank you madam chair
members of the committee.
The next one is a public
employees retirement association
agency code three six six and
Connor I believe that she once
again.
Indeed.
The federal budget again it's
agency code three sixty six
Simon Miller is still here and
we have when problems of the.
Public employees retirement
association.
This budget is about both
recommendations are identical
again all of the power of funds
are.
All of their operating funds.
Come from a parent retirement
funds so there is no hit to the
general fund.
Just real quick and I'm like you
are do you can see the the
largest single item in their
budget they're category is that
contractual services category
that makes up the vast majority
of spending and the majority of
that is due to investment
services
Also of note you'll see that
both recommendations reduced
contractual services and
increase to be other costs
category the majority of
That kind of swap was DFA
classifying certain IT
expenditures as other cost
rather than contractual
services.
LFC and executive staff have
come to consensus on performance
measures and targets and with
that I'd like to turn it over to
Mr Miller for additional
comments.
Thanks Connor good morning again
madam chair members of the
committee my name is Simon
Miller I work for DFA
Mike Carter said both
recommendations in the same and
are basically flat to the
current fiscal year so I won't
waste any of your time and I'll
turn it over to director props
thank you but before we go to
director probes just for new
people on the committee we
mention that there's no general
fund but we have a general fund
transferred the three point line
if one of you would just explain
that for the benefit of the
committee before we go go
further.
Yes madam chairman I'm I'm sorry
we are.
Neglected that so there's a.
It's actually four thousand nine
hundred dollar general fund
appropriation that's made to
pair up that appropriation
supports para being the social
security administrator
For a number of agencies and
because it is those funds are
related to social security and
not
Tyerman the legislature several
years back
Included that that appropriation
and it did decline from fifty
two point eight thousand to that
forty eight point nine so that's
what you're seeing is the three
point nine thousand dollar
reduction and that was done to
keep it in line with actual
expenditures from from the prior
year but that's again for
administration of social
security benefits rather than
administration of her of funds
and I think there's one FTE
funded through that Bo the
executive director can certainly
correct me on that I'm sorry for
the oversight madam chair no no
problem and and great
explanation thank you very much
Connor Mr pro.
Okay good morning madam chair
members of the subcommittee
explained props on the executive
director of public employees
retirement association I have
joined this morning madam chair
by Mr correct Trujillo who will
be taking over as interim parent
director at the end of next week
as I transition our parents.
madam chair and members of the
subcommittee have been doing
this for about sixteen years I
don't think I've ever seen the
LFC and DFA recommendations
match up exactly.
and since I've been doing it
that long I know that when you
get what you want you should
probably make your presentation
pretty short before somebody
changes their mind so we I will
be brief this morning.
Great I think we do have a few
slides to go over.
Happy to stand for any questions
I'm sure.
I thank you with you'll share
your screen there we go.
So madam chair on us slide to is
our is our FY twenty two
appropriation requests as a
slight decrease from our
approved operating budget for FY
twenty one I believe this is
either a fourth of the fifth
year that we have a request
either a flat or slightly
decreased budget over that
period of time as well madam
chair members of the
subcommittee we reverted to tens
of millions of dollars back to
the trust fund putting over one
million dollars unspent salaries
and benefits we take the
management of the trust fund
very seriously is our members
money is funded by their
contributions and contributions
from their employers we try to
be very good stewards of those
funds so again our budget
request which is a slight
increase over FY.
Anyone want to slide three.
Four years we've submitted a
flat budgets we did take into
account a US agency rates of
five percent in art FY twenty
two request we're not requesting
any expansions or I. T.
appropriations pertaining to
special initiatives.
On site for.
Brief overview of our fund
performance and it's always
something that's of interest as
of December thirty first as miss
Goodwin educator for ERP the
parents on also had an all time
high of sixteen point four
million dollars our FY twenty
returned you see was a negative
one point five percent that's
below are seeing right to seven
and a quarter percent that
included the recorders three and
quarter four when the pandemic
it was a rough year.
FY twenty was a rough year for
all public pensions across the
country we're no no exceptions
of sensor.
Fund has bounced back I think
our return for the fiscal year
to date is around thirteen
percent as well so these numbers
will look very different when we
report to you again.
It is again at the end of the
fiscal year.
Slide five.
There is a significant economic
force in the state of New Mexico
as you know madam chair we paid
out one point one billion
dollars to retirees in New
Mexico in two thousand twenty
we'll find out about one point
two billion this this this next
year.
Spread out throughout the
throughout the state.
A number of retirees is about
forty three thousand growing but
this is this is our how it
affects in your communities or
counties or cities.
Actor of the money that we pay
out to our retirees I believe
that's the last slide madam
chair and I'd be happy to answer
any questions of the
subcommittee house.
Thank you very much Mr Propst if
you would quit sharing the
screen I'll be able to see
everyone a little bit easier we
appreciate your efforts on
behalf of the entire state and
it was interesting to hear you
referred him as a significant
economic force because that
retirees are significant
economic force in in our state
M. and we look at our state
retirees.
Impressive so I'm still not
seeing.
In your search where
Representative.
The L. some with me see if I can
do this a different way to see
that and we might have raised.
And I'm not seeing any do we
have any questions from the
committee our Representative
Crowder will start with you
thank you.
Thank you madam chair.
Madam chair deadline guests
Mister Probst if if he with the.
Give us a quick snapshot of his
thoughts the next seven to ten
years what's going to happen in
the markets how's it gonna
affect your target right.
We we asked the same question of
a yes I see another so I would
be curious to hear your
thoughts.
Madam chair and members of the
subcommittee and Representative
Crowder thank you for that
question.
Beginning of my presentation I'm
transitioning out of here next
week perhaps allows me to a
little bit a little bit more
free and my our predictions
because I won't be held
accountable for them.
I mentioned are returned it is
seven or expected rate of return
someone a quarter percent would
be my hope that so over the next
year so that the board would
reevaluate that I think you seen
public pension plans across the
country to do what we are be
justified which is to lower
closer to seven percent seven
and three quarters percent
overall I think our our chief
investment officer Mr Garcia
boards investment advisors would
agree with yes I see that
they're probably a little bit
more conservative than but we
would be what do agreed next ten
years will likely be a
challenging environment for
investments and returns of seven
seven of course and a half I
will be very challenging to get.
On chairman of the subcommittee.
You will many of your call the.
Difficult and painful
discussions over pension reform
legislation in the last
legislative session Senate bill
seventy two which passed the
Senate bill Senator was intended
to address that exact or.
Current scenario going forward
lowered her low return
environment you saw our return
for FY twenty was negative one
point five percent.
If we had if we had not passed
if you're not pass the Senate
bill seventy two with a negative
one point five percent and that
one fiscal year alone our
projections would be that the
fund would be on a path to
insolvency within about forty
years.
Because the Senate bill seventy
two we kept from prevented us
from adding almost another eight
hundred million dollars for
unfunded liability.
And our projections are using
our current rate of return is it
would be eighty four percent
round eighty four percent funded
and twenty five years so a long
answers your question but I do
think that most.
Advisors I would trust my money
with us I believe that the next
ten years will be a challenging
return environment those returns
of seven some have some.
Or higher are are likely to be
realized.
Thank you for that and and I I'm
gonna go on a limb and ask your
question because they're going
out the door can't be held
accountable.
Is is there been any
consideration of of the
consolidation between E. R. B.
P. E. R. a state investment
council.
To use the same
Investor investment advisors for
all the contractor faced just
totaled up there's ninety seven
point two million dollars worth
contractual fees being paid the
fund managers Justin yes I see a
R. B. a P. R. I..
That does not include the
retiree
health care thirty in in that
the expenditures taken place in
that agency so.
What are your thoughts about
consolidating in in in utilizing
and see if you can help the
funds by using the same
investment advisors.
Madam chairman of the
subcommittee and representative
that's an idea that pops up
every once in awhile I I've been
executive director now for eight
years almost nine years it is
something that's been discussed.
Yes misadventures oversight
committee there was a memorial
several years ago I required
requesting a study.
Validation you know I I think
there could be room for some
maybe not consolidation but but
cooperation particularly between
ERP and para yes I see is very
different European parent the
sense that we we have to make a
monthly payroll so our
investment structure is probably
going to be strategy or probably
going to be a little bit
different than the S. ICD could
be a little bit more
conservative because unlike
Perivale have to send out a
hundred and ten million dollars
budget each and every month so
there are some differences that
make that
that.
cooperation with us I see a
little bit more difficult but
between parent and your B. I
think there there might be some
room for that.
The course for both
constitutional entities so
depending on the level of the
consolidation of review consider
you might get into a position
where you're actually having to
amend the constitution which
would be very difficult but you
know I I it it I think this is
reasonable for please see our
the parents of to look at what
we Senator com the time is a
scale where.
It appreciate very much you just
you know from an outsider
looking in at a hundred million
dollars a year for the
consulted contractual fees is a
big number.
If there are some method of
cooperation or.
Whatever you want to call it.
It would seem that it could be
advantageous is not I didn't
know if that had been
attempted over or tried in the
past so I thank you very much
for your answer.
Exactly what I was curious about
thank you thank you madam chair.
Thank you Representative are
there any other questions from
the committee.
All right and before I ask for
the motion Wayne I heard you say
you were nine years as a
director how many years with the
agency.
One of those as director I was
director of the retiree health
care authority for about four
years before I came over to
parents.
Twelve.
Well thank you and for those of
you who were in on early I I
mention that **** was my student
body president when we were up
underground and eastern New
Mexico university for the the
nice to.
It connect why you're there we
wish you the very best and.
The next stage of your public
service because I know you're
not going far I don't think so
then I go to Representative a
vice chair had a four motion
please.
Thank you madam chairman if we
adopt the LFC recommendation
right we have a motion for Ella
see is there seconds.
Thank.
Thank you representative small
we have a motion and a second is
there any objection to that
motion.
Thank you with that that will
have a recommendation for the
LFC and budget goes thank you
very much.
Okay number fourteen in the
ethics commission let me think I
know that you Connor is Allison
with us yes madam chair.
thank Allison Nichols and I'm
balanced analyst for the ethics
commission and I'm also joined
by two minutes the DFA analyst
for the commission as well as
Jeremy Ferris the executive
director shin so briefly review
some of the differences between
the two recommendations the
the executive recommendation at
budget for the ethics commission
of almost nine hundred fifty
thousand dollars well LFC
recommendation represents a five
percent decrease or about nine
hundred thousand dollars.
It is entirely funded general
fund revenue.
the
like I said the executive
recommendation provides a flat
budget across categories the LFC
recommendation provides a flat
budget for contracts and a flat
budget in other category and
then decreases the person budget
by about seven percent
The EDD executive recommendation
fully funds the SX authorized to
use.
It currently has one vacancy I
believe for us special projects
coordinator and we have reached
consensus on performance
measures target so all CFI Diego
at thank you.
Good morning madam chair thank
you Alison
I think Allison and pretty well
the differences in the person
category the executive
recommendation fully funds the
six positions.
LFC recommendation decrease
personal.
Percent.
Thank you madam chair.
Thank you Diego and we have our
executive director yes with us
yes good morning madam chair
members of the committee my name
is German terrace and the
executive director of the state
ethics commission the state
ethics commission is is an
independent constitutional
bipartisan commission really has
three functions first the the
commission adjudicates
complaints that are filed with
the commission alleging
violations of the state's ethics
and disclosure laws second.
The commission issues advisory
opinions provides trainings
around the state on the ethics
and disclosure laws including to
the legislators and promulgate
some of a code of ethics which
you can find it one point eight
point four of the imac.
Less the the ethics commission
files lawsuits to enforce the
civil compliance provisions of
the state's ethics and
disclosure laws
because this is a nation HSD.
In our first year of operations
I just want to give you a
highlight on on the successes
from from the commission's first
year so the commission
adjudicated about forty ethics
complaints in its first year
issued eight advisory opinions
the commission enforce the
campaign reporting act against a
dark money groups forcing and
then in a in a pre-filing
settlement to disclose the the
amounts that they spent in in
New Mexico elections the
commission participants
participating and and as an
amicus and a Supreme Court case
regarding the enforceability of
the governmental conduct act the
commission.
Legislative Sierra eight and
trainings around the state
including to the legislators and
the commission received and and
modified canyon demonstrating
its its financial health and its
and its first first year
just to provide an update on
what miss Nichols said the the
commission has has just hired
it's it's six position a special
projects coordinator to position
so currently the commission is
that zero vacancies
the commission still building
out this agency along the time
line that the legislature
planned for in the state ethics
commission act so in in in this
session the legislature asked
the ethics commission the
secretary of state's office to
provide recommendations for the
more efficient administration
and enforcement of the campaign
reporting act the voter action
act the lobbyist regulation Act
in the financial disclosure Act
and the the two agencies
provided recommendations and
have bipartisan sponsors in H.
B. two forty four which you
might seen in your other your
other committees
Legislature also test the
commission to provided
recommendations in October of
this year regarding the the
commission's jurisdiction and
and that's the the function of
the special projects coordinator
to the commission just brought
on board that personal be
reaching around to to local
governments around the state
working with the building is
believed to Mexico counties in
trying to get a sense of how the
ethics commission can best serve
our our local public bodies in
the state and the madam chair
members of the committee that
the practical difference between
the executive and the LESC
recommendation is really how
long the commission can fund
that six position in FY twenty
two under the LFC recommendation
we can fund that position
through August so just one month
and FY twenty two under the
executive recommendation the
commission can fund that
position through December of
which is after when when the
commissioners it's October
reports to the legislature and
the governor and with that Madam
chairman and committee members
and I'm happy to set for any
questions you might have.
Thank you very much and thank
you for for the brief overview
we have several new members on
our subcommittee here new
members to the legislature so
they're unaware of all of their
the discussion that went around
creating this ethics commission
and so I was interested to hear
that you had forty complains I'm
I'm looking to the committee for
questions and I don't see any
hand right which kind of
surprised me because it was a
pretty there were a lot of
intense conversations going
around actually creating this
commission and so I was curious
to see how the first year
enrollment I will turn it over
to vice chair small that with
some questions thank you.
Thank you so much madam chair
thank you director Ferris thank
you analyst madam chair
But director Sarah just really
kind of coming down to this six
position
well we're back up for the LFC
recommendation I would ask LFC
analysts Taos and was part of
the recommendation based upon
Calendar year twenty twenty
budget cycles where there was a
an expectation that there would
be the the recommended at least
five percent cut for state
agencies or was there a
different reason for including
the lower LFC recommendation.
I'm vice chairman small that
insured yes yes that's that's
correct time the recommendation
was developed there was
expectation at most executive
agencies would.
How five percent so at.
Okay that that thank you very
much thank you for that thank
you madam chair next madam chair
director for us this the six
position and and first want to
just thank you for your work
setting up as you say a nascent
agency that has the bipartisan
hope and commitment of our
state.
But also of course is thrust
into some of the most
challenging
Questions and challenge and and
and difficult issues of the day
thank you for taking those on.
For madam chair director Ferris
for this six special projects
position director fares do you
see this as a sort of temporary
position to
do some of these robust things
that you are describing
especially set up some of the
systems whether that's with
local governments or otherwise
but ultimately that that it's
not part of the core team or do
you see this madam chair madam
chair Dr Ferris as part of the
core team that there will always
be a special project from the
ethics commission.
Madam chair and and vice chair
small that's that's a really
nice question the answer is that
the the special projects
coordinator to position is is a
good exposition that was the
commission's first position it
was held initially I Mr Matt
Baca who is or reward for the
senators for some time who
helped to get the agency up and
going it was taken for a while
and now it's it's being brought
back as in response to your
question in a temporary capacity
to to help the ethics commission
get through it's it's October
first twenty twenty one report
right I believe that.
As the HSD matures
The HSD will need more staff
than thank kind of I
positions
but that might not include a gov
exponential projects coordinator
to at some position at some
point said some junction the
future I think we need to
restructure the O. L. to add
additional
positions because each of our
positions and our staff staff
members are are you know in in
the new agency are are taking on
positions that and other
agencies would be allocated
across several different rules
so as the commission grows as as
its volume increases as as we
get engaged in and more
compliance for lawsuits as I
mean as as some of the
constitutional amendments that
are currently pending or or the
Senate joint resolutions that
are currently pending it gets
sorted out by the legislature
the the profile of this agency
could change over time and as
the staffing needs will change
over time so there might need to
be a special projects
coordinator to for the first few
years to help kind of sort out
that basic structure but once
once the HSD is on a more stable
footing perhaps for five years
in the future at that point
disposition might could be
removed from the well and by
your small I I really appreciate
the question the commission is a
constitutional entity is not
going anywhere and so we we do
need to think together about how
to structure it over over the
long term.
Understood thank you very much
director Ferris
Knowing that this were just at
the recommendation states I know
the the lower general fund is is
the LFC recommendation but I
appreciate kind of the the
collaborative thinking as we as
we look at this together thank
you madam chair thank you
director Ferris.
Thank you representative small
do we have any other questions
for this.
New agency created the.
Through a vote by the public.
We restore confidence in.
Governments.
Not seeing any other questions
so I greatly appreciate we've
all been curious as to how hello
the first year was going and the
organization and the growing
pains and selling your report
has been very helpful
Representative executive
director Ferris with that I will
go to Representative vice chair
have a for a motion.
Thank you madam chair I I and
you're going to call on me so I
did have one question for direct
affairs I hope I hope that's
okay I I'm curious directed this
this was a very contentious
really piece of legislation that
was that.
And then their arguments on both
sides I'm curious setting up an
office like this is kind of a
once in a lifetime opportunity
for anybody involved in public
service I'm curious about
What problems you you had in
setting this up that you didn't
anticipate I'd like to know what
happened and setting it up that
you were kind of surprised about
it if you would.
Senator rare that that's that's
a difficult question
What one one answer I think.
Is that.
Their significance time lacks I
believe but because agencies.
Basically you can use the the
people of New Mexico in the
legislature.
Provided a state statutory
blueprint for HSD and then we
had to drop that agency into an
ecosystem of other agencies that
already regulate some of the
same areas and so one of the
challenges was sorting out the
overlapping jurisdictions with
the secretary of state's office
with respect to a Centers
closure statutes with this with
the General Services Division
with respect to the procurement
code so we want to be honest
unexpected challenges was just
sorting out the contractual
arrangements by which that share
jurisdiction was was going to
proceed and I think that we've
we've we've gotten through that
and again and House Bill to
forty four
we're we're hoping to codify so
some of those thoughts and some
of some of those improvements to
share jurisdiction
another challenge is just how
long it takes to on board staff
working with with with other
agencies that that you know that
that are involved with that so.
In in in you see that reflected
you know perhaps and if if you
look to our our FY FY twenty FY
twenty twenty one budgets it
takes time to spend the money
that the legislature
appropriates for this purpose
simply because you know it's
it's just not a matter of of
hiring just as you would in a in
a private enterprise so so that
the time delays and staffing up
a new agency is you know it is a
bit of a challenge but I think
over the over the long haul
those challenges will recede as
as the HSD accumulates more
stuff and then last
Representative madam chair
Representative Herrera the the
other the other challenges just
relate to surprising thoughts
that issue from from legislators
about how even even at the very
earliest most plastic days of
this agency but what else it
might do and then trying to plan
for for those kinds of
contingencies in the future so
Madam chair representative I
think that's kind of the three
three unexpected challenges but
it is it is a very nice
opportunity and act I appreciate
the confidence.
That's fascinating thank you
thank you director fast thank
you madam chair and with that I
move that the committee adopt
the LFC recommendation.
Thank you for that motion is
there is session.
Representative Crowder on the
second I appreciate that is
there any objection.
All right and I do want to say I
understand that we there was
someone who wanted to offer
public comment on this
particular agency at this time
in this process we do not accept
public comment I do encourage
anyone who would like us to have
that public comment to please
email the HSA FC staff and they
will forward that coming to all
of us again this is a we are the
recommendation faces a sept
Committee and therefore we will
have another chance to consider
this agency in the final
approval and any public comment
can be considered by the full
HSC committee at that time so so
just please no we don't take
public comment now but we are
certainly open to hearing from
the public if you will email
your comments we will share them
so so thank you I appreciate the
work that you've done executive
director Jeremy Ferris anyone
who started anything from from
the ground up knows what a
challenge you've had so I
appreciate your work and and our
analyst as well and we will
forward the LFC recommendation
at this time.
Good morning.
All right and my wonderful
committee took me seriously when
I said we had a hard stop at
eleven so we've got all of the
all but one done in an hour so
let's see if we can spend the
next hour on do it not just.
We have do.
Operative information technology
as our final agency for today
and that Jessica I believe is is
our analyst there she is so if
you will start us out Jessica
and introduce your the DFA
counterpart and our agency
contact Mr Salazar depreciated.
Well so much madam chair members
of the committee and thank you
all for being here right early
on a Saturday I am adjusting its
men and I'm here again with Mr
Simon Miller over at TFA and we
are also joined with us
secretary John Salazar and his
team over at do it who will have
a short presentation for you
all.
so if you will look and I will
also follow the organization
I'll go ahead and present the
differences in turn it over to
Simon for additional comment.
Overall the agency's budget
request for general fund
revenues did reflect a five
percent decrease from the FY
twenty one operating budget if
you see on your summary sheet on
page one and again this is a HSD
code three six one my apologies.
the executive recommendation is
two point eight million dollars
above the LFC recommendation
you'll see recommendation did
not include three million
dollars in general fund revenues
for the compliance and project
management program which is to
be used for cyber security
assessments and upgrades which
the agency did not include in
their base budget request you'll
see and Executive
recommendations both support the
inactivation of thirty six long
term vacant FTE as well as
several proposed FTP transfers
between program if you go to
page three for the program
support program.
The executive recommendation for
other revenues is four hundred
and sixty six point five
thousand dollars lower than the
LFC recommendation and this is
accounted for primarily through
differences in the person
category for this program the
difference is that the executive
holds personal flat from the FY
twenty one operating budget
where is the LFC recommendation
fully funds the agency's request
for person hi and this is your
reflect a of funding of I
already filled FTE transferred
into that program.
If you go to page it for you'll
see the compliance and project
management program I'm in this
is the program that provides
guidance and oversight to state
agencies and supports the
project certification committee
which is the oversight or or
state agency I. T. projects.
This program is where the
primary differences between the
executive and the LESC rack.
As the executive recommendation
is three point three million
over the LFC rack and that's
because the executive included
an additional three million
dollars in general fund revenues
for cyber security assessments
and upgrades and thirty six
point five million in other
revenues which again is
primarily related to the
cybersecurity funds are the LFC
did not include the three
million in general funds because
they were not included in the FY
twenty two budget request that
the agency submitted to LFC and
so the assessment for three
million dollars in general fund
was not reviewed by LFC staff.
Are we recommend in this program
the LFC recommends a two hundred
and sixty four thousand dollar
reduction in other state funds
for person and this is to
reflect the high vacancy rate
with in the program as we were
just funding a slightly lower
vacancy rate than the executive
recommendation for this.
we also had a test so primarily
the differences in this program
were counted for for that
cybersecurity.
For the enterprise Services
program which is on page seven
and eight of your packet.
The executive an LFC
recommendations both fully funds
the agency request which was a
two point five percent increase
over the twenty one operating
budget
and we both support the agency's
request to transfer eight point
six million from the enterprise
Services program to fund
equipment replacement funds are
there quick replacement fund
helps to upgrade and replace
aging technology over time.
Are we also supported for the
enterprise Services program the
removal of twenty four long term
vacant FTE.
If you go to your last program
which is the equipment
replacement fund on page nine.
Are the equipment replacement
fund is funded primarily through
internal agency transfers as
well as the allocation of
depreciation costs into the
rates that it charges agencies
and for this program the LFC and
Executive recommendations do not
differ as we fully funded there
were agencies request for
expenditures.
This included a of five point
four million in expenditures for
the enterprise equipment
replacement fund and three point
one million for the share and
equipment replacement about
those two different funds here
and again the LFC and exec did
not differ on these last
programs and we also reach
perform of consensus on
performance measures and targets
up for the first three programs
because the equipment
replacement fund does not have
performance measures nor FTE in
turn it over to Simon and if you
have any additional questions or
comments.
Thank you Jessica good morning
again madam chair members of the
committee
again I'm Simon Miller from DFA
So R. as Jessica stated the the
biggest difference between the
two recommendations is that
three million dollar general
fund increase in the executive
recommendation within P. seven
seven two actually said it's for
cybersecurity assessments and
upgrades statewide in the last
several years cyber attacks on
state and local governments have
risen substantially in addition
to the obvious concerns
regarding privacy and data
integrity these attacks can also
be very costly for example the
twenty nineteen cyber attack on
the city of Baltimore costs the
city over eighteen million
dollars in damages in mediation
so in response to this growing
concern the executive has
recommended three million in
recurring funding.
So with that I will turn it over
to secretary Salazar thank you.
Thank you and welcome secretary
Seles good to see on a Saturday
morning.
Good morning madam chair
committee members thank you so
much for allowing us the
opportunity to be here on a
Saturday to present our budget I
want to quickly introduce my
team here I have Andrea Martinez
our CFO Brenda frescoes are
project manager responsible for
strategic planning and quality
assurance August seraphim will
we'll overseas our general
counsel Raja Sam band our chief
information security officer
Michael Rohrbacher lose our
acting director of public safety
radio and I have Kendra carp our
our director of brought down so
with that we have a short
presentation that we'd like to
walk through with you all and
Andrea is going to be driving on
our behalf.
Thank you address.
So we see that she started
sharing your screen but it's
still.
Just a minute if we can wait
till that start showing.
All I see is Andrea Martinez
says started screen sharing is
that what everyone else is
saying yes.
Technology is so fabulous until
stops working.
There we go thank you.
Was there for a second.
I apologize for the delay your
hopefully you'll come up there
quickly.
Slash through someone no
internet.
In the broadcasting business
I've learned that everything
works perfectly until you need
it to work absolutely.
Thank you so with us.
Let me see if I can try to share
my screen.
There we go.
Thank you great Andrea can you
come over so they were just like
to please.
For whatever reason secretary is
is just.
Then on my community in New all
the giants.
We understand even your audio is
not acting normal secretary
would you like to try sharing
your screen yes let me address
your years The effective
operational please.
Our.
And we understand completely we
we've all been experiencing this
as we've gone through this
session so.
As we go into this year.
The on that.
Andrea can you stop sharing.
Thank you Marci is working this
morning apparently.
It.
Can you see the screen now okay
yes.
Yes awesome I'm gonna go on to
our second
Slide here in that well brief
overview of the presentation
today we're going to give you a
quick overview of the budget and
the numbers of already been
spoken for I think you guys are
are you are accustomed to the
numbers there we want to give
you of overview of our agency
goals and priorities and then a
quick overview just a pie chart
of our budget request for FY
twenty two.
we're gonna give you some
information related to the
executive general fund
recommendation for cyber
security then now we're going to
do an overview of our public
safety radio communication
system and we're gonna end up
with broadband talk a little bit
about broadband what we're doing
in those areas
the next slide.
When I first came on board of
March of last year I was here
about a week before the pandemic
kit and you know we have to a
lot of activity related to the
pandemic but
Part of the do it act a lot of
requires us to meet to develop a
strategic plan for the next
three years so we got our team
together we develop their
strategic goals for not only the
department of information
technology but for statewide and
this is some of the things that
came from the strategic planning
are we had a vendor that helped
us with the plan.
the first item is we really
needed to mature cybersecurity
bit capabilities and practices
are we needed to enhance state
broadband technologies in
support capabilities.
All we needed to modernized our.
The state's information
technology infrastructure that
we host or a do it.
we need and to implement an
integrated public safety
communications network we have
been focusing on just state
facilities and then the resend
the past year or so we've been
working with other counties and
cities to collaborate on public
safety radio and the last item
is really need to develop and
deploy geospatial technology
strategy we do a lot of work
with you on them they're at the
EAC our group that does a lot of
mapping for us but based upon
the strategic goals that we
identified on the next on the on
the right hand side we've
identified some priorities that
we really need to focus on on FY
twenty two and the priorities
are you know the kind of sync up
with what everybody else in the
nation is doing as far as the
other states cybersecurity as
you all know is on the top of
our list because we you know we
have so many activities on a
regular basis related to
cybersecurity almost daily we
get alerts from different
organizations about on PC's
servers are our network
equipment that have to be
upgraded have to be pads have to
be replaced take several so
cybersecurity has been keeping
us very very busy.
the second areas public safety
radio communications all we have
been trying to build and
modernize our public safety
facilities for quite some time
on the initial price code was a
hundred seventy million dollars
for public safety radio and over
the course of the last couple
years we've been funded about
thirty million so we have a Ste
still have a huge gap in public
safety radio and then the last
item is broadband as you guys
know broadband is a major issue
not only in the state of New
Mexico but and the whole nation
out there are still pockets
rural pockets within the state's
were broadband is not available
to constituents so those are the
things that we focused on as we
develop our budget.
I'm gonna move on to the next
slide and the next slide is just
an overview of the budget
request and I'm not going to
spend a lot of time here because
you guys have the figures you
know the numbers associated with
the budget.
All at this point I want to turn
it over to Raju's and and he's
our chief information security
officer madam chair I want to
talk a little bit about cyber
security so that you can get a
sense of the issues with
cyber security and the requests
we submitted late but it is
critical to our transition so
Raja if you can please address
the two sides.
Yes
thank you Secretary and good
morning madam chair and members
of the committee so as John
pointed out my name is Madison
anymore I'm the chief
information security officer for
the state of New Mexico
my function is New York it goes
up created beginning of laugh.
The twenty just after John came
on board I came on board into
this role.
We are slowly but steadily over
the last year I put in various
process these and that
technology solutions to improve
our cyber security posture I can
get into the details due to the
sensitivity letter and not more
operated sitting but I will give
you as much information as
possible through this process be
requested three million dollars
I was recurring revenue source
from the general fund so that we
can staff of operation and
continued to be are the four for
in depth risk mitigation when it
comes to cyber security at right
now we have one thing funding
the to be under the license the
staff at the function to buy
some technologies by some
process sees expert consulting
help and baby is experts help so
we have done that I and some of
the accomplishments that be go I
would be happy if you can move
on to the next slide please.
So as you can see I have some
very high level information for
everybody's understanding
the first and foremost I element
of I. tech is to know what that
back directors are do know that
this to know and understand that
pack worked as we need to focus
on one of our vulnerabilities
are so we took a very large
effort which is one of the
management program create a
program and I understand that I
would risk exposures are are
going to the state IT ecosystem
so asked one of them one of the
management program I'm happy to
say we have onboarded about
forty platelets agencies.
And then just this is that you
have you right so so this in
twenty twenty calendar year we
have scanned close to fifty
thousand assets meeting hardware
assets and then a hundred and
eighty seven application and
that is yield that so many
findings and so many items that
we need to mitigate so we have
constantly working with the
individual state agency
at their I. T. management and
support to mitigate these risks
and that just occasion site
alone these are applications
that service the state I am
going to creation as well as the
constituents so we have two
thousand plus that that's
continuously that the employee
to address and these are not a
one day event as we continue to
address and mitigate these risks
that are new welding abilities
that keeps popping up now there
is a ransom that that is malware
these are some of the more state
sponsored outside the shores of
US so we are trying to mitigate
develop service things of that
nature
so just to give a perspective
why do we need that money that
money so that I can staff my
office and provide the
monitoring that do require on a
continuous basis because
security is just not that one
bank thing it is that continuous
occurring issue.
In addition I will be focusing
on implementing as enterprise
cybersecurity program.
The industry experts and show
biz practices not follow and
implement
all we are also looking at
cybersecurity tools as a unit
commented do we pull up the
public needs to be addressed
specifically when it comes to
ransom madam didn't of students
which to most prominent things
that we work on in twenty
twenty.
Not only that one of this
mitigation technique is to
improve the cybersecurity
autonomous for the state ID
employee poses so we have a lot
of program and get yeah and one
more than one hundred employees
right now and we have
continuously
expanding that program the
include all state agencies
specifically the small and mid
size agencies because a lot of
agencies and implement that that
won't programs as it relates to
cyber security awareness so with
that
thank you John.
Madam chair at this point I'd
like to turn it over to Michael
Rohrbacher our public safety
director to talk about public
safety radio so Michael go
please go ahead.
Good morning madam chair members
of the committee I am Mike for
about current currently the
acting director of public safety
communications for the
department and I just like to
brief you on one of our top
projects right now which is the
replacement and modernization of
the state's public safety radio
communication system this is a
multi year capital project which
is the secretary mentioned will
cost approximately one hundred
seventy million in total the new
radio system is based on a
digital technology which is
called P. twenty five or project
twenty five this is a standard
which is been federally adopted
in the United States for public
safety is and the department of
information technology is
continuing to make forward
progress on this project by
replacing public safety
communications infrastructure as
funding becomes available our
goals for the project for FY
twenty two are the expansion of
the coverage of the system to
cover approximately forty
percent of our state and
statewide geographic coverage as
well as the completion of the on
boarding of the department of
public safety the department of
game and fish state parks and
the completion of coverage and
several major road corridors
next slide please.
So this system is is actually
going to become a a single
unified platform for public
safety entities this is really
important because in the past
we've had several despair at
legacy systems that don't talk
to each other having a unified
platform will make things a lot
better for everybody the
coverage on the system is shared
by both state executive level
agencies as well as
participating federal tribal and
local agencies.
primarily the the whole purpose
of the system is to provide
seamless inter operability
between the agencies that are
participating on the system so
that when they have major
incidents disasters are projects
they're able to actually
communicate with each other on
the radio this is an eight year
capital project is currently
planned the current I C. I. P.
plan has it from FY nineteen to
FY twenty six we did start the
project and FY nineteen.
I potentially this is a revenue
generating project we do charge
for the executive level state
agencies pay through service
fees and rates external
agencies pay at a separate fixed
rate were estimated currently
that the revenue is about five
million per year at the end of
project completion that's
forecast based on the interest
that we have in the system now
and the available potential
subscribers for the system the
deployment plan is based on a
phased approach for the service
area.
And the priority is covering
roadways major roadways first
and then falling into minor
roadways the area of the state
that we expect to serve
geographically in total upon
completion of the project is
about eighty five percent
coverage statewide and as a
secretary mentioned we are
working with many local federal
and tribal agencies to together
for participation in the system
and we've been quite successful
in that effort with many
agencies already joining and and
several others that are
preparing to join at this time.
So that's what I have and public
safety communications and I'd
like to turn it over to miss
Clarke to discuss broadband.
Thank you madam chair and Mr
Rohrabacher I appreciate this
opportunity to share some
information on broadband.
So.
This line provides a quick
overview of general tasks.
That are needed in preparing it
for expanding the current office
of broadband operation should
say leadership elect to do so
with the stakeholder
participation the broadband
framework includes establishing
a governance structure roles and
responsibilities setting
performance measures
Defining a grant methodology to
include state federal and grant
team grant T. bonding
requirements prioritizing the
deployment of projects in
shaping strategies for technical
solutions in an important
element to the program is
leveraging state federal and
private investment funding.
Next slide please.
So very high level the dude
strategy for executing its
broadband mission is to bridge
broadband availability gaps in
to address affordability needs.
Our Raul brought Sussman has
pinpointed residential and
business understands throughout
the state that are currently
unserved by broadband
identifying major infrastructure
projects that need to be
developed we can bridge
availability gaps by
administrate administering an
effective state rural broadband
grant program leveraging federal
funds and private investment
delivering technical planning
assistance that will directly
support entities in developing
competitive project plans for
federal create opportunities we
can also address affordability
by maximizing New Mexico share
of all existing and future
federal broadband grant and
subsidy program funds and by
helping support residents in
internet service providers to
leverage subsidy funding
opportunities in order to boost
New Mexico participation in
these programs.
Next slide please thank you.
This reflects our grant
strategy.
Provides an estimate of
potential federal and private
funding source gains.
Our statewide rural broadband
assessment found that as of June
twenty twenty New Mexico has an
estimated one billion in rural
broadband gaps that need to be
fixed we estimate that a state
investment of at least two
hundred million or forty million
per year for five years for
broadband infrastructure grants
partnering with the internet
service provider community will
go a long way in enabling
critical projects by leveraging
federal in private funds.
Anti matching funds are
considered to be a best practice
nowadays because a financial
commitment from a grant team
will help ensure successful
project.
If the state were to split match
fifty fifty with grantees for
Fred federally funded projects
this could provide an additional
two hundred million in private
funds for New Mexico broadband
infrastructure so we
conservatively estimate another
hundred million that can be
leveraged through federal
broadband grant programs in the
six hundred million noted on
slide is really a best case
scenario so madam chair and
committee members this concludes
the presentation I'd like to
hand the staff over to secretary
cells are for any questions.
Thank you can director of can't
thank you so much madam chair
members of the committee we are.
A point for answering any
questions that you may have at
this point thank you so much
thank you director Salazar and
thank you to your staff a very
important agency with a lot of
information so obviously we
would end up with quite a few
committee questions and I
appreciate that and we will
start with Representative
Hochman be him please.
Thank you very much madam chair
I members of the committee
director cells are thank you
very much for your informative
program I know a lot of other
members have questions so I'll
keep mine to just one just lost
my lighting in my office.
you just and and miss curfew
were talking about the C. T. C.
broadband study that you
completed earlier this year I
believe it's part of that
recommendation you
included something like five
over five billion dollars five
point four I think billion with
a B. dollars for expansion of
broadband through last mile
connectivity with fiber optics.
In the light of New Mexicos
budgetary volatility and
additional
the incident happened meaning
that the vitamins and
ministration moratorium on oil
and gas does it do it have any
plans to update that study to
include let's say less expensive
methods of expanding middle and
last mile services and if so
when can we expect that report.
Madam chair representative.
so just a little bit background
on the CDC's this strategic plan
and assessment the.
The study was a nine month study
where they looked at broadband
needs in New Mexico and up the
the study was done very well it
started by looking at the all
the on served and that the way
they determined the on served as
they got the data from the nine
one one system which is
basically all the addresses in
the state we also got data from
the Navajo Nation as well to
include every everyone in the
state they match that against
The FCC for seventy seven form
data that identifies where the
word the ISP providers fry data
and in your statement that this
study did identify between the
two and five billion dollars gap
to provide fiber optics to every
single resident in the state of
New Mexico the study further
identified that that's probably
not the best strategy going
forward the I recommended it a
couple of different strategies
but the the strategy that we're
trying to implement is our
second it's called a model to
hybrid strategy which includes
installing fiber in areas were
up to locations are clustered
closely together
the identified projects to to
address that gap utilizing that
methodology and that strategy we
can pick up about fifty five
thousand individuals residence
premises except drop from.
what you doing fiber that's a
cost of about five hundred
seventy two million dollars for
that part they recommended
secondarily doing a wireless on
a fixed wireless rollout and
with that strategy we can pick
up forty five thousand premises
so between the fifty thousand
forty five thousand that's about
ninety five thousand the
wireless
strategy has a price code of
about a hundred ninety three
million dollars to get that done
now the the critical part is
that they're still a group of
individuals that are on served
about thirty one thousand those
thirty one thousand they
recommended that we wait to all
involving technologies come
around because that's going to
provide services to them they're
just scattered out there and the
fiber or wireless with the work
we've been working with starlink
and some of the other satellite
companies and they're they're
rolling out facilities and those
facilities will be able to serve
the the remaining of the public
so that's a strategy that we're
going to utilize that this the
the plan had everything that we
need going forward so.
I hope that answers your
question adequately and I'm
going to interrupt here as
secretary Representative we have
a Micaela Fischer with LFC who
can share some information with
us I believe on some funding
availabilities and Micaela if
you're.
On and this is an appropriate
time to share that.
Here thanks madam chair so.
I share my screen.
Yes please.
So.
Chart here.
That.
Shows some of there's a good
amount of money that's come into
the state to help support
broadband a lot of that is
resulted the federal stimulus
stuff dollars of coming to the
state as a result of the
pandemic
He is the exception to that is
this first line this is
seventeen million dollars that
the state it's recurring from
the rural universal service fund
that the PRC runs right now for
five million of that is
dedicated to broadband every
year and
another twelve has been granted
to broadband companies to help
serve so that's recurring
funding that that does already
exist and will continue to exist
I think there's
at least one bill if not more to
even up the amount of money that
that would put out every year.
Here are some of the other.
Cares and other related stimulus
funding that's that's been
available made available to the
state this year I do I got a
nice one point five million
dollar grant from EDA is part of
the cares Act provide technical
support for broadband
development.
There was a you know a billion
dollars in the last consolidated
appropriations act last on the
stimulus bill that came out in
January of this year just for
tribal broadband we don't know
how that's going to be
allocated among all the tribes
in the US now but it's not in
our nation's one of the biggest
tribes in in both land massing
general membership we expect a
good chunk of that will come.
And to be deployed in tribal
areas in New Mexico he twelve
got a good chunk of money both
who cares in this latest on of a
stimulus all of which could be
used for student connectivity
although schools are gonna need
some of that for PPE and other
expenditures to open up
Is another two point or twenty
seven point one million that the
US the governor got just for
education related pandemic
response on the latest on the
stimulus bill had an interesting
three point two billion dollars
and that that was going to go to
internet service providers to
help them subsidize their rates
for low income families you know
we we don't again don't know
exactly how much that's going to
end up in New Mexico but we kind
of have rough benchmarks for how
much proportional national
allocations and up in New Mexico
and we're guessing that's going
to be about sixteen million
coming into New Mexico this year
to help support you know
families that are already in
broadband accessible areas he
for their monthly internet bills
State has been getting out some
capital outlay in the past and
that's been doled out by do it
to some specific projects would
need pueblo county and and in
the southeastern part of the
state there's also you know
these big recurring federal
funds that can madam you know
best case scenario is going to
be six hundred million dollars
what we've seen in recent years
as and in the recent years been
that
we've gotten twenty million
dollars urban areas counties
from USDA's rural broadband
infrastructure program and
another hundred sixty million
dollars to the FCC that that's
to support build out over ten
years so it's it's a complicated
a lot of different funding
sources
you know LFC has done work on
broad staff has done work on
broadband in the past and
recommended that because of this
large amount of funding that
comes in the car and the
complications of the funding
that you know there is the state
would benefit from a centralized
office to help coordinate some
of this
but there's a lot of work coming
on there's a lot of work going
on a lot of funding coming into
the state despite not having
that offices well so I hope
that's helpful information madam
chair thank you very much
Micaela very helpful only I just
thought it would be important
for the the committee to see
that we do have a lot of of
wells in the air and and money
coming in in a lot of different
ways so I apologize for the
interruption I would turn back
now to Representative Hochman
Vigil who has the floor.
And and we do have a number of
other committee members with
questions so we'll go next to
Representative Castellano
followed by Representative Lang
that happened to him.
You very much madam chair and I
understand that we have others
that need to ask questions we
have a hard stop so the interest
of time allowing for that I will
take the remainder my questions
offline to the director thank
you
thank you very much all right
Representative Castellano
followed by Representative
laying in Representative
Armstrong.
Thank you madam chair.
Real quick maybe Micaela.
where is that money now I think
it's nine hundred and some
million dollars just when we
gonna see that money in the
state for technology or or have
we seen any of that money at
this point.
Some of it has Representative
Castellano madam chair some of
the money has reached the state
already especially stuff that
was awarded to internet service
providers through the USDA in
SEC big federal grants and some
of the carriers money some of
the other monies that came
especially in the last stimulus
bill and that just passed in
late December early January of
this year
some of it may have made it to
its final destination and some
of it may be on its way so it's
a little bit of a mixed bag.
Thank you.
Thank you madam chair I have one
more question on the
cybersecurity madam chair I know
I know.
security is very important to
our state we have some so much
records that you know social
security numbers and so on so
forth I don't The presentation
Roger talked about measures that
they have already gone through
one of the accomplishments on
those measures that do it has
done to help what are the at
right now with those
accomplishments madam chair.
Madam chair representative that
that's a good question
you know I I got on board and
and luckily my predecessor has
started the process of the
process to hire us chief
information security officer
because we we didn't have on
individual cybersecurity was not
really accounted for in the the
things that do it did not at a
centralized environment it was
kind of scattered everybody had
their own little cyber security
stuff that they were working on
we have our email team we have
our server to make Sandra so
when we when we I hired rajon we
hired him on in the late April
may time frame we came on board
and quickly we started trying to
get our hands on what was
happening with cyber security so
as Roger mentioned in the slide
we've been able to this applies
to risks sense platform and
again this is something our
processes started before us
which is is good stuff
were actually on a quarterly
basis doing an assessment of all
the different computer assets
that we have out there and we
run through the assets
individually with the auto my
automated process where we
identify security risks in each
one of those computer assets and
then we work with the different
agencies to resolve those
Those one ability so that
process is really kept us
up to date with the security
patches are that occurring and
it's limited the exposure that
we have in New Mexico so we've
made a lot of progress on that
we are also building the cyber
security team or hiring a couple
of other individuals to support
him we started the interview
process we have to individuals
that we've offered.
my job to and they're going to
be joining us pretty quickly but
cyber security needs to be it's
nice to have a recurring funding
in order for us to be able to
support it going forward
cyber security doesn't work for
you give us you know amount of
money this year and then ten
years later you can give us
another pot the threats are
there on a daily basis and we
need to be able to adapt the
technology is changing the tools
are changing and we've been able
to build a plan get some
specifics on what we need to go
we're not completely done but I
think we have a good start in
the you know the for five months
the Raja and I have been here
and then Brenda from LFC has
been very critical in helping us
with that whole process as well
Roger I'd like to turn it over
to see if there's anything I
missed if if that's okay with
you madam chair briefly please
these we have a request thank
you Secretary and madam chair
members of the committee so
I was joined by John as
committed please have pointed
out we have been working heavily
in building that are building
blocks putting them in the right
places to have a more realistic
cyber security program in place
cybersecurity program in the
state cybersecurity program it
has many moving parts are
associated with it for example
we need to manage both if you
need to have policies and
procedures in place we need to
have a governance program in
place I know one of the key
stumbling block that are are are
you know a lot of difficulties
that we have is that there is no
centralization what what what
what the last fifteen twenty
years the state has you know
have centralized IT service be
individual agencies manage their
own system and they take care of
them access so
the issue the advisory for them
to pass and it's up get
dependent on those agencies
completing those acting and it
would be because of obsolete
software obsolete hardware that
they have they put in operating
with impacted to the cleanest
and I don't level so there are
various aspects that B. and
dealing with
hopefully that answers your
question so that is one of the
reasons we have seeking some are
getting funding so that we can
keep this program on going out
of business that secretary
pointed out security is not a
one bank thing and it's a
continuous did today process so
we need to create and security
operations center to monitor and
then improve our visibility into
the state agencies I do the
system right now we have limited
be.
As a internet service provider
we provide the data to the bill
step and that's all we know what
happens to that information
very well I have Representative
that you pointed out of both
sensitive information and these
agencies such as social security
number I prior to this role I
came from TRD that I was
managing the sentence of
sensitive information right I
was license information right to
information property tax
information tax information you
name it you tax information
include many of the financial
documents that you find thank to
protect them they know the
backed by the malicious actors
know that we have data rich but
the need to protect them and
protection it's time money and
resources okay thank you and you
know back now I I apologize that
we are under a time time
restraints Representative
Castellano did that answer your
question.
Yes madam chair thank you and
and I think cybersecurity is
very important for our state and
I'm new at this I I don't know
how we can take a look at that
time.
Million dollar always at the
executive have has put on their
recommendation but thank you
madam chair thank you Secretary
center.
So I apologize yours thank you
representative we know now go to
Representative Lee.
Thank you madam chair and things
The presentation and as we were
told and we all know the demand
for I. T. service projects it's
it's increasing so I just have a
basic question I noticed for FY
twenty the reserve version about
eight hundred eighty five
thousand back to the general
fund could I just get some help
in understanding the reason for
that reversion thank you madam
chair thank you yes Madam chair
representative that was in there
that was not we we did that we
for all eight hundred thousand I
believe the reversion amount was
eighty thousand
Andre I think you have a little
bit more information on that if
I could just have the answer
quickly for an actor number
please.
Yes thank you Secretary Salazar
madam chair representative lane
I'm it does appear that there in
the LFC Williams three the
reversion mouth wrapped
referenced
table I'm so we actually
Representative I reverted eighty
six thousand four hundred and
eighty nine dollars in FY twenty
from general fund.
Thank you madam chair what
differences here on the left
side of the screen does make
thanks for the clarification.
Thank you representative Lente
yes I will go to representative
Armstrong followed by
representatives.
Thank you madam chair I'll be
quick and to the point on the
public safety radio is there a
map of the forty percent
coverage that you have in the
state and do local law
enforcement EMS and fire have
access to that those towers.
Madam chair representative I'm
gonna turn that off question to
Michael's you'll answer that for
you.
Madam chair representative
Armstrong we do have a map for
clarification currently we're at
twenty one point six percent
coverage in the state our goal
for the next fiscal year is
forty percent we do have and map
that shows that protection I'm
happy to get that over to the
committee.
Local agencies do have the
opportunity to participate in
the system currently at the fee
based system in which there is a
the person describer or per
radio per month to join the
system and that we do have many
local agencies that are
participating and build out of
the system either through
matching funds are direct
investments into technology on
the system.
Okay thank you for that answer
and I would like to see a map if
at all possible if we could get
that to the LFC I'm also I
wondered what the thought is on
broadband and working with local
coops.
If there's been any talk about
that at all.
Madam chair representative so
yes that's part of the framework
that we want to build for for to
do it office right now we don't
have a week we have to study
that's very scientific it tells
us where the gaps are tell us is
the funding sources all of that
stuff but what we're trying to
do is build the framework of of
how broadband is going to be
rolled out in New Mexico we can
affect governance structures we
talked about this kid can
identify how the granting
process is gonna work the
participants what's the
expectation the contract to
process all of that stuff these
to do be developed it's kind of
like building a house right you
want to just go out there you
need to have the architect
architect build that plan so
that you follow the and that's
what's lacking right now that
that's something that we want to
do will working with a couple of
vendors to see if they can help
us with that plan.
Okay thank you so much for that
answer I just want to hope that
you keep in mind that the local
co ops in compass cities and
rural New Mexico and it's it
gets a little convoluted and
crazy trying to get everyone to
say okay and and you know we've
had some issues down in this
coral like trick coop area so I
appreciate all your hard work in
your answers thank you so much.
Thank you representative
Armstrong and Mr rove occur I do
think we would all appreciate
seeing that coverage ma'am so I
appreciate you sharing it with
LFC could share with us yes and
now we go to Representative have
a.
I thank you madam chair thank
you Secretary Salazar and all
your staff.
We're very grateful to you just
staff just so I I just want to
just a couple things here and
We went through this report very
very carefully at this group of
eight women eight excuse me
eight legislators who have
worked on this for about eight
months of all last year of we
have the right New Mexico out
thank I guess I'm just going to
put that out there we work
closely with rural electric
coops too closely with ISPs with
a lot of different people and
and really I think one of the
major findings in the report if
I could just tell everybody was
at the office of broadband it
said elevate and from the office
of broadband for those of you
who don't understand before
there are really two people
running the office of broadband
in New Mexico I mean if there's
a reason we don't have statewide
affordable and universal
internet services is because we
are dedicating the money that it
needs so so we work closely with
the LFC with the chairman
Lundstrom with a lot of people
do it the governor's office to
see if we couldn't pull together
of funding sourced that would
really work and expand this
office and our I.
I I think that cybersecurity is
really our new military these
days that's really how important
it is to every single agency and
every single home really in this
in this country and and so a
large part of this effort will
be to really reach out and make
this
affordable for rural for the
unserved and the underserved and
we do have broadband deserts in
the middle the Albuquerque to so
so a lot what we need to do is
really combine hello the assets
in the state which means all of
our state agencies the most
important part of what I think
we've agreed to do we're trying
to do is to work together so
that so that you don't have what
I call internet cybersecurity
silence in the state so that you
can bring together the state all
the agencies that we all are
under one broadband office so
that so that policies and
procedures are uniform
throughout the state and that's
that was I think the big lacking
well there's a lot of things but
that's certainly one of the most
important thing how do you bring
all your state agencies together
so that you can have the best
people working together
to bring about this service in
New Mexico and I I realize madam
chair I haven't really
given question here you're
probably aware is the question I
think it's really for those of
you who have the time and I know
this is like a fire hose in the
middle of the legislative
session but they do it
technology strategic plan is
really a good document if you
have any time to read it or just
read the executive summary I
think it really lays out what
the problems are and also what
the solutions are for for
getting our for bringing our
state up to par and really this
grant writing is going to be
critical what you should know is
that the
The car selector discussed
twenty six million in federal
grants to bring up both peak at
Easton Task pueblo up to par
they will have a hundred percent
service center right there and
then they got another of that
from the rural digital on real
digital opportunities fund and
then there's something else
called the rural utilities
service spent on another's
seventy.
One million seven million five
hundred to do eight thousand
drops of drops in rural New
Mexico so the money that the
funding is there funding is
there what what we are doing is
taking advantage of that so we
have to bring all this funding
from the budget down to the
local level work with our I. S.
P.'s in a real clubs in the
people providing that service
and help them as a coordinated
effort and I will be quiet madam
chair that's all I have to say
thank you.
Thank you Representative and
thank you for the work that you
and your colleagues have done in
this particular area over over
the last year and we are running
out of time US secretary Salazar
I will just say that I I do also
share Representative customers
concern on cyber security
assessments and upgrades I think
it's hugely important this will
Mister money or a brings to the
forefront how you how we need to
have these requests in a timely
fashion store LFC staff who are
our staff working with this can
can analyze them thoroughly and
incorporate so that we we get
really good guidance as we go
forward I mean that's basically
the difference in the budgets
and and unfortunately.
You know this cybersecurity
three point three million was
not in the LFC request because
it wasn't given to our analyst
in time so I know we're all
doing the best we can under a
lot of different circumstances
and that kind of brings us to we
where we are at this point but I
do want to give you and your
staff great amount of credit for
what you've been doing and I
know it's been a very
challenging time with with the
pandemic for all of us and and
cybersecurity technology
everything kind of is is in your
department that's been brought
to the forefront with this new
virtual age that we're dealing
with.
So having said all that I will
turn to vice chair had another
for a motion.
Thank you madam chair I
recommend we go with the that
committee adopt the LFC
recommendation.
Thank you.
Thank you for that and thank you
for the second representative
Alice is there anyone who
objects to that recommendation.
Seeing no hands and earn I I
will go forward with the
recommendation and remind
everyone this is a
recommendation to the full AGFC
and and we do have some
opportunities to and maybe look
at the request that we've been
unable to feel at this point and
and I think cybersecurity
assessments and upgrades which
would certainly be worth another
look so.
Well under that direction for
LFC staff as well.
And with that I thank you very
much so committee you have
concluded that the business in
time for us to take a five
minute stretch and get to our
eleven AM next committee
meetings so thank you thank you
for all of your your hard work
on this committee all of our
analysts hard work and and
especially for giving part of
your Saturday morning to our
important agencies and with that
hopefully we will see you all
virtually or many of you
virtually Monday thank you have
a good weekend goes thank you
have a good.
Jack.
