Representative Garrett.
Representative Hernandez.
Here.
Representative Herndon.
President
Representative Herena.
Representative Little here.
Representative Lujan.
Representative Lujan.
Representative Pettigrew.
Representative Pettigrew.
Representative Sanchez.
Representative Sareana,
Representative Silva.
Here.
Representative Vincent?
Vice Chair Dixon.
Vice Chair Dixon, uh,
chair small.
We have a corm. Excellent. OK,
thanks, members, uh, we'll go
straight to Representative
Garrett on House Bill 195 as
amended.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Um, I'm
here, uh, House Bill 195, school
nurse salary ears and minimums
with my witness, Joshua Laundry.
He's a nurse at Chaparral Middle
School all the way from Malamo
Gordo. Uh, do you want me to do
the amend it first, or? Um, can
you uh explain the budget,
uh, or,
uh, if you can, uh, summarize
the bill and then uh tell us the
amendment number and we'll get
to that. OK, so nurses play a
really vital part in.
in our schools today, as they
always have us the 195 is twice
amended, brings clarity to
school nursing licensure levels
as well as with commensurate
salary levels and reduces
turnover.
That's it. OK, uh, can you tell
us the amendment number, please?
Yes, it's 231-881.1. Great. OK,
that's what we got and can uh
have a motion in a second for
the amendment to for discussion.
OK, uh, moved by ranking member
Chatfield, same by
Representative Duncan. The
amendment does.
What
It removes
Amendments 1 and 4.
Excuse me, doesn't
Strike House Education Committee
Amendments 1 and 41 was just to
add an or and a and, and the 2nd
Amendment put in a uh
OK. Uh, so, uh, we're getting
clarification from our um from
the budget director that it
removes the $250,000
appropriation, that's the key
point.
Which was added in house
education.
Uh, but there was a little
mistake in the original one, and
we had to um
Remove and add to uh an or and
and.
OK, got it. Yeah.
OK, um, so that, uh, is removing
the, um
The, that, that $250,000. Any
questions on that amendment?
Can have a motion to adopt HAFC
amendment.
OK, it's been moved by
Representative Duncan saying by
Representative uh Hereta, is
there any opposition to that
motion?
We've adopted that.
Is there anybody here who would
like to speak on House Bill 195
as amended?
Commander.
Good night, Mr. Chair and
members of the committee. My
name is Gloria Doherty. I am a
registered nurse and a nurse
practitioner, and I am here on
behalf of the New Mexico Nursing
Association and the New Mexico
nurse practitioner Council. We
strongly urge you to vote in
support of House Bill 195 are
nurses are integral to our
children's development and their
education, they play a vital
role in our kids' lives. I
myself
have two adult boys who if it
weren't for the elementary
school teachers would probably
be very messed up living through
a divorce that my ex-husband
wouldn't let me send him to
counseling and the nurses took
it upon themselves to make sure
that they were OK, and nurses
are the heart of everything, and
they're under they're underpaid
just like teachers, and so
hopefully this can give them a
little boost so that they can
take care of our kids and help
them mature into responsible.
adults and healthy adults. Thank
you. Great. Thank you very much.
OK, I don't see anybody else,
uh, in person. Is there anyone
online?
OK.
Don't see anyone online, um.
OK. Well, we'll go then to the
committee for any questions.
Um
I guess, Representative Silva.
Uh, thank you, Mr. Chair. um,
thank you for coming out all the
way from Chaparral, that's in uh
House District 53, so I just
wanted to give a shout out and
say thank you for the work that
you do at Chaparral Middle
School, uh, and, you know,
that's a really important
community to be serving out
there. So thank you so much.
Thank you, Chair. Thank you. OK.
Um,
The, uh, OK, and, and
Representative Garrett is sort
of looking at some of the
explanation. This is um the, the
increases to public school, uh,
Personnel is the source of the
funding that will be utilized
for this? Is that correct?
That's correct. It's in the
budget. OK. OK. OK, that's the
question, the main question we
asked San Pettigrew, another
question.
Thank you, chair.
and representative, thank you
for the bill. I'm just a little
confused as to why we need to
level nurses.
Uh,
I have.
Mr. Chair, uh, representative.
Uh, so presently, um, school
nurses, uh, across the state,
uh, are not in the same.
Uh, pay parity as our cohorts
so.
Teachers, administrators, and
school counselors. That's
unregulated presently. uh,
teachers, counselors,
administrators are all on a
three-tiered system. Um, so
level one, you're at the 50,000
level 2, 60,000, level 3,
70,000.
Um, and school nurses, that's
unregulated. It's currently
decided by the local LEA.
Um
And so we did a survey, the New
Mexico School Nurses
Association.
Um, many of the largest cities
in the state are already on that
structured system, um, some of
the cities are also giving you a
stipend that the teachers
received for having a national
board certification, um.
But many of the rural
communities, um,
And the places where
Uh, nurses are needed the most.
Or at a lower pay level, um,
below that of teachers.
Administrators and counselors.
Thank you for that, Mr. Speaker,
and, and representative and
expert.
So what's the low end?
And what's the high end for our
nurses right now.
Mr. Speaker, uh, I'm sorry.
Mr. Chair.
Representative, um.
So in the survey, I don't have
like actual figures from a.
A, but uh from the survey, we
had people that reported that
they were paid either hourly,
uh, we're making $30,000 a year.
Um, and that's the low end. Um,
the average school nurse in New
Mexico is presently paid um.
According to the New Mexico
Public Education department
around $68,000 per year. Um,
And
Um.
That's, that's the current
standing on the high end, I, I
couldn't tell you a high end.
Mr. Chair and, and
representative and expert, um,
So, let's just pick the one,
30,000 a year.
This is for a full-time
registered nurse.
Uh, Mr. Chair, uh,
Representative, and so,
In nursing as a registered
nurse, you have different levels
of of uh so you have like an
associate degree, which will
give you a registered nurse. Um,
do you have a bachelor's degree
registered nurse or a master's
degree registered nurse.
And so I do not know what level
that person is at.
But my assumption would be that
they're probably an associate
degree nurse.
Which is one of the lower end of
the pay scales that we would see
across the state.
Mr. Chair, representative and
expert.
So you're a registered nurse
with an associate's degree and
you have a master's degree
registered nurse. What's the
Difference between what they can
both do.
Um, so registered nurses,
associate degree, bachelor's
degree, master's degree. My
apologies, uh.
Mr. Chair, Representative.
Um
It's your level of education,
um, the amount of professional
skills that you're able to
perform, um,
And so, at the high end also
like a master's degree with the
national board certification. It
creates a high level of
competence, um, and ability to
be able to perform your job at
its best, making sure students
are getting the best care that
they can.
Herman and representatives and
expert, so we're, we're defining
We're, we're saying that
education over
They,
their work is in residency to
get before they get their
registered nursing license is
more important. We value school.
A master's degree.
When they both can do the same
thing.
An associate level nurse.
Mr. Chair, expert versus a
master's level, I mean, just
because one went to school for 4
more years.
We value that more.
And they both take the same
test.
Uh, Mr. Chair, Representative.
Um, right, so with any
profession, even in
Uh, education.
Currently, uh, there's a
three-tiered system for
teachers, um, teachers,
You have the three tiered, so
you'd have a bachelor's degree,
um.
After that, you get to a level
2, where you would have
potentially years of experience
and then
If you were to get a board
certification or a master's
degree move up to a level 3.
And so that's the current
structure for teachers, where
education is valued.
And that would be the case for
nursing as well.
Mr. Chair, expert, I would think
competency would be valued.
Not education.
Uh, Mr. Chair and
Representative, this
standardizes that because it's
both experience and the
education levels.
Again, sure, representative, I
appreciate the bill. I just
don't understand it. I would
think that.
You're a nurse, you're a nurse.
Doesn't matter what your degree
is, you're still able to take
that exam.
You're still able to go through
the process to get your
registered nurse's license.
Competency over over over
college.
would then become the critical.
just like it would incorporate,
not in
Bureaucrat government.
Um
OK.
Uh, I appreciate this. I would
like to know offline who that
school is cause I'd like to meet
the superintendent that can hire
a nurse uh registered nurse for
30,000 a year. I want to hire
him.
Thank you. Thank you very much,
Representative Pettigrew. Thank
you, uh, we'll go to Saint
Vincent for the motion.
Mr. Chair, I'd like to make a
motion for HB 195 as amended,
uh, the do pass
it's been moved by
Representative Vincent, seconded
by ranking member Chatfield, any
opposition to that motion, we
shall represent Pettigrew in
opposition.
Thank you very much Garrett,
thank you. Also thanks to uh Ms.
Member Mattis from DFA for being
here.
Uh, Murphy, perfect on time. Uh,
so Murphy represent Lahan.
For uh House Bill 394.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker, uh, Mr.
Chair.
committee members, um, we're
presenting today, uh Hopi 3.
Um, the substitute for um let me
get this.
Excuse me. How energy,
environment, and natural
Resources Committee substitute
for House Bill 340394.
Uh, Mr. Cha, it's relating to
energy creating the state energy
advisory Board and prescribing
duties and we struck um
We struck the appropriation, uh,
madam Mr. Chair, so we have an
amended, we have an amendment
for the bill, Mr. Chair. OK.
Perfect. Can you read us that
amendment number, please? Yes,
sir, it is.
231-871.1 we've got. Can we have
a motion in a second to discuss
the amendment? OK, uh, it's been
moved by ranking Commander
Chatfield, saying by
Representative Sanchez, uh, can
you, uh, go ahead, please
explain the
representative, Mr. Chair,
simply we struck the
appropriation, and then on page
two lines, um.
1 and 2 we struck energy
infrastructure sector and
inserted in lieu thereof
electric utility and industry,
and then on page 3 restrict
lines 24, 25, and on page 4, we
struck lines 1 through 6.
And that was just in regards to
the appropriation, Mr. Chair.
Great. OK, so we're taking out
the appropriation.
Um
And also
Uh, making the one change.
To, um, electric utility
industry.
OK. Any questions on the
amendment?
Can we, uh, have a motion to
adopt the amendment.
OK, there's a motion a second to
adopt the amendment, any
opposition to that, then.
Adopted the amendment. Now we'll
go to uh public comment.
Well, actually, uh, yeah, we'll
go to public comment and then
we'll come back representatives,
uh, any additional thoughts you
guys want to add, uh, public
comment.
Test it.
Uh, good evening, Mr. Chair and
members of the committee, with
respect, my name is Scott Lopez
and I founded Vida Mehor Capital
at Okeinga Pueblo and Espanola.
We are a 501c3 nonprofit. The
New Mexico Energy Policy
symposium, a two-day meeting for
tribal, rural and urban energy
stakeholders is one of our
projects last October, we
gathered over 300 state
residents in Espanola to
educate, discuss, and work on
energy transition.
Transition solutions while
balancing economic development
and prosperity. Many of you
generously supported that event.
Thank you. I wholeheartedly
support House Bill 394 because
of the direct applicability of
relevant information and data
for energy policy and research
here in New Mexico, as well as
the creation of an energy
resource board. Thank you, Mr.
Chair and committee members for
your consideration. Thank you.
Good evening, Mr. Chair and
members of the committee,
Sherrohorse with P&M. Uh, we
think the uh sponsor for uh
introducing this conversation
and we do think that this is an
important bill, especially as we
talk about the transition to
cleaner energy as well as uh
other energy resources. Thank
you. Great. Thank you.
OK, uh, I don't see anyone
online, uh, representatives will
go back to you, Representative
Murphy, thanks for being here.
We'll go to you.
Thank you, Mr. Chair and members
of the committee, um,
The, uh, I really appreciate the
uh
Microphones a little touchy. Um,
appreciate the, uh,
My colleague bringing this
forward. Um, I have some
experience in this area and um
Under the George HW Bush
administration. I served as a
public lands policy advisor to
the Secretary of Energy are very
famous and well respected um
Manuel Lujan, who was uh our
former congressman and uh of
course, Secretary of Energy
Secretary of the Interior, and,
um, and during that time, I sort
of got introduced.
This idea of a high level policy
committee, um, advising
secretaries uh in this matter.
Interior, um, uh, public lands
matters, and as we know, the
intersection between public
lands and energy development is
uh is very robust.
Um, during the Clinton
administration, President
Clinton administration, um, I
was asked to serve on the
Secretary of Energy Advisory
Board.
And I'm glad to see uh that this
is uh has been uh renamed a
little bit and it's a state
energy advisory board and it
makes the acronym very simple,
CAP.
Um, and that was, uh, under
President Clinton, um, Hazel
O'Leary, and then um uh later
Secretary Pena, who was the
former mayor of Denver and, and
also uh a very active uh and uh.
Um, Secretary of Energy. And so,
I'm glad to see the
establishment of this type of
advisory board with broad
representation.
Because I think that it serves a
number of purposes.
One is that it gives the
secretary.
Very broad and diverse
information and opinions on, uh,
from all sectors, and you can
tell from the bill that's drawn
upon all of those areas, right?
Renewables, traditional energy
and oil and gas.
Um, all the areas that, that we
sort of think of as the nexus of
energy.
And it also provides, I think, a
very high level.
Um
Input but also output.
Of, um, perhaps, um, they're
going to be, as we make this
energy transition.
Um, areas of, of pressure in
areas of policy that we're gonna
have to, um, as a legislative
body negotiate.
And figure out
But also too, at the cabinet
secretary level, um, this person
is going, wanting to hear, is
going to want to hear from.
From, uh, diverse opinions.
And so, um,
This is a, an area of volunteer
experts at a very high level
coming in to advise the
secretary, um, he or she, and
they may
Accept that advice, they may
reject that advice, but they
have that advice.
And the thing that I have found
in my short term in this body is
we need a lot of advice, but
mainly we need good accurate
information, and we need it from
people that know what they're
talking about.
Um, and then we can evaluate
that, that information, right?
But that leads to good policy
decisions. And I was reminded by
uh Secretary of Interior, uh
Lujan that uh good science.
Leads to good policy.
And so this will lead to good
science, good advice, and good
policy. And so that's why I'm,
I'm here and talking from the
real world perspective of how
this can work and why I'm so
supportive of it. Thank you, uh,
Mr. Chair. Thank you very much.
Thank you, Representative
Murphy. Thank you,
Representative Lohan. Uh, we'll
go to questions now. Uh, we'll
start with Representative
Little.
Thank you, Mr. Chair, thank you
very much, Representative and
representative bringing this
forward a couple of
clarification, uh, uh,
questions, um, under the FIR
under significant issues. I'm
curious as to uh how uh the
board will or will the address,
the um first issue that was
noted about uh um
ination between the PRC and uh
EMNRD.
That's in the first paragraph.
And secondly, and uh uh the
second question is also on the,
in the 3rd paragraph.
Um
Uh
Uh, the world the board
membership, it will be be tasked
with also providing.
Mm
Will they be clarifying the
language or um
Resolving the conflict, or will
this be, is this addressed in
the bill somewhere that I'm not
seeing.
Thank you, uh, Mr. Chair
Representatives. Thank you,
thank you, um, Mr. Chair, uh,
Representative, so your first
question is how the board will
coordinate with the the PRC. Is
that correct?
Uh just your first question so I
can and then I'll take the next
step. Thank you, Mr. Chair. Um,
uh, in the first paragraph, uh,
it was noted, um, you can read
it highlighting the first
paragraph under significant
issues.
It doesn't codify any
coordination between the PRC
even though both agencies are
engaged in regulation and
cultivation of the state's clean
and.
Clean energy and natural
resources.
And so, um.
I'm wondering if that is the
intent.
Of this body.
Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Thank you Mr. Chair
Representative Little, um,
I, uh
I can't answer specifically how
that coordination will occur, I
would, I would say that this is
a policy board that is really
going to be advising the
Secretary of Energy and because
of her position, um, regarding,
um,
Oil conservation vision, MAD.
All of the things that fall
underneath her, her, his or her
perspectively, um, Purview.
Um, will be sort of a trickle
down from that. And that is, is
that um this is a very high
level of uh board that, that,
uh, um, would it, would consult
with the secretary and the
secretary, I think from that.
would make sure that her
departments and excuse me, her
cabinet level, um, um, positions
and departments underneath that
would be following obviously the
direction of the governor, the
secretary and and down with
that. I hope that's a sufficient
answer by me and missed the
point of your question, yeah,
Chair, on page 3 subsection 5,
It says, uh, they would generate
annual report to the Secretary
of Energy, Minerals and Natural
Resources and legislative
legislative Finance Committee.
So we, we make sure we'd
integrate um and coordinate also
with the, with the secretary
with information and
I think that's the coordination
if that answers your question.
Partly it does, but I appreciate
you providing a response.
And um, and your second
question, ma'am, was on the 3rd
issue that was identified, uh,
the third paragraph. I'm sorry.
You mind reading that, um, Mr.
Chair.
Representative
I'm looking at the FIR. I'm not
sure if you're looking at that
as well. I'm looking at the FR
page too. Is that what you're
looking at, um, under Mner or
the 3rd point.
In spite of the paragraph in
spite of these issues, advisory
boards such as the one proposed
in HB 394 can play important
functions for agencies.
Particularly when it comes to
raising the profile of agency
actions such as
Rule changes land acquisitions,
notices of funding, is that
correct?
No, am I?
Uh,
no, no, I think, uh I think
maybe one of the things, uh, the
FIR may be referring to an
original, uh, the bill, we now
have a committee substitute of
Little, and I think that may be
um the committee substitute has
taken out some of the, uh, the
subject of some of that
analysis.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. I'm gonna,
I'll review my documents so that
I, I see if the answer if, if
that's been resolved here, if
not, I'll let you know. Thank
you. Thank you, Mr. Chair. Thank
you, representatives. Great. Uh,
now we're gonna go to
representative Brown, please.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Good
evening, everybody. Um, and to
the representatives, I
I too was thrown by the
analysis, um, I compared them to
the bill, and so I have in front
of me the committee substitute,
but I'm wondering, Mr. Chairman,
if the bill title doesn't really
reflect the bill now.
Um, it shortened it to say, um,
It's the state energy advisory
Board, and what I saw um state
energy, I thought, oh, that's a
host of types of energy, but the
bill itself really narrows the
scope and looks like it's now
referring in the bill to clean
energy, and if that is truly the
focus, then I think the bill
title isn't very uh accurate,
Mr. Chair, representative. Oh,
thank you for, thank you for
catching that, Mr. Chair. It it
is, we did take that out. It is,
it is now just the state energy
advisory Board, um.
Mr. Chair Representative. Yeah,
um, so, I, I guess what I'm
trying to say, Mr. Chairman,
Representatives is, I'm not sure
that
Advisory board when you just,
it's so generic and the energy.
Advised state Energy advisory
Board, but in fact, in the bill,
it looks like they're only
really going to focus on clean
energy.
And so I just wonder if the bill
title ought to reflect that.
Usually the bill title has to
be.
Catching what the uh, so I'm
just going to raise that as a as
a point, um, and then, let me
move on, Mr. Chairman and
representatives.
So what threw me about the
analysis, they were really done
on the original bill. One of
them was not. It was done on the
committee sub, uh, but the
numbers of people from the
various uh categories, uh, the
of the analyses talked about two
members from various categories,
and it's down to one in my
understanding, Mr. Chair,
Representative, yes, that's
correct. That was that was a
changed uh in the.
In the substitute, so it went
from, if you look at the
substitute from page one.
Starting page one, line 22 to.
Uh, page 2 line 11, you'll see
that now there are 11 instead of
19.
And, uh, madam, uh, excuse me,
Mr. Chair and the representative
Brown, um, that was largely done
as a uh um
Due to some comments in house
energy principally from Chair
McQueen about the size of the
board.
And so there's always that
balance, right? You have to have
it big enough where you can
probably, uh, well, you have to
have a big enough where you have
a representation of all of the,
um, the industries and, and, and
the various stakeholders and the
concern, um, but you want, but
you also have to have it
reasonably sized where you can
get a quarter people to actually
show up.
And so, you know, is that, is
this exactly the right number? I
don't know, but I, I think it
is, um, because, um, it's, it's
large enough, it represented
enough.
Um, to have that sort of broad
stakeholder uh participation at
the same time, um, it's
reasonable in terms of actually
getting people to show up. So
that's the balance that we're,
we're trying to strike. Thank
you. uh, Mr. Chair and.
Mr. Cherry representative, so I,
I know what you're saying. I
think smaller is better. I've
been on a board that had 30
members, and it was unwieldy, so
smaller is usually better, and
Mr. Tre and representatives, I
have a concern on page 3 of the
bill. This is the committee sub.
And it's really just a syntax
issue, I think. Um, I'm looking
starting at line 12.
It's support to, it says
basically state Energy Advisory
Board shall, and that's up
above, and 2 says provide expert
input.
And specific advice to the
Secretary of Energy, Minerals
and Natural Resources, and that
Secretary Staff to the governor
and to relevant interim
legislative committees
addressing energy and natural
resources for implementing and
maintaining so forth.
So I, I think
It can be misread, uh, because,
uh, Mr. Chair, it sounds like
the committees
That would be given advice or
addressing energy and natural
resources.
And so forth, and maybe that
Part of the uh paragraph should
be put up on page 12 after the
word advice cause what we're I
think we're not talking so much
about the interim committees.
Or uh the uh
Yeah, it's interim committees.
uh, Mr. Chair, so I'm just
thinking if you take the words
addressing, and this is on line
15, addressing energy and
natural resources for
implementing and maintaining
clean energy in the state and
just take that and put it on my
12 after the word advice, and I
think that it modifies
correctly.
Uh, just so there's no
misreading, so, um, just one
suggestion.
So
Yeah, Mr. Chairman and we
consider that a friendly
amendment. Great. Let's, uh,
we'll, uh, that's a pretty I, I
think we can do that on the fly.
Let's go through some additional
questions, um,
OK, great. Yeah, keep going,
representative. Thanks, Mr.
Chairman. um.
And so then, um,
I don't know if I've ever had a
friendly amendment, so this is
exciting for me.
But Mr. Chairman,
representatives, I'm, I'm
looking at, I think it's the uh
physical impact report and
Uh, no, this is an agency
analysis from Amner directly,
and they're wondering.
Um, about the timing of the
meetings and the the bill says
Um, meet at least twice.
Uh, so I, I think that covers
one of the concerns that was um
brought up earlier.
But for some reason they're
interpreting in what it says
before the legislature meets and
then after they're thinking
somehow it's this meeting before
the session will be right in the
middle of the holidays. I don't
think I read it that way. I
think it could be in October or
whenever, but.
So I don't think there was an
issue with that. I thought about
it and we looked at that too and
Mr. Chair, um, representative,
uh, and we with the Chairman
McQueen as well, and he, he
brought that up and he's OK with
he had his.
There's another adjustment, so
that was corrected, so it's
fine, I think, thank you.
Uh, great. Thank you,
Representatives, um, uh, let's
go to other questions and
We've got representative Hernan
well, before we go on to that,
uh, Brown, would you mind making
that motion, um.
And then we can get a second
just so that we capture that,
please.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Um,
I'm I gonna phrase this? Um, Mr.
Tur, I moved that.
Um, the, um, house energy,
environment, and Natural
Resources Committee substitute
for House Bill 394 be amended
here in committee.
2 on page 3 of the bill.
Um
I don't want to say I don't want
to say strike, but basically
take the language on page 14 of
uh let's see, uh, line 14 of
page 3.
And uh we would capture the
words.
Um
Let's see, let me get back.
Advice, um, yeah, OK, it's line
15. There you go. Um, so we
capture the words addressing
energy and natural resources
than on 16 for implementing and
maintaining clean energy in the
state and just basically circle
that.
And move it up to line 12 after
the word advice.
It.
OK
And we'll, and renumber
accordingly, although we
probably won't need to remember.
Correct. But, OK, OK, the, is
there a second? OK, it's been
moved by uh representative
Brown, same by representative
Sanchez, and this moves.
From line 15, the from words
addressing.
Uh, energy and natural resources
for implementing and maintaining
clean energy in the state, it
moves that to line 12 following
advice.
OK, any questions.
Yes, that is correct. That's
true.
Uh, OK, and add the semicolon
after committees.
OK. Um, any opposition?
Oh no, I'm sorry, um.
So we're capturing up to the on
line 16 of the word state at
semicolon actually would remain,
so we wouldn't have to add a
semicolon.
Yeah. Leaving our semicolon
intact. Yeah, thank you.
OK.
Um, OK.
I think we've got that. Our
staff has got that.
Got the thumbs up. Any
opposition to that?
and
We've adopted uh house
corporations and finance
committees, Amendment number 2.
The house energy. OK, great. Um,
now we're on to uh other
questions going to
Representative Hernandez. Repent
Hernandez.
Mm
Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Uh, uh, Mr. Chair and uh
representatives, first off, I
really appreciate you guys
bringing this forward, um, you
know, it's always needed to have
these um discussions, uh,
especially, uh, looking at this
is focused mostly on the agency.
Is that correct, Mr. Chairman,
Representative?
Representative, uh, uh, Mr.
Chair Representative, yes. Mr.
Chairman, uh, Representative, I,
I, I've been a part of numerous
advisory committees, boards, and
under, um, you know, the, the
last couple of years and um
just, just kind of uh uh
concerned about the overlap, you
know, with these, um, boards,
Mr. Chairman, representative,
there's a one that I feel like
is really similar to this, and
that's a sustainable economy
advisory taskforce.
which Mr. Chairman
Representative, which is, I
believe it's under the economic
development department, was
chairman representative, are,
are, are you guys familiar with
that? And will you guys be
working with them because it
seems like they're doing the
exact same things that is
outlined on here, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Chair, um, representative,
thank you for bringing that up,
uh, and through discussions with
the secretary or now secretary
can tell of emner and others,
um, we did consider that and we
understood that. What is
significant to this is that this
is the secretary that
That is focused on the scope of
of of um.
Of all the of all the parties
that we brought together, and
she the current and then maybe
future would need that to
develop that focus, understand
the economic development. I, I
assume and I see how that can
partner and be part of, you
know, part of the, the, the
advisory of those experts that
would be part of this team,
Mister Chair.
Presenting
My, my, my last question, Mr.
Chairman, is, uh, um, you know,
uh,
representatives is that um in,
in, in my district, and not just
in my, in, in, in, in, in Mike
County, but throughout, uh, Mr.
Chairman, Representative, and in
rural communities, there's just
a a huge need to help, uh,
communities get electrified and
help communities um get access
to, to electricity, and I'm
really glad that
He then was here to to uh
support uh this, Mr. Chairman
Representative, uh,
M nerd is, is, has a, a grant, I
believe it's, it's a solar for
all grant of $135 million. Just
want to make sure that if this
is gonna be something that's
gonna be on, on your uh advisory
groups uh to help inner, uh,
Push the money out into
communities that need it the
most. Thank you, Mr. Chairman
Representative.
Mr. Chairman Representative
Hernandez, I appreciate that
question. Um, one of the things
that I see this advisory board
doing is, quite frankly, one of
the first things is to
consolidate all the boards
underneath the energy
department. They're, I think
there were about 17 and some of
them were formed for various uh
specific purposes, uh, which may
have passed, um.
But I think we need some
consolidation there, um, to,
and, and, but then secondly, um,
to your point, and um,
Microphones are hard to manage.
I'm gonna move it away a little
bit further.
If we strike the balance here.
Um.
We should share with um and
representative is that I think
there's been, uh, luckily I, I,
I serve on, on the two great
committees, one is the energy
committee, and the other is the
commerce Committee. And the
thing that we have been talking
about so much is how we've got
to get, um, or grid upgraded.
We've got to get electricity,
especially in the rural areas,
especially on, on um Nava
Nation, um, in the Northwest. We
have areas throughout the state
that need that.
And um I see this board is, is
uh pushing that agenda and uh
supporting those efforts. Thank
you, uh, Mr. Chair and
Representative.
Thank you.
Great. Uh thank you. Uh, um,
thank you, Representative
Hernandez. We're going to go
next to Representative Vincent.
Thank you, Mr. Chair, my
question was answered.
Appreciate it. Great. Thank you.
Verra.
I move the do pass.
OK, uh, any other questions?
Uh, let's go to Representative
Verera for the motion.
Oh, I thought I made
Uh, Mr. Chair, I moved uh a due
pass on, uh, let me see, 394 as
amended. Uh, energy,
environment, and Natural
Resources Committee substitute
for House Bill 394 as twice
amended. That's what I meant to
say, OK, uh, saying by
Representative Sanchez, any
opposition, seeing none.
Thank you very much, Murphy, Mr.
Chair, members of the committee,
thank you so much. Excellent.
OK, um,
OK.
Oh, great. Perfect.
Representative Brown, please,
that's awesome.
You better order dinner because
we're gonna be here for a while.
Let's go later.
Right. Representative Brown,
please.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman, members
of the committee. I'm very
pleased to present this bill on
behalf of Senator Leo Jaramillo.
Um, it's a very simple bill
actually, but I have an expert
here just in case. Um, this is
Cecilia Maromatti. Did I say it
right?
Um, so this is in regard to the
DWI programs that we have in all
33 counties, uh, they are
funded, um, in large part
through um the liquor excise
tax, 45% of that tax revenue
goes to support these programs.
They have been receiving
additional revenue as alcohol
sales, you know, increase over
the years, but the
administrative portion of the
program has stayed with outdated
funding.
And so what this bill proposes
to do is take $500,000 that
Out of the 22 million that would
normally go to the programs, it
would put it into administration
at DFA in the local government
division, and the division would
provide some really excellent
oversight and guidance for the
33 county DWI programs. The
trade-off is, Mr. Chairman, the
local um programs would receive
a little bit less in grant
funding, but I believe they
would more than have it made up.
through better um management
guidance evaluation, things like
that. And then I'll just um
mention also that this would
have no impact on the general
fund.
The money's already there, Mr.
Chair. Awesome. Thank you very
much, Representative Brown. Uh,
thanks for your expert. Anybody,
uh, anybody who wants to make
public comment?
Uh
DFA and LLC in the house, so.
Um, uh, anybody online?
I don't see anybody, any
questions from the committee?
We'll go for emotion. OK, it's
been moved by Representative
Sanchez, seconded by ranking
member Chatfield. Any opposition
to that motion, seeing that,
thank you very much for Brown.
Thank you. OK, uh, members that
does it for tonight. We're
looking at potentially not
having we won't have committee
one night this week. It likely
will be tomorrow night, but I'll
well, we'll, we'll, we'll check
in with folks, um, thanks for
your work tonight though. Oh
yeah.
With
under advisement. But uh thank
you all very much, HAFC is
adjourned.
