Okay thank you for that over
here Representative do we have
anybody from had not yet.
Representative small in here.
Madam chair not that I see I
have taxes cherries who are and
also emailed him
So so madam chair no I don't not
see anybody from had.
Like you to do Representative
Trujillo is to tax that
individual you've been working
with with had so they can get on
the board here media outlay it's
my intention to hear some public
comment on this bill but the
committee is not going to get
into the nitty gritty of the
policy we're going to talk about
how it gets paid for okay so
we're gonna go ahead and if
there's some folks that would
like to make a comment or two
how many do we have waiting to
do that.
Mike.
Madam chair we have three people
with their hands raised at this
time okay for this bill let's go
ahead and bring them in and
hopefully get somebody from Pat
before we go to the committee so
go ahead Mike this spring H. one
and okay we will start with Mr
Christopher vane or yes go ahead
please.
Hi my name is Christopher Ryan
and I am the president of the
New Mexico association for the
gifted the page plus New Mexico
fellow and teacher at chief
manually to middle school and
got McKinley County district I
come to you today to ask you to
support H. B. one thirty we
often hear stories about how New
Mexico is fiftieth in education
and we often hear about the
things we're going to do to
change one of my grandfather's
favorite sayings all hat no
cattle and from the classroom
perspective that is an apt
description when we talk about
the need to get to gifted
students and what we're going to
do to help them.
H. B. one thirty gives us the
opportunity to go from the
number fifty to number one just
like that.
We would be the first state to
ensuring equity in our walls
while at the same time demanding
fiscal responsibility.
You heard Representative
Trujillo mention the FIR the FY
are is incomplete at best
because even the FY are
acknowledges that there is no
way to adequately track the
gifted funding that we currently
have we don't know how being
spent H. B. one thirty creates a
budget code so that we can
assure taxpayer money is being
spent effectively efficiently
and on what it is supposed to be
spent on in addition we will
ensure that over twenty three
thousand students receive the
services that are currently
being denied to that.
H. B. one thirty presents us
with an opportunity to actually
make positive changes in
education in the state of New
Mexico both in terms of the
quality of education but also in
terms of how we spend our
taxpayer money that to me is one
of the key components of this
bill I encourage you all to
support H. B. one thirty thank
you.
Thank you Sir just a reminder we
do have a one minute limitation
please on the public comment and
we'll go now to Mr Steve Pyle if
that's okay madam chair yes go
ahead.
Hello madam chair committee
members my name's Steve Heil and
I'm the president of New Mexico
art education association also
the arts network chair elect for
the national association for
gifted children and I am a given
to support specialist with Santa
Fe public schools currently and
did a lot of my teaching in my
career as an art educator in
Gallup hi Patty thank you for
your service
I just would like to add my
voice to support this bill
because as it everyone has said
this is gonna make a huge
difference for a lot of very
smart kids who are not getting
opportunities they need
especially of under represented
groups thank you.
Thank you very much.
Thank you will not go to Jerry
Lynn morning Salazar please go
ahead.
Hello everybody my name is Gerry
one morning Salazar and I am a
teacher at Nina Otero community
schools and I am here to support
this bill gifted students have a
need for programs that allow
them to learn at their own pace
would like ability appears this
bill will support that.
All schools provided general
education for students of the
same age as special services for
those with disabilities however
New Mexico schools only have to
provide gifted education once
students are identified are
labeled so school sometimes
unfairly denied given to
students and appropriate
education when they do not
provide them
New Mexico funds gifted
education at the state level as
well as general and special
education all schools must
account for the way that they
use money for general education
and special education for
students with disabilities
they're held responsible for
quality programs and outcomes
for these students but not for
gifted students so I'd like to
add my voice to surprise.
Thank you.
Okay have anybody else Mike on
this bill the test that we have
about four more persons
including.
Mr Jeffrey moon go ahead.
Madam chair members the
committee I like to thank you
guys for your dedication to the
important work of appropriately
and equitably funding our
schools I'm also get an
education specialist for Santa
Fe public schools and work for a
long time and Gallup New Mexico
and for five years here in Santa
Fe
I want really want to speak to
the funding of this bill
There is no that estimate that
is really easy to pen down for
how much this will cost effects
because it depends on the new
rules PED will set and the
activity of local school
districts based on the new
accountability measures required
in the bill HB one thirty does
not mandate how many kids we
should find how equitable we
should be or how school should
spend dollars generated for
gifted education rather it
exposes inequity and under
identification the light of day
and then let's local and state
policymakers decide how fast and
how far to go in the pursuit of
both equity and excellence house
bill one thirty make sure
schools and PED look at the
abilities of kids like the kids
that we have all across our
state you have varieties of
levels of ability and raise
levels of opportunity and make
sure that we give them all an
appropriate education I
secretary support thank you.
Thank you next we'll go with
Katrina Garcia's building please
go ahead.
Hi my name's Katrina Garcia
Spelman I'm a gifted teacher at
and we're Gonzalez elementary
school in Albuquerque public
schools I'm a board member of
the New Mexico association for
the gifted and a school
representative for Albuquerque
teachers federation for years
we've been under identifying and
under serving our high potential
students in low income and title
one schools I've seen my
caseload dropped from twenty
eight at the most two one and I
have seventeen years of teaching
experience are underserved
students move on to middle
school they have schoolwide
enrichment model currently only
with APS but they're not
guaranteed Services in middle
school and high school after
that and so there education
becomes last lackluster this
bill is very important to
address Yazzie Martinez and
recognize the high potential
students are also important and
need those supports and
services.
Thank you.
Thank you next will go a
sundress.
Go ahead.
Yes good afternoon
I am calling in today in support
for H. B. one thirty
something different but you
might hear from me is that I am
a parent I'm not an educator.
And with that being said
The group of kids that we are
Leaving behind are the biggest
and brightest kids that we can
have in the state.
And it just it it just set up
travesty that we have allowed it
to go this far and we have the
opportunity now.
To fix that I hope that we can.
Yes this bill with a with a do
pass today and I thank you for
your time.
Thank you next we'll go with
Lori Coleman Lee please go
ahead.
Madam chair members of the
committee thank you for this
opportunity my name is Laurie
Molly Kaplan I am a past
president of the New Mexico
association for the gifted I am
a pass gifted coordinator for
the Los crucis public schools
I'm I'm looking at this from a
community standpoint.
I just I serve gifted
individuals in my private
practice and I see too many of
them leave the state because
they're not getting the services
that they actually have on paper
but they're not getting them in
there's no accountability and
there are many underserved
children in this state that we
need to fix and so I stand in
support of house bill one thirty
as well.
Thank you madam chair we have
one additional speaker in
support of the bill M. Clark go
ahead please.
Hello.
Yes in trouble with my
microphone I apologize.
My name is Marianne Clark in the
coordinator for gifted education
at Gaston Independent School
District and I would like to
support this bill also I want to
really point out that for
districts such as Gaskin were
the fourth largest in the state
we're in an extremely
economically depressed area I am
working with many students who
are gifted that have absolutely
no opportunities and no support
to break out of some very
serious circumstance including
poverty emotional distress at
cetera and I'm begging that we
please pass this bill to support
our students out of south
central New Mexico that need as
much support as they can get
thank you.
I thank you do we have anybody
in opposition.
We have anybody in opposition no
ma'am I don't show anybody
raising their hand Madam chair
okay we have Mr sent a horn
here.
John yes madam chair I'm here
okay good because
Before I go to committee I guess
I want to know why on earth or
what is the what's the position
of head on this bill.
Madam chair and doesn't have a
efficient position on the bill.
Are there specific questions
that that that have come up that
we might be able to answer I'm
not asking you questions I want
to know where you stand on this
bill.
This is an education bill you
guys should be here from the
Santo every time we have
education bills in front of HFC
it would seem to me that was
because what we're doing is
imposing additional requirements
on school districts that you
would have a position.
I mean to say no position then
that is going to come out of the
SCG.
And I mean that's the way I
understand this I'm looking at
fiscal implications on the
second page second sentence
absent Appropration to offset
the increase in new program here
that's the formula would
redistribute formula based state
equalization guarantee dollars
some schools with your given to
students one is it comes out of
the SCG.
And with all the additional
federal money that's coming in.
And that we received in December
I guess let me I'm expecting
this department to have a
position on education bills.
So so madam chair what what I
can say is it's one is it's hard
to determine exactly what that
fiscal implications would be we
don't have
that and that.
And as far as I can tell that
they wouldn't have any fiscal
implications for the next fiscal
year.
Because of the prior year
funding we wouldn't be
identifying you students until
next school year so we went
would be of.
Spending any additional funds
until the following fiscal year
FY twenty four okay so that's
important for the committee to
understand is that because we
use prior year numbers and
because of the way we set up a
hold harmless inside of house
bill two and how the committee
then has looked at how the SCG
and the funding formula would
work when you have an increase
in student population in a
certain care and.
Area then the funding formula
kicks in so what I want to do is
I'm gonna call the on the
committee members I want you to
stick to the fiscal implications
we're not going to get and all
the policy implications on this
bill will start with
Representative Anderson.
Sir thank you madam chairman
I'll be short to the point of to
the sponsor I would start by
making a comment that I'm
concerned about.
And seems to want to address the
fiscal implications of the bill
and that gives me great concern
and and caution about whether or
not this is the circumstance
under which we want to improve.
so my question I suppose is to
the sponsor.
In certain parts of this bill
that you see as a funded.
Of mandate requiring local
districts to change the way in
which they are dressing special
education as.
You get to get an education
question.
Madam chair then respond.
Yes of Representative Anderson
I've had this conversation with
the sunny lu for quite a while
and we debated this particular
aspect of this and because he
estimated that.
Of school district school
districts could potentially
identify as a certain number of
of students that there are that
would change the funding formula
as chairwoman Lundstrom said
however.
If you look at the if I are very
carefully it's all.
kind of nebulous because we
don't know how many of students
the school districts will
actually well actually
identified they have to actually
make a concerted effort to start
looking And identify looking for
and identifying those students
but it's really really kind of
one of those random things
because nobody knows members and
I do madam chair have of.
The Secretary Stewart on the
line as well if you might if
anyone we would just ask you a
quick.
Please madam secretary if he can
make a brief statement on behalf
of the PED and specifically
their reluctance to weigh in on
the bill question.
And.
Sorry madam chair is is
Representative do you want to
put on the secretary otherwise I
can speak to.
Yes the secretary just texted me
that he's on let's bring.
Madam chair while we wait for
the secretary I'm going to
simply say that after if we hear
his brief comment either way I'm
done thank you.
Let's go to the secretary are
you on Sir.
I think thank you madam chair
thank you Representative and
apologize and I'm coming into
the conversation here right in
the middle and could use a
little bit of clarity on
precisely what what we're what
we're wanting to know Mr
secretary is is the department's
position on house bill one
thirty.
And
what's the reluctance by the
department is whatever Kaufer
Representative Anderson but go
ahead Sir.
So so the representative on on
house bill one thirty at I do
believe that
Johnson is our is our resident
expert who who can talk more
specifically about the the
impacts of this bill I I without
looking
again at the bill specifically I
don't have a
in off the hands what this chair
yeah what what we're talking
about Mr Secretary Business
School gifted education
requirements should be changing
of some of the a public school
code to impose new requirements
for school districts.
The way the formula works is
when there is an increase in
enrollment or decrease there is
automatic re calibration.
but we did get a comment from
John center earlier let me
repeat that number going to move
on so go ahead John.
Yes madam chair so again we're
we're we're unsure about the
fiscal implications only because
we don't know how many more
students would be identified and
again because that's prior year
funding any fiscal implications
wouldn't really take affect
until FY twenty four the only
the only other thing I would say
about it in our discussions and
I've and I mentioned this to the
representative is.
Currently school districts do
not do universal screening for
for gifted students so that so
that particular required
districts would be new and
something that we're not sure
how that would affect how
districts would be able to
implement the universal
screening obviously that's the
the piece that would that would
result in in in more potentially
more students being identified I
can say that the number of
gifted students in New Mexico
has fallen pretty consistently
over the last few years from
about seventeen thousand five or
six years ago to about fourteen
and a half thousand
this the last in two thousand
nineteen two thousand twenty and
so I think and I can also say
that the department has been
working with gifted advocates.
To to figure out to make sure
that we're are that we're
correctly identifying students
at the at the district level
I just wanted to comment I guess
for me Mr secretary and John and
we're going to go to the next
next person here just seems
counter intuitive for me here we
don't know how many new people
we're going to get when we've
had such a decrease in school
enrollment this last year
Representative Chatfield.
Thank you madam chair trying it
here.
Madam chair let me let me push
run you but.
There we go can you hear me yes
we can't I was looking at the L.
E. S. C. bill analysis.
And on the second paragraph it
just says that this bill may
entail a fiscal M. A. impact in
a given to students are
considered part of special
education.
And that the five hundred
sixteen point seven million
dollars of special ed
appropriations come from the
general fund.
And then the F. I. R..
On this page two.
It says that this could have a
potential recurring fiscal
impact to the SCG of seventy
five point six million dollars.
And of course because we also on
the on page one of the fiscal
impact report three your total
cost of ninety five over ninety
five million you know I I I
guess to the.
Sponsor I you know I think it's
a crying shame that we don't
know how many gifted students we
have and I think it's also a
shame that we don't have funding
to push them forward
It just in Appropriations
Committee it it looks to me like
everyone agrees that there is a
fiscal impact and how have we
provided for that fiscal impact
I think we are you know I wish
what we had no a long time ago
to be able to start.
Thinking about the budget and
where would come from I don't
know that passing a bill with no
way to pay for it solves the
problem thank you madam chair.
Representative Herrera.
Thank you madam chair thank you
a sponsor I I just want to add
that the you know I worked with
thirteen school districts in
northern New Mexico for
seventeen years and I was always
just I always thought the
special kids for.
Given to kids were undercounted
I really think you have to go to
Los Alamos and look at their
gifted education program there
they take it seriously I am
going to a fifth grade seeing
kids doing academic research
papers at the call level I am
not on that and and I think they
have the numbers under control
and they know how to run it and
and probably PED needs to work
with creek Dr creed Stein that
was almost and and figure this
settler little closer thank you
madam chair thank is currently
Representative Eli.
Thank you madam chair you know
just a couple comments by to
have concerns about the the
financial impacts and I feel
like we're we're sort of putting
the cart before the horse.
It's all an issue I think we
recognize that we need to
improve upon but we don't really
know what the fiscal impact
going to be in New that's a
problem for this particular
committee and I also do you see
there there are some some
essentially on sentiment non
unfunded mandates the worker
eight so for example not just
the universal screening on
behalf of school districts but
this bill also creates a due
process appeal rights for
students who are denied
admission so we start talking
about those kind of kinds of
parameters those to put you know
financial impact on districts
without additional compensation
Roger Representative lane is a
full our south as a former
school board member.
Is it your opinion that this is
something that school districts
should be doing anyway.
Madam chair I I do think that we
should be taken seriously every
student whether here she should
be yep off so yeah I think I
think this is all school
districts should billing anyways
at a high level concept not
necessarily the details that are
in this bill.
Okay.
Representative Dixon.
Thank you madam chair because
the couple questions to the
sponsor
Representative Trujillo you
mentioned that school districts
are already supposed to be doing
that this is that correct yes
madam chair they they're
supposed to have IEPs for from
those students whose teachers
recommended.
The teachers recommended that
schools have an I. P. but ends
up happening is that
there's a lot of convoluted
information that occurs and that
the IP is not followed through
on and and because
Gifted kids are part of idea if
I'm correct Representative
Representative Stuart they're
not part of IT our state.
That's right Representative so
that becomes even more
problematic but madam chair time
Sir Representative Chatfield
question if we had known about
putting this in the house bill
two that's the issue of concern
I've had all along is that we do
the bills after we do house bill
two so we can bring this up
until.
Until after and then so we're
out of the loop I had the
conversation with David Abbey
and I told him it was a priority
bill and that's why Sonny who
was involved in the first place
so that's a big concern for me
thank you madam chair.
Madam chair
and Representative Trujillo so
those school districts are
already supposed to be doing
this is the first thing that I
wanted to highlight and then
madam chair I think this
question might be more
appropriate to
Mr Sanneh and that is if you
could confirm again that we're
expecting no fiscal impact in.
FY twenty two.
in this this next year.
So madam madam chair up
Representative Dixon so couple
things I just want to clarify
the universal screening pieces
is not currently required again
because.
Gifted education is not part of
the federal special education
program universal screening in
in our in other words screening
all kids to see if they're given
is not a requirement that this
bill would add that requirements
to get to get an education that
is not currently a requirement
once they are identified then
yes it falls under we we in New
Mexico we handle a gifted
education very similarly to how
we handle.
Special education that is good
into the individualized
education plan and then a school
is responsible for meeting the
requirements of that plus I just
want to clarify that for so
that's that's not a current
requirements.
And I should probably clarify
the fiscal implications so there
will be no fiscal implications
in terms of serving students for
FY twenty three because we
haven't identified those
students yet.
Once identified those students
would generate additional units
in the funding formula which
could lead to fiscal
implications in FY twenty four.
There may be some additional and
again we don't know what this
would look like
in terms of conducting that
universal screening at the
district level which is
currently not happening.
Districts may incur some
additional costs in doing that
we don't know what that would
look like.
Thank you madam chair and Mr
Santa I'm one of the things that
I was also interested in is the
reduction in the number of
students that have been you
mentioned that we've gone from
seventeen thousand to fourteen
and a half thousand.
gifted students and one of my
questions is are we providing is
PED providing sufficient
oversight and monitoring to make
sure that this is happening
because as we talk about fiscal
implications
I'm concerned that you know we
should be doing.
To a large extent it's not
happening and we've already sort
of accounted for some of this
money
So you know I'd like to make
sure that there is going to be
oversight and monitoring to make
sure that this happened.
So Madam chair representative
Dixon.
One of one of the things that we
are doing currently is working
again as I said before with
advocates for gifted education
to ensure that that districts
are doing a better job of
training individuals and
providing tools that would help
in this in in identifying
students for gifted education as
appropriate.
And if I could madam chair we in
there as well and Representative
land I believe you you mentioned
you made reference to some of
the administrative work that
would be done both district
level and at the state level and
I think for for the public
education department certainly
as we look through the bill
there are a number of areas
where we can we can always
certainly be diving deeper what
would need to dive in
significantly deeper in terms of
of our supports and we would
need to then figure out exactly
how that gets staffed and and
funded at the department level
to make sure that happens and so
that's one thing that that we
are always right because of.
I'm thank you madam chair and
Representative Trujillo I really
appreciate that this has been
brought forward this is
something that concerns me
greatly as a parent and I've
heard from a number of
constituents on this very
specific issue and so I would
like to see forward progress on
this and
you know I I just look forward
to working with you
in the future to make sure that
this is addressed thank you
madam chair.
Thank you very much
representative Garcia.
Thank you madam chair of this
question before Representative
but the feel of used earlier
when you started your
presentation these FIR read
correct what what upcoming
should that apply here wrong.
All of madam chair and
representative Garcia those
those.
Mr in my opinion and discussions
with the with the.
The person who did the FIR is
he.
My discussion with the.
Highest number he could possibly
use in my opinion without really
knowing the exact number of kids
that we're going to be affected
or included and the I thought
that the right greatly
exaggerated after revisiting it
with him and David Abbey we were
able to come back.
Instead of zero to seventy five
in the first year was going to
be zero to seventeen I don't
know if you see that is the FY
are but that was of the re done
FIR and again I feel like we
have
I feel like we have
If we can implement this this
year because it doesn't have
an immediate impact until these
kids are identified.
Then.
Next.
And try to fund it like
Representative Chatfield said we
have the information thank you.
Thank you madam chair and
representative my concern is
that we are looking at numbers
here of nineteen million seven
twenty four and twenty two.
And so forth.
these numbers coming about if
you don't know how many here are
gifted students result there are
people that need the services
you know it just concerning that
you know it's hard to wrap my
head around it a little bit
confused of what we're trying to
do.
We have a big number madam chair
and and we don't roll how many
kids are out there and that's
concerning on how these numbers
came about.
Well madam chair and I think
that's a perfect question for a
job and etcetera.
Madam chair representative
Garcia so in my reading of the
FIR I am doing some some of our
own research just just a little
bit of context.
that there's been a lot of
there's been a lot of concern
nationwide that students of
color in particular have been
under identified for gifted
education so that's that's the
national context and from what I
understand LFC staff used a
study out of Purdue University
estimated a certain number of
students that could be
identified if processes were
improved in order to identify
more students so there was a
estimate of students that could
potentially be identified
through improving processes use
that estimate to calculate the
fiscal impact based on the units
that those students would
generate over the next few years
in my reading of the initial FIR
it was the largest estimate that
was used to to to estimate what
the fiscal impact would be over
one fiscal year.
Thank you madam chair of the.
You know we're it's hard to
compare apples to oranges and
other states in our state you
know we should compare our state
will we have facing us not what
are some other of the state or
what they do have a lot of
problems you know the gist of my
concerns and you know it and
that.
Madam chair and representative.
I know that our students need
help given to keep kids need
help I understand that for a
while but it's hard to grasp
what we're doing here what not
even knowing numbers of how many
school we had is the earlier in
conversation I heard madam chair
and representative of there were
seventeen thousand to twenty
four thousand and should have
dropped down seventy thousand
those are just numbers that are
being thrown out there not just
been having a hard time wrapping
my head around that in you know
I do support have been trying to
help these kids what what I'm
looking at in front of me just
not make too much sense to me
right now thank you madam chair
thank you Representative okay
before I go to the next member I
saw Charles lady have your hand
up Sir go ahead.
I just wanted to clarify for the
committee that the study that Mr
Senate cited was doing estimates
based on New Mexico's population
and it's a the study estimated a
range of between sixty two
hundred to twenty three thousand
students that could be
identified for special education
for gifted but that we're not
and that the F. I. R. basically
estimates at the low end and
then.
Assuming the state does a better
job as a result of these policy
changes that cost would grow
over time as the state enrolled
more students into special
education so it's that the FIR
is giving you a low end range
based off of that particular
study and then noting that the
likely impact which changes New
Mexico does a better job of of
identifying special education
students as a result of the
legislation and that would have
a fiscal impact in the in the
funding formula special ed
students generate a weight of of
point seven so nearly doubling
for
people funding for a student
that is identified as a special
education.
Thank you madam chair.
Crowder.
Thank you madam chair
I would I would move to table
this.
Okay we have a motion to table
but I'm not going to allow that
yet to stymie debate we have one
more wrap that had her hand that
so we'll go to Serra
Representative Sierra and then
after that we'll take up the
table and motion go ahead
Representative thank you madam
chair as a teacher of the gifted
programs really important but
number start changing when they
get to high school because
sometimes it's not out of it
doesn't meet the needs of the
kids the gifted program and
other times the classes when
band is or when when orchestra
is or when these other classes
are so they're not going to they
usually prioritized that over
the given to provide asked so
these numbers I think it's hard
to pin down because especially
in high school right because of
that reason so I I think it's a
great program I think you can
see the kids are gifted and if
they're being challenged in
class and you try to challenge
him as much as you can but
and there's not nearly enough
Selected for the program or or
tested into the program but it
doesn't always meet their needs
so but thank you.
Thank you Representative we have
we do have a motion on the what
do we have a second.
Also.
Okay we have a motion and a
second that's a non debatable
motion was take the role.
Yes is to table now is not to
table.
Representative Allison.
Representative Anderson yes.
Representative Armstrong yes.
Representative Brown yes.
Representative Castellano.
No.
Representative Chatfield yes.
Representative Crowder.
Yes and I would like to explain
more about.
Representative Dixon.
No to table.
Representative Ezzell.
Yes.
Representative Garcia.
No.
Representative Herrerra hello.
Representative Hochman Vigil
now.
Representative Lane.
Yes.
Representative Lara.
Representative Sarinana no.
Representative Sweetser yes.
Representative Trujillo.
No.
Vice chair small.
Yes.
Madam chair yes.
Yes and nine knows.
Tabling motion will stand thank
you very much let's move on to
the next bill.
yes we have a couple people that
want to talk quickly Madam.
Yes I would like to make sure
I'm gonna bring this back and
hopefully we can hear it before
we do.
Two so that we can actually
included in the budget thank you
madam chair Representative
Crowder and quit interrupting go
ahead Representative Crowder
thank you madam chair I I
appreciate the bill a lot where
you're going I I am encouraged
that you're going to bring it
back I think it's a good idea I
just don't believe it's right at
this moment I I as a very sad
that PED did not endorse they
they were neutral on this hi
Thank you with their endorsement
this is great but we need to
have the eighties by and and we
need to have better numbers we
need to know exactly how it's
gonna be paid for and that's why
I move to table thank you madam
chair.
Thank you anybody also had to
say something after their vote.
Okay I don't see any house let's
go to the next bill.
Which is Senate bill fifty nine
that would be Senator Stewart I
think they're still on the floor
she's asked me to carry this
bill on the house floor for her
so she may not be here but we've
got Dawn from LFC that can
explain to Senate bill fifty
nine go ahead.
Yes absolutely thank you madam
chair thank you members of the
committee the Senate bill fifty
nine makes to primary changes to
the function of transfers
between reserve funds the first
one is going to increase the cap
on the operating reserve under
current law the operating
reserve can only grow to eight
percent of prior year
appropriations anything in
excess of that eight percent is
then transferred into the tax
stabilization reserve this bill
would increase that cap to
fifteen percent of prior year
appropriations before that
transfer is been triggered the
second thing that this bill will
do is find that the excess oil
and gas school tax monies that
are currently distributed to the
tax stabilization reserve our
first distributed to the
operating reserve it is still
possible for excess oil and gas
school tax money to be
transferred into the tax
stabilization reserve depending
on where the state is with the
cap so for example if the state
is near the operating reserve
cap on the amount of the excess
oil and gas school tax monies
would send it over the new
fifteen percent cap under this
bill then it's possible for
those excess money to be
transferred into the tax
stabilization reserve those are
the two primary functions of the
bill and I'm happy to answer any
questions.
Right let's go to the what I
have on the US FIR and I'm
looking at attachment one H.
five.
It's the flow chart.
If you want to make any
reference to those flow charts
this is complicated particularly
for new members of the committee
so let's let's take a peek at it
if you want to quickly go
through that yes absolutely
madam chair so on that
attachment one it shows two
different flow charts and how
the reserve fund transfers will
work the first one has to do
with the fifteen percent reserve
cap so the first thing that we
do in terms of looking at
whether to transfer to the
operating reserve or to
determine tax stabilization
reserve at the end of the year
is first we have to know with
revenues appropriations so you
see on the closure that's the
first step revenues do not
exceed appropriations we
actually end up dipping into the
reserves to help cover the
budget so no additional
transfers are made at the top of
this flow chart if revenues do
exceed appropriations than any
in anything in excess of
probation for that year as first
transferred into the operating
reserve I depending on the
balance of the operating reserve
it could then trigger a transfer
into the tax stabilization
reserve for the second that I
guess it would be a third step
in this flow chart highlighted
in green is does that operating
reserve exceed fifteen percent
of prior year appropriations if
that is not the case then
nothing happens and if it does
exceed the fifteen percent of
prior year then it's going to go
into the tax stabilization
reserve and just for quick
reference for everyone for your
FIR if you look on page two of
your FIR there is the
illustration here of how
transfers that occurred to the
tax stabilization reserve in the
past this operating reserve cap
has been the primary reason for
increased tax stabilization
reserve monies in the last three
years as you can see that
balance of that tax
stabilization reserve was zero
in FY sixteen and seventeen the
entire balance of that bond was
used to cover those years
probation during the last oil
and gas downturn however in FY
eighteen when we.
Experience the production boom
it resulted in a five hundred
and twenty seven million dollar
transfer into the tax
stabilization reserve and then
this happened again in FY
nineteen and FY twenty and the
amounts of three seventy seven
and then four eighty eight so
that cap on the operating
reserve has been the primary
reason of the tax stabilization
reserve has grown and then you
can also see the additional
transfers from the school tax
which would bring us back to
your attachment one on page five
if you look at the flow chart on
the bottom of the
decision tree there are two
mechanisms in the general fund
for stabilization of oil and gas
revenues one has to do with the
federal mineral leasing payments
this bill does not change that
at all so anything in excess of
the five year average for
federal mineral leasing payments
will continue to go to the early
childhood Trust Fund.
If you look at the the bottom
part of the flow chart the
second has to do with the school
tax distributions so if revenues
exceed the five year average for
those school tax the first
question would be are revenues
in excess of twenty five percent
under current law if revenue
excuse me our reserves if
reserves are already twenty five
percent of recurring
appropriations then all of that
excess school tax money actually
gets transferred into the early
childhood trust fund and this
bill does not change that.
Yes reserves are less than
twenty five percent.
Then it will go into the
operating reserve first until
reserves get to twenty five
percent
And then yes the again if the
operating reserve exceeds
fifteen percent at
appropriations with that
transfer then it would then
trigger on any of that access
school tax dollars above that
fifteen percent and then going
to the tax stabilization reserve
so these two well charts
outlined the the functions of
the buckets if you will of those
excess reserve dollars and I'm
happy to explain them in any
greater detail of their
questions okay.
Right thank you do we have
anybody in the queue that wants
to make a comment about this
bill.
Madam chair I don't show anybody
at this time okay so let's go to
the committee
do we have any questions from
the committee.
Representative Anderson go
ahead.
Thank you Mr chairman I I
noticed in the of FY are on page
one we talk about the
distribution of excess oil and
gas emergency school tax
revenues and then we seem to
drop we we drop a merger C. but
we keep the word access I'm I'm
I'm just really curious about if
there's excess.
emergency school tax revenue
status that not suggest that the
emergency might be over
and I made that.
Representative for an answer
that today but I leave that out
there because I do think that
when we pass taxes in New Mexico
for emergencies we should give
serious thought to.
Removing the tax ones over thank
you madam chair.
Well see.
Okay here that is a question so
Representative Crowder tools
please please be at your
compares.
Representative Crowder.
Madam chair my question was
answered thank you.
Representative Chatfield.
Madam chair
Lot of graft and things to learn
about but
highs I suppose we're talking
about the rainy day fund and
My of my question is could this
have an overall effect of
reducing our total reserves
especially on a on a good day on
good here when we're building up
reserves and not pulling from
the right rainy day fund with
this or could this
reduce our overall reserves.
Okay Representative Chatfield
what this bill is trying to do
is to make sure that we have
more in our operating account
then in our savings account at
the end of the day I mean the
yield in the onion skin back
that's what we're trying to do
because we got a lot of money in
our savings account I don't have
the high level general fund
summary sheet but I'm gonna I'm
gonna have them talk to those
two concepts so don you want to
talk to that are Charles.
Madam chair of Representative
Chatfield I'm happy to talk to
its of the current balance of
the tax stabilization reserve is
around one point seven billion
this bill does not change the
amount of the overall reserves
in and of itself what it does is
provide as as difference of how
those buckets and triggers are
are activated in terms of
allowing the operating reserve
to grow larger before
distributions are made into the
tax stabilization reserve to the
extent that the legislature has
a target for reserves for
example twenty five percent
then the tax stabilization
reserve in aspect grows at the
expense of the operating reserve
so the bigger the tax
stabilization reserve gets the
harder it is to keep funds in
that operating reserve in order
to make appropriations for the
year and still keep that twenty
five percent amount so you can
envision at some point the tax
stabilization reserve could grow
to thirty percent but if we had
a twenty percent or twenty five
percent target and that tax
stabilization reserve is very
difficult to access there would
be essentially no way to get
back down to your twenty five
percent target so what this does
is increases that the liquidity
in the flexibility of the state
by allowing more funds to be
available in the operating
reserve in order to function
with facts reserve target but it
doesn't actually change the
amount of money that are in
reserves so it is up to the
legislature every year to decide
how much they want to happen
reserves this bill doesn't
change that in itself.
All right Representative
Chatfield you still have the
floor.
Thank you madam chair thank you
don't all right Representative
Sweetser.
Thank you madam chair I was just
remembering that we've already
had to pass one piece of
legislation to help with the
liquidity am I correct in that.
Madam chair you are.
Session bill that we had to do
Representative Joe Sanchez
feared that force going into and
so by changing this from the
eight to the fifteen hopefully
we're going to eliminate the
need to constantly be during
that in my correct in
understanding that.
Yes go ahead Dawn.
I was yes madam chair and
Representative Sweetser.
Okay thank you madam chair I
just kind of wanted to make that
point because when this this was
actually an active my very first
year here and nobody quite knew
how how the fund would populate
how much we would we would have
been in and out how difficult it
would be to access when we
needed that money so we've
already had to visit I think
this bill is a grid
thanks to maybe where we don't
have to visit every session
every special session at least
that's my hope madam chair thank
you.
Thank you Representative Brown.
Thank you madam chair my
question is is there a point in
the interest rate for what is in
the tax stabilization reserve
versus what's in the operating
reserve.
Madam chair representative brown
yes there would be so in the tax
stabilization reserve it is
invested differently in any
income from that investment on
the tax stabilization reserve go
back into the tax stabilization
reserve the S. I see has a asset
allocation that distributes that
has around four percent or so
return target that gets back
into the tax stabilization
reserve monies that are in the
operating reserve are invested
in the treasury so invested with
the state treasurer's office
those are
usually more in line with cash
investments that have a lower
interest rate return so they
tend to be about one and a half
to two percent and any interest
earnings on those funds actually
get distributed back into the
general fund and did not say in
the operating reserve.
Thank you
madam chair and and darn so do
we have a dollar figure to put
on what that difference would be
say in the next year.
Madam chair representative brown
if you give me just a minute I
can come up with a dollar figure
Korea.
Madam chair representative brown
it would be a difference of
about two and a half million.
so two and a half it if we just
assuming right now the only
actual changing distribution
that this bill makes as the
school tax distributions so
that's estimated to be a hundred
and twenty six million in FY
twenty two on that hundred and
twenty six million we can
probably expect about five
million dollars assuming that
the the tax stabilization
reserve generates its return
target however under still it
would probably earn about two
and a half million dollars.
Thank you.
Charles you have your hand up I
thought I signed.
Dawn answer the question madam
chair okay Representative
Crowder.
Thank you madam chair.
Dawn can you put a dollar number
on today's budget board from
eight percent to fifty percent
dollar number what is that
amount.
Yes madam chair representative
Crowder just please give me a
moment.
This madam chair Representative
Crowder as house bill two left.
The house.
It really wouldn't trigger
anything because House Bill to.
The house version would have
eighty six million and the
operating reserve and it would
have.
One point three billion in the
tax stabilization reserve at the
end of FY twenty two so you're
your reserve target was almost
twenty four percent eighteen
percent of that would be in the
tax stabilization reserve so not
a lot of liquidity this bill
doesn't affect that balance
between the two
reserves but it would have an
impact in the future to allow
the operating reserve to be a
little bit larger that what and
it would under different sort of
the current law.
Thank you.
Yeah what what I'm what I'm
picturing in my head is we're
going to just capture a little
more the money coming in will
hold in in the operation reserve
in a little less money will
actually wind up in the tax
stabilization reserve and and
I'm trying to see if we can come
up with a dollar amount.
Of of what the difference what
what is the number.
If we move from eight percent to
fifteen percent.
Madam chair representative
Crowder in in very rough terms
eight percent would be about
about.
Five hundred and sixty million
and fifteen percent would be
about one point two billion.
So it it would almost double the
amount that could be in the
operating reserve I going from
eight percent to fifteen percent
almost doubles the
The ballot at the the percentage
so it almost doubles the amount
that could be in there so the in
rough terms it can grow to about
one point two billion before
triggering entrance.
Okay and and madam chair and don
Charles how did they arrive at
eight at the the fifty percent
why did it go from eight percent
to ten percent what what because
that decision or how was that
decision made.
Madam chair representative
Crowder out when this bill this
proposal was brought forward to
us in terms of ways to address
the distributions to the tax
stabilization reserve we
presented the sponsor with an
idea of being able to increase
that percentage and we said you
could increase it to it is up to
the legislature ten twelve
fifteen percent of the sponsor
chose fifteen percent.
And madam chair representative
of Crowder you know the eight
percent.
Kind of has been in play where
the legislature for years had a
ten percent
reserve target because of the
the stress testing that the
crank has been doing and and the
continued increasing reliance on
oil and gas revenue for the
general fund legislature's
chosen to to move that reserve
target up
rightly so because it helps you
with this pandemic
this past year so but when we
move the reserve targets up to
the stress testing and and the
greater volatility related to
the oil and gas revenue these
thresholds were never adjusted
in statute
and instead what's happened is
that the tax stabilization
reserve has grown at a much
greater rate than we originally
projected and now you've got
like John said more money than
then you may want in the future
in your savings account versus
your checking account.
And this would restore some
better balance with this new
reserve targets.
Are you still on the floor.
Representative Crowder.
Okay I see are muted set are you
married by my computer froze up
and had to reconnect and I
apologize I missed that answer
but I I would yield back my time
thank you madam chair all right
I'm gonna go now Representative
small the representative madam
chair I would move and do pass
on Senate bill fifty nine okay
we have a motion for a do pass
on Senate bill fifty nine is
there any opposition to that do
passed motion.
Take the role the service staff
take the role of the S..
Representative Allison yes.
Representative Anderson.
Yes.
Representative Armstrong.
Yes.
Representative Brown so.
Representative Castellano.
Yes and yes.
Representative Chatfield.
Representative.
No.
Representative Dixon.
Yes.
Representative Ezzell.
Representative Garcia.
Kerry are muted.
Very your muted Representative
Garcia come back to and let's
come back to a Representative
had it up yes.
Representative Hochman Vigil
yes.
Representative Lane okay.
Representative Lara yes.
Representative Sarinana yes.
Representative Sweetser yes
Representative Trujillo yes.
Representative Garcia yes.
I share small yes.
Madam chair yes.
Thirteen in the affirmative.
Working working fourteen in the
affirmative.
And I in the negative okay we
have a due pass motion on Senate
bill fifty nine list going out a
Senate bill seventy Senator
Padilla let's bring a man.
Go ahead Sir if you can hear me.
Yes madam chair can you hear me
we can't you're on go ahead.
If we listen.
Madam chair I.
Your okay go ahead Senator I
don't know why my first great
pictures up there I can take it
off right now.
That's that's better okay so
Senate bill seventy isn't NMFA
oversight committee endorsed
piece of legislation.
And that just appropriates
eleven point three million
dollars a two point five to the
from the public project
revolving fund madam chair
eleven point three million
dollars two point five to the
drinking water revolving fund
two million to local government
planning five eighty one point
eight million to the wastewater
facility construction fund and
five million dollars to the
cultural affairs
facilities fund and this is an
and NMFA endorsed peace
legislation typically they do
this all on one bill of our
different bills madam chair but
they are doing this all in in
one this time it's it's that
does not affect the general fund
it's simply we wanted your sign
off on it.
Madam etcetera etcetera cash
balances of PPRF yes it is not
all right so just so the
committee is clear this is not a
general fund.
Source it would come from cash
balances so let's go to the
audience is there anybody Mike
in the audience that has
something to say about the bill.
Any hands up.
No ma'am I don't show anybody at
this time okay any questions
from the committee.
Representative small.
Madam chair I will move it do
pass on sent Senate bill eighty
eight as amended Senate bill
seventy.
Start.
Thank yes sorry Senate bill
seventy I apologize okay to have
a second.
Representative Herrera has
seconded we do have a motion for
do pass on Senate bill seventy
is there any opposition to the
motion saying line you have a do
pass thank you senator thank you
madam chair all right how about
Senate bill eighty eight as
amended.
Thank you madam chair I'll be
presenting that bill okay let's
go with that don't.
Okay Senate bill eighty eight
madam chair as amended as the
public project revolving funds
project authorization bill which
was endorsed Sicko finance
Authority oversight committee as
amended this bill authorizes
NMFA to make loans from the PPRF
two hundred sixty separate state
and local government entities
included in the bill based on
terms and conditions established
by NMFA the PPRF legislative
authorization carries a three
year authorization period at
this time madam chair I would
like to call in my experts
Marquita Russel from NMFA in in
case us you need to answer any
questions from the committee
okay let's say a do we have
anybody in the audience so that
may have a comment about this
bill.
Okay market one one quick minute
you want to say anything else
madam chair thank you for your
time this is our annual
authorization bill and allows us
to make loans to your
communities and with that I
would stand for questions.
All right let's go to the
committee is there any questions
on this bill.
Representative small.
And now madam chair I would move
a do pass on Senate bill eighty
eight as amended during the
second second second for
Representative Herrera is there
any opposition to that motion
and staying on we have to do
passed as amended thank you
let's go to the next bill and
we'll keep Marquita on and that
is Senate bill one thirty seven.
Senator Sanchez.
You want to go head start on
that talk about that Marquita or
less Dow is here is
Representative down here in the
group is I just promote okay
let's have Representative out.
Representative Dow.
Chair thank you members of the
committee on the one water
project and authorization.
Hearing this on behalf of New
Mexico is pretty oversight
committee which unanimously
endorsed the.
This has been recommended by the
water transport for funding from
the water projects fund this
recommendation follows a
thorough evaluation of.
Application five seven HSD
refusal there are thirty
projects located in twenty four
counties applications total
approximately forty seven point
seven five million so there's
five water fund prevention
products flood prevention
projects there are to water
conservation tree recycling
reuse projects twenty seven
water storage convenience and
delivery projects and will Water
Street this is not an
appropriation bill.
Product of argument appropriated
by the water project funds and
this authorization contained in
Senate bill one thirty seven is
necessary for entities listed to
receive their awards.
Stand for questions market would
like to.
Okay.
But in the audience is going to
say anything about this we had
anybody like.
Madam chair no live.
Okay.
Go to the committee do we have
any questions
Representative Dow on this bill.
Representative small.
I'm sure I would move it do pass
on Senate bill one thirty seven
with the emergency clause.
Okay Representative second set
is there any opposition to that
motion saying none do have a due
pass thank Representative Dow.
Thank you madam chair.
All righty so we have concluded
our work for today it doesn't
look like we'll be meeting
tomorrow will be meeting on
Friday is my best guess at this
point so we'll have a day off
tomorrow lesser some big
emergency or something that
happens leadership that we gotta
pull together but right now I
think we're we've got a day off
tomorrow so with that thank you
committee and look forward to
seeing you later in the day
thank you bye bye.
