This were in commerce
consultation with Sanchez we've
either role the bill for will be
tabling but we were very pleased
to have representative Garcia
here if you want to introduce
your expert and then go ahead
with Thomas about HB twenty nine
thank you very much for of
course in the Mr chairman I do
that for on the zoom Taylor
movie with the attorney
general's office and
and and my other expert Matt
Props
physician assistant and
with the are you in Medical
Center center
but Mr chair I'd like to
briefly
If we kind of
go into the legislation not in
the the detail that we did
originally but as a summary any
for your
for your knowledge Mr chair
because you are present here
and then the I want
entertainment and.
after we do the brief summary
and then we can go into
questions regarding what the
committee has a deem necessary
in terms of moving legislation
forward which is where R. AG
assistant the has that
information to provide to the
committee so if we could proceed
from that perspective Mr chair
that sounds great okay thank
you.
Mr chair members of the
committee house bill twenty nine
in this substance use disorder
programs.
Allocates one point three
million from the opioid
settlement in the consumer
settlement fund of the attorney
general's office for integrated
residential drug treatment
center housed in the Las Vegas
New Mexico Mr chair the one
point three million will
complete the needed funding of
approximately four point eight
million to construct renovate
furnish and equip the treatment
center and Mr chair the
treatment center will serve and
opioid patient population in the
seven county area of northern
and northeast New Mexico
stretching from the Espanola
valley front on to Santa Rosa Mr
chair I do have an amendment
thank you very much average of
Garcia can someone move this
ammendment for discussion
purposes.
Okay it's been moved I or
someone twisting my
Representative Chatfield the two
two five five oh three point one
that's correct Mr chair please
explain the amendment Mr chair
of the Attorney General felt it
was important to specify exactly
what in the consumer settlement
fund we're tapping into so we're
we're just basically adding
opioid settlement portion of the
consumer settlement fund in the
AG's office so we're just adding
it opioid settlement portion of
the.
You know in the in the in the
bill to clarify that this one
point three million is coming
from the opioid settlement
portion of the consumer
settlement fund of the AG's
office has with the amendment
does Mr chair Hey thank you very
much representative Garcia thank
you for explaining it and
working on this ammendment is
there any any debate upon the
amendment.
This I think it helps clarify
for us representative Garcia
very clearly where this is
coming from is there motion to
adopt them and.
Right.
The document okay it's been
moved by Representative Trujillo
their second sept okay we got a
second by Representative for you
only because it's close.
Question okay is there any
opposition to adopting that
motion.
Seeing none you have an amended
bill Representative Trujillo
let's go briefly I know Mr way
is on line is there anybody who
wishes to speak in support of
this legislation here today.
Please Sir go ahead.
Good afternoon everyone my name
is Harold Garcia I am the San
Miguel county commission chair
and I'd like to speak on behalf
of these of of this proposal we
currently have awarded the
construction of this project
although it's not going to be a
complete project until we have
the additional funds allocated
to us but we are hoping to break
ground here within the next
thirty to forty five days it's a
much needed facility in our area
being that we are in addition
part of the state we're
incorporating San Miguel County
mora county well you pick only
into into this project we've
also incorporated the City of us
Vegas The Village of pickles and
Division OAG amount into this so
it as you can see it's going to
be a regional effort in even
though there's only a there's
only twenty eight budget
proposed it may be.
Something that will will soon be
filled because of the the the
drug use that's going on in
northeastern New Mexico but
it'll be twenty eight beds that
are that are being taken care of
twenty eight people that are
being taken care of so we're
we're we're anxious to get this
program done and started and
hopefully we can have some of
you are groundbreaking ceremony.
Thank you very much Mr chair.
Okay I don't see anyone else
online there anybody who wishes
to speak in opposition and.
Seeing none let's go online Mr
boy from the assistant Attorney
General boy.
Is there anything you'd like to
add before we go to the
committee for a motion.
Thank you Mr chairman and
members of the committee I
apologize for being unable to
attend in person as the Attorney
General this is a brief summary
on this as I know the members of
the committee or where this will
be your phone it was crafted in
order to continually photo when
it falls on the phone with the
tobacco settlement the reason
that he's wearing a lot of the
tax money for use allocated
budgets for matters completely
unrelated to the tobacco.
so in this regard.
Practice very particularly
measures we are looking Madam
but
it is also wanted in the
settlement of the product.
Will allow you activities
interactive community to craft
to the specific remediation
efforts for the communities.
If they were to those individual
maybe needs to that extent
general office all right
probably forty to twenty nine
because it exactly does what
will be your Madam seeks to do I
providing guided remediation
efforts for identical just
different
Representative understanding
access to about three more
providing wrap around services
for those efforts from some
communities were and in
particular closing at half we
believe it's finally important
to close and in the rural parts
of our states are providing
treatment for those in the
currently incarcerated
Answered many questions or
concerns all the procedures of
the Senate from support with
representative Garcia and thank
him for mothers to bring this
measure for thank you very much
Mr internet assistant Attorney
General yeah is there anybody
online who wishes to speak in
opposition please raise your
hand now.
Okay seeing none
we.
Perfect timing
with that I will go to the
committee for a motion picture I
would do pass on house amended
bill
fifty one.
I think that we're on house bill
twenty actually we're going to
go to Representative sciences it
was twenty nine starts.
Okay there's a motion to pass do
pass on house bill twenty nine
is amended is there a second.
Okay great there is a second
hello will go ahead and take the
second from of some of the hunt
Center can you briefly call the
roll.
Representative Brown.
Representative Garcia is yes.
Yeah.
Yes.
Yup yes.
Yes.
Working in the.
Thank you very much by a vote of
four to the formative you have
to do that thank you very much
Mr chair members of thanks to
all.
Okay members on house bill two
forty.
As amended the sponsor is in
another committee and so will be
unable to of present we're going
to ask that house bill two forty
be rolled.
We're gonna go to house bill for
twenty.
The sponsor for house bill for
twenty more.
I don't see this.
Okay
Okay I don't see that the
sponsors here.
Have a at.
This is just members as we can
see this is a straight
appropriation.
And
It is an appropriation and I
don't believe Mr Abbey is this
appropriation in the in house
bill to assist about okay then
we're gonna go ahead and ask for
a table emotion for House before
twenty.
Mr speaker I would Mr chair
sorry I would move to table
house bill for twenty.
Thank okay it's been moved
second by Representative
sciences when I Representative
Dixon is there any opposition to
that motion.
Thank you.
We've adapted that motion.
Okay we're now to.
House Bill three eighty three.
I did see Representative
Figueroa here.
Representative it's great to see
you and whenever you're ready on
house bill three eighty three
thank you Mr chair thank you
committee.
House Bill three eighty three is
creation of.
in the intent was for it to fall
under the line of summer and out
of school in Richmond in the
budget
it if it does not fall under
that line the intent and I've
already appropriated.
Allocated supplemental junior
funds toward this project.
it is.
A summer and then continuing
into the school year enrichment
program that serves at risk
students in the City of
Albuquerque across the city it
serves
first grade through twelfth
grade students at this point and
it follows up during the school
year with family and school site
activities each month of the
year during school it has a
great track record for reducing
or eliminating this summer loss
for the students and growing
their reading and math scores.
Thank you very much
Representative Figueroa thank
you for that explanation will go
through Representative Lujan
for.
First is there anybody in the
audience which is speak on this
bill seeing none I don't see
anybody online we'll go to
Representative Lujan.
Thank you.
Representative it was you say
you have money in the in the but
in the budget for this.
Mr chair and representative
I am unclear and I was unable to
find out which is why drop the
bill whether this is covered in
the current line up for summer
and out of school in Richmond
it's it's I wasn't sure whether
this was included I did it as a
separate bill Mr chair.
So that I could make sure at
least supplemental money got
there and so it could be
considered to go under that line
in future years thank you Mr
chair thank representative of
this is something that I've been
addressing for many years now
since I became Representative
mean even before so we do have
my understanding and I would ask
LFC Mister chair if they if they
needed to add to this that there
is funding in our budget for
this and we make sure that this
is covered in through each
district then you would have the
the individual programs reach
out to the districts in order to
utilize that funding if I'm not
mistaken Mr chair.
Mr Abbey on the hot.
This.
Thank you very much Mr having
thank you Mr chair to serve
their analyze the the the same
information I have which means
the because we allowed the
flexibility within within the
the language with the budget
that you the each district has
the capacity to to apply for
these programs is that correct
Mr chair.
Yes.
This.
Thank you Mr chair thank you Mr
Abbey and thank you
Representative for bringing this
forward you are on the same
track alignment with me and they
made really specifically wanted
to make sure that these were for
any sort in Richmond programs so
thank you and stand the Richmond
programs thank you very much
thank you Mr chair and
representative I would just add
that there is very little
clarity in the public about how
to access these funds that this
organization that has receive
supplemental funds from me in
previous years that they don't
now and that they do I and I
can't tell them whether they are
getting reoccurring funding or
if they have to apply to whereby
when and how there is no clarity
on there and
and I would hope Mr chair that.
As I walk out of here I wouldn't
be able to help them find that
clarity in access these funds
especially if they are in the
budget somewhere.
Thank you very much for up to
figure out what we're going to
go to Representative Pettigrew
and I've.
Couple quick Representative
please.
Thank you chairman and thank you
Representative for bring the
sport to the understand chairman
and Representative that.
House Bill three eighty three is
specific to our.
Mr chair and representative it
is specific to Albuquerque on
the.
Thank you Representative for
that
I understand all the we have
three hundred million and the
expanded learning side we have
twenty million and the perfect.
So.
I guess I look at this and it
and this is our obligation and
and for us Representative figure
out.
That.
This is where all the different
money is this.
Well I'm not gonna say hidden
because it's the vote it's out
there but it's hard to find.
And then go to our school boards
and just have that conversation
and say oh by the way you need
to go look here specifically
need to go ask for this here's
Pacific plate so I was just kind
of curious and how we do that
because.
There is a piece of the
frustration for me that I've
seen about fifteen bills this.
Session already very
specifically.
For our part the only area.
Curious the times that the I
thought we were looking at the
statewide what's best for the
state thank you Joe thank you
very much Representative
Pettigrew and we're especially
as we hear the legislation we
we've heard road built specific
to certain regions of the state
I think we understand that that
different members are going to
being bills relevant to their
region but thank you thank you
and should clarify this bill is
not specific to Albuquerque but
the program I know that meets
this criteria that does the R.
F. P. for this work the only one
I know of is in Albuquerque
it would be great if it were
everywhere.
But that they are pacifica and I
I appreciate very much the
conversation we're not because
this is already in the budget
and because this is a straight
appropriation we will ask for a
table in motion I do a I think
one of the things that we're
keeping track of as a committee
Representative Figueroa is some
of these sort of outstanding
points of light wherever they
are around the state and we want
to learn more about them so that
we can to Representative
pedigrees point insure that they
the opportunities are offered
statewide in that this in this
case school boards and others
are aware of the opportunities
that are out there with the
funding that this committee is
provided okay thank you very
much Representative Figueroa
we're going to ask we're gonna
go to by two Dixon for the
tabling motion.
Thank you Mr chair I move to
table house bill three eighty.
For a second thank okay it's
been moved by by Terry Dixon
second by Representative
Chatfield is there any
opposition to adopting that
motion.
Saying that in.
Thank you very much
Representative Figueroa.
Okay
Members I'm in a
We I we we have Representative
Ferrary here we're gonna go back
at I'm gonna ask vice chair
Dixon for a motion to remove
house bill for twenty from the
table make it the next order of
business that sort of the and
then what will cause
Representative Ferrary is here
we want to hear from her by
projects and thank you Mr
speaker I would move to remove
house bill for twenty from the
chairs tables and make it the
next order of business it's been
moved by Representative Dixon
second by Representative
Trujillo to make house bill four
twenty the next item of business
is there any opposition to that
motion.
I don't see any opposition the.
Representative Ferrary good to
see you.
Let's go back to house bill for
twenty thank you Mr chairman
committee I apologize for being
late
I was rushing over
The house bill four twenty is
asking for an appropriation for
early childhood education and
care department to reduce in
order to reduce rates of adverse
child X. hood experiences and
this one million one hundred
forty thousand dollars if
appropriated would provide the
early childhood education and
care department
from twenty twenty four three
twenty twenty seven so for years
to facilitate facilitate
coordination among providers and
improve access to expand the
capacity of existing support
services for families in Dona
ana county and as we I'm sure
you've heard a lot about aces
and how important it is that we
reduce that and so with
this funding to help coordinate
in our county
would really make a big
improvement I have an expert on
zoom do you have zoom of Israel
Chavis might be there.
We're looking.
Can you raise this hand I can
text and to.
First we're gonna go to is there
anybody here today wishes to
speak in support of house bill
for twenty.
Is there anybody wishes to speak
in opposition to house bill for
twenty.
Seeing none let's go online.
Is Mr Chavez on the amendment I
don't see him in okay we're
gonna go it's okay.
okay we're gonna go
Mr Abbey we're we're gonna ask
you for the ECECD what H. B. two
included.
And.
Thank you very much Mr I've and
also Representative Ferrary
there's one million dollars
specifically for the local
coalitions that are Dona ana
county many others have taken
advantage of.
So there is an yep this would
help coordinate Mr chair and
committee that at about
approximately two hundred fifty
thousand each year to just help
coordinate all the different
things going on.
Great thank thank you very much
Representative Ferrary
is there are there any questions
on this.
I think we we are looking at a
very at the largest increase in
in history to ECECD ever so far
this is something that will pay
close attention to to see how
the coordination works with the
additional funding that is
flowing through H. B. two
unfortunately this specific
appropriation is not
isolated in H. B. two is part of
the General Fund so
unfortunately we'll have to ask
for tabling motion but deeply
appreciate very unfair thank you
thank you for the
reconsideration absolutely okay
okay we'll go back to vice chair
Dixon.
Thank you Mr speaker I move to
table house bill for twenty
shares a motion.
Have been moved by
Representative Dixon second by
Representative Sanchez there any
opposition opposition to the
opting that motion.
Thing then.
We've table house bill four
twenty thank you very much
Representative Ferrary you Mr
chairman committee.
Kate members were on to F. House
Bill four fifty six.
Representative okay great to see
you again please go ahead.
Thank you very much Mr chair and
committee I'm presenting house
bill of four fifty six is very
simple appropriations bill
there's more bills that is in
the second committee already at
the Senate on it is to provide
funding for of our PBS stations
here in the state of New Mexico
there is funding in the board of
regents in the three state
universities eastern New Mexico
state and U. N. M. a hundred
twenty five thousand each
and G. as we know the PBS and
those stations are not only
serving the university students
for opportunities that providing
a lot of a local programming at
the site and I have an expert
witness here from PBS fronts
George during a joint them and
and so it he could make as a
brief statement thank you very
much Representative K. Mr Joyce
thank you terms MA a committee
members appreciate the ability
to speak with you today so you
guys again it's a fairly simple
funding request to increase our
line item funding under each of
our universities to account for
the largest increases in
services that each of us have
taken on over the last ten to
twelve years particularly as it
as we became more known during
the pandemic for the services we
provide we are now more than
just one station providing
educational content across to
every citizen in the state were
not providing I channel
streaming services online cable
satellite we serve across the
board as our mission states
anywhere anytime that is our
goal to reach every citizen of
New Mexico we're very proud of
the fact that the universal
service mandate that we operate
under through the FCC which
mandates that we serve every
citizen regardless of return on
investment that here in New
Mexico we are know what we are
reaching ninety nine percent of
the population and we are
constantly seeking the other one
percent to figure out how to
serve them.
Thank you very much Mr Joyce
thank you Representative Kate is
there anybody who wishes to
speak in support of this
legislation.
Okay saying no one is there
anybody who wish to speak in
opposition.
Right they were gonna look
online I don't see any hand
raised for this okay we're gonna
go back thank you very much for
The presentation there are
significant increases that are
contemplated to the higher
education
Yeah are there any questions on
this.
K. and then we're gonna go west
for tabling motion sick in order
Representative K. anything to
close with please Mr chair a
committee and and I understand I
mean just understand the process
but I will say that this is not
the funding request here is not
out of the higher education
we understand that PBS is funded
through another round this is
the a hundred and twenty five
thousand that's already in the
board of regents from each in
university this extra on top of
the PBS obviously each station
costs more than a hundred twenty
five thousand dollars to to run
for the year thank you thank
thank you very much
Representative Kate.
Okay will now go to vice chair
Dixon for the table in motion
thank you Mr chair
I would move to a table house
bill four fifty six.
Okay.
It's been moved by
Representative Dixon second by
Representative Sanchez is there
any opposition to that motion.
Thing we without the thank you
very much thank you very much
for your time.
Okay.
Members Representative Lara is
in another is actively
presenting a piece of
legislation and another
committee it's so will roll over
house bill two to six.
which brings us to House Bill to
ten.
Yeah
it's great.
Okay.
It's great to see Representative
Roybal Caballero if you're.
Have thank.
Representative Caballero
whenever you're ready all right.
Mr chair I think we're ready for
we read.
So thank you Mr chairman members
of the committee I am here
Representative Lundstrom was
unable to be here.
And for this presentation so I'm
gonna go ahead and make the
presentations and it is to
introduce House Bill to ten
which is relating to public
employee pensions providing a
temporary additional non
compounding payment to certain
retired members under the public
Education Act.
And
What this bill is doing actually
and I'm going to introduce
the experts of he's the expert
in all things and that's Mr of
Greg to the field so would you
like to say a few words about.
Thank you Mr chairman members
Gregory you executive director
with PED already Representative
Lundstrom hit a.
Requested some some numbers and
Alice's of providing a
thirteenth cheque to are
retirees is it as some of you
may recall Senate bill seventy
two stop the cost of living
adjustment for most pair
retirees and replace it with a
two percent a lump sum thirteen
to check
because of inflation she asked
what it would cost to to
continue the thirteenth check
payments for members that were
sixty five and older
she proposes five years to do so
two percent non compounding a
thirteenth cheque payments of
for sixty five and older in that
cost about eighty million
dollars a year for a total of a
ninety million dollars I will
say that our retirees will
receive a half a percent cost of
living adjustment this year that
is still going to going to place
of these two percent one time
payment would be in addition to
that cost of living adjustment
and happy to answer any question
question Mr chairman thank you
very much for so quick robocop
io thank you very much Mr
Trujillo is there anybody who
wishes to speak in either
support or opposition to this
bill here today.
Okay seeing none is there
anybody online who wishes to
speak in support or opposition
to this bill today.
Casing let's go to
Representative Lujan for first
question thank you Mr chair at
thank you for bringing this bill
forward to.
Just to clarify because with
their study or information
provided that we came to a to
percent one time increases Mr
chair.
Mr chairman and Representative
Lujan I believe it was because
the two percent payment had been
paid for the last three years
that's that's why the two
percent was thank you Mr chair
thank you Mr chair that's what I
thought I really appreciate that
we did make some adjustments in
some information and having more
As I was working for the state
this came up we had town halls
in regards to some of those
changes in this adjustments and
you know there's there's been a
lot of discussion of maybe even.
changing the board can
constructs so to speak and which
I do not favor but I want to say
thank you again for bringing
this forward and and as we're
feat.
We can do with this year this is
something we really need to be
looking at specially the cost of
living being
affected by some of these
changes that we have that we
maybe maybe now of under this
new
Revenues and everything or where
we are we know that we're having
a forecast for the next five
years that we can we address
this I I really do appreciate
you bringing this forward
because.
This from my understanding
experience that this is what the
this is where our state
employees we wanted our retirees
wanted and I think there are
some other adjustments that we
need to to look on down for the
further down the road to really
reinvested and protector of P.
E. R. A. thank you Mr chair
appreciate the time Mr miss you
very much present off of some of
this Mr chair I just wanted to
what concerns me the most and
why I
As a result of being on
investments pensions an
oversight committee and the
chairman at this year we were
privy to a lot of information
and part of the information that
we were privy to was that and I
don't know if members of the
committee or aware of this but
we have literally sixty seven
percent all of our para or para
retirees sixty seven percent or
fifty sixty five and older.
That's a significant amount
that's almost seventy percent of
our retirees and they are living
right now Mr chair in a on a
state of fear.
In a state of chaos because many
of them even though the
receiving their retirement.
Are not able to make it.
And they are being resorting to
having to either have move with
family members or seek
Supportive services such as food
stamps on such as housing
assistance
and you name it and this is very
concerning because these are
individuals that when they
entered into public service with
us under para and began paying
into para Mr chair members of
the committee they were secure
with the fact that their
retirement would be sufficient.
After twenty five thirty years
to be able to live on we're now
in an extreme inflationary
for yet and that's why this this
increase with some very
important to put in the here and
now.
again because sixty seven
percent of our retiree
population is over sixty five
and suffering right now and they
are I think they're appealing to
all of us and all of our
districts because they are all
statewide retirees and I just
hate the idea Mr chair that they
are subject to having to seek
supplemental on social services
because they're not able to make
it and that's one of the biggest
reasons why Representative Lujan
thank you for your statement but
you know I I would really.
Say to them well let's wait and
see what the economy's going to
be like but we don't have that
advantage right now but we know
that we have
Committed funds.
And we know we have a limited
amount of uncommitted funds and
I guess this is what this
committee as to is prioritized
on at the end of the day where
those funds are and so we really
would I I just can't stress
enough that these are people
that are worked great put in a
lot of of their years of service
thank you thank thank you very
much for the Representative
robot coming out of.
Representative Garcia please.
Thank you Mr chairman thanks for
the presentation a one quick
question you mention from sixty
five and up what does that do to
the people are retired.
Under the age of sixty five.
Mr chairman and representative
Garcia so if if the member is
eligible for a Cola today if
they're younger than sixty five
what we will be granting this
year in July is a half a percent
cost of living compounding cost
of living adjustment.
Those members would still
continue to receive that half a
percent.
What are you.
Share whether receiving now.
Mr chairman and representative
Garcia for the last three years
the received a two percent non
compounding lump sum payment so
in lieu of the compounding Cola
they received a two percent one
time payment each July for the
last three years of Mr chair
noted Tommy wouldn't cut him
down to to have percent
Representative.
Mr chairman and Representative
Garcia when Senate bill seven
seventy two passed in of the
twenty twenty to legislative
session it changes the whole
model based on Perez funded
status which today stands at
seventy percent in our
investment return for the the
previous year last year we
returned a negative one point
six percent so for the for the
the most part any time we
returning negative here in
investment returns are retirees
will be saying a half a percent
cost of living adjustment Mr
chair you know much of the
confused what what do you mean
by a negative percent you where
you in the negative what was
going on.
Mr chairman and Representative
Garcia you know we invest the
para Fund in the a number of
investments and depending on how
the stock market does that here
that's what we return in twenty
twenty two of her returned about
a twenty four percent positive
investment returns last year
wasn't nearly as good and we
actually lost one point six
seven percent.
Mr one last question in other
words for bad investments the
people are retired under age
sixty four or sixty five their
paper that bad investment that
correct that was coming down to
Mr chairman and and
Representative Garcia you know
the market has been bad the
median pension fund similar to
us returned a negative nine
percent of return in that year
we were down one point six seven
percent and kind of the only so
Senate bill seventy two was we
were going to pay Cole is when
we can afford it with a minimum
of a half a percent when we we
lost money in the stock market
this previous year that that's
why the formula calls for a half
a percent increase.
So Mr Chairman representative if
I may Mister chair just to
further clarify it's not
necessarily bad investments the
volatility of the stock market
based on economic conditions so
because we've experienced
What a tough ride economically a
lot of the investments that
we're more eight that were part
of that larger portfolio that
gives us our return on
investments were made in.
A multitude of areas it's a
large portfolio and so it the
volatility of the market just
throws that investment off which
makes our all our retirement
systems including our
educational retirement board our
public entire all of them have
to constantly be reviewing that
so that we can get a handle that
particular fiscal year on how
we're going to make the
adjustments in in the what we
pay out so it's a it's a it's
not necessarily bad investments
because we have.
You know either mismanaged or in
any way miss something that we
should have not it's just the
volatility of the market Mr
chairman and Representative it's
a bad investment.
As far as to the bad investment
you know I I've individual forty
years in a five to one at this
point doesn't bring me any money
back it just about in this
that's all I think thank you
very much for progressive we're
gonna go to resemble Lujan for a
second time.
Thank you Mr again I'm I just
read it right that to that this
this is a risk market and this
is these these are we know we
deal with that we in even with
our own revenues in our own
budget with the oil and gas of
all to do is we always discuss
and we have to move with the
times and so I understand we
made some corrections but I
think that we can moving forward
look at this again and just
recognize Mr chair that for
state employees we have this
budget this retirement package
and benefits but I like to to
let our committee know that
there is a private sector out
there with employees that have
no retirement and we are
struggling and listening to the
testimony to date of those that
do have a pension from our
state.
And they are struggling and I
just like to make that
comparison put that on the line
as there is legislation to help
recover both both the private
and government sectors thank you
Mr chair thank you very much
Representative Lujan okay I
don't see any other questions
Representative provide a copy of
the State you've added a number
of things there anything
additional before although we
don't have this in the yeah in
H. B. to structure this year
appreciate very much the
conversation about making sure
that this is very top of mind
for the committee anything you
to us you'd like to add or Mr
Trujillo Mr chairman and the
members if I may
In our investment portfolio
isn't we don't have bad
investments it was a bad
investment here
Nationally so that's the reason
for the return we did better
than most but I just wanted to
point that out thank you very
much Mr thank you very much they
are Representative Roybal
Caballero we're going to go to
vice chair Dixon for the motion.
Thank you Mr chair I move to
table house bill two ten.
Okay it's been moved by
Representative Dixon second by
Representative Garcia is there
any opposition to that motion
please show Representative Lujan
in opposition.
Okay
good let's go ahead.
We'll go ahead and call the roll
please before the US.
Yes the table.
Yes to table Representative.
Representative yes to table
Representative.
Yes the table Representative.
Yes.
Yes.
Here Paul yes.
Kate.
Great thank you very much thank
you for your take the time.
Okay we're gonna go now to
House Bill for sixteen.
It's great to see Representative
Hernandez here.
Through as much scarier on the
side.
Good afternoon Representative
Hernandez hi would you care to
introduce your vote sure so
we're here to here for about two
minutes on house bill four
sixteen
so as to make an appropriation
and really get a conversation
started
to conduct site readiness and
gap analysis assessments to
identify properties able to be
developed for industry
throughout our state
As time has gone on to this
program introduced we are likely
going to work this and interim
and pair it with some leader
population changes and really
try to get a comprehensive plan
going over the interim
my in case anybody has questions
before you table this bill might
have.
Are you laid the mood here
my expert witnesses Jason
Espinoza and with that I am
ready for it to be tabled or any
questions what what your what
your expert witness like to make
any remarks so do you.
I'm madam chair members of the
committee dismissed as I hear on
behalf in New Mexico idea the
statewide economic development
professionals association just
one quick comment.
I think a lot of times we think
of economic development we think
of sexy things we think of
incentives we think any programs
one of the foundational items as
economic developers know that we
need to work on this site
reading this and development
here and so really you know this
preparation we're looking at
will put together and worked in
the interim with Representative
Hernandez and others for
interested to put together a
package to really address site
reading this here in New Mexico
so we have an inventory of sites
what do they can be developed
for what they need to add
predictability so when companies
are looking for new site we know
what's available thank you.
Thank you do we have anyone in
the audience that would like to
speak in support of this bill or
opposition.
anyone online in support.
Or opposition raise your hand.
Seeing none would move to the
committee for questions.
There.
Madam chair I just want to say
that I sincerely appreciate the
appreciate the lack of
desperation I have.
Have been times pass made the
motion to table my own bill in
this committee to do also played
the code is it is not fun but I.
Representative you know it's
coming at some point.
Mr chair.
Thank you madam chair thank you
Representative I just want to
say thank you for into your in
your it's for for bringing this
legislation you we have unique
opportunities that we can move
forward today but there's unique
opportunities to really invest
and diversify our economy and
appreciate your work in this
area.
It's in four hundred Mr chairman
the I move to table those moved
by by Representative Baca second
by Representative Garrett thank
you.
The.
That's been move by
Representative Baca state by
Representative Pettigrew is
there any opposition to that
thing that motion.
Saying that and.
Thank you very much for thank
you Mr chairman committee for a
fun few minutes.
Okay we're now to House Bill
three sixty five members I just
want to briefly announce in
consultation with the Sanchez
house bill one eighty eight
as amended is being rolled and
also.
That house bill four seven three
in consultation with with our
with our own Sanchez but with
that let's will go to House Bill
three six five this is
Representative Roybal Caballero
and Representative Ferrary.
Okay let's would will give a
we'll go down then
We're gonna go to Representative
yeah great to see representative
Nibert and Representative Ezzell
we're gonna go to Committee
substitute for house bill one
forty one.
I.
Is a triple.
Yes we're we're here
House Bill one four one.
It's great to see representative
Nibert Representative Ezzell as
Mr chairman thank you very much
were here presenting house
transportation public works
capital improvements committee
substitute for house bill one
forty.
Thank you very much for that is
that correct that that is
correct okay Mr chairman members
of the committee but we are here
to do is the we have some people
from down home their son was
killed he was in the line of
duty their helicopter crash and
they're Senators kids he was
part of law enforcement and
there is a national organization
called cops they want to make
that a special registration
plate for the state of New
Mexico as well and with that
it's.
Pretty self explanatory but if
it's not renewed in next number
years that this goes away we
stand for questions
Representative did not approve
might have something to say.
Thank you very much the results
of the north.
The concerns of police survivors
has requested this.
We put in the language that
the transportation committee
required to make sure that there
is a fee charged make sure that
they have a minimum baseline of
people who receive the plates
and the.
Sunset provision if they did not
meet that that threshold so with
that I believe we have
everything in order if there's
no money I believe that we're
asking for.
Thank you comports with what we
see Representative Nibert and
thanks to use our phones L. into
the our colleague the
transportation committee for
their diligence.
Okay I will go to
go to Representative for motion.
I was nasco Representative
Sweetser for questioners XP to
funding
There's probably there's any
funding there's no restrictions
Representative and I with that
thank you very much
Representative Sweetser
Representative is our cell
number to confirm the intent is
that the the the ten dollar fee
attached to this legislation
will help administer this or
that the fees sorry may not ten
dollars and of your initially
forty five dollars renewal of
thirty five dollars right.
Okay and so that so that this
bill essentially pays for itself
representative or into dollars
so that the US retain
appropriate department to defray
the cost of creating it and
thirty five dollars of that
initial registration fee and
their after it goes to the law
enforcement protection fund okay
great thank you representatives
we'll go to Representative
Brown.
Mr chairman of the Palestine has
transportation public works and
capital improvements committee
substitute for house bill twenty
one Hey it's been moved by
Representative brown second by
Representative Sanchez is there
any opposition to that
legislation.
Okay seeing none thank you very
much Representative great thank
you very much Sir.
Appreciate the work.
Okay we're gonna go back I
believe Representative Caballero
Roybal Caballero is here on
house bill.
Three sixty five.
Okay.
Great to see you Representative
Roybal Caballero for this year
experts
What we ask is if you could
Please briefly introduce the
legislation amendment law as for
we see that we have an amendment
here.
So will ask for a member to move
that and then the third
discussion first we're going to
go to you representative of all
have a of.
This
wasn't aware of an amendment.
May we have a couple yeah hi
this three purpose of this make
sure that our staff gets to us.
So.
Do we know.
is submitting the.
That is probably the straight
Representative about coming out
of this is I believe an
amendment from our committee to
ensure so that we can consider
this bill get it.
Can
be able to prove.
Representative Roybal Caballero
if you'd go ahead please thank
you
again Mr chair members of the
committee and here to present
House Bill three sixty five.
Which is related to geothermal
resources and what we're doing
is adding excuse me a center of
excellence for geothermal
resources at the New Mexico
institute of mining and
technology.
Recreating the jerk geothermal
projects development on.
Authorizing grants and creating
the geothermal projects
revolving loan fund Fund however
we are proposing going to
propose a couple of suggested
changes before I get there are
Mr chair members of the
committee and introduced the two
expert witnesses we have Tom
Solomon who is who was the
facilitator of the geothermal
working group that came up with
proposed legislation and then we
have doctor sherry Kelly was a
geophysicist with the New Mexico
tech.
Institute who is the expert in
geo thermal
technology so and is the your
geophysicists the sector that's
correct so far too
expert witness service and I
don't know if Tom wants to Mr
Solomon wants to say just a
quick few words about where we
stand right now with this
legislation.
Thank you Representative Roybal
Caballero Mr Solomon please go
ahead thank you Mr chair yes my
name is Tom Salamon I'm a
retired electrical engineer and
been pleased to be facilitating
the few thermal working group
for the last year mostly with
Senator Ortiz Y. Pino but number
of others so we're looking at
the opportunity to develop New
Mexico's quite substantial
geothermal resources as a source
of clean renewable electricity
which would be fully
dispatchable power if it were
developed into electricity
generating resource but it is
also in use already in the state
in a number of ways there are
twenty nine hot springs and spas
the geothermal geothermal heated
greenhouse hot house in the
radium springs in in New Mexico
serving the el Paso flower
market the second largest you
thoroughly green he green house
in the country and because of
New Mexico somewhat unique
geology we are the sixth largest
this the state with the six
largest geothermal resource
potential in the entire country
and what we are looking at and
have been partnering and working
through working with a number of
Other advanced geothermal
technology companies is to
develop the technology in the
state to be able to
basically drill for hot rocks
and develop geothermal resources
as a source of electricity
generation nearly anywhere in
the state in an example of that
was done just this last summer
and fall by a company called
ever in the southern New Mexico
just in the Animas valley just
south of Lordsburg they drilled
an eighteen thousand foot deep
geothermal well a yes well.
One of the deepest wells that's
ever been drilled in the country
and they were able to find two
hundred fifty degree Celsius hot
rock
and.
as an opportunity for geothermal
resource development it that
project is right adjacent to New
Mexico is one of only geothermal
electricity plants in the state
right now called Lente drive
it's a fifteen excuse me to
fifteen megawatts of power plant
and
We would love to use that
opportunity to develop.
Geothermal.
Our energy based on hot rocks
using Evers technology Sandia
labs
geothermal resource center thank
you that would please conclude
your thought okay okay the
number of bills okay sure and so
in any case this is a a real
opportunity for New Mexico to
develop sustainable
economic development for the
state and what we're looking for
is to see that with the start up
of the of a geothermal center of
excellence in New Mexico tech
and to add three about three
heads to the Energy minerals
natural resources department to
help us permit adicional
geothermal plants into a plan to
the federal government for some
of the hundreds of millions of
dollars in geothermal grants
that are available for the
states to apply for but we need
that additional head count and
and to be able to make those
applications Mr chairman that's
the substance of that thank you
very much Mr chair I don't
believe we move the amendment I.
Right now we we wanted to talk a
little bit about the.
can I have a motion to move the
of the amendment for discussion
please.
Okay it's been moved by
Representative Montoya second I
Representative Lujan.
Reserves you had at Robel coming
out on to your experts here in
front you the amendment.
Removes on page eleven and
twelve strike section seven in
its entirety.
So this removes the
appropriation as The
appropriation is not not in
house bill two I think we would
I would ask Representative
Montoya and Representative Lujan
if it's a friendly amendment and
Representative Montoya pointed
this out so Representative
Montoya can you please also
point out an additional fees yes
Mr chair in removing the
appropriation we also have to.
Here additional line.
Leave with unnecessary is on
page one.
Line lines seventeen eighteen
strike the semi colon making
appropriations.
And then online to is what you
just stated on I am the second
item is on page eleven and and
twelve strike section seven its
entirety which removes the
appropriation and then third
remembering the succeeding
sections accordingly.
Funds are appropriated.
So thanks to Mr Valdez for
pointing out
The the funds are.
Our up put into.
here so let's let's hold we've
we've got the we've got the
amendment moved for discussions
eight
we're going to let's hold off is
there any we're gonna hold off
on adding sort of the additional
piece including plan seventeen
eighteen just a little
clarification are there any
questions on
on the amendment.
Okay and we might ask Mr Valdez
to X. if you can explain the.
Funds are created here.
Are they talk about how to use
the money it's better that if
they were in for fun.
Definition that is appropriate
money invest wisely making
appropriation still there right
now we're striking maybe
appropriation of the bill.
That thank you very much Mr all
those okay with that and we
appreciate deeply the chief of
staff Mr vote of all that
what will keep the amendment as
is is there any opposition to
adopting this amendment.
Saying none we have adopted the
amendment.
Okay now on house bill three
sixty five as amended
is there anybody who wishes to
speak in support of house bill
three sixty five.
Or in opposition.
Casey and none will ask online
we do have one person online
Mr Mona blabber of labor Ramona
for one minute whenever you're
ready please.
Thank you chairman's line
committee members my name is ana
labor and I represent a thirty
five thousand members and
supporters of the Sierra Club
Rio Grande chapter we strongly
support this legislation your
thermal energy is a renewable
resource that can serve as an
active twenty four seven Alfa
for solar and wind power you
know the movie us and it doesn't
distract alignment air quality
so it's wonderful economic
opportunity for New Mexico the
development of your thermal
energy represents an actual
transition opportunities not
only workers in the oil and gas
industry but also for those
throughout the state including
disadvantaged communities your
need to pass on this legislation
thank you.
Thank you very much.
Okay I don't see any other
comments online.
Now go to the committee.
Thank okay we're going to go to
Representative Sweetser than
Representative Brown the roofs
of the thank you Mr judges have
a quick question but the current
cost per kilowatt hour no offer
geothermal just curious.
Cost per kilowatt hour you of a
Mr Chairman representative we
see if I can get to the
substance of your question so
how expensive is geothermal
relative to other energy
generation resources
the levelized cost of energy for
geothermal as assessed by little
lizard investments and banking
that grades all sources of
energy generation puts renewable
energy from the current
generation of geothermal
electric plants
that comparable to a combined
cycle gas power plant
I believe geothermal is about
seventy five dollars per
megawatt hour levelized cost
we're a combined cycle gas plant
is about sixty or so sixty
dollars per megawatt hour
geothermal electricity tends to
be
right in the middle of the pack
of all electricity generation
that it's cheaper solar and wind
less expensive the nuclear and
coal.
thank you very much sciences
Representative Brown then
resemble upon them with so much
Representative Brown please
chairman thank you so much
Representative.
I really support geothermal we
have a success story in
Carlsbad.
Of the legislative process home
of the national cave and karst
research institute which is
affiliated with New Mexico tech
and that facility is cared for
by geo thermal and it's kind of
interesting because most of the
inner workings are into the
parking lot and you never know
that it's there but as far as I
know it's working very well so I
think anything we can do to
promote this energy sector is a
very good idea Mr Chairman
representative I did have one
question so it looks like there
is some money in the house bill
two but I'm not sure it's for
geo thermal for a center of
excellence and just calling for
some clarity
of that one point four million
for geophysical research center
and then about four point six
million for a bureau of geology
and mineral so the question is
Mr chair.
Is any of this out a couple to
the geo thermal center of
excellence thank you very much
Representative Brown and and
drive I apologize I didn't catch
your name again.
Dr Kelly if you'd like to.
Yes yes sorry.
To
Those numbers don't sound.
Familiar to me so I'm not sure
what those in what what that
that is applied to and thank you
Dr Kelly and Representative Brad
I get as this is in house bill
two is it sort of process over
so it's the fund Senate action
has been taken yet
What Mr Abbey do you have
anything to add on some of the
additional appropriations to New
Mexico tech that have been out
there that members we would
point out go ahead go ahead
first Mr everything.
Okay thank thank you very much
and Representative brown you've
pointed out some of the other
additional specific funds I
think we'll probably have to do
a little bit more research on
those for you thank you for
bringing them up but I think we
can also see that there are
significant additional resources
that could be applied in this
area.
Mr chairman and and so.
It's a question but what if that
of those amounts of money have
been spoken for already by
someone else and that that's
kind of where I'm I'm I would
like to know just to have a
clear in my mind that's all
thank you thank you very much
thank you very much
Representative Brown
Representative Lujan and then
Representative Montoya thank you
Mr chair thank you I'm also as a
co signer on to this bill and so
obviously support for very
obvious reasons and one of the
questions I was getting that too
is that the center of excellence
I think we can we delineated
that these are two different
types of funds that are being
asked would this be a separate
fund that is already created are
being asked for from EMNRD.
But I am interested in that
those other funds and if we
could if there would be a.
I don't know how we do it in
this committee Mr chair to Ricky
question I know different
committees move in different
ways to offer up a different
amendment for a portion of the
funding to go to take from one
of these funds for maybe like a
million dollars or so for so
that would be use one of these
other funds for this project Mr
chair I don't know if that's
allowable and just as we're at
moving into conversation thank
you Representative Lujan at so
we we we're we're not going to
entertain that to the nor can we
given Representative that we the
the bill is still going through
a process but I think it does
give us a certain degree of
knowledge that there are
significant resources that could
be applied here and
So Representative Lujan in the
various ways that those funds
will be administered the likely
be eligible for this purpose Mr
chair just for clarification so
something to the point like
we're talking about the
education funding for after
school programs.
And similar to your new subject.
I guess in some ways in some
ways not but it it's a positive
thing for this legislation as we
sort of talked about what we
have thank you Mr chair I
appreciate that and and so that
can give you a little more for
all of us a little more
information of of how how this
bill could be supported without
the funding at current time but
also just once a strongly for
many reasons already mentioned
especially from the Sierra Club
that this is a really good force
of of renewable clean energy
thank you Mr chair Preciado I
thank you very much
Representative Lujan that we're
we're running a little short on
time Representative Roybal
Caballero I'd love to go to
Representative Montoya and then
come back to you thank you guys
because the question of process
so whenever you get back to me
thanks Representative Montoya
please thank you Mr chair
to questions Sir Representative
Sweetser question.
This it's hard to do apples to
apples comparison on this
because.
Current geo thermal which is
readily available is that has
been developed as because it's a
lot easier to get this is a
little more trying to figure out
how we take advantage of the hot
rocks that we have here it'll
probably a little bit more to do
this but I see the advantage to
this because this would be
dispatchable energy so I think
it's worth it for us to invest
the money towards this goal
because as we go forward what we
have to have more sources of
energy that we then when people
want the energy is able to come
online and and also Mr chair and
and and Representative this
could answer some of the
questions as to what we do when
winds not blowing the Suns not
shining so we this could be an
area of expansion for us this
energy secretary secretary so I
do support yes I do have similar
questions though as have been
passed and I believe similar to
what the representatives gonna
ask that that you know is the
could this money be directed if
not I do see there's a big
amount of money in here for New
Mexico tech and this does appear
to be one of their priorities so
I do believe money would go
towards this but I think all of
us would like to have some
clarity I know we can't do it in
this but before we get to the
floor if there's some way can be
communicated to all of us I
think everybody would like.
Purpose thank you Mr great thank
you very much Representative
Montoya are there any other
questions casing on
Representative Roybal Caballero
for any questions and then for
you to close
Go ahead thank you so my
question was process and and I
know that the Senator Ortiz Pena
who is this this big sponsor in
the Senate and also the sponsor
in this bill has been in
conversation with Senate finance
as well in the chair and I think
they're moving they have some
comfortable on discussions about
what you just identified as you
know the larger pod but there's
also some comfortable come on
discussions about.
Placing
making some changes and and
placing some additional requests
from the Senate finance
standpoint so I just wanted to
make sure we were it seems like
we're all aligned and I just
want to say thank you to
Representative Montoya and
Representative brown because
they they brought up the key
point here and that is
dispatchable energy and we have
an abundance of keep coming from
Mother Earth in the state so
that that makes it well worth of
the investments and so I just
want to close at that and say
thank you very much Mr chair and
members of the committee that's
closing thank thank you very
much Representative Roybal
Caballero thank you to your
experts members I think as we've
talked about I think we can move
this forward today there will be
in particular some conversations
that we need to have with energy
and minerals we're gonna go to
Representative brown for the
motion.
Just.
Okay it's been moved by
Representative brown seconded by
Representative Montoya this is
on a two passed for House Bill
Three sixty five as amended
we're going to go this would be
a can you call the roll.
Yes.
Graham yes.
Yes.
Yes.
Yes.
Representative.
Yes.
Yes.
Good.
Yes.
Representative Sweetser yes.
Yes.
Yes.
Yes.
Chair small yes.
Okay thank you very much thank
you very much for the I voted by
that those sixteen for move one
the negative we've move forward
thank you very much for percent
thank you members of the
committee thank you I don't
think I see you anymore today
the firm.
Thank you.
Okay we are members were going
on
We did we had Representative of
war so where are.
We're going to be rolling house
bill one eighty eight as well as
house bill fifty one.
As well as house bill four seven
three
And this is in consultation with
Sanchez.
We're down to house bill four
fifty seven.
West Representative Hotmail
right to.
Representative how to me please
and I apologize if we will go
after this I apologize to caucus
chair Lara a great to see you
will go to you right after this
I've I forgot for so how to be a
please go ahead Mr chair and
members of the community of the
committee rather this is house
bill four fifty seven domestic
violence provider fund of for an
overview we had heard about this
and other committees and prior
to twenty twenty one the service
reimbursement schedule for
domestic violence services was
stagnant much had not been
increased since nineteen ninety
seven providers could not fill
essential positions and last
year providers finally received
a badly needed increase for
salaries and infrastructure
after years of stagnant funding
and rising costs but inflation
and one point one million dollar
cut in federal victims of crime
act victims assistance voca
funding wiped out that came.
We are here today because we
heard uncial or whether this was
funded I have my expert witness
here Mary Ellen Garcia to top.
Thank you very much for him up
harm how to meal
it's going to thank you Mr
chairman out of my chair members
of the committee again my name
is Maryland Garcia I'm the pop
director of policy at the New
Mexico a coalition against
domestic violence and as
Representative honey stated we
have been working diligently
with our children youth and
families which is where the
domestic violence funding since
for the state of New Mexico to
all of our service providers
prior to the legislative session
it was brought to our attention
that there would be additional
an increase in funding that
would be an CYFD is budget we
learned just prior to the start
of the session that that was not
in fact the case the numbers
that you have in front of you is
an ask of three point one
million dollars Mr chair and
members of the committee what
that represents is we did
receive an increase last fiscal
year that increase included a
special appropriation was which
was one time funding in addition
to our for funding our funding
is rescue act COVID really
funding from the found family
wants protection act this
particular part of funding is
extremely difficult for our
providers to utilize in
sustainability of funding it's
very restrictive and it cannot
be utilized for long term
initiatives I know that it also
expires in twenty twenty five I
know that the committee and we
work with Representative have
any of that the committee had
received some information from
LFC that Representative that
there was a three point three
four million dollars in Phipps
of funding and federal funding
for domestic violence which
would would it which would have
been at a two million dollar
increase that is not in fact the
case we have worked with CYFD
that is inclusive of sexual
violence funding the Phipps of
funding included arpa funds for
sexual violence as well as
domestic violence we learned
that seven hundred fifty
thousand of that three point
four million three.
Three million dollars is going
to domestic violence providers
so are three point one million
dollar ask is been reduced
because now we know we have
seven hundred fifty thousand
dollars available but in looking
at the funds that come from
children youth and families in
state appropriations we are flat
lined in looking at the federal
funds that we received there is
a reduction in funding and
looking at the arc of funds
received we are receiving seven
hundred fifty thousand which is
a reduction from the prior year
which was one million I'm so
right now we're at a one point
nine almost two million dollar
reduction in funding and to to
inform members of this committee
that is going to increase next
fiscal year as well the vocal
victims assistance funding will
be going down an additional an
additional appropriation amount
and the crime victims reparation
commission who administers that
funds will be cutting all of
their providers fifty percent in
fiscal year twenty twenty five
so not only are we looking at a
two million two million dollar
reduction this year but those
are non reoccurring funds so
we're still seeing providers not
able to sustainably support
providers and Mr chair you you
mentioned that we're looking for
you know points of brightness
really what I want to hit on is
our providers have not been able
to sustain funding for many many
years they're operating in a
scarcity model which creates
great points of darkness for our
providers and our survivors
domestic violence is increasing
we're seeing the rates of
violence increasing we need to
adequately and meaningfully
supporter providers and so we're
not certain if this made into
hospital to but we're hoping it
did because our providers and
most importantly our survivors
needed thank you very much miss
Garcia okay the and thank you
very much for somehow to me
we're gonna go to the committee
for questions
Representative Lujan please Mr
chair
As we're looking at this budget.
Has any have you put any money
for from junior funding or
anything any other sources of
funding for.
The chair.
Mr chair Representative Lujan we
have been notified that there is
about four hundred twenty five
thousand dollars in junior bill
appropriation that was received
in the LFC charts but
Representative Lujan I'd like to
have a that that's one time
funding and what makes that
incredibly difficult is I meet
with providers I've been doing
this work for over twenty years
here in New Mexico they're
losing qualified amazing
advocacy counseling attorney's
staff to to target to Walmart
because they're able to make
more so we're not able to really
utilize these funds to have
competitive salaries to deal
with the inflation and one time
appropriation is is wonderful
and it helps fill the hole we're
going to be in this position
again and again until we
meaningfully and adequately.
place reoccurring funds and.
Thank thank you Sir I really
appreciate that that does this
quite a bit of money for one
time funding as I see it and put
you into it in a better position
than not having anything
absolutely and madam
Representative Lujan up Mr
Chairman Representative Lujan
Sir I got a little too excited
we did take that into
consideration when we the three
point one third one point nine
million that we're saying we're
short on includes four hundred
twenty five thousand and the
additional seven hundred fifty
thousand in our before and that
we were not aware of thank you
Mr chair and and thank you for
that response and I just want to
say it also I put junior funding
for specific programs here in in
my own district for.
For these these purposes and and
there I'm just curious Mr chair
there are other funding sources
it throughout our budget for
types of these types of programs
if I'm not mistaking
For us is it the commission
women's and women's status and
and so forth and they're asking
for some of this funding not
director for programs or some of
the work that they're doing and
I'm just wondering.
Mr chair
Representative have have what is
the coordination understand for
all the funding that we have
right now.
Absolutely Mr chair
Representative Lujan members of
the committee
Prior to January first of this
year I was the bureau chief of
the crime victims reparation
commission and the victims of
crime act of violence against
women administrator for the
state of New Mexico so I am
uniquely aware of the totality
of funding that's available for
all survivors services
specific to reoccurring
sustainable funding in the state
of New Mexico there are two
major agencies that support
domestic violence programs
children youth and families and
the crime victims reparation
commission the domestic violence
funding sits within the children
youth and families department
which is that at about fifteen
million dollars the predators
reparation Commission allocates
currently this fiscal year will
be allocating four point seven
million dollars specifically to
domestic violence this is not in
the totality of all survivors
services the other and those are
the the major funding sources
that support on going salary
staff and the resources
necessary for the delivery of
services thank thank you Mr
chair up thank you for the
dancers I think this is you know
substantial work and I want to
thank everybody that works.
In any of our.
Any.
Way shape or form with any kind
of domestic violence and and
crimes against women and I just
want state.
We're all we're very happy to
work with you on this and and
and moving for I think this is
something I would support I just
want to put that out there and I
just want to say we do have a
lot of other
sources that are moving forward
and and maybe we need to get
together and understand all
those programs and how they're
all how we can put them all
together so that we have enough
services for those that need
them Mr chair thank you thank
you very much Representative
Lujan.
Okay I don't see any other
questions
Mister C. thank you and and I
think it's great for the
committee to hear of sort of
your previous role that I think
it will very much help us as we
work through what can be very.
Sort of he sometimes hard to
find and silo funding and then
mix of federal and state and
other sources it's very
important that your voice is
incredibly important will this
is unfortunately not in our
budget right now from our side
we would encourage sort of
conversations to happen with our
Senate colleagues and I think
this is something as we go into
the summertime is been said over
to on the your voice in
particular will be a very
helpful one
Representative you know would
you like to add anything no but
thank you for listening to it
thank you very much okay members
we're going to go to of to vice
chair Dixon for tabling motion
and keep a close eye.
Thank you Mr chair I move to
table House Bill endorsed fifty
seven.
Okay there's a motion to table
house bill four fifty seven.
Okay it's been second by
Representative Garrett is there
any opposition to that motion.
Okay seeing none the house bill
four fifty seven is budget thank
you thank you.
Okay and members we're gonna go
back to.
House bill two to six thank you
very much Representative Lara
for being here and thank you for
your patience.
Thank you Mr chair members of
the committee.
C. slide my experts offended me.
You start with the so thank you
very much for.
Mr chair members the committee
house bill two twenty six
addresses a very simple issue so
the school districts get X.
amount of money to purchase
instructional materials based on
their student populations based
on this you need what happens is
is that sometimes.
That fall short in school
districts or or needing to
purchase additional materials to
to make sure that all the
children have classroom
materials and when that happens
the school districts usually use
operational operational funds to
purchase those materials this
bill proposes that that that
money when the lights
operational material operational
funds that exam some from the
current code just like the
instructional material funds are
already accepted from the
material from the from the
procurement code.
This will allow the school
districts to finish purchasing
the materials that they may need
for for the students in their
classrooms and and with that Mr
chair members the committee
answer for questions.
Thank you very much
Representative Lara and I
apologize of the previous bill I
did not go for public comment is
there anybody who wishes to
speak yeah and they're in
support or opposition to house
bill two to six.
K. yes go ahead yes Mr Sani's.
Chair members of the committee
I'm Steve see on.
Sorry.
Good evening Mister chair
members of the committee I'm
Steve CNU is government
relations director within the
New Mexico.
on behalf of our members we
stand in support of house bill
two twenty six we fully support
the intent of this bill are
members of told us that
essential instructional
materials are often delayed or
simply not available.
This bill seeks to streamline
that processes ensures we place
the necessary instructional
materials in the hands of both
our students and educators in a
timely manner we thank the
sponsor and we ask that you
consider a favorable vote thank
you thank you very much Mr
Sani's.
Okay is there anyone online who
wishes either to speak in
support or opposition.
Okay seeing that we're going to
go to the committee for.
Representative.
Oh sorry it was I I don't see.
I apologize let's go to
Representative Baca first
reading about quickly thank you
Mr chairman.
Thank you Representative Lara
so.
Again I I understand as far as
the instructional materials or
something that I think that
school districts have has
struggled with.
so Mister chairman and
Representative Lara what is the
what is the cost of what you're
Is there an additional cost or
how the money be sent out to the
school district.
Mr chair Representative aka so
the
of the instructional materials.
Portion of the SCG is already
sent to the school districts so
anything above and beyond that
Representative Mr chair would
come out of operational costs of
the need to purchase additional
materials thank you Mr chairman
thank you Representative a lot
of so really this is to can get
materials that may be a
supplemental or off cycle
materials that we needed for
instruction in the school or
based upon identified need to
the school district is that
correct Mr chairman and
representative Mr chair
representative yes if the school
district which need to utilize
that or they could use that
funding as well to purchase the
current adopted materials from
the state thank you Mr chairman
thank you Representative I guess
is our current is our current
dollar amount with the
procurement code as far as.
What a purchase less than a
certain amount would not fall
under the procurement code so Mr
Chairman representative can you
identify what the that dollar
amount would be more than the
procurement laws would come into
effect you representative
Representative Mr chair I
believe it's a thousand dollars.
Thank you Mr chairman thank you
Representative thank you very
much for Sembach.
Representative Representative.
Representative Pettigrew the
reverse of Montoya.
thank you chairman and thank you
Representative for the bill.
I think I heard you just answer
a question Chairman
Representative thousand dollars
is your Max.
Mr chair representative yes if
if if the school district is
going to go through the is it
the school district use is
utilizing a put the procurement
code and in addition to that
they have to get two or three
quotes to purchases materials.
Mr chair representative of
what's the maximum you can go
without.
It Mr chair representative
anything under a thousand
dollars.
And and what's Mr chair and
representative what do you think
the maximum amount of the
purchase like.
Recommendation that you're
describing thank you thank you
Representative Mr chair I'm and
I just a question that happened
to me last year I I read the
description Department
destruction which is part of our
school district and we had to
use an additional three hundred
thousand dollars of operational
funds because we didn't have
enough money instruction
material money to purchase of
the materials for students so
Mister chair representative the
school district had to use about
three hundred thousand dollars
of operational funds to cover
the rest of the materials.
Thank you for that I have for
and Mr Chairman representative
so in that situation.
You've got you've got three
closed correct.
Mr chair representative.
Excuse me yes we have to go to
the recall process on those
additional three thousand yes Mr
chairman and representative.
What this bill does a six year
suggests the don't have to
follow that code anymore Mr
chair representative correct as
long as it's for the purchase of
the instruction to.
Thank you Mr chairman thank you
Representative thank you very
much Representative Pettigrew
we're going Representative
Montoya than Representative
Chatfield.
Thank you Mr chairman and
representative so as I
understand it it doesn't.
Approve it doesn't set takeaway
the necessity of going to the
people procurement code whenever
you're going through the regular
process but only when you have
to purchase materials.
and you have are taking the
money out of operational funds
for is that all of the time Mr
Chairman representative Mr chair
representative is only one
operational funds are used so
thank you Mr chairman so
generally all of these materials
are purchased.
through pretty procurement code.
As part of the SAG formula when
you're purchasing materials
however in the instance that
the monies that have been given
to the school district for SIG
three SIG.
Then if additional materials are
needed or as I think
Representative Baca mentioned
and maybe and non cycle of that
that you could purchase procure
those without going.
And it would just take away the
limit of up to a thousand
dollars so if if it costs more
than a thousand dollars you can
still do it without going to the
procurement code is that
correct.
Mr chair representative that's
correct usually it's best
practice Representative Mr chair
to purchase those out of
adoption materials with PSEG
money because there are
reporting requirements for the
school districts to report to
PED on what were how the loan
what we're spending a month so
usually we would purchase it not
it optimal trail or supplemental
material with SEG funds and not
necessarily operational funds
thank you Mr Chairman
representative of order my
question is simply.
making it not necessary to go
through the procurement code in
this instance why is there an
appropriation at all why is
there it seems to me like those
are operational fund from the
school bus to reimbursed less
schools reimbursed for that I
don't understand why there's
there's even appropriation
attached for a potential because
I'm reading it's costs to be
zero to up to nine.
What would be the increased cost
to the state Mr Chairman
representative.
Mr chair representative he
would.
Only complete it would wholly
depend on the needs of the
school district.
So so Mister chair and
representative and maybe Mr
chair this I just question for
you or for for.
Someone from.
LFC Mr chair is what's yes
that's coming on the operational
funds is is that reimburses
schools for why is there a it is
that why there is a potential
charge back to the general fund
Mr chair.
Thank you very much for someone
to buy a anything to add to that
yes Mr chair a Representative so
the the money that comes in Mr
chair representative through the
SCG that is reimbursable
anything that they spent over
and above that using our
personal funds that is not
reimbursement.
So Mister I don't see that
there's a cost at all associated
with this thank you Mr chair
thank you very much
Representative Montoya
Representative Chatfield.
Thank you Mr chair
I.
I agree with Representative
Montoya for what it's worth I
don't think there's an
appropriation
but you probably should question
for Judiciary yes fairly
There was procurement.
the most to state agencies have
a as the ability to work through
CVS the LCS contracts the state
procurement office has other
contracts
You know thousand dollars and
under you you get telephone yes
you really have to go out for
for Cup you really have to go
out to be it's still twenty five
thousand dollars it seems to me
like over twenty five thousand
dollars you're getting into an
area where you need to go out
for yes unless you have a CVS
contract or something I mean
just to walk in there and say
okay I want three million
dollars for I look to say well
okay you know
see it's up for tonight rather
low but that this that causes
seem like good practice to me
you know I
like I say I'm I'm not sure what
the.
What.
Where the the fiduciary agents
for the state so how are we
benefiting the state Byron
relieving the duty of
procurement law to the the
schools are not much big fan of
school.
Thank you Representative thank
you Mr chair that is a really
good question.
So up instructional materials
before the before the school
districts receive the a list
approve of approved publishers
they go through that number one
the vetting process and number
two Representative they also go
through the procurement process
the PED so PED because of that
that the the procurement costs
the process with those
publishers that have submitted
materials and that's where the
negotiate the prices for for for
for the materials so it's about
it's not that they're just Mr
chair representative you're
purchasing just to purchase it's
the materials have been pre
approved and are subject to the
contracts that the that PED has
established with the publishers
Mr chair that she had the man
Tarly different light on it for
me thank you.
Thank you very much
represents half of great
questions thank you
Representative Lara seeing no
further questions we're gonna go
to Representative Baca for the
motion thank you Mr I'd
recommend to do pass for of two
twenty six okay it's been moved
by Representative Baca second by
Representative Chatfield is
there any opposition to that
motion.
okay
please yes let's go ahead
we're going to show
Representative Brown.
Thank you thank you very much
for your like you members of the
committee.
Senator metal thank you so much
for your patience.
We're gonna ask you to come on
up.
The her first time at.
Longtime listener first time
caller.
House bill one seventy five.
And please go ahead and feel
free to into.
With thank you Mr chair house
bill one seventy five is
basically an expansion of a
program we passed in twenty
nineteen on the reduction of
crime grant they've been very
successful around the state
being access by every single
county on except for one but
that said we're trying to do
everything we can to make sure
that this fund is available to
again very successful and I
would like to expand that
opportunity this funding is in
house bill two but we'd like to
further on the
information included on the in
the actual statute to to ensure
that this.
And have expanded access and
opportunity and with me is
Douglas carver and I'll let him
speak about the programs service
please thank you Mr chair
members of the committee also up
for some for this committee it's
great to be here my name's
Douglas carver I'm deputy
director of the New Mexico
sentencing commission and I know
you're pressed for time right
just to get on the floor I'll
give you a thirty thousand foot
view of what this bill does it
eliminates the duties of the
grant administration agency in
the act because how the act has
been funded implemented since it
was created in twenty nineteen
contemplated a number of
different requests going through
a number of different agencies
it's always been funded through
the sentencing commission and so
we've been acting in the store
role so that's cleanup language
and makes various changes to the
criminal justice coordinating
councils their structure
and how they're organized
invests the sensing Commission
with the task of organizing
those councils something we've
been doing anyway because
they're necessary for the act
and so we thought we'd better if
that was in statute.
The two most important parts or
is it adds to additional
purposes from the acts it did
one is to develop or expand
digitize records and the other
is to to develop or expand the
ability of any criminal justice
coordinating council member to
share data with an access data
on the statewide criminal
justice data integration
platform so one of the smaller
districts might be a county jail
on the DA's office member just
don't have the money to plug
into these greater data sharing
efforts that the state is doing
so as to facilitate that and
importantly for this committee
it's creating a crime reduction
grant act fund the dedicated
fund for these acts that's
modeled on the violence
intervention program act fund
that the legislature passed last
year W. non reverting fund Mr
chair great thank you very much
Mister carver thank you
Representative Romero we do have
a has the amendment that has to
to Representative and
Representative Romero you have a
copy of the amendment.
I think we please get a copy to
Representative Romero I
Representative Romero this is on
page eight and to your expert
line eighteen.
This is sort of standard
practice Representative an
expert
it does not change the nature of
the fund it just ensures that
the legislature maintains its
appropriating role Miss Mister
chairman I think that's very
friendly right okay is there a
motion to adopt.
let's do a motion discuss the
amendment.
Mr Chairman.
Maybe it's because the okay it's
been moved by Representative
Montoya second by Representative
Trujillo Representative Montoya
so Mr chair the this would be
creating a fund so a landing
spot but no appropriation this
year is that why the languages.
This strike you saying subject
to appropriations
thank you Representative Montoya
and so that so you are right in
terms of what we're doing here
but Representative Montoya and
for committee percent Romero
the subject to appropriation is
more of a standard practice to
ensure that whatever as dollars
begin to flow in this area that
they are subject to the
legislature's appropriation if
if we kept Representative and if
we kept appropriated there may
be a manner in which those
procreation really never come
before the legislature that it's
a sort of automatically
appropriated every year through
law without any sort of
oversight for legislative intent
okay thank you Mr thank you for
the question Representative
Allison Mr chair of.
Carry on to Representative
Montoya.
If we make that change according
to the amendment should we also
be making a change on page one
line thirteen strike and then
make an amendment thank you for
your patience thank you very
much for the question
Representative Allison I'll turn
to so this is chief of staff all
as of now making that that
language on page one line
thirteen languages making
appropriation is there
essentially to sort of create
the fund so we we can keep that
and we can change your online on
page eight one eight thank you
Mr thank you for the question.
Hey Sian no other questions is
there any opposition to adopting
the house appropriations and
finance committee number one to
house bill one seventy five.
Casein and we've adopted the
amendment.
Hey we're back to the bill you
explain the bill Representative
I did see Mr pep is there
anybody who wishes to speak on
in support of this legislation.
This sample.
Thank you Mr chair small and
members of the committee my name
is Genevieve grant I work for
the ministry of office of the
courts judicial information
division I am the product owner
of the data exchange platform
called New Mexico data exchange
and I'm here to support this
bill as it expands the ability
to share criminal justice data
on the integrated platform which
is currently New Mexico state
exchange so thank you so much
thank you very much.
Mr Kevin please.
Thank you Mr chairman of the
committee what Genevieve said
it's really important that the
sensor Commission expand the
mission of the CCJ sees the
Corning councils to be able to
do support that exchange it's
growing it's working it's a hard
effort county by county and
attended these are working
really well with the
coordinating councils and that's
why we have data sharing a whole
number of counties and with the
with this bill would be that
many more so I urge you to
support great thank you very
much respect and is there
anybody wishes to speak in
opposition.
CNN is there anybody online.
I don't see anybody online
we'll go to the committee with
the pleasure of the committee.
Mr chair I move it to pass as
amended for house bill one
seventy five.
Okay it's been moved by vice
chair Dixon second by
Representative Garcia is for do
pass on house bill one seventy
five is amended is there any
opposition to that motion.
Seeing none.
Thank you very much
Representative thank you Mr
Carter thank you Mr chair thank
Kate members with the with the
of those that we've rolled and
we'll be seeing again and of the
rest of it I believe that
concludes our work for today
thank you members for very
productive day.
For someone to.
Work.
Members there is no weekend
house appropriations and finance
committee.
Thank you all.
