Everything for me. Oh, here,
representative Luhan.
Representative Montoya
Pettigrew, representative
Sanchez represent your Dixon
here. Small. Thank you.
Thank you very much, Mr Becker.
Okay, we do have a quorum
members. We're going to start
hearing bills for the first time
This session. A couple of just
sort of, um, perspective are
focuses primarily and mostly
focused on whether or not the
bills that we here are in the
budget. Many different policy
questions may come before us.
Um there's not a hard and fast
you know, I'm not going to gavel
someone down for talking about
policy. I think this committee
we've made it a practice to have
open conversation. But again,
our stress is really to focus on
the budget. Um and so we'll just
to put that out there.
Um can we? Of course we had
public comment on agency
budgets. We will have public
comment on individual bills as
well. We'll try to keep that
brief. I'll ask for a show of
hands and support in an
opposition and then if folks
want to make public comments
narrow go by each piece of
legislation sort of at the end.
Uh, finally, members will see a
lot of bills that will end up
having to be tabled for various
reasons. Perhaps they're not in
the budget. Perhaps they are in
the budget, and there's simply
no need for any of the other
legislative language. Um, and
that brings us to I would ask
the vice chair.
For a motion to table House Bill
82 in consultation with the
sponsors. Um we've determined
that that bill is no longer
needed.
Mr. Chair, I would move to table
House Bill 82.
Okay. It's been moved by vice
predictions. Second by represent
Garrett. Is there any opposition
to that motion seeing none.
Okay, So now members, we're
gonna go to our own
representative Herndon with
house Bill 33. Please feel free
to give us a short synopsis of
your bill introduced the experts
that you have, and we'll go
through. Thank you.
Oh, and I'm being told that
there's a substitute. Um
We're getting that passed out.
Okay, We're getting the
substitute passed out. There may
be a need to make a few more
copies.
Um
Representing Do you have the
substitute in front of you? I do
not. Mr. Chair, okay?
Yeah, Yeah, Let's get that.
Okay. Um have 0.227762 0.2. Yes,
I do. Mr. Chair. Vice chair.
Dixon, Can you move the
substitute for discussion?
So moved
Okay. It's been moved by for
discussion represent Herndon on
the substitute. That's in front
of members, please.
Mr Chair. I will give you just a
high level overview of what this
bill does and why there was a
substitute. I will ask my expert
to make a a focused discussion
of that, so you'll know and also
make sure that you know who else
is at the table and then we'll
be over able available for
questions. So how spill 33? I'm
sorry. The amendment to House
Bill 33, the House
Appropriations and Finance
Committee substitute for House
Bill 33.
Creates the prescription drug
Price Transparency Act to
increase transparency and the
prescription drugs supply track
chain. The bill requires
manufacturers, pharmacy services
and administrative
organizations, health insurers
and pharmacy benefit managers to
annually report prescription
drug prices and trans to the
Office of Superintendent
By May 1st 2025. The bill also
requires the office of the
superintendent of insurance to
compile all data and published
an annual report to present to
the Legislative Finance
Committee, Legislative, Health
and Human Services Committee and
made available on the agency's
website and presented in a
public meeting with that, Mr
Chair. I would like to introduce
my
Experts who are here
individually and then I would
like to turn it over to one
specific expert to describe why
this substitute was committee
substitute was present it
Please introduce yourselves.
Uh, Mr Terror and members of the
committee. My name is Barbara
Weber. I'm the executive
director of health action to
Mexico and also stand to speak
for the new Mexico consumers.
Yeah, you can have it closer.
It's the green button is on.
It's on. Okay, Great. Good. So
I'm also representing the new
Mexico consumers for affordable
prescriptions. This is a body
that about 30 organizations has
been meeting for four years now.
And we're really interested in
what we consider a primary
issue, and that is the
escalating cost of prescription
drugs when people are not able
to access the drugs, they really
don't have access to medical
care because they are not able
to manage their condition their
accident there. Surgery or
whatever, Uh
Polling that we've done has
shown that about 44% of the
Mexicans are reporting that they
either do not fill their
prescriptions or they skip
medications because of cost.
That's almost half of our
population. That's twice the
national average. So we're
anxious for this bill to
transparency. We think that's
the number one foundational
source of information that US
decision makers
And the public can understand
what's happening in the drug
market so that we can then start
talking about our state
solutions to also contribute
bringing down cost. Thank you.
Introduce yourself, Uh
Mr Chair members of the
committee. I am Alice Cane
Superintendent of insurance. Uh,
speaking on behalf of the Office
of Superintendent of Insurance,
we would like to thank the
sponsor and the advocates for
bringing forward this
legislation.
The complexity of our
prescription drug supply chain
obscures how each component of
the chain contributes to the
final price. This legislation
takes a comprehensive look
across the entire supply chain,
which is a necessary first step
to addressing skyrocketing
prescription drug costs US. I
appreciate this committee's
support of an appropriation for
this legislation, and we will
work with these
Send it to secure additional
resources.
Thanks again to the sponsor for
bringing forward this important,
bill. Thank you, Mr Chair and
Committee members. My name is
Gabriella Rivera. I'm the
director of policy and
communications with health
action in Mexico. Um, I know
you'd like me to be brief, so
I'll just walk you through the
changes in the committee
substitute very quickly. So both
in the committee substitute and
in the original bill sections
337 put those reporting
requirements.
On the entities of the supply
chain, as described by the
sponsor, and the other main
element of the bill lies in
Section seven, which outlines OS
has requirement to interpret the
data and report to the
Legislature and the public. Um,
the rest of the bill is pretty
standard. I won't go through
that. Um, but with the committee
sub what we want you to know is
that we've worked with
Numerous stakeholders included,
including the entities of the
supply chain. Um and with OSC to
clarify language, clear up
requirements and strengthen
confidentiality requirements.
Um we've also added a couple of
requirements of manufacturers
and updated the data requested a
Seo s, Um And finally, um, and
most of interest to this
committee is that we are asking
for a higher appropriation at
Oasis request.
They're here to answer questions
on that, and we've added a small
appropriation for HST. Thank
you.
With that, Mr Chair. We stand
for questions. Excellent. Thank
you very much for Sam Herndon.
Thank you to your experts by a
show of hands Who's here to
support House Bill 33.
Okay, Great. Uh, actually, if
anybody would like to make
public comment, if you could
please line up and give brief
public testimony
That now they're in bear with
us. There should be microphones.
There that should sort of
capture.
Um So let's try it out. Alright,
Mr Chairman, members of the
committee. My name is OT MBA.
Who? Me? I'm the advocacy
director for AARP, New Mexico.
We represent over 241,000
members statewide who care very
deeply about the rising costs of
prescription drugs. In fact, we
have an advocacy member.
Volunteer, in fact, who cares
really deeply about this, and
she lives with multiple
sclerosis. And she pays $93,000
or actually, she doesn't pay
that. But it costs $93,000 for
her medications annually in
Canada, Same costs would be
about $23,000.
Many seniors in our state have
to struggle between whether
they're going to choose to put
food on the table or take their
medications and we know that
medications don't work if you
don't take them, or you can't
afford them, So we respectfully
ask for you to pass this bill.
Thank you. Thank you very much.
Mr Chair members of the
committee. My name is Frank
more. I am a registered lobbyist
for America's health insurance
plans, which is a National Trade
Association health plans, and
I'm also here representing Blue
Cross and Blue Shield. I'm a
registered lobbyist for them as
well. Health plans Stand in
favor of this piece of
legislation and I would note for
you. Health plans are willingly
coming forward.
And taking on additional
reporting requirements and the
reason why we're willing to do
that is the cost of
pharmaceuticals is
Very, very difficult for us to
deal with. We try to provide
good health coverage to our
members and the cost of drugs is
the single largest cost driver
for us, and so we are for
transparency were willing to do
the reporting. We ask that you
passed this piece of
legislation. Thank you. Thank
you, Mr Moore.
Thank you, Mr Chair. Members of
Committee John Lip suits with
the New Mexico Federation of
Labor. F l C i O representing
are nearly 40,000 active members
and additional thousands of
retired members. This is a bill
that we have been following for
years and think the sponsor for
once again bringing it up. Our
members are retirees, especially
well, very much benefit from
this passing and being able to
afford their prescription drugs.
So for that reason
We ask that you support Thank
you. Thank you very much, Mr.
Lipson. Good afternoon chair
Members of the committee. My
name is Erica Sanchez. I'm with
New Mexico Center on law and
poverty. We stand in support of
house Bill 33, because we
believe that health care is a
human right and making
prescription drugs affordable is
crucial to ensuring that new
Mexicans
Have access to the care that
they need.
House Bill 33 is a major step in
our state's efforts to increase
the affordability of
medications. We need access to
the full picture of what is
driving high drug costs,
including transparency from
manufacturers and others in the
supply chain.
We ask you to please support
this step toward creating
effective policy to improve
patient access to medication.
Thank you. Thank you very much,
Mr. Sanchez. We have one person
online. We're gonna go to Sarah
Fitzgerald for one minute,
please.
Thank you, Mr Chair. Members of
the committee. I'm Sarah
Fitzgerald, senior vice
president of the Greater
Albuquerque Chamber of Commerce.
We're pleased to stand in
support of this bill alongside
so many others from across our
state costs keep rising for New
Mexico residents and
prescription drugs are no
exception. We need more
transparency, both as consumers
and as providers.
So parents can get the
treatments. Excuse me. Patients
can get the treatment they need
at a fair price. We urged the
committee to vote. Yes, thank
you.
Thank you very much, Gerald.
Okay. Uh, is there anyone who
wishes to stand or speak in
opposition to house Bill 33?
Okay, seeing and let's go to the
committee.
But mission, okay?
Uh, we saw Hang up, Brett
Michelin, are you do you wish to
speak in opposition to house
Bill 33.
Uh, unfortunately, yes, although
I'd like to say in the very, um
perhaps weakest opposition at
this point possible just because
of all the amount of work and,
uh, effort that has been done on
this bill from the other
advocates. My name is Brett
Michelin. I'm with you.
Association for Accessible
Medicines AM represents the
generic.
And biosimilar manufacturers.
Um, I think everyone knows
overall biosimilars and generics
save money. In fact, in 22
alone, New Mexico saved over $2
billion through the use of
generics and biosimilars. We do
have just a couple of concerns
left in this bill. We do
certainly appreciate the work
that was done on some of the
earlier triggers, but I do want
to highlight some of the
concerns left. Uh, primarily
that's in the second report that
is required in section
In three D. This will actually
produce data that will most
likely be inaccurate. By the
time it's even reported by the
superintendent.
This requires the reporting of
launch prices for biosimilar in
generic drugs. The problem with
reporting launch prices is for
biosimilar generics. The prices
go down and so you're now going
to be, uh, taking information on
prices that are going to drop as
more competition comes into the
marketplace.
As opposed to brand drugs, which
tend to have it one or two price
increases per year. So this is
gonna 15
Happy to answer questions.
Okay. Thank you very much. Mr
Michelin, please wrap up in the
thoughts and then Okay. Okay.
Well, I think that's good. We'll
go to the committee thanks to
our staff for making sure that
the public comment worked very
well. We're gonna start with
represent Chatfield.
Thank you, Mr Chair.
Uh, see if it's in this
committee. My question to you
is. Is there an appropriation
associated with this bill?
Yes, there is Mr Mr Chair,
Representative Tad Field. There
is
So thank you, Mr Chairs,
representative. Is it in the
budget?
Uh, Mr Tear, Representative
Chatfield. The answer is yes.
Thank you, Mr Chair. Thank you.
Rep. Representative Chatfield
representative pedigree, please.
Thank you, Mr Chairman.
Questions are gonna be collected
Simple. Uh, so seriously. I need
a teaching session with respect
to some of this.
Um and we can address the
majority of it on the floor. I'm
just going to give you a
preemptive of the questions that
I see going through this.
My first
Comment is an experience that I
deal with with local pharmacies
and what I talked with my
constituents.
Where pharmacy Page X
They can build.
Why
And they get Z.
Does this help them?
In other words.
What they have to pay for it.
What's taking charged consumer
is lower than that and what they
get in return is lower than
both.
So as we go through debate on
the floor
Um, those are answers that I
just I'm giving you the answers
to the test, Okay?
And and so because I'm not gonna
sit here and try and debate the
context.
There are things within the U. N
m response to the DOJ response,
Aging response and even the
response from the OS. I let's
let's like several
Areas of concern with respect to
this
So
Just be prepared that I'm going
to ask those questions when we
get to the floor.
Representative chats, Hill last
questions that needed to be
asked here and I know the rules
that were supposed to play by
and
And chairman's phone knows I'm
not much of a role players. So,
um, but with respect to that, I
just wanted to give you some
insight on where we're gonna go
when we talk about this when it
gets to the floor. Thank you,
John. Thank you very much
represented pedigree.
Okay. I don't see any other
questions We're going to go to
represent.
Oh, represent Brown for a
question.
Please.
Thank you, Mr Chairman and just
I know that we're the budget
committee, but I just need a
little bit of information, Mr
Chair and, uh, represented
Herndon.
So it says here that this is all
about transparency and the
reporting of prescription drug
price trends.
What I seen Mr Chair represents
is always up.
It's always upward price trend.
Maybe if something goes generic,
the price will drop.
But what really will happen with
this information? Whatever you
you collect. That goes to the
office of the superintendent of
insurance.
What effect? Will this
information have?
And specifically, how will it
help my constituents? Mr Chair?
Okay?
Mr. Chair representative. Thank
you for that question. Um, First
of all your constituents are
absolutely suffering from this
issue right there, making
impossible choices. Their health
is suffering. They're
manageable. Conditions are
worsening. Um, so this is
absolutely an issue that affects
all of Mexicans as far as what
this information is going to do
we've seen in other states the
price hikes that are happening
have already leveled out a
little bit.
So we're asking them to report
on these large hat price hikes,
and it's already causing
manufacturers to choose against
those price hikes. So it has
worked already in in that sense
that it's um preventing those
really high hikes with no light
on them, Um otherwise what what
else is going to happen all of
these entities in the supply
chain have come before this
body.
And repeatedly claimed that they
are not at fault for rising
costs, and it's time with this
legislation to let the data
speak and show the real story
and let this this body act
accordingly on further
legislation if necessary.
So, Mr Chair and representative
and the panel, So this is
Um
Just basically, you're
collecting baseline down about
drug prices. I know what it's
like to have sticker shock and
many of my constituents when you
go to pick up a prescription at
the pharmacy, so
I don't even think doctors
understand how expensive these
things are that they're
prescribing a lot of cases.
Um so I feel like Mr Chair. This
is headed in a certain
direction.
Um, which may or may not be
good. But could we just briefly
find out from you, Mr Cherif?
The pharmacies are in favor or
not in favor of this bill.
Mr Chair representative. He's
not here today, but they'll
tinker of the pharmacy
association stood in support of
this bill in the previous
committee and plans to and
further committees and as usual,
Mr Chairman, we do something in
the Legislature like this.
There's a we hope for cost
savings for everybody. But there
may be cost, too.
The pharmacies, the drug
companies and all that. And
quite frankly, after
Covid and what we saw with drug
prices there. I'm not, um, real
sympathetic to Big Pharma right
now.
Um So, um
That is, you know what it is,
but
Um, Anyway, I do notice here,
Mr. Chair. There is some civil
penalties. Could you just
briefly touch on that? Like what
kinds of civil penalties, Mr
Chair?
Mr Terror representative. The
Civil penalties match are in the
insurance code already. This is
all going into the insurance
coda, and we're just referencing
back to them. So that's 5000 a
day per offense. Um, which could
be multiple. So if one
manufacturer fails to report or
make several reports on a
particular drug that could add
up to more than 5000 a day.
Easily. Um, and it could be up
to 10,000 a day for willful, um,
lack of reporting. And, um,
Yeah. If you need more
clarification, I'm sure
Superintendent can can do that.
Thank you, Mr Chair. Thank you
Represent Brown. Let's go to
represent Sanchez for the
motion. Mr. Chairman will do
pass. It's been moved by
representative Sanchez.
Oh, sorry. Uh,
Move I do pass on House
Appropriations and Finance
Committee substitute for house
Bill 33.
Okay. Uh, that motion by
representative Sanchez, second
by representative Luhan. Is
there any opposition to that
motion?
Saying none.
Thank you all
Great
me What's going up? Yeah, that's
good.
Yeah.
There's a
Yeah.
Okay, Um
Cruz and vice chair, Dixon will
pass out the amendment.
And we'll make sure to get an
amendment to the sponsors.
Oh, goodness.
Okay, uh, representatives, um
Can we, uh, every kid you have
the amendment in front of you.
Mr Terry. Yes, we do. It is
0.227910 0.1. Okay, That's what
we have. Can we move the
amendment for discussion? Try
and move the amendment for
discussion moves their second.
Same member percent figure out
Okay, uh, representatives if you
could take us through the bill,
and then explain your amendment.
Thank you, Mr. Chair, Um,
representative dela Cruz and I
are here today to present house.
Bill 193 is amended. Um, and our
expert witness is Sylvia Stern
off from the Department of
Public Safety. This bill is
fairly straightforward and
contains some technical fixes
requested by the Department of
Publix Safety to the law
enforcement.
Retention fund that after two
years of implementation have
been determined, you know, will
help in the administration of
the fund, and there is money in
House Bill two.
For this bill.
Thank you. Mr Speaker. I have
nothing to add at this time.
Okay. Thank you both very much.
Mr. Chairman. Sorry. I do that
all the time. I don't want that
raisin or got a great speaker.
We'll keep working on our focus
here in the appropriations.
Okay, Thank you for being here.
Um, And as you explained the
amendment strips the
appropriation, but that's the
bill still tracks the exact
amount of the appropriation
that's in the budget. Is that
correct?
Yes, Mr Chair. That is correct.
Okay, Great. Uh, is there
anybody here then? Who is? Uh,
here too? Well, let me ask this.
Is there any objection to
adopting the House
Appropriations of Finance
Committee Amendment number one
to House Bill 193.
Seeing none. We've adapted the
amendment were on the bill. Ah,
Is there anybody here who wishes
to speak in opposition to house
Bill 193?
Okay? I don't see anybody. Is
there anybody here who wishes to
speak in support of house Bill
193.
Please come on up. Thank you for
being here. The mic was working
pretty well.
Right in that sweet spot. Maybe
right in there, I think
Proven to be beneficial and thus
retaining officers and we
strongly support this
legislation.
Thank you very much.
Mr Chairman, members of the
committee. My name is Jason
Bowie, the secretary for the
department. Public safety and
one of my responsibilities is to
have a pulse and and connect
with law enforcement across
state in New Mexico to see
what's needed in the law
enforcement attention fund has
been very instrumental in
retaining law enforcement office
Cross state We had a lot of
positive feedback from chiefs
and sheriffs for many
initiatives in support of law
enforcement in this one of them,
and we asked
For support
program for Mr Chair. Thank you.
Thank you very much, Mr
Secretary.
Okay. I don't see any other
public comment. I'll go. Yes for
absent Figueroa.
Please.
Moving. Do, man 193. Is Amanda.
Okay? Uh, let's I'm gonna go to
represent Pettigrew briefly for
a question.
Thank you, Mr Chair. Um one
simple question.
What is the purpose of not
allowing the fund to revert
back?
Mr Chair representative.
The purpose of that is that I
told you the
We had some issues with the fund
last year, Um
It was running very low, and
it's it makes it easier for us
to be able to ensure that we
have enough money to provide
these statements, stipends from
year to year if the money is
rolling over from one year to
the next, Um, in addition to
that we do have law enforcement
agencies that may have to revert
money back if
Let's say they were given money
for four officers, for example,
and what and
Three of them retired by the
time it was time to pay them
out, and they would be reverting
that money we could utilize that
money moving into the next year.
Thank you, Chairman And thank
you for that answer. The reason
I asked specifically is because
reports that I have show that
your annual costs are somewhere
between 254 100,000.
Which is substantially below the
million dollars.
And I'm curious. Mr Chair in
This will be my last question.
Um
Do you have a cap on? How much
can go into that before? It does
start to any overage does start
to revert.
Thank you, Chairman.
So, Mr Mr Chairman,
Representative. I believe what
you are referring to is in the
in the F I. R from the
Department of Public Safety. The
250,000 to $400,000 was the
estimated amount that it would
cost, um, that we are
anticipating for each new law
enforcement agency to apply for
the fund and be eligible for the
fund in subsequent years.
So we have several different
factors that may drive the cost
of this fund up. Um, at this
point in time, one of those
would obvious obviously be
adding these two new groups of
officers to this fund, but the
third is is the increased
participation that we're seeing
from law enforcement agencies
across the state.
And, um, it is really dependent
upon the number of eligible
officers within each of those
agencies that we would have to
pay out which could drive this
cost up. And that was just an
average. The 250 to 400 was an
average factoring that in
Thank you, Chairman and thank
you for that. I would personally
just like to see some level of a
cap.
But
Thank you. I appreciate it.
Thank you Represent pedigree.
Okay?
We'll open the floor for a
motion.
Do best.
Okay. We have a due Passi as
amended second by representing
figured out. Um, Is there any
opposition to adopting that
motion?
Casing and thank you both very
much.
And of course, we'll show our to
the representatives of the table
is voting in the affirmative.
Okay. Uh, Next, we're going to
ask.
Our representative Garrett come
down.
Mr Chair. There's a there's a
committee substitute.
We're being, uh, we're being
given a amendment.
And we'll make sure that you get
a copy to make sure that we're
tracking it, okay?
What's on Okay, Representative.
We have amendment here. It's
0.2279 to 6.2.
Is that what you have?
No, It's sorry. We're getting
that.
Oh,
Do you want the committee's sub
number?
Okay?
Ah!
Strike. Yes, we Yeah. Oh,
Committee substitute, I guess.
Is there an amendment to that
committee substitutes?
No. This just came to me. Three
through nine. Okay. Got it.
Okay, So let's get the okay.
Thank you for tracking with
this. Let's make sure and get
the committee substitute.
No, you're doing great. This is
good.
Um and that emit Thank you,
representing Garrett making sure
we're tracking here.
Okay?
We're making sure that we sort
of have all of the mechanics
down, so we're gonna do this
properly. Just sort of we're
gonna
We'll ask for emotion here as
soon as it's passed out.
To move the committee substitute
for
Discussion.
Once we do that, and we're going
to have our public comment on
the committee substitute once we
have adopted that for
discussion will then choose
whether or not to adopt the
committee substitute. We'll have
to amend the committee
substitute.
So
You're making sure we're on our
toes. Tell me whatever I have to
do.
What's its, I think? Does
everybody have a copy?
Okay, I would ask for a motion,
then to move house
Appropriations and Finance
Committee substitute for House
Bill five.
Ms. Discussion, Mr. Chair, I
would move House appropriations
and finance committees
Substitute for house Bill five.
You want me to read the tour to
number please to to being
227487.3.
For discussion. Okay, It's been
moved by by sheer Dixon, second
by ranking member Armstrong any.
Uh, I don't see opposition to
that. Let's
Very well noted. We do not have
that rule in this committee,
particularly this time, but very
well noted
Okay, uh, represented Garret,
Can you please take us through
the committee Substitute? Feel
free to introduce your experts
and we'd love to hear from them
as well. Okay. Um, Mr Sponsors
are Garrett Chandler, Kate.
Simple and Padilla.
Um, my expert witnesses today,
our Secretary Sorry to hear of
Workforce Solutions Department
and Brian Condon, executive
director of the building trades
What the committee substitute
does is it removes the
requirement that apprenticeship
programs have no unresolved
complaints or violations and
some other things that in
consultation with the multiple
organizations that deal with
apprenticeships.
We all agreed on to do that.
That's the primary thing.
That's changed. The original
bill, already updated language
pertaining to the federal Labor
Department departments and the
State Department within
workforce solutions that deals
with the expense.
Excellent. Thank you for that
Excellent synopsis. Madam
Secretary, Mr Kanda. Anything to
add?
Mr Chair just on this on this
sub. No. Okay. Uh, I don't see
any other. Uh, let's can we go
for public comment? Is there
anybody here who is here to
speak in opposition to House
Bill five.
The committee and now that our
committee substitute for
Hospital five
Saying none. Is there anybody
here who wishes to speak in
support of House Bill five.
Great. Please come on up. Line
up. We've microphone is right
there just behind our
presenters.
Um
We'll have a few folks online.
Please tell us who you are. And
then for a minute, will open up
Public comment. Thank you, Mr
Chair. Members of the committee.
My name is Carla Coogler. I am
the president of associated
Builders and contractors. Excuse
me. We are the Commercial
Construction Association. We
have the largest multi trade
apprenticeship program in the
state of New Mexico Merit based
And we do stand in support of
House Bill five. We want to
thank the sponsor for listening
to us and for making these
changes that are really
addressed and eliminated some
some purity issues that we that
we saw and where we can stand in
support today, um for years and
years years, its first back as I
can remember.
The through the Apprenticeship
Assistance Act, the state of New
Mexico has allocated $600,000
for apprenticeship programs for
the state. So any apprenticeship
eligible apprenticeship program
can apply for these funds.
Through the years apprenticeship
has grown it should. It's an
amazing program, but that
$600,000 has remained stagnant.
so every year with the growth of
apprenticeship the amount of
funding that every
apprenticeship program can
receive has gotten smaller and
smaller. Um, now it's not just
construction and it shouldn't
be. There's 58 programs in the
state of New Mexico. Now we have
blood text and we have I t and
coding and
Was a lot of other industries
that adopt apprenticeship out of
the 58. There's 21 of them that
are now It's just construction.
Um
That funding for us is critical
for our program and employer.
The contractor pays 100% of all
of the tuition, the books, the
lab fees and everything in it
right up, Okay, they so we try
and keep all of those costs
small as small as we can that
way.
Our contractors can train
people, so this money is really
critical for us to be able to
retain instructors to be able to
expand our services around the
state. So we really asked for
you guys to invest in our in the
current programs and then help
us an apprenticeship growth. So
thank you. Thank you very much.
Good evening, Mr Chair and
members of the committee chair,
Chrome Horse with P and M.
Uh,
Public service company of New
Mexico stands in support of HB
five. We think the sponsor and
the partners for sponsoring this
this forward we recently
announced a 1 $million million
investment in support of high
school students in New Mexico
went into Electric Trade
electric trade programs and
effort developed by working
closely with the International
Brotherhood of Electrical
Workers.
Nicholsex Press 611.
We are proud to partner with VW
on this high school effort and
support this bill to create more
apprenticeship opportunities
here in New Mexico. Thank you.
Thank you very much.
Thank you, Mr Chair. Members of
the committee. John Lips shoots
with the New Mexico Federation
of Labor. AFL. C I O once again
on behalf of all of our members.
This has been an issue that we
have stood in solidarity with
our building trades Brothers and
sisters for
As long as I could remember, but
this is across the board for all
Union members. Training
apprenticeship programs are our
lifeblood. This is not just an
investment in our state. It's an
investment in our future. This
is the future of our workforce,
And this is why we needed this
funding. We thank you very much
for including funding in House
Bill two and urge your support
of this bill.
Thank you very much.
Thank you, Mr. Chair, Uh and
representative Miguel Tubman
with I F F local to 44, as well
as the New Mexico Professional
Firefighters Association are
firefighters standard support
the building trades with our
union brothers and sisters. We
thank the sponsor for bringing
this legislation and we urge
your support to support union
jobs in New Mexico. Thank you.
Thank you very much, Mr Tipton.
Okay. I see. We have a few folks
online. We're gonna go first to
Steffy Weisberg for one minute,
please. Steffi. That afternoon,
Chairman Small and members. My
name is Stephanie Weisberg and
I'm representing 350, New
Mexico, the rural, a biscuit
advocacy group. We strongly
support this bill not only
because it will create jobs for
rural residents, but also
because of the great need for
electricians and plumbers and
other installers.
Or electrification and
electrification will bring down
our climate pollution and lower
energy costs. We have an
unprecedented opportunity to
leverage federal funds for the
energy transition, but if we
don't have the contractors, we
can't take advantage of them,
and that's the experience of a
lot of people who are trying to
make these installations. Now.
there just aren't enough people
to install them.
So I really appreciate this
bill. Thank you very much. Thank
you very much. Next, we're gonna
go to John Baker. Joan, please
for one minute.
Mr Chair. Members of the
committee. Um, can you hear me,
Okay.
We sure can.
Thank you, Mr Chair. Members of
the committee. My name is Joan
Baker. I'm the political affairs
director for you, a local for
12. That's a plumber and
pipefitters Union. Um, when I
started two years ago, we had an
apprenticeship count of just
over 200 apprentices. Now we're
breaking 436 with the same pot
of money.
So this is a very important
investment in our workforce. The
United States Department of
Commerce States that for every
dollar spent in apprenticeship
has a $28 return on investment
in public benefit. So I do ask
you to make this investment in
our state and passed house Bill
five. Thank you.
Thank you very much. Joan. Next
we're going to go to, uh, Martin
Elia.
And Martin will conclude us. Go
ahead, please.
Good evening, Mr Chair Committee
members. My name is Martino Lay
and I'm here on behalf of CNN as
their policy liaison. CNN
supports hospital five and
strengthening workforce training
and apprenticeship capacity
across the state for all
programs and colleagues and in
the sector. Thank you. Thank you
very much, Mr Olio.
Okay. Uh, I think that concludes
our public comment.
Are there any committee
questions?
Representative Montoya.
Thank you, Mr Chair.
Um
Just briefly, Mr Chair and
panel.
Um
How does this apprenticeship
program interact with our
community Colleges?
And the programs that they have
in the community colleges.
Uh, Mr Chair, Representative
Montoya. We work closely with
the community colleges that
offer the related technical
instruction piece of
apprenticeships and, um, you
heard C N M on the public
comment, So there is a lot of
integration and I think there'll
be more going forward.
Thank you, Mr Chair.
Um and Madam Secretary the I
guess the question I have for
for folks who have
Gone through one of our
community colleges and have
gotten a certificate.
Is that considered sufficient?
Since they would be probably
teaching the same things.
Um would that be sufficient for,
uh folks who have in the last
several years gone through
probably the same programs at
the community. College is okay.
Korea. Thank you. Thank you.
There is there is apprenticeship
programs are a little different
than certificate programs at the
community college right
Apprenticeship programs in New
Mexico are only the established
training mechanism We have that
are designed and established to
create fully.
Journey level craft construction
craft professionals, So we
coordinate with C N M northern
New Mexico Community College,
but there's certainly different
A graduate with a two year
certificate, right?
Still has to earn four years of
construction related experience
before they can qualify to take
the state test.
So
There. There. There are
different. Our apprenticeship
programs are developed
specifically to create journey
level construction craft press
professionals, So thank you for
that. I appreciate that. Answer,
Mr Chair and
And Madam secretary and panel.
Um
So if they've gone through
One of these courses and gotten
a certificate and has a job with
Whatever the field is.
Um, and if they're working for a
safe for a company
That has
That will likely need to comply
with a journeymen type of
program.
With the years of experience be
enough for them. What? What is
what is going to be missing? Mr
Chairman? Thank you, Chairman,
Representative Montoya. So your
classroom time and community
college will not apply for your
construction experience
necessary for four crafts that
have to have journeymen
patricians, plumbers, sheet
metal workers and Sprinkle our
betters actually have to have a
journeyman certificate issued by
the state.
Qualify for that. You have to
have four years experience in
that particular trade. So, Mr
Speaker or Mr Chairman, and, uh,
Madam Secretary panel
Um, so for folks who have have
done it, what I'm trying to
figure out is how is there a
path forward?
For those folks who have
graduated recently. I don't want
to penalize through what we're
trying to do by and growing the
workforce. I don't want to
penalize folks who have
Gone paid money out of pocket to
to move forward. I don't want to
harm workers who are already in
the field. Totally Mr Chairman,
representative, exactly the fact
we often have, uh, community
college certificate graduates
coming out of the programs. They
go into the ABC apprenticeship
of Ramsey come into ours and
they start
As the first year apprentice
right now, they give them in
some cases, depending on the
program. They'll give them a
year of credit.
Chords.
Towards their classroom time.
But according to US media well
in New Mexico State
apprenticeship council, they
have to have the time served in
the program.
So Yeah, there is a path for
them. It does kind of have a
tendency to along gate.
That time it will take to
actually qualified.
Test for the tournament
certificate.
The C I D. Thank you. Mr
Sharon's in 11. Last question is
there uh, incentive
In place for companies who have
those employees already.
To help current employees to be
able to comply.
Um
Once again, there's folks in the
workforce were already counting
on. I just don't want to
Harm them in any way or make it
more difficult for them to be
able to to get somebody who's
going through program.
Mr Chair and Representative
Montoya. No, nothing in this
bill should harm people who are
doing that sort of sequential
path where they're learning and
then earning, um, the the joy
The great part about
apprenticeship is that you get
to earn and learn at the same
time. Um, but nothing in this
bill, or in the way that we
administer apprentices detracts
from
People who want to do it one
step at a time, and furthermore,
in this current labor market, we
need everybody on every path,
especially in the construction
trades. Okay, Thank you, Mr
Chair. Montoya. We're going to
go now to represent pedigree.
Thank you, Chairman. Thank you,
Representative. Madam Secretary
for being here. Um, and the
bill.
I think my first question is
pretty straightforward. Um
The funding that's available for
this goes to union and nonunion.
Mr Chair and Representative
Pedigree. Yes. Um, that's a
great question, and we get it
often everybody, all
apprenticeship programs whether
their union non union, we even
have some municipalities. Um,
they are all equally eligible
for the funding as long as they
meet the standards currently
that splits out to about one
third, two third, both in the
number of programs one third
nonunion in two thirds union.
Both in the number of programs
in the number of apprentices who
are coming through every year,
And that's just by virtue of how
the programs have evolved. But
there's there's no limitation in
that sense.
Thank you, Chairman. Thank you,
madam Secretary for that answer,
And, um I understand the
appropriations been stripped is
that because of the 30 Million
for that's already existing in
House Bill two.
So just briefly on that, Um,
we're we're on this sub. Our
amendment to the substitute will
strip the appropriate Thank you.
Chairman and thank you for that.
I appreciate
Thank you very much, Okay. I
don't see any other questions.
We're gonna go to representative
Sanchez for the motion of some
Armstrong for the second. Oh,
sorry. Represent brown. Please.
I apologize. Thank you. So
Just a little bit of
clarification, Mr Chair, so I
understand there's an amendment
coming because the committees we
have in the budget 30 million
the committee Substances 50. Now
you're saying there's an
amendment to the committee sub
coming
Okay. Thank you.
Thank you for clarifying that
represents Sanchez.
Mr Chair. We just adopting the
Substitute. That's right. I
moved to adopt the substitute
committee. Can we ask for a do
nut? Sorry. Do not pass on House
Bill five, Hospital five and,
uh, do pass on the Finance
Committee. Substitute for
hospital. Five. Okay, there's a
motion.
I'll second moved by represents
Sanchez saying by representative
or ranking member Armstrong so
we are adopting house
appropriations of Finance
Committee. Substitute for House
Bill five. Is there any
opposition to that motion?
Okay. Please show percent
pedigree and opposition to that
motion.
Okay. Now I'd ask for an
amendment for house
Appropriations and Finance
Committee Amendment one
Um, this is 0.2279 to 6.2. Is
that what you have represented
Garrett?
Okay. Can we move that amendment
for adoption?
Okay. It's been moved by
represented Garcia. Second. My
representative Sanchez, is there
any opposition to adopting that
amendment?
Okay?
We now have the okay now we'll
ask for a final motion.
As amended. We may have done an
extra one in there.
Can we ask? Go back to represent
Sanchez to move house
Appropriations and Finance
Committee substitute for House
Bill five as amended, So moved
seconds Okay. Been moved and
seconded. Is there any
opposition to that motion,
please? So, uh, noted. Okay. Uh,
thank you all very much. This is
so exciting. Our biggest
investment in in
apprenticeships, perhaps ever in
the history of the state. Want
to thank all of my
Colleagues. I want to thank the
presenters, the experts
And all who are working to make
new Mexico better place. Thank
you.
Kate. Uh, we're down now to
house Bill 88.
We'll ask our owner send Luhan
and represent Borrego.
Okay. Great to see you. Thank
you all for being here. Senator.
How to me? Oh, great to have you
here at house appropriations.
Please go ahead and present
House Bill 88, and then we'll
ask for the amendment here soon,
And whoever wants to start okay.
Represent Borrego, please.
Thank you, Mr Chair members.
Thank you for having us here
this evening. Um, midway through
our session, and we all still
some of us have a smile. So, uh,
with that being said, I'm here
to present to you. House Bill
88, and I would like to
introduce my guests, uh, and my
co sponsors.
Senator Leo had a meal.
Representative Tara Luhan.
And we have a couple of guests
with us today that are our chief
fire marshal from the state of
New Mexico.
Yeah, and also, uh local, um
44. I knew that I sf um and Mr
Tinman, and I think our guests
will be able to respond to your
questions. This is an act
relating to firefighters
requiring the Department of
Finance and administration to
establish a program to
distribute funds appropriated to
the department for statewide and
local firefighter recruitment.
And making an appropriation. And
if you remember, uh um
Representatives and senators
last year with my freshman face
on, I came here asking for a
similar, um, bill to be passed.
However, I forgot to put the
appropriation and so this
corrects that mistake and I
think that, um you know, our
firefighters are wonderful and
My father was a firefighter for
30 years and Los Alamos didn't
have a clue what he did, but I
definitely know now and so with
that I will turn it over to
Senator Um how to meal or any
comments.
Thank you, Mr Chairman. As you
know, firefighters serve a major
role, a critical role in all of
our communities.
What we're trying to do is
identify the next generation of
firefighters to come in and help
in the vital need of ensuring
that our communities are safe
when you look at rural New
Mexico like myself, firefighters
are often the first responders
who come and help out in our
areas another need for
recruitment to paid firefighters
is due to the lack of volunteers
throughout the state of New
Mexico and Mr Chairman. This is
also a national trend.
Now the hope is with this bill
is that we get firefighters and
areas to help supplement the
volunteers response and cover
the gaps in coverage to
insurers a response in all of
our communities, whether it's
farming TEM Espanola, all of our
communities need this help. This
is by no means a bill to exclude
or push out volunteers.
This is to help supplement a
response to our communities.
This is also to ensure the
departments maintain and improve
their I o so ratings and with
that I will yield Thank you,
senator representing Johan,
please.
Thank you, Mr Chair. Thank you
to all of our members. I am
going to be very brief in. Turn
this over to a few words from
our chief. Thank you. Thank you
very much.
Good afternoon, Mr Chair.
Members of the committee Randiv
Marshall was just like to say
that in the state of New Mexico
and nationwide. We're losing
volunteers throughout New
Mexico. We have a shortage and
we've got to fill those gaps.
One of the big issues that we're
seeing out there if we continue
to lose volunteers, our
insurance rates are gonna
skyrocket and seeing New Mexico.
we had some issues in 2017 and
18 in the Donut Donut and a
county
Where we lost the volunteers and
the departments all went to
class 10 departments. Insurance
rates went off the roof at that
time they created HB 311 to hold
the insurance companies have to
notify any communities when
their department's gonna retro
So we do see that happening in
the near future in New Mexico,
So I think we started good
assault, supplementing our
departments were paid members.
In order to continue insurance
rates and continue to protect
our communities. And by no means
are we trying to push our
volunteers out, But we're trying
to supplement and improve our
service. Thank you. Thank you
very much. Mr. Fire Marshal.
Okay. Thank you all very much.
We're going to go now. Um
Well, can we ask for a motion
for amendment and make sure that
you all have it this? We have
0.227870 0.1.
Okay, uh, this simply strips the
appropriation as all
appropriations do And we know
that this is in the budget.
That was for that amendment.
Mr Chair, I moved house
Appropriations and Finance
Committee Amendment one to house
Bill. Idiot. Okay, there's
Close one,
saying by recent Garcia. Um is
there any adopt any opposition
to adopting that amendment?
Seeing none adopted the
amendment. Okay, Now, let's go
for public comment. Is there
anybody here who wishes to speak
in opposition to house Bill 88?
Seeing none. Anybody for those
who are here to speak in support
of house Bill 88. Please go
ahead. Come on up line up here.
And speak right behind
Represent beret Go and we should
be able to catch you.
For about a minute. Good evening
Chair representatives. It's an
honor to be before you, bill
that you have before you is an
important one for the future of
firefighting in the state of New
Mexico.
Being the second largest
department in the state doesn't
doesn't necessarily benefit my
department, but it definitely
benefits my brothers and sisters
that wear the same uniform out
in the community. Hope is that
we can increase the number of
combined fire departments across
our state, and that will enhance
the level of care that all of us
that are traveling through our
beautiful state and rely on
regardless of where we are rural
or urban or metro. So I thank
you for your support.
Thank you.
Afternoon. Speak, Speak. Sorry.
Good afternoon, Mr Chair members
of the committee. My name is
Matt Problem. The fire chief in
Valencia County. I represent a
combination Fire department. We
have volunteers and career
staff. Over the last few years,
we've seen a drastic decline in
our volunteers putting in
Huge demand on our career staff
to try to accommodate that call
volume. Um, what this is
intended to do is give agencies
a mechanism to fund new
position starting much today and
agencies that have never had to
budget for positions before the
vast majority of departments in
the state are volunteer, so
those agencies have never
thought about budgeting for
positions.
The problem is, we need people
responding today, and this is a
mechanism to allow those
agencies to get responders into
the seats today.
Take the time to budget. Make
sure that they can keep these
responders into the long term.
So
We definitely support this bill.
We appreciate your
consideration.
You, Mr. Chair. Representative.
My name is Miguel Timon
president if local to 44 and
vice president of Mexico
professional firefighters that
represents approximately 3000
Firefighters statewide, like the
chief said This isn't gonna help
my municipality from
Albuquerque. But all our
brothers and sisters across the
state, including the volunteers,
we want to professionalize the
fire service in the in the
history of our fire service
We've tackled from fighting
fires in municipalities to wire
land to E. M s to Hazmat.
Too high angle rescue to urban
search and rescue to mountain
rescue two helicopter rescue to
responding to covid. So we keep
answering the call. Our play
gets fuller and fuller. And the
truth is, we need to. We need to
continue the motor staffing in
every corner of this state. I'd
like to thank the sponsors for
bringing this last year, the
sponsors for bringing this year
this year as well as the Metro
Fire chiefs. Lot of them are
here today, as well as the
members of our of our union.
The collaboratively
collaboratively did this
together and we want to thank
the governor's office that
helped us in the interim and
dedicated and committed $35
million in her executive budget
to this initiative to support
firefighters in New Mexico. So
we rise in support of this and
thank you for your support.
Thank you very much. Mr
Chairman. My name is Albert 40
Edema, retired captain from the
Fire department, also working on
behalf of Mexico Professional
Firefighters Association.
And, uh, Mr Reiterate everything
that our brothers have said
today strongly urge your support
and we want to thank our
sponsors for bringing this
forward and fighting for those
who are fighting for us every
day. Thank you.
Thank you.
Mr Chairman, Members of the
committee Wesley Billingsley, D
F. A local government division
director. We have helped
administer other funding sources
like this other recruitment
funds and we're standing in
support of this and we'll be
here ready to help
administrators fans as well.
Thank you. Thank you very much.
Thank you, Mr Chair. Members of
Committee. John Lip shoots with
the new Mexican Federation of
Labor. F l c i O once again. We
are standing here in solidarity
with our first responders, you
know?
If there's one position in the
state that I hope we can all
agree on is we cannot have first
responders missing in action.
These are people that put their
lives on the line to help us
They will go at any length to do
that. And if we can provide them
with the necessary personnel to
help in that, cause, then that
is on us. You know, we have
definitely done a great job in
helping our law enforcement and
the state and helping recruit.
Recruit those members. We help
just for some measure of parody
to help bring our firefighters
up in the same ring. Thank you
very much for this opportunity,
And we hope you support this
bill. Thank you very much.
Thank you, Mr Chairman and
Committee and TJ Kathy's City
Palace Fire chief.
I'm also here to express support
from the sixth volunteer
departments that serve our in
conjunction with our paid
department. Staffing is a huge
struggle across offers
responders, and that's why we're
here. That's why these great
people have done a great thing
to bring this before you today
and we ask that you supported.
Thank you. Thank you.
Mr Chair members of the
committee. My name's Aiden
Lopez. I'm the president of the
Santa Fe Firefighters
Association. I represent 100 and
50 of the bravest men and women
of the city of Santa Fe. We hope
that you guys do pass this bill
at this time. It's all about
recruitment. It's all about
growth. And as of right now,
with the call volume increases,
that's all we need within this
state right now is to grow our
numbers and to make sure that
our guys aren't overworked. I
appreciate you guys. Thank you
for your time. Thank you
Sponsors.
Thank you very much.
With the chairman and the
members. My name is Charles
Scars from the fire Chief
Roland. We're a small apartment
were both paid and volunteer. As
we talked before. It's hard to
get people.
Um
Two.
Fight virus. Um we have a very
small budget.
To help us
To help our community very, very
important.
We hope that you supported spill
Thank you very much.
Mr Chair. Members of the
community, managed Mateo Garcia
in emergency medicine, physician
and medical director from any
rural and tribal agencies across
the state. I started in firing
E. M. S, E. M T and a volunteer
firefighter 21 years ago, and it
led me to a career in medicine.
I just want to say we see a
decline in the
Number of people willing to
answer the call and just want to
say thank you to all the first
responders who courageously
answered the call for Fire E. M
s Wild Land Response. Thank you
very much, Mr Garcia.
Yeah, 19. I'm a person with
multiple disabilities and the
disability advocate and I felt
moved to say that I may not
always want me to be here, but I
would not be here alive if it
had not been for emergency
medical transport, emergency
medical tips just
Um
Paramedics. Thank you very much.
Thank you very much support.
Good afternoon. My name is Rick
Romero and chief of the Cuban
New Mexico Fire Department. We
maintain an idea. So four and
struggle. We are totally
volunteer. We have no paid
members. Um and we've lost
approximately 75% of our
membership because of economic
times. People are unable to
responding longer.
Out of the few that we have 40
members about 10% respond now.
We very much need this kind of
service where the where the type
of services we're really talking
about.
Thank you very much.
Afternoon chairman. Small
members of committee is David
three on the Crown fire chief of
small Rule department and
futures for county trucks
standing strong support of this
bill. We see it as an
opportunity. Our frustration is
we often trainer. Our recruits.
um, are volunteers and then they
usually move on to bigger and
better opportunities with the
training and get full
temperance.
Position, so we see this an
opportunity to offer potential
growth for them and a potential
jobs so that they can stay in
our home and help us protect so
strong support. Thank you. Thank
you very much. We have one
person who's online who wish to,
uh oh.
Madam chair. I thought, you
know problem. I just wanted to
come up here. My boys have
firefighter. I want you to
understand if you're from a
urban area that these volunteer
firefighters, they do all the
emergency. Um um, medical and
all the emergency medical care
when there's an accident, So you
know I live along highway
Highway
68 that goes from Espanola. All
the way to tell us we have
horrific accidents along there,
and it is our readers are
volunteer firefighters who go
out there. Take care of those
people. Call the ambulances. Get
them get them. Hopefully in a
safe situation. We have a lot of
deaths on that highway.
Um
I just want you to understand
how important they are and how
much they do My little, uh, my
volunteer Fire department
actually did to recruit kids
started giving, uh of
firefighter training to fourth
graders through high school so
that they're trying to get
Build a volunteer.
Idea in people's in young kids
mind so they understand how
important this is for our
community because
Because of our economy. People
just started volunteering
anymore. This This is critical
for our state, and we just don't
have. You know we're not
Albuquerque. Volunteer Fire.
We're not Los Alamos. Where if
you're rural, you depend on
these people to save your life.
That's all there is to it, so I
would like to encourage this
committee to vote for this, and
I appreciate the sponsors very
much. Thank you. Thank you very
much.
Okay, We're gonna go online. We
have
Justin Drum, Justin Drum for one
minute, please.
Thank you, Mr Chair and
Committee member. Thank you, Mr
Chair and Committee members. I
am the fire. Chief M s director
for Clayton Fire rescue in the
town of Clayton 100% on board
with this, uh, as we are
affected in our very rural area.
Uh, your ironically started my
24th year serving my community,
the county and the state of New
Mexico.
Today. So, uh, 24 years ago we
had 38 volunteer members today.
I have 17 representing I s o
Class five. We're working hard
to maintain that for our
community, But this this bill
would help. Uh, our city and our
our town. Get us to that next
level and maintain is, uh, but
declining volunteerism. Economic
times. People don't have the
time to do that, Uh, I
appreciate
Eight the opportunity to speak,
but we're going to be in full
supported this in our area.
Hmm.
They thank you very much, Chief
Trump. Okay, we're going to go
now to committee comments First
two ranking member Armstrong.
Thank you. Mr Chairman. I have a
question. My first question is,
um
How do you become a certified
firefighter?
Turn the microphone.
Thank you, Mr Chair. Members of
the committee. We do have a fire
academy and Socorro or that we
train him through the whole
program. They go through their
firefighter one. They start off
with their hazmat. They go to
the firefighter, one firefighter
to class, So we provide the
training in coral at no cost. If
there are thank you for that,
because I I read here.
Um, that to be able to get these
funds you have to
Recruit firefighters who are
certified and have taken the
oath prescribed for firefighters
and our for licensed emergency
medical technicians.
So
My constituents reached out to
me.
And they can't recruit anyone
with those credentials.
And so this isn't really going
to help rule New Mexico in my
district.
To help recruit and retain
because they're not certified to
begin with.
Is that an issue? Um, that you
see in other areas.
Or as, uh, it only in
Catherine County.
Um, Mr Chair members of the
committee. That question has
come up quite a bit, And I
believe that we can work around
that and we can drain them and
then put them out on the field.
Mr Chairman, and and, uh how.
How long is the training?
Mr Chair members of the
committee the training You're
looking at 40 hours for the
Hazmat. Then you're looking at
another two weeks for
firefighter one and two.
Are you kidding me? And there's
other trainings that will be
added to that. Uh, so you play
looking anywhere from 4 to 6
weeks through the academy.
Also it is also depends on the
local governments because they
have different types of
trainings, and they have longer
training that they provide. And
I do have inferred witness here
and we do have a fire chief
Petty is that could probably
explain their trainings and how
they do that to a local
government. That's okay. Thank
you so much for that
information. I just have a real
Um, my constituents are telling
me they have a real problem with
this. No one's going to go and
take that kind of training. Um,
to be a volunteer.
Ah, in in rural New Mexico.
Maybe some are. Maybe some
aren't but I
I think I'm all for
More firefighters and I'm
completely for this.
Except for that language that
they have to be certified before
they can apply for the funds.
And so the other question I have
is is all 35 million.
Going out or is this actually a
fund and we're only spending the
interest offer.
Thank you.
Thank you, madam. Mr. Chair. Um
Frankie member.
I'm struck. We in the budget
currently have $5 million for
this. As we previously stated
last year, we got the bill
through. Just agree. It's a fund
that was vetoed by the governor
and we came back this year as
you heard from testimony,
working through the interim and
trying to figure out how with
the best way to get a fund
together.
And the recommendation was
executive wreck was $35 million,
and we were able to get five
Million dollars, which is a good
start for us, and it feels like
this is going to get us to build
the fund.
But it's ah, as we all know is
not always enough, but it's
something that we were proud to
to take right now.
Okay. Thank you for that
information. And just once
again, I don't really think this
is going to help.
Really rule New Mexico.
Mr Chair. We have a comment for
that response. Mr. Chairman,
Representative. Thank you for
that. So when you're a volunteer
firefighter, you do get the
firefighter one training, So
you're trained and you get the
basic E M T training as a
volunteer firefighter, which
qualifies you the training to be
an entry level professional
firefighter.
Which is that this one would
kick in if you choose to move
out of the volunteer aspect of
firefighting and move into the
professional, which means you'd
be paid for the job you do as a
volunteer.
Okay. Thank you. I'm I'm I know
My my constituent is listening,
so I'll see what her response
is. Thank you for your your
responses. Thank you were gonna
go next represented Garcia, then
Representative Pedigree den
Represent girl.
Thank you, Mr Chairman.
Thanks for the presentation. I
got about 3000 reasons why I
want to support this bill.
Because every firefighter do you
said about you had about 3000.
You know, I have a concern.
Uh,
In this fix every firefighter
out here knowledge electric
vehicles are coming out.
And that's gonna be a different
ballgame. And how do you put on
an electrical fire on on the
interstate on an electric
vehicle? Because, Mr German, I
heard it if you don't
Disconnect the battery. However
they do. I'm can actually kill
you from electrical shock. Are
you guys prepared for these
fires, and these cars were
accidents and these electric
cars.
Mr Chair. Members of the
committee represented Garcia.
Yes, our training Academy
trains the firefighters to
respond to this type of incident
because I heard on in the
community today, and it's going
to be a different type of trying
to put a fire rod in electric
vehicles a little bit different,
trying to put out a gas fire, my
correct
Yes, sir.
And you say you have training
for that already. Mr. Chair.
members of the committees. Yes,
we do.
Thank you for that, and I want
to refer back to represent, um,
arms from negative, same
problem. You know, my district
is all most of the frontier.
And how do we train these
people?
Mhm the middle of nowhere.
So they can benefit from this
fund because I hate for this fun
just to go to Albuquerque, Santa
Fe, Las Cruces, you know, needs
to be divided in rural New
Mexico just as much as any
results.
Mr Chair. What we see is our
volunteer and fires are mostly
in our rural communities.
As as we heard through
testimony, and this is where
we're really trying to focus in
on these dollars and making sure
that we're sharing up those
volunteers so that we can move
into more of a
professionalization so that
We're building a fund so that we
can come up with those those
ideas and we have that
innovation so that we can
really, really address what is
going on in a rural communities.
Thank you, Mr Chair.
Mr. Thank you for that
representative. We know people
that live out there in the
middle of nowhere. It's very
hard for them to come to and
carry me it really is And it's
not gonna happen so therefore,
if they're not certified or
qualified, they're going to be
left out of this pond.
And we need to don't know how
we're gonna do it. Get out reach
to him or
How do we address the the issue
and
Really ruining Mexican.
Mr Chairman, which is why I'm
sitting at this table as a rural
new Mexican is that I understand
the importance of the needs and
although it won't be managing
the fund, this is written up in
a way that would help rural New
Mexico to ensure that those
firefighters who already have
their firefighter, one training
their E M T basic training,
which they get as volunteers
would definitely help us in
rural New Mexico and building
our professional
Firefighters in the areas that
need it the most, and that's why
I'm at the table and why I chose
to sponsor the bill.
Thank you. Thank you. Thank you,
Mr Garcia Perry pedigree. I'm
thinking new name today. Thank
you, Chairman.
Um, thank you, Senator,
Representative, representative
and fire marshal, right?
Thank you. Um, Chairman. I just
want to follow up on have
several questions or preparatory
questions for you guys for the
floor.
But, um
With respect Chairman to what
representatives Garcia had to
say.
Less document I've seen from
Arlo, my local fire chiefs from
the state fire marshal with
respect.
Two emergency vehicle fires this
pull everything else away that
can burn and let it burn to the
ground.
Is that that ruling changed from
you and you? We now have a way
to deal with that.
Mr Chairman, members of the
Committee representative. Yes,
we do. We always provided
training to our volunteers and
paid staff to fight vehicle
fires. Electric fires.
So the training is there if the
volunteers and the members
determined and, uh
Thank you for that answer.
I'd like to get an email with
the details on what that
training is.
Um
With respect to that, If if
chairman if I understand you may
not understand everything that I
heard, so I'm going to clarify
something.
The bill.
It's specific to recruit
firefighters who are as true as
ranking member, Armstrong said,
are certified and have taken the
Earth for
Firefighters and their license
for emergency.
I believe chairman that I heard
the senator say that, um
There is a way to get the
preliminary
Training with respect to that.
And then I also believe I heard
Chairman the fire marshal say
that, um, we have a workaround
around the lines on 25 and on
Page one, and pick up line one
on Page two.
There's a piece of that
chairman. That kind of gives me
a concern.
So we have a workaround.
Already for a law that we don't
even have passed.
Mr Chairman, members of the
committee. So what we have out
there is we do have a lot of
volunteer firefighters and we
have all of them that are
certified firefighter. One
Firefighter two and E m t one E
m T basic L s and a lot of
volunteers that in this
communities
Always apply for the positions
and moving to this pay
positions, So I think we do have
a percentage of their that can
do that.
So I feel pretty comfortable
with his volunteers applying for
these positions and being
trained
Thank you, Chairman and thank
you for that.
Like I said, I heard one thing
and then I heard another and
they seem to be in conflict. I
don't think they are. And I
think your your answer was very
was clear with respect to that.
So that that was a concern for
me. I
Drawing a piece of legislation
that that me that we already
have a have a backdoor find on
how to get around it. It's not a
good idea for me, so I
appreciate the clarification
with that.
Chairman and committee members.
Uh
Built presenters.
Some of the things in here. Some
of the comments are. The bill
has a lack of processes and
guidelines utilized for the Fire
department qualification that I
have patients to receive funds.
Additionally, there's no
oversight mechanisms. Place for
fun disbursements to ensure
compliance.
Use of the funds for recruitment
and only
And lack of clarity on whether
the funds can be used for newly
certified firefighters and E M.
T s.
I placed that information out
there because those questions
and it and it will go more in
depth with respect to the debate
that we have on the floor. I
feel like this bill is pretty
much a complete the duplicate of
House Bill 345 from last year.
Mr President.
Mr Chair and
Um, representative pedigree.
Thank you for your questions.
Um, I think that, um, basically
what we did is we went back and
we met with most of the
Individuals who you see in this
room today, Um, we met with the
governor's office to develop the
bill. Um, Bill basically is is a
duplicate of what we brought
last year. There are some, um um
Probably strong, stronger, um,
intent to create more
professional and we already have
very professional certified
people, but from our volunteer
firefighters to ensure that they
have a ladder to know that they
have a possible career in this
particular field.
And so those those are really
important points. Um, because,
um, often and and this also
ensures that that volunteer
firefighters will have training
and they will have what they
need. And I think that's what
this fund is really
establishing. Is that there that
that
Sort of process does fall into
place and that people understand
it across the state, including
in the rural areas that those
career ladders are available.
Chairman and representative I
appreciate your comments. I look
forward to the debate on the
floor. You have an appropriation
for this. I'm not gonna stand in
the way of that.
We'll deal with the rest of it
on the floor. I just want to see
the clarity of a multitude of
volunteer fire departments where
I live. So, um, look forward to
the clarity. Thank you,
Chairman.
Thank you very much Represent
pedigree. Next we're gonna go to
represent Garrett, please.
Thanks, Mr Chair. Two questions.
Um, I'm there's eight institutes
based at our two year colleges
all over the state. However, it
does say that they have to be
certified first C N. M. If
you're hired, you can Then go
and get your basic
A firefighter and emergency.
Um, qualification, so I don't
know. Maybe we can talk offline
about slightly changing this. It
looks like the opportunity
scholarship is eligible, at
least at CNN. So I'm just
You know, there's there's some
methods to pay for it anyway.
Offline if we can talk about
that before it comes to the
floor. Thank you.
Thanks. Okay?
Represented Garrett. Okay,
Great. We're all in suspense,
OK, thank you all very much.
Thank you, for the questions
will now move. I don't see any
committee. Further committee.
questions will move for a motion
on house. Bill 88 as a man.
Okay, uh, it's been moved by
representative Sanchez.
Seconded by representative
Brown to do pass on house Bill
88 as amended. Is there any
opposition to that motion?
Saying none.
Okay. Thank you all very much.
Thank you. Mr Chairman. Members
of the
Okay. Great to see that. Thank
you, representing Luhan.
Um, and it's great to see so
many of our appropriation
members really doing excellent
work through the budget process
and now on a very important
pieces of legislation. We're
gonna go to House Bill.
91, Please go ahead and feel
free to introduce your expert
and will love to hear from him
as well.
Thank you, Mr Chair. Thank you.
Committee members, Um
Please introduce House Bill.
91 relating to the deal of First
We have an amendment. Mr
Charter. Would we like to move
that? Can you read out that 202
number, please? Thank you, Mr
Chair, 7227874.2.
Is that not correct?
Hold on, Let's let's make sure
and get we may have a different
amendment. Mr. Let's make sure
I'll give you that can take that
Mr Chair that that amendment is
changed to 2279 to 0.1 Got it.
Okay. Perfect. Thank you. Can we
move that amendment for
discussion? Okay.
Second, it's been moved by
represented Al Cruz second and
for by ranking member Armstrong
and this amendment simply
removes making appropriations
and, uh
Read. Does it removes the
entirety of Section six?
And remembers the succeeding
sections accordingly.
Uh, is there any opposition to
adopting this amendment?
Okay. Lets sorry about that.
We'll go ahead we've adopted
were on the amended bill
represented Bohannan. Your
expert, Mr Solomon. Thank you,
Mr Chair. Um, House Bill 91 is
related to Gerald Thermal
Resources. This is also, uh,
previously, um
Well, that was brought.
Through last year, and we've
gone back and we worked it and
worked. We worked it through our
budget process is you know and
through the interim
Um, committee communities with
this does is amended Amends the
duties of the Energy
conservation and management
division of the Energy, Minerals
and Natural Resources
Department, which creating the
geothermal more projects
Development fund unauthorized
grants, creating the joint
geothermal projects revolving
loan fund authorizing loans and
And thus making the
appropriation Mr. Chair. Have my
guests introduce himself. Thank
you.
Thank you, Mr Chairman. Members
of the committee. My name is Tom
Solomon. I'm a retired and
electrical engineer, and I have
been pleased to facilitate the
New Mexico Deal. Thermal working
group for the last, uh, coming
up on two years now, Um, Would
you like me to give a quick
summary of the bill? Very
briefly, please. Yeah. Give you
a two minute summary.
So, um
Uh huh.
The bill has described as, um
does exactly what was mentioned
The intent of this bill is to
promote the development of New
Mexico's abundant geothermal
resources. We are number six in
the nation and geothermal
resource potential, and in the
last just a couple of years, um,
the very first advanced hard
rock.
Um, fully, um, re circulating
geothermal plants are being
constructed in Utah and in
Nevada, and this bill is
intended to bring some of those
companies here to develop New
Mexico's youth more resources by
providing some small grants and
loans.
Uh, and helping to leverage the
quite enormous amount of federal
dollars through the inflation
reduction act, some matching
funds to be able to bring
geothermal funds from the
federal level into the state and
develop new Mexico's. Um, uh,
great deals potential, so
Thank you very much. Okay. Uh,
thank you. Both. Is there
anybody here who wishes to speak
in opposition to house Bill 91.
See anybody. Is there anybody
here who wishes to speak in
support of hospital 91.
Okay. Please, come on up. Good
afternoon, Mr Chair members of
the committee. I'll be super
quick, Luis Guerrero with the
Sierra Club and the chapter
presenting our 35,000 members
and supporters, uh, in New
Mexico, and we strongly support
this bill. Geothermal energy is
a 24 7 clean energy resource,
and it serves as an effective
backup for solar and wind power.
Development of geothermal energy
representative transition
opportunity for workers in the
oil industry and many other jobs
throughout the state, including
disadvantaged communities. This
bill creates the conditions in
New Mexico to further this clean
energy industry. And we ask your
vote yesterday. Thank you.
Excellent. Thank you very much,
Mr Garrido.
Kate. I don't see any other
public comment. I don't see any
online. Let's go to the
committee.
Mr Chair. I would move to do
pass. Okay. We have a do pass
for house Bill 91 as amendment
Second
Seconded by representative
Chatfield. Is there any
opposition to that motion?
Saying none.
Congratulations. Thank you for
the work and thank you in
particular. As you mentioned
several Han. This is two years
in the making, and it's great to
see that we're making. Okay,
We're gonna go now.
Ah to our New Mexico Match fund.
We'll see what was vice chair
Dixon and we'll welcome ranking
member Armstrong.
Feels good and and represent,
Yeah.
Okay. Uh, it's great to see
We have a chair left open and
deep respect. It's great.
Um, Mr Chair. I'm I expect
represent representative
Armstrong to return. So when she
does understood, we've got a
spot for the waiting although,
albeit cold. Okay, uh, Dixon
represent Barrera. Um please go
ahead and take us through house
Bill 177.
Thank you, Mr Chair. Would you
like for me to introduce the
amendment as well? Yes. Please,
Mr. Chair. We have an amendment
that strikes the appropriation.
It is 0.227909 0.1. Okay. Oh,
good. You got representatives
like charisma, and the amendment
represented Chatfield second in
the amendment.
Uh, as you explain, this simply
strikes the appropriation. Uh,
and re numbers the page
accordingly.
Is there any opposition to
adopting that amendment?
Okay. I don't see any
Okay, you go.
We have adopted the amendment.
Okay, We're on an amendment
bill.
Feeling good.
Vice chair, please. Thank you,
Mr Chair. Um so House Bill 177
is the New Mexico Match fund. I
am sure that everyone on this
committee is aware of this and
it's very excited for its
potential. The New Mexico Match
Fund will establish a reliable
and nimble source of funding for
over 2800 eligible entities in
our state, including all towns,
counties, other political
subdivisions, state agencies,
tribes nations in pueblos.
There's currently $50 million in
House Bill two and we are
working to reach the full $100
million request for this new
fund. Um we the D f A. Oh, let
me introduce if I may 1st, one
of our co sponsors
representatives, Susan Herrera.
Um and then the two experts for
this bill for questions should
members have any Rebecca Reus,
the governor's infrastructure
advisor, and Wesley Billingsley
with D. F, A director of local
government.
Perfect.
Um
I don't think that
Really need to go into a whole
lot of detail. If folks have
questions, we can certainly
answer them. But the match fund
has been a long time coming. Um,
we have seen the impact that the
$10 million appropriation had
this last year. Um, there was an
8 to 1 return.
On investment, and the funds
have been distributed across the
state to some very small towns.
Um
Rural frontier communities for a
number of projects. So we have
had success and we are ready to
move forward with a larger
appropriations so that the state
can capitalize on the federal
matching funds that are
available through the B L and I
R. A
Thank you. Thank you very much.
for seven. Dixon represent
Moreira. Miss Ruse. Anything to
add? We don't think we're all
very excited here.
Uh,
Needless to say, Mr Chair and
members of the committee. I
think this is one of the most
important pieces of legislation.
we have, uh, and our disposal
this year, Um
Federal grants. Federal money is
coming in. If what's really
great about this fund, is that
it? It doesn't have a deadline.
So so grants come in when they
come in and always in the past,
we kind of had to wait for a
certain specific time before we
could match that very awkward.
This means that if you get a
grant, and you can match it the
next day, we can then start this
project immediately. So, uh,
I really think this is, uh and
an innovative idea. It's one
that we desperately need. Uh,
small communities are bringing
in more and more money. I can
tell you my card brought in
34 $35 million in a year and a
half.
Ah, with with some with some
junior money. I think that's
going to just increase
throughout the state. And I hope
that you will. Um I hope you
will support this endeavor.
Thank you. Excellent. Thank you
very much for several to thank
you to our d f A. And Mr
Billingsley.
This rule is great to see you.
Okay? We're gonna go for public
comment. Is there anybody here
who wishes to speak in
opposition to house Bill 177.
I don't see anybody. We don't
see anybody online. Anybody here
who wishes to speak in support.
Please line on up.
Great and we see a number of
folks we want to get through.
Please be brief, but we really
appreciate folks taking time. So
we're gonna We'll make sure
everybody has a chance to share
their comments. Go ahead,
please. Thank you, Mr Chair and
Commission members. Thank you.
It's an opportunity here. I'm
John Rhodes, Environment
Department director of the Water
Protection Division.
I am here to stand.
On behalf of the department in
support of this bill.
It's a very important tool in
the toolbox to be able to help
our communities across the
state. It's also an important
tool, potentially to fund some
of the federal programs that we
run Construction Program Bureau,
which is in my division, and
those clean water state
revolving fund.
There is a magic component to
that.
It has
By a reliable, sustainable
opportunity, and I would like to
stress that the funds that are
matched
It was claimed W federal funding
the CW srf
I'll go back into the
communities. It's all for
community industry
infrastructure.
Thank you. Thank you, Mr Roger.
Thank you, Mr Chair and members
of the committee. I'm Ashley
Wagner, vice president of
government affairs for the New
Mexico Oil and Gas Association.
We support this bill because
this investment of state fans
will unlock federal funds and
help local economies and job
creation. This is especially
true in rural New Mexico, where
many of the employees in our
industry living work. Thank you.
Thank you very much.
Mr Chairman, members of the
committee. My name is Jim
Desjardin. I represent the
Renewable Energy Industry
Association of New Mexico
Inflation Reduction Act, also
known as the IRA will be
providing $369 billion over the
next 10 years. The investment
and
Investment infrastructure
investment jobs. Acts also be
providing funding. There's other
federal funding opportunities
for much of this funding
requires matching grants and
also requires resources to apply
for those grants. So this bill
will help us realize that in
many ways to support it, Thank
you very much. Thank you.
Good evening, Mr Chair. Members
of the committee. My name is Lee
Gagnon and I represent the New
Mexico Office of broadband
access and expansion. We are
strongly in support of House
Bill 177 as we administer
broadband infrastructure grant
programs from both the federal
and state level matching
requirement is always a part of
every approved program plan.
And so the resources in house
Bill 177 will allow our tribal
communities in our local
community partners to be
successful, who may not have had
the initial capital to
participate. Otherwise, Thank
you for your time Consideration.
Thank you very much. Mr.
Chairman of the Committee, Jason
weeks registered lobbyists for
Bernalillo County. We stand in
support of this bill want to
thank the sponsors for bringing
it forward and all the hard
work?
On the legislation. It is a tool
that will help us leverage
again, as everybody has said
Federal files state funds with
federal matching funds so that
we can actually pursue
development of critical
infrastructure on the local
level to better serve
constituents that we represent
Burleigh County. Thank you.
Thank you, Mr weeks.
Thank you, Mr Chairman, Members
of the committee generally
future at the new Mexican
Federation of Labor. I feel like
I should have a seat up here
today. Um, we definitely urge
your support of house Bill 177.
Year. Two terms, money and
infrastructure. Those two terms
like, look really good for us.
more jobs. We really appreciate
your support. Thank you.
Thank you very much.
Adam or Mr Chair. Excuse me and
members of the committee Tiffany
Rivera, registered lobbyist for
Elephant Butte Irrigation
District, so very excited to
see, um irrigation districts
included within the eligible
entity, language and very
excited on the possibilities in
getting water infrastructure
deployed and southern New
Mexico. So thank you very much
to the sponsors for carrying
this
Thank you, Mr Ruben. Good
evening, Mr Chair. Members of
the committee and thank you,
Madam chair for bringing this
forward today and to the
sponsors. My name is Justin
Green. I'm a county commissioner
from Santa Fe County District
One and I am in support of this
bill, but I ask you to look at
it and add more money to this
$50 million is only a drop in
the bucket. Every dollar that
you put in this bill will be
will be leveraged 3 to 4 times.
So imagine that every dollar
that you put in could return 3
to 4 times of free money from
the federal government towards
projects here in New Mexico, So
I ask that you look at this
bill. Uh, turn it into a $250
million bill with $50 million
for the Albuquerque area because
they would eat that up in a 2nd
$50 million for other classic
counties. $50 million for tribal
areas, $50 million for rural
areas and $50 million for
emergency projects such as the
dam that, uh,
One of the sponsors,
representative Herrera was
talking about in Rio Reba County
that would affect 1000 people in
my district and in the
neighboring Rio Arriba district
that are at risk of failing.
Damn. So I thank you and I
encourage your support and
adding more money to this. Thank
you very much. Thank you,
Commissioner Green.
Thank you. Chairman. Um,
remembers my name is Tammy Cowen
Be climate energy director with
conservation voters in Mexico
and we are in strong support of
this bill, and we are also
speaking on behalf of 37 other
conservation and water advocacy
groups that are listed on a one
pager that you should have
before you. Um as you've heard
the 2022 Congress passed the I R
A and I I J a
Um, putting billions of dollars
up for clean energy investments,
and there may be somewhat of a
misconception that these funds
are easily up for grabs. That is
not true. Um it's gonna be
extremely competitive for these
states to get these funds.
Regionally. We are competing
with Nevada and Utah with higher
capacity and funding to go after
these grants. Additionally,
Colorado last year passed their
state state match funds Bill for
100. I'm sorry $80 million in
Minnesota passed their bill for
$100 million, So that is the
competition that we are facing.
Mexico needs these monies for
our underserved, just
disadvantaged communities for
things like not just clean
energy investments, but also
water infrastructure, better
roads and broadband access. So
for all those reasons and other
reasons prepared, please support
this bill for $100 million.
Thank you. Thank you.
Thank you, Mr Chair
Representatives. My name is
Michael Leon Guerrero with the
center Pacific policy. I also
want to thank our sponsors for
this bill.
Many of you represent rural
communities and are well aware
of the challenges they face and
applying for federal grants.
This bill will help to address a
number of those problems. It's
not just the match fund. It's
also cost overruns and managing
the grants, and that kind of
capacity building is really
critical.
Uh, D f a the cards. Local
governments are really going
above and beyond, to move some
of that federal funding already.
this bill will help put them in
a much stronger position to be
able to access those federal
funds so strongly yours your
support and thank you very much.
Thank you very much.
Hey, uh, we have
One person we have a few folks
online.
Ah was folks to be brief. Um,
we're going to go first to
Chelsea, Canada.
Chair members of the committee.
My name is Chelsea, Canada, and
I'm, the director of public
policy at the New Mexico Chamber
of Commerce. The chamber
supports HB 177, Our research
report driving New Mexico's
future identified that
infrastructure is one of the key
pillars that drives economic
competitiveness. The creation of
a local matching fund to utilize
and leverage historic federal
infrastructure funds will ensure
money is not left on the table
and important projects are
realized statewide. We're
excited about the fellow
supporters who have come
Come forward and the possibility
of the range of potential
projects from water roads.
broadband, among others. The
time is now to make a
significant investment for this
purpose, like our neighboring
states. As you know, New Mexico
State revenues are at an all
time high and federal
infrastructure funds will expire
in a few years. This strategy
supports New Mexico's aging
infrastructure and strategically
ensures that local communities
statewide are able to bring new
infrastructure jobs and
prosperity into their
communities. We appreciate the
leadership on this.
Proposal and urge you to
continue to support building up
infrastructure statewide. Thank
you. Thank you.
Thank you very much. Next. We're
going to go to Steffy Weisberg
for one minute. Steffi?
Thank you, Mr Chair. I am
representing 350, New Mexico, I
will advocacy group and for all
the reasons stated above, we've
strongly suggest supporting this
bill, especially in rural areas
to help them plan for and
respond to extreme weather as
climate change intensifies that
Thank you very much. Thank you.
Next, we're going to go to
Duval, Westfall briefly.
Develop, please.
Good evening Chairman Small and
committee members. I'm DiVall
Westfall with the Greater
Albuquerque Chamber of Commerce,
And we like many of the people
there think HB 177 is just about
smart money and creating this
$100 million matching funds that
can be used by state and local
and Indian agencies to secure
federal funding for much needed
projects. Well, you know, we're
thinking repair of existing and
construction of new roads and
highways and bridges and water
systems and other high dollar
High priority infrastructure
needs. The governor referenced
the need for this fund Inter
State of the State address so
that we don't leave any money on
the table, ensuring our
villages or towns or cities or
counties are water associations
are pueblos and more have the
required matching funds to
leverage federal dollars.
Again. It's just smart money.
And so the chamber urges the
committee to pass HB 177. Thank
you. Thank you very much, Mr
Asphalt. We're gonna conclude
with Cary Robyn Brender. Carry
for one minute, please.
Good evening, Mr Chairman and
members of the committee carry
Robin Bruner registered
lobbyists with the water
Foundation. The water
foundations really excited about
this bill because a few years
ago, the governor can be a water
policy task force and one of the
recommendations from that task
force was to create a state
matching funds. So we hope you
pass the bill. There's a lot of
love tonight. And, uh, we
appreciate your time. Thanks so
much.
Thank you very much.
Okay, that will conclude our
public comment, Uh, breaking
member Armstrong. Anything that
you'd like to add, and we'll go
for a few questions. No, thank
you, Mr Chairman. I'm sure
everything's been said, and it
wouldn't be on this bill. If I
didn't think it was a good idea.
Fantastic. Okay, we're gonna go
first to representative dela
Cruz. Present pedigree
represented Luhan and represent
Garcia. Thank you. Mr Chairman.
I don't have a question. I just
want to make a brief statement.
I can't imagine a
More effective way for the
Mexico and Mexicans to invest in
themselves to invest in
community personal experience.
Mr Chairman recently I was
trying to get money for my
community. Extend water lines,
Water lines, citizen, just
putting a, uh, lines into homes.
It's also eliminating water
being drawn out of the aquifer.
Which means if you don't have
municipal water, you're also not
going to have municipal sword if
you don't have municipal short
guess where that water goes, Mr
Chairman.
Thank you. This grateful. Thank
you Represent Del Cruz represent
Pettigrew, please. Thank you,
Chairman. Um this is gonna be a
fun debate on the floor.
And and so seriously great idea.
Thank you for bringing it. Um,
but
Um
You think, Miss Miss Canada that
spoke on zoom.
Brought up some of the some of
the potential issues that we
have.
With respect to we all know
where we're at.
With federal funding.
We know that's going to tailor
off.
I really look forward to hearing
the sponsors game plan three
years down the road.
This is the
This is an interesting concept.
This is stuff that is actually
been tried in the past.
Many, many places many of our
political subdivisions. Many of
our municipalities have had this
issues that I'm 60. So there you
go. I can go back that far. Um I
really appreciate that one of
the interesting things chairman
that I heard in the in the
beginning part of this.
Was some of the different types
of funding that we're going
after. Which tells me that there
is a vision somewhere within one
of the bill's answers were one
of those supporters that this is
gonna work towards the beyond
that B I l funding for E V
charging stations as well. So be
prepared for that discussion as
well. Thank you.
Thank you for saying Pettigrew.
Next, we're gonna go to
represent Luhan.
Thank you, Mr. Thank you, Mr
Chair on the first day that yes.
This is probably one of the very
innovative way of dealing with
the many needs that we have. And
I see this fund as a big
umbrella for a lot of needs.
That the state has
And I also don't think it's
enough. Um
But
Most concerning to me, though,
with that said, and from the
testimony of the most diverse
Testimony we can get from one
end to another is
Is that
There could be some false hope,
and I don't like that to happen.
I like us to be more prudent and
more.
Prepared and planning with our
dollars. Mr Chair.
And I think that this bill is
trying to achieve some of the
most important things that we
can do.
Especially as a member that
served on the water task forces
that was mentioned.
But I have some have some
concerns because I don't know
what the guardrails are, and I
know there's going to be a rule.
Um, in place for DFA to make for
how these dollars are going to
be spent, and I know that this
came up in the previous, um
Committee of how those dollars
and Who's Going to priority be
prioritized when we have so many
needs, and I see our rural
communities in a real rural
sponsors represented on this
bill, and especially, um, what
this means for our rule.
Communities. And then when we
Place upon that or under that
umbrella, economic development
and I hear Mr Chair, oil and gas
here in full support of this as
well. I wonder
What their intentions are with.
They make it out of some of
these types of matching funds,
and that brings concern to me.
Because I know the greatest
needs are in our rural
communities. And I know that
this is this is really a focus
of most of our of our sponsors.
So I just want to make sure that
we're getting those guarantees.
And we're getting those. Those,
um
Those needs met first and
foremost, so
If the sponsors want to speak to
that and how that how those
funds or any ideas through the
rulemaking that those are going
to be prioritized, Mr. Mr Chair.
Thank you.
Uh, thank you for that question,
Mr Chair. I'm going to let Mr
Reuss start and and let's see
where that goes. And then I may
have some to add. Thank you.
Thank you. Thank you, Mr Chair.
Members of the committee
representative Wuhan, I this
this question that you've
brought up about and comment.
The range of need the extent of
need and the sort of real and
apparent emphasis of that in our
rural communities is very, very
much a driver of this bill being
in front of you today and being
Moving through the chamber. So,
um, what I'll say is in all the
work that we did with the
sponsors with advocates with cog
directors, Um other experts
across the the state who are on
the ground, trying to bring in
federal dollars and put them to
work in communities in crafting
this bill.
We're very intentional about
setting the stage for
implementation of a nimble grant
program. That's going to be a
bit different than some of the
other grant programs that we
have in that, Um as
representative Herrera said, so
articulately. It's really key
that these funds are available
when the federal grant deadlines
are coming up. So the the
Rolling application and funding
cycle is really important. And,
um, the
The
The depth and diversity of
needs, as representative Dixon
said in her opening remarks,
there's over in the definition
of eligible entities in the bill
over 2800 different entities fit
within that definition of
political subdivisions of the
state and others. Um, so the
idea is we, uh, will set up
through the Department of
Finance Administration director
Billingsley and his team.
Uh, procedures invite public
comment on those procedures that
will lay out how the decisions
will be made on a rolling basis
to make sure that those who need
these dollars get them and to
the extent that they're
available, and
I think that the demand for this
is beyond anything we've seen in
discussed yet. Um, but we
haven't had enough experience
out there with smaller matching
grant allotments to really know
how great the demand is. We know
what the opportunities are from
the federal government. I think
that the demand across the state
is going to be pretty great.
And, um and I think that will
need to see uh through
The procedures and the
discussion with communities on
those procedures and
implementation, the best way to
ensure they get
Uh, that as many entities as
possible and all of our
communities and diverse needs
are represented in this bill.
Um, so there's there's a lot to
come a lot of really important
conversations to come in terms
of how we implement this while
still keeping, um, sight of the
importance of making the funds
available, right when, right as
communities and other entities
and tribes and pueblos need
those dollars.
And I would just add Mr Chairman
and representative, Um we've had
a great visit on your insight,
and I appreciate that so much.
And, um
You know, sometimes we have to
take a chance.
And
I'm willing at this point to
take the chance. I'm sure people
will get grants that I'm not
happy that they get the grant.
And I'm sure people that will
get grants that I'm very happy
they'll get the grants, so it's
across the board. Um, you heard
the divers like you said
Entities that are are standing
in favor of this. And so my hope
is that it would be divided
equally.
Um, you know, uh, diverse Lee
across New Mexico for rural New
Mexico. Um, the first thing I
said, is I don't want
Albuquerque, Santa Fe and and
Dona Ana to get all the money.
I wanted to spread out from just
the I 25 corridor. And so, um,
we're really gonna be I'm
personally want to be and watch
really closely in the rulemaking
and make those comments and I
would encourage all of you to do
that as well. Thank you, Mr
Chair. I really appreciate that,
Um, comment from you, Um,
ranking member, Um Armstrong.
Um, Mr Chair. I just don't want
you to this to come back and
having heard
All the hope and and it's well
accepted. And all that hope. I
hope we can come back here and
say Well, this wasn't enough. We
knew this was enough, and we
need to do twice the amount of
three times the amount
And maybe create some other and
some other investment types of
funding out of those resources
that we have more revenues.
And I just want to say thank you
for the sponsors and thank you
for the work on this and for
listening to me, Mr Chair
because
This work is is intense, and
we're hearing other bills and
other
Matching fund funds like, uh
Well, here's some more
throughout this committee
throughout this process, and
there's a lot that we're doing
with those those matching funds,
so I want us to be very diligent
And as the appropriators in the
committee for that I want to be
asking this committee. There's
these questions and really
digging in because
This is this is kind of broad
and wide open and I have. I have
some concerns with that, as
As you do.
And I wanted to make sure that
we're doing everything that we
can with our taxpayer dollars to
ensure that those in the message
that we keep delivering that
those most in need that the
dollars are going to reach those
most in need. That's all I have,
Mr. Joe. Thank you. Thank you
represented Luhan. Next we're
gonna present Garcia then
represent Garrett.
Thank you, Mr Chairman.
They don't have no questions. I
just have a comment and I wanted
to make emotions. Chairman. You
know, I'm glad that this little
ship came up, especially for
ruining Mexico and including
tribes, because, as he was it
represented mark from those
seams that
Sanofi of groupie Las Cruces.
Give most of it and ruin Mexico
kind of get left out all the
time. And I you know, I've been
a rep for eight years now, and
I've been seeing it for eight
years. You know, it's changing a
little bit, Mr Chairman, and we
need to keep on working on it to
make it better for ruining
Mexico with that being said.
Ah!
Thank you for introducing this
bill. Enough fully supported and
can't make a motion itself.
Somebody else on the list back
to you. Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Thank you for seven. Garcia. Uh,
Is it? X x? We've got a few more
questions, okay?
Representative Garrett, please.
Thanks, Mr Chair. Just one
question, So this is purely when
you want to access the matte
sheen funds for a federal grant
Correct.
Correct? Yes. Thank you. Mr Mr.
Chair of my question is just
like when I look at the list,
you have domestic mutual
Domestic water Consumers
Association. Thank you. Uh,
representative had it for me
knowing what that is.
But we have grounds with the New
Mexico finance authorities. So
my question is as part of what
Mr Billing see Billing sleep
apartment going to do department
going to do
It is.
Make sure that they've done the
state matching kind of things.
Which is a very robust program
before
Um, they start searching for
federal grants.
Mr Chairman, members of the
committee representative
Garrett. Thank you. Just since I
met the mic, uh, Director
Billington lately, and I work
really closely together. Um, our
plan is that in the application
process that's that's developed
for this. There would be a
requirement that the applicant
for our match grant demonstrate
that they've exhausted other
sources of funding before they
come to this fund so again that
helps us make, um spread the
funding out as much as possible
across as many receiving an
Titties.
Thank you. Thank you. That's it.
Great. Thank you. Very represent
Garrett Brown, please.
Yes. Thank you very much, Mr
Chair and sponsors. Thank you,
Rebecca. Good to see you again.
All of you.
So, Mr Chairman, um
I've been a supporter of
matching funds now for a while.
We've I know. Several of us have
worked together on that.
Um, Mr Cherry? Just wanna, um
and I will support the bill. I
just want to mention that
there's another bill moving.
That's a matching funds Bill,
and you may or may not be aware
of it, Um
And the sponsor of the
Transportation Trust fund
proposal.
And there are a few differences
in how we're approaching this so
Um, my first question, I guess,
um, is to the sponsors, Um, put
these matching funds to be used
on transportation projects. For
example, the county wanted to
build a segment of road, Mr
Chair.
Yes. Uh, Mr Chair and
Representative Brown. Nice to
see you. Absolutely. We expect
transportation projects across
the state to benefit from this
fund. I love that. Thank you so
much so
Mr Chair and sponsors. I, um
I just want to explain my house
Bill 146. It was amended
recently at my request, but what
this does is create a durable
fund.
This particular Bill Hospital
177. It's going to be expended
at some point. And what I did is
model my bill after the early
Childhood Education Trust fund,
which has it was given seed
money, and I'm asking for that
in my bill, but I also have
feeder funds that will help
boost the fund and keep it going
and in perpetuity, so
5% would come out after the
third year, starting after the
third year, we're doing a
rolling average.
And we would have matching
funds for infrastructure
projects through that bill.
And so just briefly, Mr. Chair.
I don't know if you're familiar
with the feeder funds are, for
example, unspent capital outlay.
dollars after if, after six
years that money has not been
spent or encumbered. We're
sitting there complaining about
this 5 billion sitting in this
fund. Some of it, of course,
will be expended in a timely
fashion. But some of it will
not. And so I'm taking those
capital dollars and
Um, circulating them into the
Transportation Trust fund, which
is for bricks and mortar as
well. So we have a logical
nexus there. Also, Mr Chair and
sponsors. Um, Also another
feeder fund is the motor vehicle
excise tax taking a little bit
more of that.
And making sure it's used for
road projects because there's a
logical nexus there as well. And
then finally, Mr Carroll just
mentioned
That I'm also, um, in my bill. I
have a um, feeder fund of 1% of
the revenue that's collected on
electricity sales because there
is a tax on that, and that is to
help out where the we know the
push for electric vehicles.
They're not paying gas tax. And
this way At least we capture
some of the electricity tax at
the state is already collecting
and just saying that that
It makes sense to put some of
that into this fund, so just to
let you know Mr Chair and others
that
This bill is moving. I sure hope
to get it across the finish line
And and I have lauded your bill,
by the way have let people know
I really appreciate what you're
doing. And you do have a good
bill. Thank you, Mr Chair. Okay,
Now we're gonna go for any
clothes. I don't see any other
questions.
Or comments will go to closing
from vice chair and ranking
member
Thank you, Mr Chair. Um, I just
want to let folks know we'll get
this map to everyone and the
list because I think it's really
fascinating. For instance, in
Eddy County of the 10 million
that was previously
appropriated, Eddy County
received over $1.2 million in
matching funds. Um, and for
representatives, Garcia and
number of matching funds went to
McKinley County and Cibola
County.
Some of those smaller
communities and in fact, zero on
this list went to burn Leo
County. Um, so that's you know,
pretty pretty good track record
their injured our vote here.
So, um, with that, you know, I
am.
I think it's a wonderful bill. I
hope everyone will support it
and let's hit the ranking member
would like to add.
Just really quickly. Mr. Chair,
Representative Brown, You're
always so eloquently spoken
about how you're doing things
and and representative Luhan
also has brought up this the
same idea of Saint Peter
creating a fund and appreciate
all that insight. And, um, we're
hoping that
This just gets bigger and
better, And it's good for the
state of New Mexico and we would
ask for your support. Thank you,
Mr Chairman. Thank you all very
much. Okay, we have amended
house. Bill 177, who wants to
make the open the floor for a
motion. Quick. Um, Mr Chairman
moved. Wow. Alright. That's that
figure at all was ready to go
there, okay?
Been moved by represent figure
or seconded by representative
had Emilio. Is there any
objection to adapting that?
I don't see any. Thank you all
very much. Okay, members. We
have two more things to do
first. Thank you. Chair.
Thompson's great to see you
here. We're going to ask the
chair. Thompson up for her,
bill. Um and then we're gonna
have to. We're going to go back
to house Bill 33. We have to,
um, actually amend out the
appropriation, which it seems
like we did not do.
So
Uh, if we could quickly clear
the room or keep the
conversations muted.
Chair. Thompson. Please be
brief, but thank you for being
here were excited to take up.
Uh, this legislation, um House
Bill 98.
And then we do have to go back
briefly again to do house Bill
33 Take it away. Sometimes I
just move a do pass, Uh, quickly
and we'll get there. This will
be very quick. So this is this
is about the able accounts,
which are accounts for
discipline people with
disabilities to be able to save
money.
With with benefits that they
receive. They can never have
more than $2000 so saving to go
to college or buying a vehicle
or home is out of reach of them.
So we're making. That's what
these accounts are about. We're
making two minor changes. Page
two line 24 were, um
Amending the age from 26 to 46,
and that's to mirror federal
law. I believe, in large part to
catch soldiers and people like
that, who get disabled a little
later in life.
And then on Page four line 19.
It's
Basically the the state and the
feds have the capability to go
into those funds to get money
for medical services that have
been provided or, um, death
benefit, if if they paid for
death benefits, and what we're
doing here is just saying it
hasn't been normally done, but
we're making it so that it can't
be done so that
That folks who have saved their
money and their able accounts
are able to hold on to it. Okay.
Thank you very much. Sam
Thompson. And so there is no
money attached to this bill.
This simply brings us into
accordance with federal statute.
Better make these accounts
usable. Great. Any questions?
Moved by your representative
Sanchez.
Taken by representing daylight.
Cruz. Is there any opposition to
passing house? Bill 98 seeing?
None. You have a do pass. Thank
you. Chip. You were okay,
members. I'm gonna ask now, too,
If we can bring back house Bill
33 there any opposition to bring
him back house Bill 33, so that
we can take action.
I don't see any opposition to
that, Um
Do we have the
At last for the Hey, we're gonna
do this as an oral amendment
members, so I'd ask that we all
turn to house Bill 33.
Well, yeah, let's and I, You're
right, So don't turn to the
bill. Let's go back to our
committee Substitute for house
Bill 33. This should have been
it was handed out to all of us.
Okay, we're gonna confirm the
202 number. It's 227762.2.
Okay. See Amanda nodding? Yes.
Okay, Um, so we're on the
substitute and our oil. Excuse
me are oral amendment here.
Is to strike Section nine.
In its entirety.
So this is on the final page
members Page 17.
Section nine strikes out the
appropriations.
And that is lines three through
16.
We're gonna change section 10.
To Section nine.
10 goes to nine at the bottom of
page 17.
And re and we'll remember the
succeeding accordingly.
Are we all tracking that?
And the vice chair has made an
excellent catch. Also on Page
one.
Thank you. Vice chair line, 19
and 20.
We'll need to strike. Uh
Making an appropriation.
And remember accordingly since
line 20 will go away.
And
Means oh, and the semi colon
preceding making an
appropriation. Thank you
represented Brown. Okay, so just
so we're all tracking again on
the committee. Substitute
227762.2.
On Page one.
Striking the semicolon.
In the words making an
appropriation remembering
accordingly.
And then on page 17.
Striking section nine lines
three Su 16 in their entirety.
Remembering section 10.
As Section nine.
And re numbering accordingly.
Clear.
Okay. It's very clear. Thanks
for our staff for catching this.
We We know time is short. So
very big things. Okay? Can we
have that motion?
So moved. Okay. It's been moved
by Vice to your Dixon saying by
representative day like Cruz, Is
there any adoption to adopting
that amendment?
Uh huh.
What? You said it. Yeah. Okay.
Is there any objection? Is there
an objection to the language I'm
using Is there objection to
adopting that amendment.
I see nothing.
Okay. Now can we have a motion
to
Not adopt House Committee or not
adopt House Bill 33.
But adopt the House
Appropriations Committee.
House Appropriations of Finance
Committee substitute for House
Bill 33 as amended.
Okay. It's been moved by vice
Chair, Dixon saying, by
represent Pettigrew. Any
opposition to that motion?
Seeing none.
We're good. Uh, that's uh, past
