American specific.
The second priority areas that
we have is improving and
distributing data on African
Americans in New Mexico we want
to make sure that the data we
created in FY twenty one is
maintained and grown so that all
folks you really need to have
this African American specific
information are able to access
it in order to do that we're
asking for an increase in the
contract expenses category and
we want to add to that data hope
some mapping some heat mapping
that the people can read and
visualize the data in a more.
Accessible way.
Our third priority area is
increasing our services
statewide so often the work that
we do is limited to Albuquerque
because it's the only location
where we have an office being
able to really increase our
communications through having a
digital magazine through hobby
in are black expo you bet have
both virtual and in person
activities really means that all
people throughout the state can
access that and that means we
need an increase from the quick
meant and some subscriptions to
different communications
services and also we need to be
able to add in some training on.
And then the final category that
we're really looking to focus on
it's really building up the
internal structure so that we
are competitive and resilient.
This is why we're asking for two
additional FTE ease as well as
making sure that we maintain our
current FTEs we want to be fully
staffed we want to be available
to the community and we want to
make sure that we're creating
with in our own agency a career
ladder at this point we have a
high turnover because there is
no incentive for retaining our
staff there isn't a way for them
to move up within our agency
we're having a really high
difficulty maintaining quality
staff.
And you may be asking yourself a
couple of questions right right
why are we asking for positions
when we did have a long term
vacancies.
Folks the two positions where we
have long term vacancies they
have the reasons why we were not
able to fill them in the last
year.
One of those because we request
our deputy director to move from
a seventy five pay bands when
eighty five eight that means
that we're bringing in someone
with high quality you can get
the administrative things done
to make sure that we have a
structured agency the other
position with our budget analyst
position and we've been working
with HSD this year so that they
can support and really making
sure that our H. R. and our
budgets structures are strong
and that we're ready now to
bring back in that budget
analyst position.
One thing also might be asking
is about our reversion of we had
a very high FY twenty one
reversion.
Part of that is because I am the
executive director was in term
for more than six months and my
salary was not paid by the
office of us.
It was paid by CYFD where I was
employed at the time.
We also had the two vacant
positions the largest thing that
that we have that is our biggest
expense we weren't able to do in
person and so we went virtual.
We are confident that the two
additional positions that we
have are going to improve our
performance measures it's going
to move our programs into multi
sessions which is best practices
for education and we know that
it's in good increase the impact
on our community but we also
know that we still need to have
structure within our agency and
that is only going to help us
maintain and grow if we can keep
the two positions that have been
taken for this last year.
And so with that I will yield my
time and take any questions that
might.
Okay thank you for an excellent
presentation
will open.
To the panel professionals
saying and the first on my
screen would be representative
Garcia.
Thank you Mr chairman of the
settlement wide field of yes
this question.
Thank you your sole goal on
audits.
How are your orders right now as
we speak because I know they're
audit is indeed there was issues
pending.
And I need to know if it's been
taken care of or where are we at
on your audit.
To date.
So are audits have been on time
for the last seven years we have
not had any problems with our
audits we had a finding last
year that finding was connected
to the the African American
performing arts the African
American performing arts center
foundation it's one of the
reasons why we work with the DFA
analyst to move those funds over
to expo and they talked about in
the earlier presentation I'm not
sure I I may be wrong I I don't
think that
I don't know what audits are
pending if you could provide me
more information on that I can
certainly find that out.
Mr chairman and madam I can't
the value to what were your
auditor right that's why I'm
asking you the question do you
have any outstanding finding on
your audits.
No Sir we do not have any
outstanding findings on our
audit we don't have any pending
audits all of our audits have
been on time.
Thank you.
Mr chairman if if I may help out
here.
The auditor's report for the
fiscal year that ended in FY
twenty one.
there was to current your
findings to new ones and on
timely reversion that I lay
audit report and then there was
a
one finding from last year that
was resolved and that one that
was repeated and modified.
And that was for that untimely
rivers.
Thank you that's what I need to
know thank you Mr chairman.
Thank you Representative next we
have the Representative
Sari√±ana.
Thank you Mr chairman I just
have a question on the data of
how much money are you looking
at what is that gonna cost.
Thank you Mr chairman and
members of the house committee
so the cost for the data had
this year was about thirteen
thousand dollars we did a very
basic way out for and so we're
asking for additional twenty
thousand dollars next year so
that we can go up a level and do
some of our GIS data mapping and
and other things that the
contract will require if we if
we grow that.
Is Mr chairman and
in this with is there
is this data you're asking for
taken from the state website is
all of it just taken from the
state website.
It's taken from several
different sources we we bring in
data that is from the department
of health we bring in data
that's from the Human Services
Department but then we also use
data that has been collected by
other programs throughout the
state we've been able to work
with that the New Mexico Public
Health Association on gathering
some data that they've also used
and then we also have
partnerships at UNM to use data
that they've had on education
and economics and health.
Okay so most of this is just
clicking on a link if I if I
went to get it it would just
being going to whatever site
clicking on a link so.
Twenty thousand dollars I I just
question I mean I used to be a
computer programmer develop
databases so this is an easy
easy ask but I I just wonder on
the cost but that's all thank
you.
Thank you.
Okay.
Thank you for that our next on
the screen is of.
Representative Lane.
Thank you Mr chair
Agency with all that a question
about the podcast what's the
name of it and and what
platforms can we listen to.
Sure.
Yes thank you Mr chairman thank
you Representative lane the
podcast is called re educated it
is both on the I tunes and also
on Spotify and also on read you
can go to our website and it
will link you to any three of
those platforms.
Thank you.
Is that it Representative Lane.
Okay I still see Representative
Garcia and Representative lane
and still up so if you're done
with Chattfield employees and
hi.
Don't see any other hands coming
up.
I guess that means that there's
no more questions so I want to
thank the presenters and will
now go to the vice chair for
recommendation.
And the second.
Mr Chairman.
Okay here Representative Garcia
second and now let's go ahead
and vote on it.
Again with the show hands maybe
the vice chair can count the
hands a lot quicker than I can.
I only see eight I missing one
one two three four five six.
Seven eight.
Do we have nine last time.
We have nine the last season
okay this is a okay we have nine
thank you.
Excuse me Mr chairman I the
audio cut out for a second there
what was the motion.
The motion was to accept the.
LFC recommendation.
Thank you.
That concludes that presentation
or will move on to the next
presentation which is business
unit.
Fund.
Working with.
Again Mr chair NEA here back on.
All right Mr chairman.
Thank you very much were on the
Martin Luther king junior
commission that's business unit
six zero five.
I just wanted to point out
in order to provide some LFC.
the LFC right up zoom in
volume two on page two forty
two.
with us today I believe we have
the executive director Leonard
Waites.
And again it's it's the DFA
analyst is Laurie Schiappa
with that okay go ahead and go
through the additionally this
one's not too bad.
Both LFC and exec there were no
differences in this request this
is a small agency it has two FTE
and the the the agency to ask
for any difference and both
sides agreed to the the request
with that all I'll pass it over
to the executive for further
comment.
Thank you Mr shin J. Mr chair
representative it when you're
looking there are there is one
difference the difference that
you'll see is that and the
executive recommendation for the
personal services employee
benefits category we are one
point three thousand dollars
four point seven percent less
than the FY twenty two operating
budget the FY twenty two
operating budget is over funded
by a one point three thousand
and the personal services
employee benefits category due
to the elimination of a long
term vacant position and October
twenty twenty.
The executive recommendation
right allocates at one point
three thousand dollars from the
personal services employee
benefits category to the other
category to accommodate
an anticipated increase in
travel due to an expansion of
the youth leadership summer just
a summit administered by the
department and that is all that
I have to comments so at this
point I will pass it over to
director weights.
Thank you good morning members
of the committee thank you for
this opportunity to speak with
you today on behalf of the
Martin Luther king Commission my
name is lighter weights I am the
executive director also with B.
as I associate director Mr Lee
Jordan.
Dr Martin Luther king junior
basically yet forcefully
challenged the nation to embrace
the diversity of all its people
recognize that the beauty of our
world lies in the differences in
our individual histories and
cultures his dream of a nation
where all people are judged by
the color of their skin not by
the color of skin but the
content of their character as
yet to be realized however the
movie the launch remains a vital
and vibrant as ever.
Our mission here at Martin is
keen Commission is to promote Dr
king's philosophy on human
rights equality nonviolence
social change to the people of
New Mexico through remembered
celebration and action the theme
of Dr Martin Luther king
Commission this year is the
beloved community.
Dr king believe that the last
community stood for justice not
for any one oppressed group but
for all people as Dr king
offered often stated injustice
anywhere is a threat of justice
everywhere.
Again as was stated desk for FY
twenty budget request remains
flat with the original FY twenty
two general fund appropriations
of fully funds to FTEs we are
asking that you fully restore
our funding for FY twenty three.
The steps that affect our
success one
was our positive audits
I am proud to say that the
Martin Luther king Commission
has completed all audits to date
I FY twenty one audits had won
only one finding.
Martin Luther king Commission
and exemplifies Dr king's vision
by educating the public.
I'm Dr king's philosophy.
The importance of combating
social problems in it and
equities providing diversity
training across the state.
While also providing the public
with resources to outcome
overcome the three evils which
are prejudice poverty and
no Sir is.
We continued supporting national
in okay condition initiatives
programs include the name of the
pay day commemorations M. okay
leadership youth leadership
program hello the other civil
rights events.
Our strategy is to partnership.
One partnership to create a
stronger network of community
organizations by collaboration
assisting organizations and
groups who are committed to
providing community programs to
promote Dr king's principles.
Three statewide participation
and support.
For funding employee grant
writing.
I in it also is increased
transparency.
The office supports three major
projects throughout the year
traditionally.
The commission has organized a
commemoration March and ceremony
throughout the state this year
we have commemoration events in
Clovis Los crucis Alamogordo the
land grants hospitality and
Farmington our goal is to
increase our outreach programs
so that we include our northern
communities and more of our
seven cities.
The program which I am very
proud of this year.
Thank you for leadership program
was created to build awareness
of much use associated with the
statewide MLK commission and the
programs it supports in the
communities.
Through participation in this
program young people will learn
leadership skills six principles
of nonviolence of Dr king
Robert's rules of order how
nonprofit organization boards
operates and how to develop
promote and implement their
ideas our desired outcomes them
okay commission will engage.
And educate inspire teens.
And and you adults young adults
to become more involved in our
community.
The use leadership program seeks
to help young people increase
their ability to be self
reflective and think critically
about their their expenses and
community issues.
Build.
the skills and abilities of
young people to be just sesion
Macon's makers and problem
solvers we currently have used
programs in New Mexico West Los
crucis affordable land grants
Hobbs for tell us and farms.
Our third project is the
creation of the MLK commission
magazine which is entitled to Dr
king speaking to you today.
The articles in this magazine
will be covering areas focusing
on activities events and
achievements I've used
throughout the state of New
Mexico the article will articles
will be written by use.
Or provided by individual
organizations that work with the
New Mexico you.
The publication is scheduled to
be printed quarterly.
All.
As we're very proud of this
magazine that's coming out as
you are aware we have a lot of
projects going on for such a
small budget we hope that you
will continue to support the
worth of Dr Martin Luther king
Office and I will asset to
participate in any upcoming
events in your city.
That thank you for your time
today and that concludes our
presentation and I stand for any
question.
Thank you Mr Wade's
thank you for a very interesting
and enlightening presentation
and we look forward to seeing
you in Farmington when you come
a far way with that will go to
the panel for questioning.
Don't see any minute so
vice chair.
Chairman.
Representative worthy.
Madam vice chair go ahead.
I can hear me.
I can hear you.
Thank you Mr chairman I move the
LFC recommendation.
Okay
Since since the LFC and
executive or the same so I
believe that the committee
unanimous again.
With that
Just just for the record let's
go ahead and count the votes.
But we need a second on that
recommendation.
Result Christine Trujillo is a
second email now the vote.
To accept the.
LFC recommendation.
Mr chairman I only see eight.
Representative Castellano.
Okay thank you okay all right.
That should be nine thank you
nine zero.
Okay with that the Mr Wade to
got a recommendation for the LFC
recommendation thank you can I
make one comment.
Mr Garcia I thank you just the
the office of African American
affairs about their audits.
But I think you were trying to
reference I think you're
remembering that the more to the
king Commission
were behind on so I think that's
that's where you kind of got
confused but I am proud to say
that we have completed all of
our audits to date
we did seven not it's in five
years so was a big task in a lot
of work so I just wanted to make
that statement Sir.
Thank you for that clarification
missed weights.
Okay well we'll move on to our
next presenters switch with
building business unit for
ninety.
Thank in the real world.
Mr Chairman everyone hear me
okay.
We can hear you fine okay great
my name's Amanda Dick Peddie I
am the fiscal analyst for the
legislative finance committee I
will be reviewing Cooper's Intel
tech this morning we are joined
by interim president Scott gets
the FO at Baghdad
prospered and I think I saw
Abbey back there they're all
here from the railroad we also
have executive analyst Diego
Jimenez.
So this agency is the true
enterprise agency with five
point nine million of its six
point three million dollar
budget coming from agency
revenues.
I will direct you to volume
three page seventy one there's a
really great sources and uses
chart if you're interested it
shows you where those revenues
come from so ticket sales retail
capital money in and where they
go that's provided by the agency
it's a really useful chart for
getting a sense of this budget.
Otherwise the budgets are
identical again that the LFC and
executive budget spokesman the
agency requests additional about
twenty three thousand in general
fund revenue.
So do you have anything to add.
Not have anything to add thank
you.
Okay then I will go ahead and
turn it over to a president all
right.
Thank you Mr chairman thank you
committee
we're happy to be here today and
appreciate all your support.
Last year was a rather
challenging year for the
railroad.
with all the COVID restrictions
and shutdowns of much of the
railroad was not able to operate
this past year we were covered
significantly.
in our Revenue actually exceeded
what we had had in twenty
nineteen so financially we we
did we did well.
we just completed an economic
impact study.
and the results of that show
that.
Our.
Impact to the region.
Has grown since the previous
study done twenty fourteen.
I shared that with the then the
few days ago.
Just a couple highlights.
Of the total annual impact.
Is the increased by about three
million dollars.
it showing.
Rural.
There.
And the.
Visitors to the region spent an
additional
Two point four million dollars
in the the five county region in
the two states.
And our job impact grew by
almost fifty creating fifty jobs
in the region to almost two
hundred jobs.
So we're making an impact on the
the regional economy of northern
New Mexico southern Colorado and
that's largely through the
support of of both states.
The.
As we look at the state support
much of the million dollar one
point one million dollar request
goes to our capital improvement
projects.
Locomotives the passenger cars
that people will ride on the
tracks director to ensure safe
passage.
those investments of paid off.
Again we over the last few years
and to grow our we continue to
grow our ridership we're gonna
need to invest continue the
investments locomotives and cars
particular.
There was quite a bit questions
this morning about audits or
audit was completed on time this
year we had to Representative
worked in the minor findings.
Nothing non of them were
recurring.
Well one of them was a late
check deposit.
The other one was we did not
just the commission did not
address the property companies
budget.
in a timely way as revenues
increased and spending by the
operating company the increased.
There was no issue associated
with having money on hand.
Budget was just not formally
increased.
So.
That.
Any questions.
One quick note for questions.
Yes.
I just also like to point out
for members I forgot to mention
my opening statements the LFC at
nonrecurring framework which
includes our but funding also
includes three million but
raising toll tech to help
recover some of those lost
revenues during the pandemic
just wanted to point that out
for everyone.
Thank you for that then the.
Thank you for a good
presentation Mr given and it's
good to hear that you're going
to be smoking again.
That we will.
In the
are there any questions from the
committee of of the first hand
that I see up is a
Representative Lane.
And then he will be followed by
Representative Phelps Anderson.
Thank you Mr chair are I just
want to this Madam what what a
jewel of this transfer states
very unique if you if you've
never been to the Congress area
north of trauma it's it's
spectacular all the way up to to
the Colorado border so I just
encourage legislators and and
this is not in my district but I
just think it's fantastic for
New Mexico I'd encourage my
colleagues to support this train
because it is fantastic it's a
beautiful beautiful ride and
what that brings to the trauma
area is really important too
because that's a pretty isolated
community up there so just just
appreciate all the work that
that your folks to.
Thank you for that
Representative of it is true
that sometimes you take the
beauty of the scenery when
you're traveling slower like on
a train rather than speeding
along the interstate trying to
cover as much ground as you can
so we're glad that you're back
in business back smoking Mr
give with that let's move to
Representative Anderson.
Thank you Mr chairman and and I
to echo the the wonderful day
spent with the family that we
all remember in Java and the on
the code could raise up Mr
Chairman with me is another
member of our Appropriations
Committee Representative
Herrera and she she gets to have
this wonderful resource center
district and I was going to see
if she could make a comment.
Representative Herrerra.
Thank you Mr chair and members
of the committee I think you
just have to brag about
procedural take up all the
communities of all the
communities during the COVID I
was the most worried about time
when you shut down that train.
that representative during a
pandemic you know you pretty
much shut down
the economic engine of the
region so I I knew the profound
effect that would have until may
and all small businesses and and
just everybody in general is
everybody depends on on that
train but we have an incredibly
sophisticated and gifted us
staff that run this railroad
they have an amazing volunteer
support group they not only had
to shut down a rural road then
they all turned around to help
their community to help people
deliver food boxes every week to
raise money to help the people
that we're really struggling so
you could not invent a better
business or the north and for
New Mexico so I would just like
to strongly encourage everybody
to support this effort and also
come and visit us let me know
and we'll go either way.
Thank you chairman thank you.
Representative Herrera and the
before I go on I forgot to
mention that Mr give.
Introduced his program he said
there was a very challenging
year we agree that we all had a
very challenging year but we are
survivors we are resilient we
are New Mexicans we can handle
anything so I don't see any
other hands on the board so
madam chair.
Mr chairman I think Miss Harry's
hand up Representative CS hand
up.
Okay
his words had is right the rope
so it's hard to see so
Representative Garcia.
Thank you Mr chairman up I just
want to re reiterate what
everybody else said I've been up
in Java before have never had
the opportunity to ride the
train but the.
I ask this question a couple
years ago how much impact it had
on the economy and it is huge
and all of the question again
how much impact does this have
on the economy and John models
from here Sir.
Thank you for the question
the study that we just had
completed shows that the the
railroads impact to the five
county region that touch to row
both in Colorado in New Mexico
about seventeen point eight
million dollars as of last year
so
The amount of money that we
generated ticket sales and
things like that is is roughly
R. five point four million last
year.
When you look at that and
leverage it with the dollars are
spent restaurants and hotels and
other activities throughout this
region
we have a significant impact in
Zulu lower factor three for
every dollar that is here
Representative director of.
Thank you Mr chairman thank you
for that and back to what
Representative think that
earlier in all this is a big
driver for all that part of the
country and thank you for what
you do for a that part of the
country for the state of New
Mexico thank you Mr chairman.
Thank you Representative and the
I.
Don't see any other hands going
up so madam vice chair.
Thank you Mr chairman I moved
the LFC recommendation.
Your second I'm sure.
Representative Garcia sessions
and then we'll think about.
Correct if.
Nine zero.
Thank you very much and.
Mr give will give you the LFC
recommendation.
Thank you very much.
Okay with that we move on to our
next president presenters which
would be a business unit for
ninety five this is what we and
it will also be.
Thank you Mr chairman so the
spaceport Authority of business
unit number four ninety five
again my name is Amanda Dick
Peddie fiscal analyst for the
legislative finance committee
and Diego Jimenez is joining us
from the executive we also have
on is the only director of
business operations here blacker
he'll be presenting after Diego
and I go over the differences.
So for the spaceport Authority I
can also direct you to another
sources and uses page and volume
three and that's going to be on
page seventy two again that's
going to show spaceport Revenue
is including state funding and
how those are used so it's a
very useful document.
For the executive and LFC
recommendations recommendations
include a significant general
fund increase and that is to
replace access pledge revenue
from Dona ana and Sierra
counties so the LFC
recommendation for general fund
is slightly higher the executive
recommended an additional one
point five million general fund
revenue and LFC recommended an
additional one point seven
million that's the primary
difference between the two
recommendations and that extra
two hundred thousand dollar
general fund revenue in the LFC
recommendations is all of the
person is the right person
personal.
The budget category.
for performance analyst reach
consensus on all performance
measures and targets and that is
my high level overview I will
make a quick note because we
were talking about this earlier
this these poor did have six
findings in their FY twenty on
it but for FY twenty one all of
those findings resolved and
there were no new.
With that I'll turn it over to
Diego for additional comment.
Thank you.
Mr chair David M. S. executive
budget analyst.
Mr Dick Peddie describes the
primary difference really the
only difference is the general
fund.
The legislative recommendation
put more general fund money and
the personal services employee
benefits category
well the executive
recommendation there's a little
short there provide enough
general fund to see that all of
their currently filled positions
are maintained and it truly is
the responsibility to the the
HSD to.
The revenue update.
Want to fill the other
positions.
Otherwise.
Recommendations agree in the
mouth and the the increased
amount for the contractual
services category and the.
Really important contracted
basically public safety
executing contracts and with
that handed over to the.
Mr drive around the state
portability.
Thank you very much should it go
on miss Patty Mr chairman
members of the committee I would
like to share my screen I'll
Haverstraw dissipation as to the
status of our of our agency if I
may please.
We go.
Mr chairman members of the
committee members of the
committee what we do is to start
by extending executive director
as co Dick Peddie I mean the
scope the Laughlin so in
thinking about him and
he unfortunately could not
attend the The presentation but
the issue formed off what we are
we going to to be doing today
I'm here Google actor director
of business operations at the
spaceport very quickly will go
through the budget and Amanda
and dad presented our views that
do base they recap of where we
are appropriations and then I'll
describe some of our most recent
activities.
I'm not going to grow into the
budget it was mentioned that
that the increased is
essentially to replace the axis
first revenue funding that was
previously provided by taxation
at that doing on on Sierra
County said that is no longer
available to us so that is that
is that I want to highlight that
we continue to project that that
about sixty percent or better
off of oil revenue continues to
be a customer funded we are
working diligently and
assiduously to increase that as
we go on the market that
continues to grow the commercial
space market and we have a hi
this substantial significant the
Inquirer's in the in the past
again this I did comment it's
has been mentioned many times
but not mentioning it that does
not take the take the its impact
so way from us
it's been it's been a tough two
years so and hopefully will
change soon.
again our operations continue to
increase we now have I permanent
tenants to as noted there
Virginia hospital bill up their
space environment and spend
launch our current on site daily
but relation is not exceeding
two hundred to some days said
that it scratches three hundred
depending on the amount of
activity that our tenants and
or a our customers have
that present at a we did and the
impact on our security
I'm that fire our state for a
team but
but we we are covering it well I
wanted to mention that the this
spans probably coalition this is
a a program sponsored by the the
federal government through the
department of commerce its the
the one billion dollar dollar
and build back better program
it's a regional challenge we are
members we especially the
special authority are members of
a coalition that includes the
central New Mexico college
community college it includes
the in New Mexico trade alliance
the
our new space to Mexico on that
set trade organization and
ourselves we have been met and
selected as finalists and for
the first face off if many
submissions said the department
of commerce selected sixty that
coalitions that we're one of
them are definitive proposals
for a advancing this argue in
net in March and April so who
knows we may be able to to
partake of some of the
incentives that that that that
friends are going to be
providing.
Staffing we currently have a
twenty three full time
equivalents on board including
our new director of business
development that the actually
one boarded yesterday we're very
pleased that we have filled that
position we have had us you all
are aware
a substantial change in the
management and operation off the
air organization
but anyway we are aware of
financing in the right direction
we continue to have a few
vacancies those are meant there
and they're working again to
fill them.
On the capital projects just may
have been reported to in twenty
eighteen that.
This spaceport authority was
awarded about fifty one million
dollars off of funding for
capital projects we currently
have available funds of up to
thirty four million it would
have spent about seventeen so
far frankly the the pandemic it
costs to invest a ladies
particularly in the last
eighteen months or projects and
we're about to be undertaken but
that we're just not that not
that possible to what Irish fees
in a way that that that that
would be appropriate so we do
have other programs in various
stages of development at signing
tend to it to use all the
capital of provided to to
continue to operate to modernize
the of the for structure but we
have some of the important
projects that we're doing right
now the the repairs so the S.
phase operations center building
which that which
would cost about a million and a
half dollars that this your
personal consequence off of poor
structural design happened about
fifteen years ago and the I'm
not going to go into that
that our business development
activity as I just mentioned
that we just so on boarded a new
director of business development
we have re energized over
efforts with Graham and others I
have seen good results we we
have had to Senator requires the
from from abroad basically like
like Japan and the I think one
I'm Sweden
We are we are becoming then
we're going to be quite visible
in the work setting land
spaceport so so that is very
good
the new awards so we had this
year include AeroVironment that
well you can see them there of
interested in the airforce
Thunderbirds came so space for
to to I during the week in
September I want to pay
basically obviously the contract
with us and then once I was sort
of
a and Survation visit that they
wanted to see.
What the capabilities and
abilities the spaceport location
on our installation would
provide them well are they were
quite happy with that and I am
pleased to report that that they
have returned and they started
fine again at spaceport
yesterday and they will be there
for the next two weeks this is
not a a show with the system
open to the public that they
yeah we're not permitted to have
you in that visitors look but
printer this is that they have
selected the spaceport now to be
their winter training facility
so this may be a repeat contract
that that we have.
Of course our stem program would
continue that it's part of our
charter to promote educational
opportunities in the state so we
that very quickly
I'm going to related to recent
program so the things that have
happened of space within the
last to.
Twelve months read your photo
twice a I'm going to read this
right to you know you can see
all of that they're going to
describe a specific so important
once virgin galactic's space
twice in in may and and July
that the had announced that two
additional flights before the
end of the calendar year
but they they change your mind
in the middle and that they
decided to go in hands of the
implement the enhancement area
for the mother ship carrier
aircraft so they took that back
to a mopping in California that
is being implemented now unless
you see from timeline to
timeline that the the
legislative
in November the intend to return
to the spaceport at mid year
the this year and
Star flying them probably
you do in the fall so with that
activity will will occur this
one is interesting industry
loans are you included that
photograph and don't forget that
image of the.
SO that was constructed and
spaceport
and I I associate it with the
the statue of liberty and that
is to scale this is a circular
the pan if you will is that is
actually one hundred and twenty
feet in diameter and what the
the business model of this
company has is they rotate
incited the projectile to to
hyper a sonic speeds and then
they open the tunnel and they
wants to space so the the the
model is that the first phase of
a space flight will actually be
an addict in polls I'm not
necessarily M. Q. they have to
spend this bill launches spent
the we believe the next so fifty
million dollars a public numbers
forty they created a model for
for this photograph was taken
after the first launch in that
in November as you can see the
employed them the employ of
people there.
This one is interesting in the
operator space another one of
her tenants contracted with the
with another makes New Mexico
based organization to asylum
special lapsed and this is
interesting the as reported
there by the deputy director of
also Solomos
they did they were quite pleased
with the results of this test
and they tend to repeat them
the costs if the substantial
savings that achieved in
contracting with with space on
using the facilities at
spaceport to launch to the
space.
Other launches during the year a
small The New Mexico thank it
launched a couple times the
issue of Tommy Sankey so also
higher launch I was pointed in
the U. S. military academy they
came in that and that the rock
could potentially achieve the
space they want the further down
hundred twenty kilometers high
so that was that was great and
then a small company okay at the
spaces systems this are small
launch this but they are under
contract and they provide the
revenue and of course economic
impact to the region.
There is an increased amount of
activity worldwide with the with
on my and aerial systems or
Ontario he posts UAVs we have
three of them we have three of
them at that space produce best
year of the wires that I
mentioned earlier two of them
are from USA U. S. companies so
are we continue to offer our our
air space to what those
companies this one is
interesting it's a are they have
phone a couple times out of a
space for they are currently
upgrade in the they're crafted
of the sum greater
as you see it's a it's a very
hard showing no fuselage is yes
and then in December to
conventions Moores run by solar
power and this thing flies to
about eighty thousand feet above
the surface and then the lawyers
there for actually months at a
time I need to carry state need
to of the antenna and other
electronic
the instruments of that are
required that for cell phone the
Senator phone transmission I
need said it's called so for the
cell phone tower in the sky it's
a very interesting model
particularly after the will to
rural areas
terms of the surfboard to South
America the land scene the the
invisible or or maybe it costs
for Africa so again the return
that they would return to space
forward in March other things
associated with that with what
we do
we have constructed now a a
water testing our new assisted
twice by meeting companies C.
six R. with that some major they
are more are manufactured and
then intuitive machines is
another small there is.
Based company they're testing
elastic laser system that that
will be provided if they are
successful to NASA to assist in
the landing
in the moon or maybe even
possibly Mars.
Finishes said presentation them
Mr chairman members of the
committee without mentioning the
spaceport America Cup we have
been hosting this thing since
that twenty seventeen
so we had that we had a
seventeen eighteen and nineteen
unfortunately
we had to cancel in twenty
twenty nothing happened there
because of the pandemic and is
this the best year in June we
held the Cup and virtually a
great success we have about
seventy five universities from
the worldwide participated
virtually and it was very very
successful the scope of for this
year is scheduled for June
twenty first and twenty fifth we
already have about a hundred
fifty universities are hundred
fifty teams registered from
about they believe sixteen
different countries so again we
are looking forward to that the
great success the impact that
the the current high just in
that in that region is state
subsequently in measurable
that's that's very very good.
Of course as I mentioned the
fourth the purpose in our
charter is to educational
opportunities to workforce
development in the state
particularly the region and we
continue to do that we
despite COVID the we have not
contacted Division so this is to
as many schools as we would FY
two but we are issuing podcasts
to the social media and that
several groups of students from
different schools I have visited
the spaceport and we continue to
make presentations to them and
try to encourage some interest
in them in our industry.
With that Mr chairman and
members of the committee I thank
you for your attention on but I
will stand for questions thank
you.
Okay thank you for that Mr
blacker
Terminate this.
When I listen to these
presentation I always learn
something new.
Is raising to find out there's a
lighter almost the size of a
football field that we send into
space periodically yes the
state.
Mr chairman if I may interrupt
you just interested in need to
follow the railroad the they're
both of transportation modes of
no one is some land and once in
space Senator so that was quite
interesting.
Yes.
Okay with that we're going to go
to the panel for questioning and
the first and I say up is
Mr chair feel.
Your muted.
Thank you Mr chairman.
Thank you Mr blacker but my
favorite the memories of the
last couple of years is when we
toured the space for it was an
awesome tour and we're really
enjoyed it my question is about
the two million dollars at the
state the.
But contributes annually.
To to replace the county taxes
you know just the curious over
the next five years you see that
a reduction and that the amount
that we need to contribute the
the use it remaining the same or
what what's what's the what's
the outlook for that.
Mr Chairman Representative
Chatfield thank you for that I
cannot give you the accurate the
prognosis so far how quickly we
will continue to grow our
revenue all I can say is that we
see the market for our services
a growing
I I just mentioned affected is
that we've had in the last
eighteen months five years ago
there was nothing happening at
spaceport so hopefully it for if
things continuing that the type
of curve that we're seeing in
the growth of interest in our
the spaceport I would hope that
spaceport may become a self of
self sustaining in the in the
future right I cannot honestly
you I eight an accurate
projection of when that meeting.
Thank you Sir thank you Mr
chairman that's all.
Thank you Representative
Townsend.
Thank you next we have a
Representative Trujillo.
Thank you Mr chairman thank you
I forgot your name Sir from the
space.
Roger ma'am Mr drive it so it
was so refreshing to hear the
amazing report that you just
gave us because I've been on
this committee for ten years and
both public and
Well the public point regarding
the the information that we get
from from this but the space.
Can you hear me yes.
Okay I think I was was.
Impressed about the amazing
stuff you're doing because I
haven't always heard great
things about the spaceport I've
heard a lot of comments about
how it uses up tax dollars it
said Dr and I was getting ready
to listen to you and talk to us
about well we can do this so we
couldn't do that and it was such
a refreshing presentation to
find out that you've done so
much even during this pandemic.
I'm really happy that that you
can turn things around and I
know that that it's been
difficult.
But I stand to support you know
because some I wasn't sure if
this big ship was going to be
able to be turned around
And I think this is going to be
a boondoggle when we first
started it I missed CENIC.
And not usually but this one was
one of those.
Programs that are was not going
to make it and it's fortunate
that you all have been involved
in engaged in forward looking
and so I'm this is great it's
nice to hear it for change thank
you.
Thank you very much
representative W. research
chairman
it is it is indeed encouraging
to hear your comments that we we
have had a do a couple a couple
years of great difficulty not
only with the pandemic but the
S. U. S. you'll know the
spaceport wash that we're
suffering off of some.
shortcomings in its management
about that thank you very much
for your comments we appreciate.
Thank you Mr blacker next we
have on our panels of
Representative Syriana thank you
Mr chairman I thank you Mr black
I for your presentation I have a
question so you talked about
students coming to see that the
spaceport or accessing the
spaceport how do we do that do
you have more information on how
we can get some of our schools
either virtually or their.
The Mr Chairman representative
certain Sari√±ana thank you very
much yes I commuted details of
our program but I will I will
grab the forward you the
information our our PAO our
public relations coordinator and
I would director of airspace
operations Dr Goodman that they
contact the schools and
sometimes it is so that the
schools actually Nishant if that
call us for to organize their
own bases or sometimes we
contact them so allow me to send
you some information on that I
will go science Representative
saying that great thank you
thank you welcome and thank you
mmhm thank you Mr chairman.
Okay as I scanned the board Hey
don't see any more handsome.
So I I want to thank you Mr
blacker in your presenters for a
very very interesting and
lightning presentation so with
that
madam vice chair.
Thank you Mr chairman I move the
LFC recommendation.
Second Christine yes Sir it is
the second okay the second.
I move to accept the eight LFC
Representative a recommendation
with that let's place of of.
We need Phelps's group.
Thanks eight.
Percent have not voted sure get.
Any opposition.
Okay with no opposition.
will accept the LFC
recommendation Mr blacker.
Thank you very much Mr chairman
and members of the committee.
Thank you to the national
analysts and that to see you
soon.
Thank you Mr blacker and with
that conclusion of the
presentation we move on to all
our presenters for the sporting
a minute.
Six six two.
Okay.
Good morning Mr chairman and
members of the committee nice to
see everybody
first of all I just want to
start with an apology somehow
and trying to get everything
organized the folks from minors
hospital did not get the note
that we were gonna be doing this
today B. as them and they came
all the way from geico on so
that so far so sincere apologies
to you folks despite our best
efforts and I trying to see if
they were trying to find a place
that they were in the capitol no
I'm not here can you see is
there you are okay you found a
place that you are okay very
good thank you then I'll begin
again Mr chairman this is
business unit six six two minors
Hospital of New Mexico which is
located up in that on and I'm
RubyAnn SQL the LFC analysts and
MaryBeth Densmore is the DFA
analyst with us today.
I'll go ahead and begin and then
Mary Beth can add any anything
and then we'll turn it over to
to the folks from the hospital.
So if you're looking at your
different sheets for minors
hospital on.
We really have
A couple of revenue differences
that will want to point out
typically in the past minors
hospital has been funded
entirely with minors Trust Fund
revenue it's one of the
designees in the constitution to
be a beneficiary of the land
grant permanent fund there's
some higher education
institutions minor costs that
all the hospital in Las Vegas
that you introduce that are
lucky enough to be recipients
and benefit from that revenue
and minors hospital one of them
they typically have an amount
that about.
Depending on the performance of
the funds six to eight million
dollars annually so that help
support it in addition to
the land grant permanent fund
revenues in the minors Trust
Fund they also get patient
revenues so Medicaid Medicare
private insurance.
And they also get a certain
amount of federal funds black
federal land at black land funds
from the fed and other funds
there the hospital has been self
sustaining with all of that
revenue combination all along
now last year in if for now for
FY twenty two when the
compensation package was put
together for FY twenty two the
department of finance and
administration for the first
time added two hundred thousand
in general fund dollars to this.
Our men to minors hospital so
that's something new and I'm
kind of giving you that little
bit of background on that
because of that one of the
differences you'll see here in
the two recommendations that
department of finance and
administration are the executive
recommendation maintains that
two hundred thousand in general
fund for FY twenty three the LFC
recommendation does not maintain
that two hundred thousand in
general fund however in the LFC
recommendation that that that
the committee Oscar at the two
hundred thousand in general fund
an increase that with minors
Trust Fund revenue so the
economists look at the revenue
make sure that the fund would
perform sufficiently such that
we would have that revenue
available and.
That LFC recommendation just up
my district band increases that
by two hundred thousand so
That's a difference you see in
the revenue mix.
And
we have another little thing
here that showing at in.
The different thing you might
think when you're looking at
that besides the two hundred
thousand in general fund there's
a difference as seven point four
nine four seven point five
million and other transfers but
that's a little bit of
I miss number it's basically an
account team
at the counting situation we've
come up with you all may be
aware we're using a new system
now for our budget and.
What is the current here is.
Basically it at an accounting
issue versus a budgeting issue
so that you'll see and other
financing uses down here.
Friends of
seven six seven point six
million.
When you go to the uses.
We have.
Yeah I can help you with that
it's an interagency transfers so
the transfer from our miners
Trust Fund into our operating
account so it's really no
additional money coming in and
no additional money going out so
that that's that's what it is
right so as I would correct
thank money so as I would say Mr
chairman this is basically just
an accounting issue so it's not
really a budgetary issues so the
difference that you see here is
basically a wash it just washes
out because it's being shown
down here is an expenditure
being shown by the executive in
their recommendation up here as
a revenue source so it basically
washes out so we can and it has
since removed that off the table
so I just wanted to explain that
so really the only difference
you see here is the difference
in general fund two hundred
thousand higher miners Trust
Fund in the LFC two hundred
thousand general fund in the
executive and both both rector
basically at that exact at the
agency requests and I hope
letting him easy to match with
that I'll turn it over to me
right that thank you.
Thanks and morning Mr chair
committee members
I don't have too much to add
RubyAnn as usual explained
everything really well I just
wanted to elaborate a little bit
on on that general fund amounts
that the executive has capped in
the budget so not only was I
just so as you know typically
you know we'll get compensation
and we work that into agency
budgets after the bill is passed
in this instance though you all
remember I'm sure that there was
an additional piece for
frontline worker compensation
last year which was to help with
the people that work at the
front lines the pandemic it was
a two point six percent increase
so this general fund is purely
because of that it's it's not
typical compensation since
minors hospital is basically an
enterprise without this small
amount of general fund they
don't we usually just ask them
to come up with the compensation
within their budgets but for the
frontline compensation as
RubyAnn said this is the first
year that DFA.
Sent some general fund to a few
non general fund agencies and it
was to support those frontline
workers so just wanted to
clarify that for you quickly but
I don't have anything else to
say on this one through the and
said they're very similar Raxaul
turn it over to you executive
director Bochy.
Mr Chairman one of the many
members my name is beau beams
and the CEO miners Colfax
Medical Center have and have the
pleasure leading organization up
Rihanna Mexico course I have
bonding with dean on our CFO
with me and he's he's the
brainchild behind our budget the
one that crashed each year on
our behalf so I'll give you a
little bit of overview of miners
Colfax Medical Center and then
turn it over to wanting for any
additional comments on the
budget and wells up please stand
for any questions I think I
think most of you know miners
Colfax Medical Center is located
in the top New Mexico it's a
twenty five bed critical access
hospital we have the source
state inpatient rehabilitation
unit reported I see you we're
the only OB provider for a large
distance Trinidad Colorado
doesn't provide will be and so
you have to go a hundred miles
north of the Pueblo or hundred
miles south down the west status
in Las Vegas is had their issues
with staffing and keeping only
program going so
we also east and west we go out
to simply Cimarron and out to
the the east all the way to our
claim and
Since much of their own be here
to miners Colfax Medical Center.
In addition to regular hospital
services are the services like
our radiology respiratory
therapy laboratory services
which are so important this
pandemic we have a number I long
programs federal are going
programs that serve our miners
former miners in New Mexico and
our surrounding states we get
about a million dollars a year
from our waters called herself
funds federal funds help from
the health resources and
services administration helps
are hopelessly product
supporters back going programs
have an affiliation with the
university of New Mexico and we
are are supported in the down
chair in they provide us with a
pharmacologist Dr Garcia soon we
provides clinic services for
minors across the state well
with pulmonary in other mining
related diseases as well such as
uranium mines and our other
resource minds across our our
state
I think I've talked about are
right by the beach and we're
small but we're really regional
hospital we serve are we over to
YouTube for in Cimarron this
year we had twenty five thousand
scare us counts come this summer
to Philmont scout ranch that was
a record partner with them in
the summer to provide care for
them course we services smaller
communities in the area spring
or Max hold one sometimes
Clayton for there'll be here
other things that they don't do
such as general surgery and so
we are we we we have a wide
range that we serve our as we
begin and betas are mentioned
where are we don't receive any
state general fund we're self
sustaining but a big part of
that support comes from miners
Trust Fund it have the support
of the long term care facility
be program substances don't make
money for us that need the
support to us Sir the
northeastern part of the state.
In minors across the nation are
we have some pretty major
achievements even amid the the
pandemic this past year we were
at the scene the five star
designation from the center for
Medicare services are we were
the only five star hospital in
the state for quality and
patient satisfaction
our our long term care facility
facility also received a five
star rating so those are both
notable
we were the community resource
for vaccination of course we did
we delivered over sixty five
hundred doses of vaccine to the
community and we're still
administering booster shots you
know it's a little slower than
we'd like to be are we still
provide booster shots to the
community included in primary
care doctor in in internal
medicine a new nurse
practitioner in replacement
general surgeon so
we
we had some success in
recruiting.
This may not seem like a big
deal but we had a major overhaul
of our medical staff bylaws they
did the work during the pandemic
about eighteen months are these
bylaws adopted updated in
probably fifteen years and we're
are catered to today's model of
health care and really boosted
the quality of care provided by
the medical staff is the I also
for the self governance of the
medical staff members a major
undertaking believe me are those
of the work in health care you
know what the deal that is and I
think just the again our ongoing
emergency response to the global
pandemic we partnered with
regional our hospitals to our
regional hub and Christus St
Vincent has been our main hub
and they've been excellent and
honest we coordinate here
sometimes need to transfer
patients at a higher level of
care than what we can take for.
Take care of so we've we managed
well during the pandemic is on
going challenges you know we do
have COVID patients in our
hospital constantly now we
basically have Turner I see you
into a COVID unit and our
doctors have become more
comfortable and cared for the
stations locally and I get most
of the nursing or the on
vaccinated although we do see is
occasional vaccinated patients
it needs inpatient care
also another achievement I I
need to I want to sing praises
for my CFO I had we had a clean
audit this year no findings
and that was much different for
much different than prior to
bodies are becoming part of our
hostage so he's gonna have a
long track record of of clean
audit findings which is very
difficult for our hospital our
audit is very challenging
because you're really more and
help to different financial
systems a hospital accounting
system with the state accounting
governmental accounting system
so he has a big challenge in
that but do you know what we
always seems to succeed so kudos
to dividing our challenges for
next year of course our on going
you know management of the our
of our publications of the
pandemic another really big
monumental thing for us is our
current
electronic medical records
system is sunsetting to
a new platform in in the
process.
We have decided to change year
marketers we we can get a better
product it'll with what we
believe is the same or lesser
cost
by making this change so we'll
be moving to a new electronic
medical record system called
Sir.
I which is
What is the market leaders and
and one of the best systems are
there so it is going to be a big
improvement but just a ton of
work and admits the short
staffed tired exhausted
workforce is going to be a big
challenge for sin funding will
be leading that endeavor as well
as he manages are I. T. services
some of our that's those are the
two biggest things were stature
we have some other smaller
projects those are the biggest
challenges I just ongoing
finding nurses are supported our
nurses supporting our clinical
professionals through this the
we have had some leave to become
a travelling nurses because the
rates are so high in the could
make so much money so it it
leaves the burden on the nurses
that are permanent and and with
our within our workforce going
forward we're seeing rates for
travelers and agency nurses in
our hospitals around hundred
forty two hundred sixty dollars
an hour on is what they're
demanding from these traveling
agencies so that is going to
affect our budget we do have a
number of travelers we have to
depend on the travelers we don't
have enough confidence employed
staff to demanded staff to
hospitals in our clinic if we
don't use traveler in the
regency science that's gonna be
our biggest challenge we've been
resilient flexible we moved
clinic nurses and that and
ramped up their training and
education so that they can float
over to the I see your reserves
or other areas as needed robbing
Peter to pay Paul there and we
we still staffing is our our our
biggest challenge we did get
support from DFA so to make some
market equity increases in wages
for our system can be more
competitive and retain the
nursing staff and clinical
professionals we do have that's
been a big close so we
appreciate the support we've
gotten there from the the guy.
His office DFA and spoke to make
some equity market increases so
we can retain our current step
so with that that's that's
really my summary of your
accomplishments and challenges
and I'll turn it over to wanted
to talk to you about the numbers
my.
Pretty short here for fiscal
year twenty three over fiscal
year twenty two were asking for
five point six million dollars
more.
To be able to spend it's a
fifteen point three percent
increase our personal services
are staying pretty flat at a
hundred and fifty thousand
dollar increase but we are the
biggest employer in Colfax
county with two hundred fifty
eight FTEs.
Our biggest costs again is gonna
be contractual services we're
looking at four point eight
million dollars more that we're
gonna have to spend because of
our travelling nurses are now
cost is a hundred dollars more
per hour than we expected and
fiscal year twenty one and our
other biggest thing is again R.
DM our software that's coming up
we expect this have to spend six
hundred thousand dollars more in
the next year just posted this
year because we are getting a
new PMR we're gonna have the
paper pool while we're
installing the new one so total
is five point six million
dollars more.
Yes we have for this year.
Thank you.
Okay thank you for that Mr
Medina and bow I didn't get his
last name but anyway you I
remember you used to set a
mobile unit up to the four
corners area and I hadn't seen
that in the wild but I.
I've been retired to so I guess.
We still send that up there.
Thank you know we've been
grounded with COVID for some
time are we have that we have a
beautiful mobile unit that was
replaced are just over a year
ago again paid for by a person
federal dollars beautiful unit
Had a hard time getting back on
the road are plans this year are
to get back on the road and
travel to all the mining
communities across New Mexico
including the four corners
Department areas we just don't
know exactly when that is going
to take place are we can get out
of there safely we anticipate
it'll be.
May be by the end of the first
quarter this year but is looking
more like the second order
before we
have this is the staff and
everything in place that we need
to get back on the row but
excellent question thank you
okay thanks for that and Mr
chairman also even though your
title is minors hospital you
still treat non miners as well I
think that's very good this
approach we're gonna go to the
panel for questioning and.
One thing hi go ahead RubyAnn I
was reminded by director Abbey I
forgot to mention when I made my
comments earlier regarding the
LFC adding that two hundred
thousand in revenue from minors
Trust Fund the fund balance
right now miners trust fund is
about twelve million so we
needed to point that out as well
that there is a lot of revenue
sitting in that fund balance
right now Ezzell to help support
that the hospital thank you.
Thank you RubyAnn and with that
we'll go to the panel for
questioning of the person first
person better handle was
Representative Trujillo.
Thank you Mr chairman I thank
the presenters Mr Medina and his
associate.
And respond well answered my
question it was about their work
during the COVID.
Our experiences how did they
deal with that and I think you
stated that you had travelling
nurses that we're helping you
is.
Yes.
And travelling nurses not just
nurses respiratory therapy we
have some lab techs and some
radiology texts as well they're
always in high demand right now
nursing is probably the biggest
challenges seconded that
respiratory therapists are in
highest demand but yes ma'am we
we use creditors supplemental
travelers because we were having
a hard time there is not
available right now course and
and so my question then was.
I know they cost more than
having a regular regular nursing
staff available so so how what
was the impact to your budget.
We're saying that in contractual
services gonna run is about four
point eight million dollars more
for traveling or for potential
staff traveling staff.
So the request for additional
money.
Is based on that.
Part of that.
Yes yes.
So so the with all due respect
and will be and
the money that you're stating
exists now would that be used to
pay this.
Mr Chairman representative
Trujillo the well the
recommendations the executive
and the LFC fully fund the
request so the money is in there
in both recommendations to fund
that increase in travelling
nurses and it's very expensive
it's raising hospital costs all
across the state and no
exception here minors hospital
so those funds that that
additional revenue is covered in
both the recommendations and
just in the LFC recommendation
we're not using general fund
overview the miners Trust Fund
in the executive they're using a
little bit of two hundred
thousand in general fund and as
I indicated miners Trust Fund
since this hospitals lucky
enough to be a beneficiary they
get to use those revenues and
they actually have a twelve
million dollar fund balance
currently and that in the minors
Trust Fund.
So so that I guess that was the
point so then it doesn't leave
you in the red right Mr beans
and Mister Medina your.
We're hoping that the patient
revenues will cover that so with
our hospital were critical
access hospital we get
reimbursed based on cost so some
of that money that we're going
to need is going to come from
Medicare and Medicaid.
At that time so we think we will
get some probably not all of it
but
we're hoping enough to cover
cover most of it.
Well I appreciate your responses
because that is such a vital
hospital and I didn't want you
guys to feel like you were
struggling and it sounds like
that twelve million dollars is
going to be there to
alleviate some of the pain.
Thank you for that
Representative next I have on my
list is of Madam chair Lundstrom
to be followed by Representative
Chatfield.
Madam chair.
I think madam chair might be
away so we'll go to
Representative Chatfield to be
followed by Representative
Anderson.
Mr Chairman.
Mr chairman I just want to get
all and welcome my neighbors
from
thanks Kelly and and others want
to brag on a little bit about
what a good job they do and the
they're always the they not only
do a good job on the field at
their hospital but they're
always the first to reach out to
other area hospitals share their
expertise and some other person
occasionally of they work very
well with our other our area
hospitals and the medical
personnel in our I just really
appreciate having these guys in
our community are I am
Embarrassed at what.
They had to hold up a room this
morning so you know if you guys
are ever over here in Santa Fe
and and you have to go on June
or something you have my number
give me a call we appreciate you
showing up in the thank you for
all the good you do Mr chairman
that's all.
Thank you representative will.
Next we'll go to Representative
Anderson I thank you Mr chairman
I just wanted to just the LFC
quick question about the.
let's see new accounting issue
And in my question is is that
you know in my life I've heard
about those in and sometimes
they need.
Subsequently perhaps a little
more than I understood
originally and so RubyAnn I'm
I'm asking again about the seven
million four hundred and I had
my glasses anyway we don't get
bogged down the seven point six
million dollars could you go
over one more time why that.
An account the.
Of wash your sheet.
Mr Chairman representative.
So.
The executive put in a transfer
so they would receive a transfer
and the hospital would receive a
transfer from the fund so the
transfer comes in through other
financing uses an issue you have
to balance out the revenue and
the expenditure so you'll see
that the fund amounts up in
revenues stated again and then
shown down in the five hundred
category other financing uses so
it's basically the accounting
mechanism to pull in the minors
trust fund revenue so I don't
know more about their money want
to add anything more.
Well.
Perhaps before they do let me
just continue on and then say
okay so then did I hear a number
that told me how much is in the
minors Trust Fund before the
transfer and after the transfer.
Seven Mr Chairman representative
the amount you have seen that
you have the amount budgeted
here in the LFC for for minors
Trust Fund is seven point eight
and
So it's two hundred higher than
the executive which is basically
at seven point six and then on
top of that once you do that
then there still
About twelve million there's a
projection because funds gonna
perform over the next year
because this is in FY twenty
three so that the projection.
Thank you very much then my
question to who is ever is best
able to answer it is it on LFC
volume three.
LFC volume three are we show the
land grant permanent fund
balances for beneficiaries I
believe and I see of if I should
reading it correctly the minors
hospital staff for a hundred
forty seven billion plus in the
very first column in the very
last column it's down for a
hundred no no I'm in my getting
my zeros from
it can't be a hundred and
seventy nine million I.
The end just to finish it on the
schedule I'm looking at it shows
net income earnings negative
fifty six thousand so my
question goes something like
okay we're transferring those
money out and it's a wash but
the funding has either twelve
million and it or it has a
hundred forty seven we're my
getting this role.
You Mr Abbey because there's
multiple Fund pieces here so
it's not quite so transparent
that director Abbey.
Well let's look at the the fund
is.
Page two of three of the three.
And if you would combine I'm
sorry I wanna Slevin and one is
post twenty two so the net
amount corresponds to the
figures agency S. P. Neville was
talking about.
Thank you.
Thank you Mr Abbey then I should
ignore page thirty four on
volume three showing up for some
reason and minors hospital value
of a hundred and forty seven
minutes so page thirty four is
there Trust Fund built.
And certain other numbers were
there call it their checking
account balances reported and
share and help with the treasure
different than their permanent
fund balances that are
generating income sent into the
treasury and then dispersed to
the so the seven million is a
recurring revenue stream not a
fund balance.
Then to date of but we're
transferring out of the miners
Trust Fund seven million four
and change of and.
My question is who is authorized
to make those transfers.
So this is money in the
treasury.
The seven million from their
income fund which is different
than their permanent fund their
income gets the distribution
from SIAC made to the minors
trust in the treasury and then
minors hospital I would believe
is authorizing the transfers
from their income fund to their
spending accounts.
The agency does more as a grant
with the.
I actually even have a couple of
other funds they have a rental
provide and then they have the
other and that they also get
revenue front so it gets even a
little more complicated.
Well I'm I'm about done with it
but the set the column that
second from last reports net
earnings of negative one hundred
of of fifty six thousand nine
hundred forty five and I think
you know how do you.
How do you lose that amount of
money on that corpus so.
Help with that Representative
Anderson will also because the
investment accounting for fixed
incomes is going to be on a full
accrual basis so they could have
losses or gains from fixed
income assets that are priced
mark to market.
So you can see that they have a
couple of games one which is for
their permanent fund where
they're making money on their
stocks but they could lose money
on fixed incomes when
interest rates rise the value of
the fixed income the value of
the bonds declines and that
could be an example of a month
period money modest fifty six
thousand out of their hundred
and the fifty million dollar
corpus thank you very much for
that then I'm going to conclude
with the comment that it
concerns me about continuing
general fund two hundred
thousand of because of it it
makes me wonder whether this
beneficiary I couldn't find that
resource somewhere else thank
you Mr chairman.
Representative.
I still have a.
Madam chair Lundstrom.
If she wants to ask a question.
She might be tied up and other
things can I follow up Mr
chairman or Representative
Anderson thank you Mr the
testimony Mister Medina was that
they could cover some of their
increased cost partly from
patient revenues for Medicaid
and Medicare and I I assume they
recognized as well they could
cover it from their checking
account balance of affect this
shown in the treasurers so I
think Representative Anderson
that's consistent with the LFC
recommendation not to fund
nursing costs from the general
fund we're laying out these
trust income belts is from their
trust fund.
Thank you very much.
Mr Chairman.
This is.
I am acting on behalf of the
Representative
Sarinana who has to have to
leave and I moved the LFC
recommendation.
The second second.
The vote Sir.
Yes.
Yes we have to excuses
Representative Sarinana for a
few minutes so Christine is
gladly taken up to pay so with
that we build on the
recommendation.
One two three.
Four five six seven eight and
myself is nine you have a a
recommendation that moves
forward Mr chairman.
Thank you Representative.
You have a recommendation that
moves forward.
Mr bean so Mister Medina.
RubyAnn.
Thank you for your.
Thank you Mr chairman thank you.
Four greatly appreciate it thank
you money thank you bye we
appreciate thank you committee.
Thank you and for the rest of
the team of that was our final
presenter.
And we are done for the morning
very very good presentations and
very good team we will reconvene
at one thirty for the afternoon
session so.
Temporarily adjourned.
