Ezzell.
Sarah.
Representative Garcia.
Your.
Representative headed up.
Representative Hochman Vigil
here.
Representative Lane your
Representative Lara.
Representative Sarinana.
Representative Sweetser here.
Representative Trujillo.
Chair small your madam chair
right here we have a.
Representative Anderson present
as well I got you Representative
what I'm already so it looks
like we do have a quorum and
before we take final action and
and on the bill there's a couple
things I'd like to say our first
I'd like to thank.
A number of folks and I'd like
to start with the legislative
finance committee staff I think
it's important for the whole
committee and the public that's
listening today that gosh just a
few months ago we weren't sure
exactly how we were going to
work on a budget and pull
together a a budget during a
pandemic and I need to just say
that without their commitments
and dedication of coming in and
making sure that all these
different sheets were put
together all the materials were
put together we would not have
been able to pull this budget
together I just want to make
sure that they know how much
this committee appreciates their
work.
Secondly I'd like to thank the
house appropriations and finance
committee staff.
Bill and his team you know this
is the first time we've ever had
to give it a hundred and eighty
degrees from face to face to
virtual and trying to make sure
that we could get this right I
can tell you I was a little
nervous and there's we had lots
of conversations bill and I did
on how we're going to make this
work.
I'd also like to thank the
committee particularly the
rookies I like to see when
people can swim when they're
thrown into the deep end of the
pool and I I could see that with
all of our rookies this year you
know Ricky isn't about age it's
about experience on HFC and this
isn't like any other committee
in the system so I thank you all
did additional a great job of
keeping your head above water
and and learning something which
of course is the ultimate goal.
And then finally you know the
the senior members the the long
time members of the committee
helping of R. rookies and and
stay in patient making sure that
we were all their support one
another I think that's a big
deal and certainly a big deal to
me.
So with that being said the bill
and David I I'm gonna turn this
over to you so we can go through
the through the bill but again
our heartfelt thanks to the LFC
staff HSC staff our new rookies
and the and the.
Senior members of the committee
so with that if you would
please.
Thank you madam chair.
First of all all the materials
were email to those of you all
of you and those of you that are
not in the building did not
receive hard copies but they are
all been it's all been emailed
and we will shares the screen
starting with the bullets.
My computer do that.
Madam chair the spread between
hospitals to in house bill one
which is the fee bill or general
fund recurring appropriations
for FY twenty two at seven point
three nine million billion.
This is an increase of about
four point six percent or three
hundred thirty two million over
FY twenty one operating budget
after that increase was
replacing federals me less funds
swapped in the FY twenty one
budget.
House Bill to sob is thirty
three million greater than the
LFC recommendation.
Madam chair and public education
the hospital to substitute makes
general fund appropriations for
FY twenty two up three point
three nine billion dollars which
is up a hundred and seventy five
million or five point five
percent from FY twenty one.
The bill provides a hundred and
ten million for extended
learning including K. five plus
an extra twenty five days for
all at risk elementary schools
in extended learning time.
Ten extra days for grades K.
through twelve.
The bill also eliminates credit
for local revenue notably impact
eight.
Federal stimulus in December two
thousand twenty.
We'll find school districts an
additional four hundred and
thirty nine million addressing
possible enrollment losses not
covered by the formula section
five which is the specials.
Also includes twenty million
dollars for targeted funding to
at risk schools namely the
family income index and twenty
million for community schools
for the education report on.
Ousted David Wilson from higher
education.
Madam chair members of the
committee date of.
Appropriations for higher
education Representative twenty
three million over FY twenty one
twenty million of that is
replacing the federal on swap
which was our.
Great very top priority for the
institutions there's an overall
half percent increase for
instruction and a rural there
are modest increases for some
health care areas and there's a
reductions of three percent for
many research and public service
projects but are the ones that
are like state agencies are
either flat or a decline of only
three quarters of percent after
just.
Mr Browde just.
It would continue of health and
Human Services please and then
the the budget for Medicaid was
greatly aided by a continuation
of an enhanced federal match for
the Medicaid program Medicaid of
course purpose of course is big
as the overall general fund
budget seven billion or so that
was extended after the LFC
recommendation was formulated
for two more quarters bringing
in on a net basis about a
hundred maybe a hundred million
dollars for those two quarters
though the LFC recommendation
for Medicaid is up sixty four
million it's twenty million
greater than the executive but
lower than the LFC
recommendation and that increase
can support a ten percent
increase enrollment in Medicaid
because of the federal
government also important in the
health and Human Services area
the department of health is up
ten million or three point four
percent all right the health
department also benefits from
the enhanced after about seven
million a quarter for the
developmentally disabled program
and so these appropriations are
sufficient to allow continued
expansion of the community
sports waiver the goal is to get
that to two thousand clients and
also to continue to reduce the
waiting list with rules about
four.
also some our expansions
requested by the executive
including our of funding for
teen suicide prevention
programs.
Early childhood.
The.
Appropriations are printed up
twenty two million dollars and
that's to expand pre K. home
visiting.
Increase provider rate for
families and friends other
program and increased funding to
support child care workers in
the public safety area that the
appropriation for the correction
department is about flat in FY
twenty two
when inmate population decline
of more than ten percent allows
investment recidivism reduction
programs substance abuse
treatment programs and extra
races about six percent for
public correctional officers.
The appropriation to department
of general public safety.
Is also flat at a hundred twenty
might nine million takes
advantage of vacancy savings to
implement additional recruit
school training for officers and
a six protect cent raises
implemented in FY twenty one.
In terms of compensation madam
chair this bill provides a one
and a half percent cost of
living.
For all school higher education
and agency employees at a cost
of sixty four million dollars.
David was specials.
The specials what we call the
back of the bill or in sections
five and six and are nine and
ten and the special supplemental
appropriations from the general
fund total a hundred nineteen
million the significant items
include five million.
For tourism marketing over above
their base budget appropriation
for FY twenty two a marketing
approaches ten million in the
base budget seventeen a half
million for the lead a program
we expect they'll be additional
funding in the capital outlay
bill seven million for the job
training program twelve million
for water litigation that's
mostly from other state funds
three million for state police
vehicles
twenty million to pay school
districts for impact Aid credits
that of the eighty US.
Administrative judge ruled were
improperly taken credit for FY
twenty so that twenty million
combined with existing balances
in the state support reserve
should be sufficient to cover
that liability those just
districts.
Four million dollars
supplemental for the state fair
and a six point six million
dollar general fund supplemental
to cover a shortfall in the in
general services health
insurance program matched by
over more than three million of
local revenues and five million
for the Carlsbad brine well that
also requires a local match and
there's an expectation will be
additional funding in
Wait for the Brian well I'm
severance tax bonds and then
section on.
Section ten or eleven up
authorizes general fund
transfers to a number of funds
including twenty million to the
early childhood Trust Fund
twenty million for that should
be teacher scholarships oh boy
we got some typos in this
paragraph so college
affordability and ten million
for teacher training fund and
then there is also a section ten
A. three hundred million dollar
preparation for state local
roads and that includes nine
million furnace central air
services program contingent on
passage of a bill no.
In addition the house bill two
and house bill one there are
other measures that have are
close to passing the legislature
including stimulus notably
Senate bill one and Senate bill
and house bill eleven when those
provide four hundred million for
payments to individuals and are
requests for small businesses.
And also there's Senate bill
three seventy seven which is
just hearing up in the Senate
and that will be a supplemental
general appropriation act and
that is slated to have three
hundred twenty five million to
replenish the unemployment trust
fund twenty five million for
member initiatives and thirty
nine for broadband so I if you
show all these bills reserves
which are.
You pager Act last two pagers
will total twenty three point
eight percent that's one point
seven six billion are we know
there's some additional measures
that are going to come along
madam chair may want to address
the reserve target which
probably below this figure but
based on the solvency bills and
the but supplemental general
appropriation act house bill one
and house bill two our reserves
are at twenty three point eight
percent as is shown in the act.
The packet you've got detail for
all agencies chose FY twenty one
operating budget.
Recommendations from LFC and
exec and then not additions of
the house and then that the
amount in the bill HSC pro so
with that madam chair we answer
questions or okay.
That David can you put that high
level
The general fund.
I want to point that out there
you go the financial summary.
let's look at the reserve level.
The next page thank.
Well there it is right there.
There you go ending balances and
we look at the reserves a
percentage of recurring
appropriations I just want to
again stress to the committee.
You don't have on the US the
items that David mentioned
earlier the other measures are
indicated on this but we know
they're going to happen.
So the supplemental as an
example the supplemental to the
general appropriations act.
Are some of our stimulus built
those things aren't accounted
for in here so I think at the
end of the day we're gonna be
looking not at twenty three
point eight but any closer to
twenty two.
At the end of the day which is
exactly what we talked about at
the front end of our budget
building exercise.
So with that being said we do
have a couple of questions so we
can take this down now David or
Mike.
Let's go to questions from the
committee first I have
Representative Anderson.
Thank you madam chairman
Madam chairman of.
I want to commend you and your
staff and all the others and
helping us build this.
Seven point three nine billion
dollar budget.
I thought about it this morning
madam chairman and I I framed it
up in the sense that.
Today New Mexico Taos academy
suffers from.
A pandemic and the results all
teams economic crisis.
In this economic crisis it is
not the right time to attack
state government spending
and and I believe that this bill
as it goes forward.
Is going to funded meet the
needs of New Mexicans who among
other things needs a functioning
state government to do its part
in lifting us out of this
economic crisis.
So I'm a please this morning
madam chairman don't have a a
great deal full of remarks
except I too am dismayed that of
the movie shot we launched two
years ago his stall somewhere in
space we've got students that
are locked out of schools we've
got students that are lost we've
got parents and grandparents
frustrated that arsenal their
children are there students are
not where they need to be in
school so I think on the
education component which is the
single most significant part.
Of the budget we have incredible
work to do to try to figure out
how we're going to teach our way
out of this lost pandemic here.
So madam chairman of my question
is simply one of of
making the observation that we
need to move this bill forward
thank you ma'am Madam chair.
Any thank you Representative
this now go to Representative
Crowder.
Thank you madam chair and madam
chair I I would echo the same
sentiment comments that my
colleague just did you have done
a masterful job of of managing a
team of horses and Capitoline
pulling in the same direction
when the.
At times well want to go a
different direction so you done
a very good job you you've done
a good job of developing what I
would do is as a very
conservative budget.
I I think between your work the
LFC work and and all the.
Your staff bill and the guys
there in your office it is just
been a pleasure to go through
this process of your guidance
and I greatly appreciate that I
I do you know of course have a
couple of concerns another a lot
of bills on the house floor the
Senate floor that have
appropriations we sent a couple
a list of those bills that we
have not got to see or or that
or if you
But I I know that as we go
further into the process after
the budget goes out of we we
will
We will deal with those bills as
we have to at that not I think
we'll be fine I also have a
great concern about.
The news that they're gonna stop
drilling activity on the federal
lands in the state of New Mexico
that causes a strong pause for
me but I think that
We will overcome that hurdle as
well I think this budget is
structured in a way that we have
an ability to deal with a couple
of big issues like that and I
think will do well I do madam
chair have about three or four
quick questions they're all
basically from the back of the
building to start on page two oh
six madam chair and Mr Abbey.
I just hidden here view video.
Right there.
Mrs L. can you microphone place
thank you.
Madam chair on that page two oh
six of the bill.
Where were no it's talking about
the salary increase for judges.
And the population general I
noticed that it has a word.
And there of one and a half
percent.
And madam chair I began to
wonder.
That would imply to me that some
people may get a little less
than wanted to have some people
make it a little more than one
and a half because I see that
word average in there I wanted
to know who makes that final
decision.
On that compensation increase
when the word Avid is used in
the language.
Madam chair what pages you're
referring to.
If everyone could please turn to
page two oh six of the bill.
And if you look at it starts on
the compensation appropriation
he's he's he's asking about.
We're all very almost every
category madam chair uses the
word average exactly David go
ahead my comment would be that
the agency which receives this
appropriation it allows them
discretion to achieve the
average.
Thank you Mr B. and.
Mr Abbey has that monitored does
your agency oversee that
decision making are or you would
just trust that the each agency
will do appropriately I know
they're limited by the amount of
money that goes to each agency
and and so there are some
boundaries that are some some
guardrails on it but I just
wonder kind of how the process
went so well it so each agency
will submit an operating budget
and DFA will allocate these
dollars to each agent.
And agencies that provide
increases that are out of step
with the the one and a half
percent typically get
scrutinized by our will finance
not so much LFC.
Okay thank you appreciate it Mr
I mean Madam my second question
right quick Mr Abbey is on page
two oh nine under the department
of transportation item to.
There's a hundred and twenty one
million dollars appropriation
there.
For expenditure in fiscal year
twenty one through twenty five
to carry out provisions of sixty
seven dash three dash seventy
eight NMSA nineteen seventy
eight what what exactly is that
what is that transportation
money used for.
So there was a local government
road fund and in the last year
so a bill passed to create a
new.
A new fund allocate to local
roads at authorized in the
department authorizing local
governments if I understand
correctly to apply and giving
more discretion to the
department to make sure the
money is getting out of fish at
lake and effectively to shovel
ready projects so
if I may David on that
Representative Crowder we do
have a local government road
fund but it because of the
criteria there's a bill that's
going through its Representative
Castellanos bill that sets up a
project fund so the money would
go from local the local
government road fund to the
project fund.
And then local applicants would
apply for that.
Thank you madam chair I if I to
look one line above it does talk
about transportation projects on
this that so I saw the saw the
verbiage wasn't sure what that
was so thank you madam chair my
third.
Mr Crowder to house bill two
twenty eight years.
What.
Thank you.
Representative Castellano.
Madam chair my third question is
on page two seventeen.
It's so item twenty one.
And it talks about the.
Armature is in the marketing and
promotion program of the troops
Department may request budget
increases up to five million
dollars from other state funds.
To grow the advertising efforts
leveraging partnership dollars
in the tourism help me
understand what the leveraging
component is I I'm unclear as to
what that really means.
Mr Madam chair representative
for this land which was
requested by the department and
I will have to get back to you
with I think I think we asked
for more detail on that but I
don't have that at this time and
will follow up okay I appreciate
that I just I didn't understand
exactly how the leveraging
process to eight my final
question madam chair and in Mr
Abbey zoom page two twenty one.
And it's the transfer authority
to the governor.
To
But two hundred fifty million
dollars to work.
And I noticed that they're
transferring there this is
permission to transfer from the
tax stabilization reserve.
And to transfer that money from
the tax stable session reserve I
thought required a two thirds
vote but it seems that we're
authorizing it was just a simple
majority vote.
can you help me understand.
That difference place.
Madam chair and and Mr Abbey.
I'm gonna have to research that
for you as well Representative.
My understanding of
Representative Crowder is.
Well if it's in the R. if it's
authorized within the budget
it's not a two thirds vote.
Because we're we're taking it to
the whole floor to the whole
chamber in both cases but we can
wrap we can research that and I
believe that this then goes into
the operating reserve is that
not correct David please okay
most of the operating reserve so
we don't have to do special
legislation as we've done in the
special sessions to increase the
operating reserve you might
recall we have Representative
general Sanchez carried that one
of the special sessions.
I don't want to have to do that
again so within the budget we've
allowed for that activity okay I
would I would appreciate any
thank you can find on that
that's all my questions and
again madam chair I do want to
thank you for of doing a
masterful job of working as
through in in conditions that
were up for it in my opinion I
do not like zoom meetings.
Actually I think I can it follow
Representative approach question
okay for me we are Mike maybe
well.
If you could put it up for put
no for says lost twenty twenty.
Authorize transfers from the tax
stabilization reserve to the
operating reserve operating
reserve balances are below one
percent of probation up to an
amount necessary.
Who are get to the one percent
so I believe that is the
provision passed last year that
allows I think that's consistent
Representative Lundstrom Madam
if there are.
Uses of the funds that are
authorized in the General
Appropration Act and it puts a
below to one percent last year
allows drawing on the reserve to
cover that.
Okay I've brought Preciado Mr
Abbey are thank you for madam
chair I thank you for it and
not.
Look forward to hearing the rest
the comments thank you all right
thank you Representative Crowder
representative Armstrong.
Thank you madam chair and I I
would also like to echo always.
You need to be able to.
Thank you madam chair
just all those sentiments that
have been.
Spoken about how what honestly
what an honor it is to work on
this committee and to work with
all of you and to be part of
such a tremendous activity and
and I just want to say how much
I think you it in your
leadership point all that has
been done and the fairness that
I've felt throughout the whole
thing so with that said I only
have one question madam chair
and that is I hope I heard on
the news this morning in the
stimulus or the the bailout
package cares package whatever
at the federal level there with
maybe a mandated minimum wage
and so I wonder if if that
passes if we've taken into
consideration we have back up
for that that's my only
question.
David I I don't believe we have.
A guy can take a crack at it
You know that have minimum
minimum wage yes in the pines
Camillus planned is.
Work in progress it's going to
get to the parliamentarian of
the Senate regarding whether
it's eligible to be included in
the bill and you know you've got
some members in the in the
Senate Majority work yes or in
favor of that but more important
I think we know that I even
under senator Sanders plan who's
head of the Senate budget
committee I it is phased in over
four five years so it's not like
it goes to fifteen or maybe it
was a it's fifteen and about
twenty twenty five so I would
agree that in general this
budget doesn't allow for.
Minimum wages increases at that
level but it of the face and
makes it out may make it
palatable Madam chair
representative Armstrong.
Thank you madam chair and David
that answers my questions thank
you.
Right a let's go to
representative Garcia thank you
madam chair first of all I would
like to say thank would you done
this is my fifth year with you
at appropriations I became a
member when I first came in and
it's been a struggle every year
but you do really really well of
controlling everything and
everything around you your fair
to all agencies.
no we really appreciate that and
budget agencies of.
Not a good.
This committee will are would.
You know you just described.
And I really really appreciate
the madam chair and I only have
one question madam chair and
that that probably go to David
Abbey of.
On all the twenty million
dollars for the impact aid.
It's also have divided among
some of the school districts.
Well the to the twenty million
is intended to cover FY twenty.
And.
The.
Distributions for school
districts last fiscal year.
Are assumed the full credit
would be in place at seventy
five percent but then again the
federal administrative law judge
ruled that that credit could be
taken and the state didn't
appeal that decision is my
understanding so basically this
the it's really sixty four
million that will be refunded to
school districts and there's
forty four million or so in the
state support reserve that has
already been committed to the to
the purpose of making those
payments to school districts so
we would go to them in the mouth
that previously when he D. made
distributions to school district
and reduce their pursuant to an
expectation that be a seventy
five percent credit.
Of the sixty four million would
be refunded to districts that
had their local revenues with
health were impacted so you know
the biggest beneficiaries would
be you would be of course the
central in Gallup New Jersey
districts but our civil war
but can lay it out well requests
that will district well what
benefit that Madam chair
representative Garcia.
Thank you madam chair a Mr Abbey
bank flood insurance I want to
get in my madam chair thank you
for you done.
Ready thank you representative
Garcia Representative Brown.
Go ahead yes thank you very much
madam chairman I.
I just also want to add my
thanks first of all for the
privilege of serving on this
committee and secondly for your
leadership it's
An incredible list to create a
budget and I think it went very
smoothly this year and I do
believe that the process has
been fair I just want to thank
you madam chair the committee
for the work we did on Water
Rights litigation on the Rio
Grande we have the it's a
massive
Undertaking to protect our water
rights and I believe we again
the funding that's needed by the
Attorney General and the state
engineer to Representative New
Mexico.
It looks like it's going to the
Supreme Court the US Supreme
Court so
we've got to protect our water
and I think we've given them the
resources they need to to do
that and so I'm very hopeful on
that on that litigation.
And madam chair I and you know I
have a special interest in
transportation projects are so
vital to our state into my
corner of the state and I
believe that the department of
transportation is really putting
it's.
It's a funding to use in very
effective ways and just really
thankful and just so people know
madam chair that budget has now.
Going to the one billion dollar
mark for and for transportation
department and that's that's
quite a milestone so again madam
chair thank you very much
appreciate all of the work by
you and by the committee and all
the support staff including
those who type up this very
massive a budget of pretty much
overnight so we have it in time
thank you madam chair thank you
Representative Brown
Representative Dixon.
Thank you madam chair I don't
have a question but I did want
to state how appreciative I am
of being a part of this process
and the work that goes in
especially by staff into the
committee to use data and
metrics and performance measures
to make budget recommendations
and assessments I think that
that is something that is.
That perhaps under appreciated
were not well known and I have
just been honored to be part of
this and I'm really pleased with
how decisions have been made so
thank you madam chair and thank
you to the staff and members of
the committee.
Thank you representative
Representative Hochman Vigil
thank you very much madam chair
and I too want to lend my voice
and giving thanks to everybody
who was part of this process to
you madam chair for your
leadership
it at the rate being thrown and
had first and I have learned a
lot about this process the
legislature and I am infinitely
grateful to have had that
opportunity I want to thank Mr
Avid for his mentorship he has
taught me a lot and I feel lucky
to have been able to learn from
him and also to the LFC staff
unbelievable people unbelievably
are knowledgeable in what they
and and what they do on a daily
basis I would be so lost without
them so thank you for everything
you do and also to the members
of this committee who have been
helpful and and holding my hand
and and getting used to about
what you're you're you're
correct that ensures a very
different committee for what
I've been on before so thank you
for that I also want to commend
this budget for its continued
focus on education despite the
pandemic despite the challenges
of the state is facing we
continue to give raises to
teachers we continue to provide
the opportunity and a lot of
requiring scholarships for
higher education and I think
this is a great budget despite
the challenges and circumstances
that we face and also I too was
worried madam chair and and how
this process is going to go I
think it went wonderfully I'm
just being everybody's present
but I think at the end of the
day it worked out so thank you
very much madam chair thank you
very much Representative
Allison.
The morning madam chair good
morning I don't have a question
either but it's just a comment I
also want to echo what
everybody's saying about the.
A tremendous leadership that we
had under under you
This was a great team also and
you were great coach are you let
some of us into the game gave us
some playing time even though
some of us were maybe clumsy at
times but we have some playing
time so I want to express my
appreciation for that madam
chair thank you thank you very
much I don't see any other hands
up Representative Chatfield go
ahead
thank you much time but I just
also want to thank you for your
leadership thank you for your
purpose and I thought we come
out with a good product my
appreciate the ability to learn
from all the really short
experts on that list you in this
committee and that means a lot
and it's just good to be able to
learn the process learn numbers
and thank you for your
leadership.
Thank you Representative
Chatfield
I don't see any other hands up
so one more comment before I
called and Representative small
for the motion I just think it's
important for everybody to know
that this is the cleanest bill
I've seen in the last twenty
years.
And that that's because the I
think we've all worked together
we've all focused on what the
priorities are and we've also
had a lot of help from the DFA
staff you know they were right
in there with us in in helping
to identify their priorities and
you know I think they work very
well with the LFC analysts.
So as I say this is certainly
the cleanest bill I've ever seen
so what there's no love handles
on this bill.
And that that means a lot to me
as we're moving it through.
Thank you said I'm gonna call on
Representative small for the
motion.
Thank you very much madam chair
madam chair I would move a do
not pass on house bill two and
three as amended and madam chair
I would move a do pass on the
house appropriations and finance
committee substitute for house
bill two and three as amended.
Right and we have a second for
that motion.
Okay we have Crowder Ellison
brown as a second so.
All right with that being said
is there any opposition to this
motion.
I see no opposition so with that
being said we have a a do pass
of this of this bill and again I
want to thank everyone for your
help and looks like we'll be on
the floor when state this will
be read out and then next
Wednesday the twenty fourth is
when will present the bill on
the floor so thank you everybody
madam chair yes Representative.
Do we meet this afternoon.
No we do not have a committee
meeting scheduled for this
afternoon this is our meeting
today the story.
Thank you very much all right
well thank you everybody again
and see you all soon thank you
madam chair.
