Okay could you call that chair
Alison maybe.
Otherwise I'm and also have any
sound yeah I think group thinks
it's okay I could start but I
feel like we should wait a
little.
Question do you have what six
items are we looking at because
I don't think I received
anything so it'll just be you I
Representative it'll just be the
items where the LFC and exec are
different in this section A. T.
we're really close is a lot of
agreement between both the
executive and LESC so we're just
trying to get Representative
Allison says sound working on
his machine because apparently
you can't hear anybody on this
budget hearing that he's the
chairman of.
Yeah I would
just turn down.
Okay you may want to go over
there to see if you can get a
set of workman's computer for
turn up this things or something
on those windows or something.
All right.
Michael.
Continued mention this hearing
but if you if you call somebody
to help him get this working
because he's chair of this
year's.
All right Sir right right
Representative are you in the in
the building I am not I'm sorry
okay I you're going to email you
this project.
Okay great thank you.
Representative is Representative
Hochman Vigil can I get that
working.
You can help me out yes.
Thanks.
Also I'm actually not in the
office today if you can hear me
I can hear me.
No.
Issues no Sam.
Sinkings.
Yeah but I also know that sound
and we got bills chair and just
send.
Can you hear me now.
Yes we can hear you can you hear
us.
I can hear you now yes right
excellence all right let's get
after it.
Los.
Thank you Mr chair not too bad
so I'm Micaela Fischer I am the
program evaluation manager at
the legislative finance
committee I'm actually stepping
in today for our regular I. T.
analyst Jessica hits then she
had a death in the family.
It'll be going over section
seventy eighty appropriations
and with me today I've got
MaryBeth done some more from the
department of finance
administration has a very
similar position subbing in for
regular eighteen less but we
also have I believe that
secretary Romero on that as
well.
So I'll just take a.
Into to what this section seven
I. T. appropriations is these
are one time appropriations the
last year.
And there for IT projects that
receive additional do it
oversight
You know what this means for
your spreadsheet is so these are
this good indication to an.
Mike I think you need to meet.
Sorry.
So we've got I do appropriations
that are funded via the general
fund that is transferred into
what we call the computer
systems enhancement fund
sometimes these IT projects are
also funded by the other states
you know depending on the
project in a few cases like some
big projects we have at CYFD and
for Medicaid system the systems
are funded by significant
federal funds.
This means for the spreadsheet
in front of you is that in the
general appropriations act since
the general fund for these
projects is first transferred
into a computer systems and
harassment Fund all the
probation except for federal
funds are going to appear in the
sheet in front of you as other
state funds.
You can tell the difference
between what's actually funded
with general fund and what's
actually funded with other state
funds as part of the language
Sheryl start sharing the screen
and show you my can you make me
the host so I can share my
screen please.
Yeah just give me a moment
you should be good now.
Thank you.
Spreadsheet in front of you
should look like and we make
this right there for a moment.
So the language look you could
look on this first page on item
one eighty two where it says
there's other state funds
appropriation is from health
benefit funds that means this
hundred thousand dollars is
actually from the health
benefits funds if there's no
language like that like in these
first two you can assume that
the other state funds
appropriation is all from
general fund.
So that's that's the orientation
here I know go over and right
like we said the record the
total recommendation just note
with few places where the LFC
reckon the executive director
for and I'll turn it over to DFA
for any additional comments so.
During this whole section seven
for all IT projects the LFC
recommended a total of fifty six
point four million of which
seventeen point six million was
general fund.
Total was fifty eight point
eight million of which nineteen
point eight million was general
fund so a little like that two
point three million difference
total between the two racks not
not a lot.
One of the first places that
there is a difference is this
very first item on your sheet
number one seventy four to the
AOC executive recommended two
hundred and seventy thousand
dollars the LFC actually did
recommended this but just in a
different section of the bill
since it's for equipments and
not you know larger I. T.
project LFC thought it be better
to fund it as a special
appropriation
it shows up as a difference
here.
And then on this first page
there's three pieces which for
Dick here that's extending older
appropriations hi this is
language that just didn't make
it LESC in time for our
recommendation to be built
however you know staff does Rep
collusion and for house bill two
there still a lot of money left
unspent there and.
We get to I did I get those
projects done you'll see some
more of this as we get down to
the Department of Health.
All.
Just.
And then this last item here but
again it's just a piece of
expansion language this one the
LFC did recommend in the
executive recommended it but you
can see the original ask was for
two extended through fiscal year
twenty twenty three we are
usually in the general
appropriations act for extending
appropriations it's customary to
only do it for one year at a
time and so DFA said let's do it
but only through FY twenty two
and LFC staff agree with that.
Next page.
Thank you to item one ninety
one.
Thank.
Back.
So I want to bring to your
attention to this I don't want
to be one which had a similar
situation where
the ask was true extended
through fiscal year twenty three
DFA said now is only do it
through twenty two and LFC staff
agree with that.
That's.
Next page.
Thank you to the to the line is
very bottom line on page twenty
number one ninety nine this is
the line where DFA and the
executive most deferred all
rights for a pharmacy system at
the department of health IDSA
recommended three point five
million dollars of that LFC only
recommended four hundred twenty
four hundred and forty two
thousand
and that was at but our staff
believed to be a level adequate
support at least the initiation
and planning phases of the
project not the whole project.
For
the next page page twenty one
you'll see all these languages
starting on item to to hear
going to item two ten on the
next page is again were you know
more languages to extend
probation that were included in
the executive recommendation the
LFC wreck because they didn't
get to us in time but
again LFC staff to recommend the
inclusion of these and how still
to.
Let's go all the way to item
number two ten on the next page.
So.
Another place where the
executive in LFC deferred
the for the department of
environment The LFC recommended
one point six million the
executive one million the one
point six million is about half
of what the agency requests.
All of this is general fund to
none of this is that our state
funds.
In the last place for DFA and
the executive deferred war on
this item number two eighteen
for the public education
department
so the one point two million the
LFC recommended was the full
agency requests
although if you look in the
language the LFC recommended
that half the general fund and
half come from the public
education reform Fund
the executive recommendation of
eight hundred and six thousand
was all public education reform
Fund.
So those are those of the
difference I would like to
highlight for you Mr chair if
it's okay I'd like to turn it
over to a merry best so you can
hear disease.
Presentation.
Okay MaryBeth thanks a lot thank
you Mr chair and members of the
committee I'm MaryBeth Densmore
in the and executive analyst
with DFA Micaela did a really
good job I think with the
overview as she mentioned
there's not a lot of significant
differences this year in the
recommendations from DFA in LFC
I just wanted to take a moment
to go into a little more detail
on item one ninety nine on your
sheet that's the department of
health
I am which is it makes up
probably the most significant
difference on the sheet so maybe
a little more information might
be helpful for you I'm just so I
there's there's three separate
and distinct pharmacy records
management systems right now and
he's go across I health care
facilities The Department of
Health
which manages several facilities
throughout the state this
project seeks to replace the
three pharmacy systems with one
single platform.
The project has many benefits so
first and foremost the new
system allows for inter
operability between needs deal
which divisions and that allows
for proper records management as
patients are transferred between
health care settings and
additionally having a single
system results the current issue
of staff expertise being
isolated to the one specific
system the system that they
currently work on.
That's a little less limiting.
The project also is intended to
lead to a reduction in
medication errors and in
addition to that which is that
the goal of the O. H. as it's
more cost effective it's less
expensive to manage and maintain
one system as opposed to several
across the department.
So as a chosen the spreadsheet
the executive recommendation
fully funds to you which is
request of the three point five
million and this would keep the
agency on its projected timeline
of completion in FY twenty three
the LFC recommendation does
provide a partial funding of the
four hundred and forty two
thousand which Micaela mentioned
they I believe is is what they
would need for the initial part
of the project but unfortunately
as DFA sees it that would delay
the full implementation of the
project until at least FY twenty
four and of course that also it
seems the HSD reduced receives
the additional appropriations as
the years go by I'm so that's
all I really had I just wanted
to make sure that that was there
is a little more in depth
information for you but with
that I think that's that's all I
have so I'll wrap it up and
turn it over to you Mr chair
thank you.
Okay thanks for that and then
the I think of with the help of
Bielefeld is who we're going to
go through each one of the items
that was highlighted we're going
to begin with the item number
one seventy four.
Where we see that.
There was no recommendation from
the LFC and there was a two
hundred and seventy thousand
from the executive.
What we this committee's
recommendation.
Mr chairman of that particular
item that is addressed in
another part of the budget so
you can just skip over you don't
think you think any action
whatsoever on that.
Thank you for that bill.
It was easy.
Let us go to the next item that
the we're supposed to agree on
that would be item number one
eighty three.
And I think that it was said
that there was only a language
diff different so we don't need
to act on that which is and
chairman Mr chairman you do have
to act on all these other items.
Even if there is the
recommendation is that you
accept this and and comments
allow for this language to go in
all of these items from our item
one seventy if we if I can go
back just each individual item
item one seventy six there is no
difference between the executive
and the LESC recommendation from
our Mr chairman this project the
working group to adopt that.
Recommendation some K..
And then the thanks item what
line one seventy seven.
This.
Mr Chairman.
One seventy nine.
One eighty one eighty one.
One eighty to one to one eighty
three just down the line
all of those need to be acted
are you can do it in one fell
swoop.
Or you can do it one by one.
Okay I think you just that that
for us we'll.
So that brings us back to one
eighty three where we agree on
the.
Language change.
The LFC recommendation was to
extend through fiscal year
twenty twenty three what the
recommendation from the
executive was to extend that to
fiscal year twenty to only so we
need to agree.
With the
Executive recommendation of
extending to fiscal year twenty
to only is that correct bill
that's correct Mr chair okay so.
I want to circle our
recommendations would be and we
report back to the full
committee.
Okay.
Mr Chairman you probably need to
take some motions to adopt these
two mobile monitor the next
committee.
To the full committee.
Tell you what you can do to make
a motion for my items one
seventy sixty one eighty three
the recommendation that are in
there.
One motion and we can go to the
next page of that what makes it
easier for you okay.
Okay.
I make a motion that we go from
one one seventy six to one
eighty two just keep all the
recommendations as recommended
your one eighty three Mr
chairman.
Okay two one eighty three thank.
A second.
Okay we have a second from
Representative Syria is there
any opposition Mr Chairman point
of order.
Yes Sir.
Are are you a.
Wirth says recommend that that's
the general fund from the exact
are are we accepting or removing
the legislature LFC
recommendation are the exact I
know there is the same but.
It would seem if we're gonna
drive being on page one we would
accept the LFC recommendation.
Are of all items on page one.
Is it maybe I'm wrong but it
would be the the exact general
fund column.
Except for item one seventy six
which is the LFC they're the
same become September one of
them.
Okay your is ads okay is there
any further questions.
Senator.
I think Representative has a
question.
Representative Chatfield.
Representative Herrera.
Thank you Mr chair and I'm gonna
make sure everybody that that I
I understand this right so I'm
gonna take six
item one eighty three.
So the the
governor the executive has
recommended a funding in FY
twenty two only.
And
Is that so so is the LFC and in.
They recommend the same thing is
the LFC recommended the same
thing as the exact that's what I
need to or.
Where is the LFC have made to
recommendation the only changes
the fiscal years.
LFC had recommended twenty
twenty three and executive says
to change it to
Fiscal year twenty to.
See it this point agrees with
that so they are in concert okay
let me ask just one clarifying
question Mr chair and and is
Senator about this so so the HSD
wanted to extend this to twenty
three they thought they could
get the
this so
this management information
system replacement in place and
they wanted to twenty twenty
three to get it done.
Exactly and the LESC came back
and said.
Excuse me did not we think you
should get this done by twenty
twenty two is that is that
would.
That's correct so we were
pushing the agency to get it
passed down faster than they
say.
Well we're we're if I may Mr
chair representative for make
sure that they come back every
year and ask for the extension
every year.
Mr Chairman Kayla that I guess
that was my second follow up
question so what if they don't
what if they don't get it done
by twenty two and they come back
in twenty three and we're up
money.
If we obligate this money now it
is obligated.
Three twenty twenty three and
then it is.
It down somewhere so they make
sure they have it.
If we don't accept this it means
that they have to get it done by
twenty twenty two and if they
don't work.
To come back to us and ask for
it again right.
Mr Chairman representative what
what what would actually happen
is that.
The account just they would just
ask again like for it not to
revert it the end of the it's
not like you have to agree
appropriates you just have to
stay there they can spend it
another year.
That was kind of my quick thank
you thank you that was my
question throughout all of these
things that's but he didn't
understand thank you very much
and sorry it take the
committee's time but I really
needed to understand thank.
Yeah we really need to
understand everything on this
but R. Simons are.
Thirty further questions on this
page one before we go to the
next one.
What are Representative
Chatfield as a stand up.
Representative Chatfield.
Mr Chairman if it be your will I
move that we accept item once
the executive recommendation on
item one seventy six through one
eighty three.
Okay we have a second.
It.
Yes sorry.
Okay I don't see any opposition
so page one is all good.
Thank you let's go on to the
next page.
Mr Chairman on the next page
items one ninety one is the only
one where there is a change
matter again as of the language
FY twenty two instead of twenty
three all the rest are agreed
upon by both the executive and
the LESC I recommendations for
this entire page Mr Chairman is
to adopt either the
recommendations at this point.
Okay thank you for that may
also.
May I have a recommendation to
accept all the figures that's
recommended as it is and the
only language change would be on
item one ninety one of the
language change changing of
dates.
Send page.
Mr Chairman so much.
Second.
Second by Representative Dixon.
One
position to this recommendation.
Okay we're listening to.
On to the next page.
Mr Chairman items.
One ninety three for one ninety
eight there is no difference
between the two recommendations.
I I would suggest that you adopt
those items as they are.
Okay Mr Chairman recommendation
is to adopt items one ninety
five three two one ninety eight
before we start on any motions
one nine nine.
Chairman.
Okay the.
Motion by Representative
Castellano to approved.
Option of one eighty three
through one ninety eight a
second.
Second by Representative
Syriana.
Okay on one night nine.
There's a significant difference
between the two recommendations
I think it was partially explain
to us why the executive
recommendation was higher.
Any questions on that to the
analysts any further questions.
Madam maybe can I ordered
explain it again what that
difference is.
What Mr chair.
So the differences LFC.
recommended a level of in
quarter to forty two thousand
that would support the
initiation and planning process
of this new system the three
point five million dollars that
DFA is recommending is for the
to build out the system in its
entirety is the main difference.
Okay is there any question is do
you wanna you wanna hear about
the system and try to re
appropriate again next year you
know it there might be a more in
a nuanced cost estimate at that
point in time we would you
rather give the agency the full
three years right now to do the
whole project.
Your Mr Chairman.
In my experience with these
kinds of projects they changed
from the day that from the first
time they started till the end
and it usually goes up a lot
more than the than you imagine.
I think it's appropriate on the
systems to if it's a partial
funding to start the process
that's probably wise to do I
don't know whether you want to
train fund for longer than that.
Okay so are you saying build and
that
The LFC recommendation would
eventually catch up with the
executive.
Mr chairman if if the executive
the first thing you do is to the
initial planning center on this
program.
Yes after they're doing their
best there are.
analysis and their work on it if
they find that this is not
something they want to do then
they'll drop it and they won't
come back next year these things
are are free flowing the state.
Computer system things and just
being conservative my
recommendation is to fund this
LFC is recommended.
I would I would move the LFC.
Okay we're a motion by
Representative Crowder to go
with the LFC recommendation is
there any opposition to that
motion it second Mr chairman.
Opposition on the second.
I have a this representative did
quest.
I Representative Dixon yes.
I'm sorry I think there are a
couple.
Questions that we had before we
wanted to move to the a motion.
I I know representatives Herrera
and Sariñana I'm also questions
and so I don't want to jump
ahead of them.
Okay.
Representative Herrera eros
first thank you so much Mr chair
and and I agree with the
recommendation I'm just curious
is this the is this the the
computer system where all all
medications will be listed in
one system and I know in Rio
Arriba we have people we have
problems with people shopping
for up.
Opioid legislation in different
pharmacies so they were trying
to create a system more and the
statewide system in the pharmacy
so that you could really track
how people are getting their
meds and where they were getting
the minutes I I'm just curious
if this if this computer system
as it relates to that program.
I don't know I mean me Kayla
could you answer that thank you
Mr chair representative are at
may Beth do you know the answer
to that question I I'm not quite
sure and I'm I'm sorry I'm.
Being a TLS today but how bout I
will follow up with you on that
all figured out you.
Okay is that all Representative
Herrera.
Okay Representative Syriana.
I believe Representative Dixon
was next and I was after her if
you don't mind.
Representative Dixon.
Representative thank you Mr
chairman sorry mute button I was
confused I see that miss Brenda
frescoes are noted that D. O. H.
has already completed the
initiation and planning phase.
So up Mr chair if perhaps miss
Densmore could provide a little
bit more information I would
appreciate it.
Okay Mister is more.
Thank you Mr chair
representative thank you repeat
that I I didn't hear it I'm
sorry.
Sure thank you in the in the
chat I see that misbranded
frescoes
wrote that D. O. H. has already
completed the initiation and
planning phase and so I just
wasn't sure
how that would affect this and
then if I made my second
question Mr chairman stands
we're actually is.
Do we run any risks of not
having the funds available in
the future if we decide not to
fund all of this thank you.
Mr chair and and Representative
Dixon those are two really good
questions I I would have to
speak with the O. H. R. with you
at to get the specific
information about what it
actually means that these
completed initiation planning
and I don't want to give you you
know what lead you down the
wrong path so so let me look
into that for you
And I'm really proud.
what you are asking.
Thank you.
Missed and at Mr chair at the
question the second question was
what risks do we run of not
having funds in the future to
complete projects.
Thank you Mr chair
representative Dick.
I certainly don't want to speak
to the state of the entire state
finances but I would say of
course there is a risk you know
anytime something is partially
funded that moving forward may
not be funded fully I would
imagine if this is a priority if
it's on you know the committee's
right are that it's less likely
to you to be an issue but of
course it is something that I
think is always a good idea to
keep in mind I hope that helps a
little
I I wanted to well and well I
have the the microphone really
quickly just wanted to stay on
that Mr chair.
Do it has review this the the
project committee and they do
believe it will be completed in
this time frame so for what that
is worth it has been looked at
and evaluated thank you.
Would you mind Mr chair if I
just followed up as well yes
ma'am.
Just you know echo what MaryBeth
said that you know the committee
the staff don't tend to
recommend planning for project
but not for their follow up
funding if it's a project that's
really needed you know so I
think that you know we would
just see the strap is the
likelihood of that it's pretty
low and also just to again bring
around what Mr Valdez said
earlier that you know the
project the cost of these
projects to change and that's
part of the reason we have do it
oversight over these projects to
release funds after their
appropriated and in smaller
trenches and so you know I
think.
Well there is a risk of course
that you know there might not be
as much funding available in the
future.
You know the the likelihood of
you know that being true for
Project midstream is pretty low
and also you know giving
yourself a year at a time to
look at these projects gives you
more information about the
status of where they're at and
how much funding they need to
year to year.
Okay thank you very much thank
you thank you Mr.
Thank you for that next we go to
Representative Syriana thank you
Mr chairman so I I want to
understand so the forty four or
the LCS recommendation is just
for the implementation of
planning so if they decide
there's too many problems just
in implementation will they stop
it is that what they're saying
they they wanna make sure this
is a good program and a good
company and a good
as system before they go on is
that what they're looking at.
Mr Valdez.
Mr Chairman I'm not sure what
their processes that make
Caroline and
the DFA and all certain all were
about this and I do.
This particular system all right
the only thing I speak from
experience I grew up in the data
processing world I know how this
stuff works but I am not going
to say what thank you Sir and
are not as I don not aware you
might just make a lot.
Mr chair and and Representative
Sariñana I think that's that's
correct is for initiation and
planning and you know who knows
that the department they come
back in a year and say we
actually need more money than
three point five million after
you know more consideration so
this is enough to get them
started for a year we believe.
And to come back with more
information here.
K. Mr.
Okay thank you Mr chairman okay
We have
Representative Castellano.
Thank you have your hand up it
came up and went back down yes
yes Shusterman.
Yes Sir Mr chairman I did thank
you.
So I just have a question maybe
Micaela is there any way that we
can meet the executive
You know somewhat maybe closer
maybe add a little more money
from the LFC so we can get a
little closer if it if it's
already the planning stages of
IT been done.
And it's already been
implemented
is there any way that we could
have.
Maybe help him out with a little
more than the.
Four hundred and forty two
thousand that you guys are
recommending.
Mr Chairman.
At this point.
I think that needs to be
proposed to the full committee
when we do the catcher cleanup.
A portion of the of the hospital
to and at that point could be
considered and possibly will
have more information at that
point.
For this purpose is for this
working group my suggestion is
to not change it but to that's
that's what what part of the
full committee on that one.
And I'll make sure it gets on a
list to be considered.
Okay thanks for that bill thank
thank you.
Hi of Bill thank you Mr
chairman.
Yes thank you Representative
Castellano.
I don't see any more hands on
this
All proposals so.
Representative Crowder had made
a motion.
Can you restate.
Yes Mister chairman I move the
LFC.
Okay.
The LFC do I hear second second
second by Representative
Herrera.
So will make the recommendation
of the LFC to the full committee
when we meet on the subject.
Thank you very much and let's
all go on to the next phase.
Mr Chairman.
Items two hundred two oh five
there are no differences in the
recommendations.
Okay with that since there's no
differences let's have a motion
to approve all these
recommendations as they are
written.
Mr chair I make a motion that we
move item is two hundred to two
oh five recommendations.
Second by Representative
Chatfield.
Thank you.
On to
the next page.
Mr Chairman item twenty two oh
six there to ten there are no
are your they're in agreement.
On those items.
does that include line two
thirteen as well so yes your
team has yet to write two
thirteen as well.
Right not to eleven.
Okay so on that page we're gonna
go with what's recommended on
the page and we'll be discussing
to eleven do I have a motion to
accept the page as recommended.
So move Mr chair.
Okay a motion by Representative
Herrera the second.
Okay.
Second by Representative
Syriana.
Okay bill lead us in the
discussion for item.
Not aligned to eleven.
Item number.
Two eleven Mr Chairman there's a
difference with the LFC being
higher if I recall my callow
saying is the do it recommended
the higher amount.
And but the executive came back
because all we don't really want
the higher amount.
So that's that's your real
difference I might mention
possibly if you're directs
secretary decorative on that one
that there is room to deal with
the one that we talked about
earlier.
And do you know we can leave
that out there
when we got to catch a cleanup
as well.
But that is your choice Mr
chair.
Okay do we have any other
questions for the panelists and.
The professionals.
Representative Syriana thank you
Mr chairman so why why is quite
is executive want less it did do
it say they
one of the fifteen eight is that
that's so do it believes are
information technology believes
this is the best recommendation.
Wrecked.
I believe that's one of the.
What they're saying are you
might ask MaryBeth about that we
so can we get that clarified on
on why the executive doesn't
want as much or will.
Mr chair representative I'm
actually I don't have that
information on me but I will get
I will get it as soon as we're
off this okay I would recommend
that LFC nation on this one.
Just what is meant is there any
further discussion discussion
before we accepted the
recommendation.
Okay I don't see any hand so the
recommendation has been made to
accept the LFC.
I'll second that motion Mister
chairman okay second by
Representative Castellano thank
you that completes that page
then we go on to the next page.
Mr Chairman the next page I'm
the only one that is that is not
recommended by both at the same
level is item to eighteen so to
fourteen thirteen seventeen to
twenty two twenty two.
At the moment that we won motion
and then we'll talk about two
eighteen.
Okay I want to entertain a
motion to accept lines to
fourteen to fifteen to sixteen
to seventeen to twenty and two
twenty two as recommended.
Some of Mr chair okay most
unbiased Representative Herrera
second.
The second second by
Representative Chatfield.
Okay with that let's go to
discuss them.
Nine to eighteen.
Yes Mr chairman that's a Public
Education Department again the
LFC is higher than the executive
on that one and only the
executive president why there
nor.
There are any information I
want.
I apologize that I'm sitting in
and I don't have any specific
information but once again I
would be happy to coordinate
getting a little bit more
information on that for you.
Okay you have anything to add
Micaela.
Mr chair only that the the one
point two one five four million
is the total request from the
public education department and
then just just again highlighted
after that's going to be general
fund half is good for the public
chair for.
Okay are there any further
questions.
Representative Sariñana Mr
chairman I don't have a question
but I do move the LFC
recommendation.
Okay to have a second.
Second on the LFC
recommendation.
Representative Crowder.
Okay so.
We accept the LFC
recommendation.
Thank.
Representative sorry I still see
your hand up did you have
another question note no Mr
Chairman sorry thank you.
Mr Chairman at this time you've
gone through the entire
spreadsheet we have one item
that will present to the
committee for a
consideration.
And actually this entire
spreadsheet is up for
consideration by the full
committee what you will have a
report that you can prepare for
that full committee for our full
committee at that point that
point we can change.
If need be.
So at this point Mr chairman I
think you're done.
We breeze right through this I
wish everything was as easy as
this today.
Thank you very much and.
Enjoy the rest of the day I
think this was our last meeting
for the day for me at least
once before everybody starts
leaving at three o'clock is the
meeting of the supplementals
deficiencies at cetera regalo
also be involved in that in
presenting those differences
Any of you that are not members
of that committee working group.
If your call is working group is
Representative Lundstrom
Anderson Crowder RCS moment
Sweetser anyone else is
interested is get on as as
attendees and you're certainly
welcome less than.
That's all that saves chairman.
Thank you very much bill thank
you to the analysts and thank
you to the team thank you thank
you Mr chair thank you guys
thank you.
Have a good evening you're more
rural.
