Four thank you very much thanks
members meant by your Rodriguez
sorry to keep you waiting please
kick us off for Senate bill one
fifty three thank you Mr
chairman members of the
committee and no problem we do
understand have to do the same
thing sometimes so this bill
Mister Pratt Mr chairman is
about transparency and
disclosure it's merely doing the
same thing we did with the
capital outlay bill a few years
ago where we are requiring the
Legislative Council Service to
publish a searchable list of our
allocations in in the US
supplemental appropriations bill
for example the junior bills
that we did our and it is
already being done but it is
done individually each year when
we have a junior bill it
indicates on there in the
provision that the applications
are to be disclosed but this
here put in his statutes so that
it can continue to be disclosed
for transparency on going that's
all it does.
Thank you very much anybody who
wishes to speak on Senate bill
one fifty three.
I don't see anybody because they
know they can see it online.
after service committee members
any questions or we'll go from
it Representative Garcia.
From okay most of the more.
Except it's been moved by
Representative Garcia saying my
representative Sarinana please
take the role.
Yes Representative aka yes
Representative.
Representative.
Yes Representative.
Yes.
Representative.
Yeah.
Yes for.
Representative.
Yes.
I.
Yes.
First of all yes.
The focus.
I tell you what.
We're we are we're.
We're not gonna stop now.
So.
Okay wonderful thank you so much
and I want you to know I didn't
mind waiting at all because I
feasted you're saying just that
you have there I eat so much it
was wonderful thank you thank
you madam vice chair.
Right good afternoon this the
spurs to.
Okay good afternoon
madam chair and
Many members were handing out
the spreadsheet for the house
bill two junior
madam chair I want to start just
by thinking.
The gentleman to my left the
legend in this building Mr bill
of all this and all of our HFC
staff can we get a quick round
of applause along.
Include yes our entire staff who
does an incredible amount of
work on this I also want to say
a big thank you to Mister Rick
may and although they're not
here heather Bergman's and other
members other
Caucus staff who worked closely
with members for the junior
project
you madam chair committee the
amendment in the spreadsheet
which details the amendment.
As you'll see it does not yet
have names attached Madam chair
that's because we just passed
the transparency bill
who which one signed all this
will be public so every single
every single allocation that
again was at at least fifty
thousand dollars going to a
state agency or through the
department of finance and
administration they will all be
public that's something that
this committee takes great pride
in and you have in front of you
all of those handouts that's
house appropriations and finance
committee amendment one.
To.
that's houses that that is
amendment one which I would move
madam chair.
The the amendment number one has
been moved by Representative
Montoya and actually seconded by
Representative Chatfield
Are there any objections to
adopting the amendment or do you
want us to discuss I think if
there's anything it any
questions but this is this is a
process that we followed it
follows strict criteria
including minimum allocation
amounts the staff is group these
by agency by purpose so so
there's been the really big
thing here is that it will be
fully transparent which which
members and districts allocated
what and that this this is
impossible without our house
appropriations and finance staff
the caucus staff and of course
our Senate finance caucus Senate
finance counterparts.
So we are we yeah do you want to
explain the amendment that our
son that that is madam chair
committee chair the the the
amendment
Covers all of the allocations
adding up to the thirty three
point.
got here.
Two thirty three point two.
Thirty three million.
Points we're.
Okay I just this so all of the
amendment includes all projects
from seven the house districts
that total thirty three point
two five million dollars.
Right are there any questions
from committee members on the
amendment.
No okay seeing I do have a
motion to adopt the amendment.
Is to I thought it was a trip
right after that or if we let's
we can adopt okay okay what
that.
Thank you.
The so.
Representative Lujan made the
motion and then was that
Representative Sari√±ana the
second.
Any objections to adopting the
amendment for the second time.
Okay so it is really adopted
okay we are okay which brings us
to amendment number two madam
chair committee house
appropriations and finance
committee amendment number two
this is on will be on page
thirty eight between line six
and seven madam chair committee
members this is to this is not
authorize any new spending this
Gives transfer authority that is
always part of our General
Appropration Act if revenue and
transfers to the general fund
the end of fiscal year twenty
twenty three are not sufficient
to meet appropriations they may
the governor with state board of
finance approval may transfer up
to four hundred thirty million
dollars to the appropriation
account madam chair this is to
ensure after work in the Senate
finance committee that we have
sufficient authority even with
this ammendment of course it
doesn't changing new spending we
keep our thirty percent reserves
as we sent this to the Senate
and we will likely have
significantly higher than thirty
percent reserves both through
potential over the course of
this upcoming fiscal year based
upon
inflows of revenue and potential
reversions of of funds not been
spent for a discussion madam
chair.
Right.
SO Representative Lujan has
moved the amended amendment for
discussion Representative
Montoya and seconded that
motion.
Know if there's any okay then I
have moved for adoption of house
appropriations and finance
committee amendment number two.
It wonderful so we have the
motion by a chair small seconded
by Representative Lujan doing us
any objection to adopting
amendment number two.
Okay seeing.
And I think we're good madam
chair.
It if I might just explain the
spread sheet a little bit I
might help you get through this
in your there.
The first
call in your CSS page a man in
the amendment you have a bit of
the amended bill in front of you
which it struck all the Senate
finance things and put back.
The the Senate finance items in
there as well as the house items
so which you'll find the house
items on the first of the for
instance on the first grouping
there you'll see page ones and
it's
section one of the bill and it's
you can see it right there right
on top of the bill.
we're that is you see there are
four different slots what that's
telling you is there were four
members.
That specified this particular
these particular
amounts for that purpose and the
House dollar amount the Adam up
is three hundred twenty five
thousand but the Senate also had
an additional amount in there
about a hundred and fifty
thousand dollars for the same
purpose so you will find in the
bill that it's going to say five
hundred and seventy five
thousand not three twenty five.
The staff are saying.
Okay and it it down the line
each of those it it gives you so
much detail at your be able to
provide it with the in this
document that you have in front.
Your particular items.
Take.
Our staff is always available to
help you look for further things
and I know Mr chairman thank you
for recognizes step with these
folks did always work
my can and Richard and Carol did
most of this work on this thing
and they there need to be
recognized for that
specifically.
Sort of a question.
Representative Brandon thank
you.
So madam chair and and the.
Mr about this my question is
that I want to make sure I'm
understanding under this
Representative dollar amount for
example when I go down to the
item number five on the first
page yes I'm saying seventy five
I guess this thousand was at
million this Madam chair
representative seventy five
thousand.
And then the house dollar meant
this is the amount that we put
in but what does the
Representative dollar amount
Representative madam chair and
representative it represents an
individual members allocation
from the district so Madam chair
representative in this example
at the bottom of page two for
item number five the
You actually turn the page and
you can see.
That the
Each each individual line one
hundred on page three page one
hundred and two seventy five
that's for a different this is a
eviction prevention and
diversion.
Eviction to to legislators to
districts madam chair and
representative allocated.
one hundred thousand one
distracted into hundreds that
seventy five thousand another
district again madam chair
representative the after
signing both sorry
Representative Montoya of.
After signing of the bill that
we just heard from Senator
Rodriguez each of these
allocations will be shown by
member in so whichever member
did that hunt on top of page
three.
One hundred thousand in two
hundred seventy five thousand
those were from two members to
districts the total house amount
was three hundred seventy five
thousand madam chair and
representative and for this
item.
regarding eviction prevention
and diversion.
There were only house members
who contributed to that no
Senate members made an
allocation there so that's why
the total amount for HFC is
three seventy five if we turn
back to page two.
Correct the Senate has three
hundred thousand and your bill
that's that's the Senate part.
The difference between the
seventy five thousand hospital
are mountain and the total
amount the difference is the
Senate.
And it is different rate so.
Sorry Madam we're looking.
Of the for that answer
Representative was sent from the
plans that I thought he was
explained in the one I just
about which was number five on
page okay so number five on page
one madam chair.
and.
Make it here section.
It's right here yeah that in
that madam chair and
representative the Senate did
contribute to the this is on
page two
I'm getting confused.
Page one.
Item two section two the item
may just have a repair okay yeah
and that thank you madam chair
and representative of Mr of
other that Paula eyes so in that
case there was seventy five
thousand dollars from the house
and three hundred thousand
dollars from the Santo.
So for a total of three hundred
seventy five thousand.
Madam chair.
Representative just for
clarification in terms of the
bill that we test voted for if
if individuals were looking at
this in the future what we would
see if we win and to make an
allocation to the New Mexico
court of appeals we would see
that seventy five thousand was
already allocated if we wanted
to allocate more is that what
that bill did or not thank thank
you madam chair thank you
Representative no this bill is
for more focused madam chair
representative I'm showing the
but for transparency's sake
every what individuals members
chose to do with the
allocations.
Madam chair representative so
this is so that everyone in the
public can see what they're
legislature chose to allocate
supplemental appropriations act
funding for.
In the same way madam chair and
representative the members of
the public can see what each
individual legislature allocated
capital out.
Thank you madam chair.
Any other questions from the
committee.
I do have a motion.
Okay Representative Garcia has
moved to do past we have a
second by Representative Lujan.
Miss Esther would you call the
roll what as amended.
Representative are cracked yes
Representative Brown.
Representative have.
Representative.
Yes.
Yes Representative Montoya yes
Representative.
Representative.
This was.
Yes this.
by a vote of four to the Fuhrman
is here in the negative we have
passed Senate bill one ninety
two Senate finance committee
substitute for Senate bill one
ninety two as twice amended okay
are finalized we're ask our own
representative Catherine brown
Representative Brown to present
to us house bill or Senate bill
two ninety two.
Representative it's great to see
you and also as we all know
Representative Senator.
Gay Kernan is a fantastic and
long time Senate finance
committee member although no
longer on the Senate finance
committee a valued member of the
legislative finance committee
Representative Brown we are all
years thank you Mr chairman and
members of the committee Senator
Kernan is I'm not sure able to
join us I've texted her she is
in another committee and needed
there so so this is how this is
the Senate tax business and
transportation committee
substitute for Senate bill two
ninety two and what this bill
does Mr chairman members is make
an effort to compensate the city
of Carlsbad person very massive
revenue losses due to the change
to destination taxation so it
it's a G. R. T. matter when we
went to the new way of taxing it
actually very much for the city
of Carlsbad the losses are about
on the order of two million
dollars a month and as very
sizeable especially when you you
think that municipalities depend
a lot on the G. R. T. for what
they need to do and in the case
of Carlsbad Mr chair the G. R.
T. revenue is about half of the
city's budget every year so the
losses have mounted these
lawsuits have been accruing
since July first of twenty
twenty one so very soon in a few
months it'll be two years of
losses this bill would not make
up for all of those losses but
it would help the city to
weather the downturn in revenue
and so this is a nonrecurring
one time appropriation and
that's what we're asking for in
this bill and so if TJ wants to
add anything Mr Jake you very
much Representative Brown TJ
thank you Mr Trujillo for being
here
if there will is there any kind.
Madam for our on
Senate bill.
the centex Business substitute
for two ninety two.
And San Antone see any on line.
Committee quick yes go ahead
regular Marshall I thank you Mr
chairman I would like to make a
motion to pass on Senate bill.
great okay we have
Representative let's we're going
to do the motion from ranking
member Armstrong there's a
second we heard a second here
from representative Baca we also
I'm gonna go for a second
actually from Representative
Lujan who was part of the summer
sub committee and working group
on this issue so we have a
motion from ranking member
Armstrong second from
Representative Lujan and
Representative Baca let's go
ahead and.
Call the roll this.
For the US.
Missoni also to call the roll
before we have to bang the
gavel.
Yes Representative Armstrong yes
Representative box yes.
Representative Brown yes
Representative Capulets.
Representative Cruz yes
Representative Garcia yes.
Yes not to comment on my.
Representative.
I hear cases yes.
Are small yes thank.
Thank you very much
representative Garcia please.
Thank you Mr chairman and
representative of my comment is
you know a lot of our
communities of suffered the
losses to COVID control for but
in your community we need to
keep in mind how much of that
part of the country contributes
to
Education everything you know
because the nineteen or money
probably come from the oil patch
foundation thank you for
everything.
Thank you very much
Representative Garcia
Representative Lujan please
thank you.
Mr chair I'm happy to vote for
this this bill because as you
mentioned I was a along with you
on on the a sub group there was
talking about this and so this
is been
it was shown through LFC in
discussion during the interim
that this is a community that
was hit really hard and it was a
disproportionate
Amount of of loss that was
founded this would this put this
county so I I'm happy to vote
for and I'm glad that this
legislation can point thank you
thank you very much
Representative Lujan
Representative Brown thank you
very much members we will have a
number of Senate bills tomorrow
that we do have to take up and
we may have a house built or two
as well but that concludes our
business for today members thank
you very very much staff thank
you very much.
