Representative Crowder.
Representative Dixon.
Here here.
Representative Ezzell.
Representative Garcia.
Here.
Representative Hochman Vigil
present.
Representative Lane.
I don't want.
Representative Lara.
Madam chair removed just part of
a loft chill but he is here.
Representative setting and.
Your.
Representative Sweetser here.
Representative Trujillo.
Representative Allison.
I am here.
Representative Anderson.
Representative Chatfield.
Representative Ezzell.
Representative Sweetser Candie
hearing.
Representative Lane.
Representative Lane.
Needed.
Your small I'm here.
Madam chair.
Here you have a quorum.
Okay.
The first bill that we have is
house bill sixty.
Native American language to get
salaries and we do have
representative Lente so if you
would let go ahead and start
representative Lente thank you
madam chair Avenue Committee
members I have house bill sixty
which passed the house Education
committee with bipartisan
support does have one point two
five million dollars in house
bill two and am going to be
working with PED secretary to
find another hopefully two
million in the Senate to create
a little bit more of robust of a
program but basically house bill
to amend section twenty two dash
ten eight dash thirteen.
Mexico statutes to establish a
minimum salary for native
American language and cultural
teachers or or in other words I
twenty certificate holders that
being said Madam chairwoman I
would stand for any questions
and if there are any question
that I do not have the capacity
to answer I do have to be
experts but should we need the
help of perhaps we can bring
them and madam chair the
committee members thank you very
much.
The first thing yes
representative Lente this is
already in the budget and again
no hear from bill that it is in
house bill two we do not need
the appropriation ago
Representative Sweetser for an
amendment.
We actually don't even need the
bill let me explain that
Representative Lane Hey it's
already in house bill to.
There's a reason that you need
this language usually just table
the bill but we definitely need
to strike.
Making appropriation online
thirteen.
When the entire section to on
page two.
This is already in the budget so
my question to you is is this
language needed sent you've
already worked out the details
with that.
Madam chairman committee members
yes Matt this language would be
needed to change statute making
that amendment to the
the reference section that I
mentioned earlier Representative
Sweetser for.
Amendment one amendment please
thank thank you madam chair I
would move and Amendment house
bill sixty on page one line
thirteen strike making an
appropriation and on page two
line seven through thirteen
striking of section two.
We have a motion and a second
proper motion proper segment.
Opposition to that motion.
The motion is been adopted the
amendment has been adopted is
there any questions on the bill.
But it was the question of the
committee.
Madam chair.
As amended.
Okay we have a motion in the
state of a second where do
passed as amended to house bill
sixty is there any opposition to
that motion saying but none the
bill has passed as amended.
The next bill representative
Lente house bill eighty seven as
amended thank you madam chairman
house bill eighty seven as
amended.
Has also an appropriation but it
also is very to go through the
process to change policy in
changing the Indian education
fund to allow for
Dollars to be spent you've got
intergovernmental agreements
this two went through the house
Education Committee and it
passed with their support so
with that being said madam chair
woman I said if any questions.
Representative we don't have
twenty million dollars in the
budget for this based on what I
have in front of me.
So generally what happens when
the money is not in the budget
we cable bill.
Unless there's some thank you
all right all right don't yes
let's go to the committee is
there any questions on this.
The committee on this bill house
bill eighty seven.
Madam chair.
Representative right Lara.
Thank you madam chair are thank
you representative Lente you
know our we did your this bill
in education I want to thank you
for for bringing this work with
the work you're doing is very
important I do have some
clarifying questions though are
regarding you know I think up
and we have contacted you about
the accountability
accountability piece to this
before and I still you know I
want to ask you a couple
questions regarding that so
With this if if the bills were
to go through with the with the
with the funding you know what
what do we need to you tell me
what the capacity is for the
tribal education departments to
handle this type of influx of
funds.
Chairman representative a lot of
that's a great question that's
one thing that we explained in
house education that the
capacity right now is also a
companion bill of the tribal
remedy framework to help
internally at each individual
try put lower nation build that
capacity to their tribal
education departments but we
talk about accountability
through those intergovernmental
agreements that had mentioned
earlier that will provide the
governance and accountability
measures defined between the
tribal school districts on
regard in regards to how to
track these measures of of
accomplishments.
Thank thank you all
representative madam chair so
right now all of our so this is
a another question so how how
are the funds going to be
divvied up among C. entities so
it is a I'm sorry what excuse me
I'm sorry madam chair vote
Representative Lara up to
seventy percent of these funds
will go to tribes to implement
these programs and that will be
based on a formula of heard
public tribe or nation and also
very much defined by student we
factors.
Thank you representative Lente
and madam chair so we're just
are just what is a seventy
percent come from where does
that number come from Sir.
for for this Madam woman and
Representative Lara I would ask
for the assistance of one of my
expert witnesses.
If I may
Thank
you for Mr Regis Pecos could be
brought over from.
The attendees list.
Okay let's bring in Mr pickles.
Regis are you there.
Yes madam chair.
Go ahead I don't know if you
heard the question did you hear
the question yes madam chair and
Representative Lara we've been
working with LFC on a formula
that would be equitable and one
of the things that has been part
of this whole effort is that
presently there are no money's
going to pueblos or tribes up
all of the supplemental funds to
support students services are go
directly to the local education
agencies and so I'm working with
LFC staff this kind of
Equation of having seventy
percent go to the local tribe or
pueblo is really based on
building a base budget and a
foundation with thirty percent
of that going to local schools
Ellie ace and that thirty
percent will be a whole nother
part of a process consistent
with house bill two fifty so
that the joint assessment of by
the local school districts and
the pueblos and tribes in those
districts are able to further
defined unmet areas of need for
which would drive the targeted
investments of that thirty
percent well the seventy percent
helps to establish the capacity
and program development and the
respective tribal communities.
Thank thank you Mr Beckel so
madam chair and thank you for
that information so the the
other sources of the the the
what remains at thirty percent
the remains Zachary be
administered by PED.
Madam chair representative madam
madam chair Representative Lara
those those would be a kind of a
joint effort between PED and the
local education agencies.
Yes Sir thank you Mr Picasso
thank you for for for the
answers thank you representative
Lente you madam chair that's all
I have.
Go to Representative Allison
with questions going yes Sir.
Thank you madam chair
my question is probably directed
directly to you madam chair for
the past couple years any time
that we introduce the bill that
dealt with Indian Education
we're always total there is no
money or there's nothing in the
budget what do you recommend
that we do to of get a seat at
the table thank you madam chair.
I recommend that you do though
is that generally with the
Indian Education paste it comes
through the Education Committee
and we do have a subcommittee of
public education under LESC now
and what I would what I'm going
to suggest is that you do need
to be able to create a fund in
here after read this bill.
What I'm not comfortable with is
letting it out with the
appropriation that we know it's
not in the budget what I'm going
to make the recommendation on
where this bill in order for to
move ahead is that on page one
line twenty three.
We're just money in the
financial not revert I'd like to
scratch that.
Any money in there and then on
making appropriation page one
line twelve.
Then we we take out section two.
But what I would strongly
suggest in this is that we have
banned.
We've been pretty careful about
the policy piece when it comes
to the education.
They usually you know look at
all this and it looks like they
have approved this in much and
what have you but we need to be
able to hear this in the around
we need to be able to look at it
carefully under our
subcommittee's work and to be
able to make the recommendation
inside the framework of LFC.
And I don't recall that being
the case here Representative
Allison I don't recall
The being brought forth at that
time maybe you do Representative
Sweetser did this come up in
your subcommittee.
No madam chair I did not but we
can make a commitment to hear
this in the up coming in trump
and and work with them the
sponsor and and Representative
Allison and others who are
interested.
And representative Allison as I
mentioned to the other day I'm
super encouraging you to come to
these meetings in the interim I
just think.
I think that's very important.
Okay thanks for that matter
madam chair and we will be
Representative Indian education
along with my
rather representative Lente
thank you madam chair.
Okay.
Yes Representative small are you
saying Representative small
there is but if there is money
in the budget for this year on
this.
Madam chair that is my
understanding we did make
there are appropriations in PED
directly to
the Indian education fund.
to that there there I I believe
madam chair and and percent
plenty might have more
information but we have over ten
million dollars to go to our
tribal
The tribal education fund which
seems like this would.
This would work with okay so
you're saying that there is
funding in their.
Madam this is Regis in the table
there is fourteen point nine
hundred and twenty eight million
for house bill eighty seven in
houses built to.
Okay but we still gonna ask if
it's already in the budget we're
still gonna scratch the
appropriation we're still gonna
take out section two and I know
what bills out here that don't
let money revert so I mean
that's just HSCs policy.
I want to be able to look at at
least for a couple of years and
see how things are in there
before will do something like
that list of the questions
Representative Crowder.
Thank you madam chairs I was
wondering if the sunny lu might
be online and you could talk to
some of the S. funding.
In house bill two versus what's
in the bill.
Are you on.
I don't see him.
Good evening Madam chairwoman
Nina Chavez of the LFC I can
refer any questions you have
percentage of hearing okay data
we do have a question for
Representative Crowder can you
repeat that question.
Yes madam chair and then I was
just curious that the monies
that are shown to appropriate in
house bill eighty seven match
with the funds that are in the
LFC and in house bill two
numbers do those lined up
exactly.
Madam chairman and
Representative Crowder I will
contact any right now and and
and find an answer for you.
Thank you madam chair.
Okay let's see if we have any
other questions from the
committee.
Representative small going to.
Thank you I know that I'm ready
to make a motion on the
amendment madam chair.
Okay you want to move in and
then that for discussion so
let's go ahead listen to your
amendment okay thank you very
much madam chair Madam chair on
line twelve I would strike
making a propane appropriation.
Online twenty three page one I
would strike in its entirety the
sentence that begins with money
and with revert.
And then on page three I would
strike the entirety of section
two.
Okay we've heard they
amendments is there a second to
that.
Thank.
We have a motion and a second is
there any opposition to the
amendment.
We don't have any so the ability
in amended but we do want to
answer Representative Crowder
discretion before we take final
action.
We should have that right in
front of me.
For.
Madam chair.
Yes.
We.
Thank you madam chair the FIR
does say that the LFC budget
recommendation includes
additional funding for IVF
distributions including fifteen
million for I. yep distributions
What I'm looking for what if we
actually put in there.
Okay there is.
Get my candy candy CICIG more.
It says under Indian education
fund.
We have made a recommendation
for FY twenty three HSC
substitute is nine million seven
hundred and thirty eight
thousand dollars that's what
that's what we have in there the
step on over to the Senate.
Needed needed you have anything
else on that.
Yes Madam chairwoman
To Representative Crowder is
question a sunny has confirmed
that house bill two only has
fifteen million it's not the
full twenty million.
It.
Well what we have in here yes
fourteen million nine hundred
and eighty eight point six.
This morning to our spreadsheet
here then.
Madam okay just a second let's
go back to Representative
Crowder we had thank you madam
chair since we have stricken the
appropriation amount out of
there and we're only keeping the
language.
Our.
I think we would be all right.
I'm not sure but that's would be
a big and then and then and they
certainly have an opportunity to
go over to the Senate get more.
Right.
Yes ma'am thank you madam chair
Representative small and then
we'll go Representative Lara.
My question was answered madam
chair thank you for reading
Representative Lara.
Madam I just wanted to mention
that that John center was I
think I saw a bigger so I'm on
the on the on the whole thing
here on the screen sorry I was
wondering if you could answer a
question we've already got that
answer thank you madam chair.
Okay what's the pleasure of the
committee.
Madam chair I move a do pass on
house bill eighty seven as
amended.
The motion and a second is there
any opposition to that do passed
motion.
Representative Lente Hey
amended.
Your next bill house bill eighty
eight thank you madam chair
thank you mate so for house bill
eighty eight there is money in
in H. B. two no policy necessary
for these bills so if you want
to go through a process would
appreciate that.
Do we need the language are we
good with age.
Madam chair when we are gonna
language.
Okay so let them be tabled.
So I need to table a motion
Representative small madam chair
I move to table house bill
eighty eight and house bill
ninety.
Okay we were just taking action
on eighty eight is that correct
and I also representative Lente
on ninety.
Are you comfortable with that
madam chairman yes I am okay so
we're taking two pills in this
motion it's house bill eighty
eight house bill ninety which is
the tabling motion agreed to by
the sponsor we have
Representative smallest made a
motion seconded by
Representative Anderson is there
any opposition to that table
emotions.
Thank you representative Lente
K. thank you ma'am thank you
committee members.
Okay we have house bill one
thirty four and that is
representative my system I saw
him.
Representative Maestas.
When you have an amendment here
thank you madam chair thank you
honorable members this is house
bill one thirty four there is an
amendment as you know
There is money in house bill two
as well as in the junior budget
up so this we do want to adjust
the statute and want the bill to
move on but we ask that this
committee strip the I needed
appropriation in the bill I need
somebody to move the amendment.
So move.
Representative Anderson and
seconded by Representative small
removing the amendment is staff.
There any question about this
ammendment from the committee.
The thing that is there any
opposition to the adoption of
this ammendment.
Saying go back bill
Representative my S..
Thank you madam chair will
members this is this is the
statute involving the sports
authority division of the
tourism department it is not
been funded program decades so
thanks to this committee's
leadership it will be brought
back to life and do really good
work I've been working with the
secretary of tourism on the up
on section two that we want to
modernize the.
The committee from twenty five
persons down to seven which is
consistent with the department
of tourism's up there committees
and without all stand for
questions.
Any questions.
What's better the committee.
Madam chair I move that do pass
on house bill one thirty four as
amended.
You madam chair.
Okay we have a promotion proper
second made by Representative
Castellano is there any
opposition to that do passed
motion as amended saying none
thank you very much
Representative Maestas.
Thank you.
House bill one fifty two
Representative joined here at on
or that somebody else better do
that provide.
Madam chair yes.
That we're at the request of the
Sanchez March next table.
Tabling motion the
Representative small I move to
table house bill one fifty two.
We have a motion and a second
tabling a motion for house bill
one fifty two is there any
opposition to that motion saying
that is is it do it it's been
table.
So madam chair okay house bill
one forty two Representative
small I need to table a motion I
move to table house bill one
forty two.
Representative Dixon is a second
yes thank you okay we have a
motion and a second for tabling
of house bill one forty two is
are they are is there any
opposition to that motion saying
that the bill's been cable is
now move to house bill one sixty
madam chair.
Yeah the sponsor requests that
we roll this bill the one time
if that's possible.
Okay.
Madam chair we.
Colleges and vice chair we would
like to forget the bills that
that's okay because state.
The house bill one sixty
Representative Serrato.
Thank you madam chair we do have
an amendment that we submitted
to your committee.
Educate.
Wirth.
What are those.
The amendment Representative
small madam chair I move the
amendment to house bill one
sixteen.
Okay what this amendment does
everybody it basically strikes
the appropriation on page one
line fourteen and then on page
eleven and twelve districts
section seven in its entirety we
have a motion to have a second.
Representative Anderson proper
motion proper second for the
adoption of this ammendment is
there any opposition saying that
amendment has been adopted back
on the bill Representative
Serrato thank you madam chair
thank you committee this bill
creates the historically
underutilized businesses
certification for business we're
working with tax and also I
General Services Department on
how that would be granted and it
just allows training and data
collection for state contracts
are purchasing as we see how
women owned and that communities
of color owned businesses are
engaged in the purchasing
process with the state.
What was there anybody in the
audience that wants to talk
about this bill.
The.
Okay.
A any questions on house bill
one sixty.
The committee.
Madam chair I would move that do
pass on house bill one sixty as
amended second chair.
We have a proper motion proper
second reduce passed as amended
is there any opposition to that
motion saying the bill has been
passed as a thank you
Representative.
Okay on this next bill.
Bill.
Four we have Representative and
Anderson and others that are
listed here.
What is going through this
through the hopper here and I
wanted to ask if I could get
this through.
Take action on this because.
There's a lot for them to talk
about.
We might roll over this today
and let this through do a little
more work on it we take it up in
a day or two.
Madam chair that would be an
excellent idea this is
Representative Anderson and that
we would report back I know
there Senator and the kids in on
the committee and I would be
happy to work with them and
report back on that thank you.
Okay so that would include it
Representative Anderson for more
Canadian Representative Anthony
Allison Representative Christine
Trujillo and Representative more
to the extent so we're gonna
roll over this guys and we all
be able take another bite at
this bill.
Thank you madam chair thank you
madam chair okay thank you very
much the next bill we have at
least provided maintenance house
bill one fifty seven.
This is gonna be our
Representative Castellano.
Thank you madam chair thank you
members of the committee.
House bill one fifty seven is
this.
It amended here Representative
yes I'm sorry.
Yes the amendment number is the
children are is two two two five
one eight point two.
Madam chair I propose the house
appropriations and finance
committee the following
amendments to house bill one
seven as amended on page one
nine seventeen and eighteen
strike making appropriation.
On page two line twenty three
struck the call in and online
twenty four strike the one.
On page three.
Line to strike or in straight
lines three four in their
entirety.
Number four page five straight
lines three and four in their
entirety.
Nine I remember the succeeding
paragraphs accordingly.
On page nine.
Lines two three strike other
than a daycare facility.
Madam chair number seven on page
ten line fourteen and fifteen
strike or installing operating
and make or maintaining a
surrender safety device.
Number eight eight ten.
On page ten line seventeen after
infant insert or injury arising
from the black installation
operation and maintenance of the
surrender safety device.
I'm number nine on page ten
eleven strike section eleven in
its entirety madam chair.
And ten remember the succeeding
sections of course those minutes
to one fifty seven chair.
Okay.
Wait a second just convention.
Second by Representative small
your discussion.
Through the amendment here but I
I I'm gonna have a couple
questions on the amendment let's
go to the committee on the
amendment first.
Do we have any questions from
the committee on this
ammendment.
Okay I'd like to ask you
representative
why are we striking other than a
daycare facility on here.
Can you explain yes madam chair
Early childhood.
The daycare centers.
since they're only at eight to
five we struggle because this
month as opposed to be installed
in a twenty four hour facility
where somebody is there twenty
four hours madam chair.
Okay.
The body also then then it was a
pleasure the committee on the
amendment.
Is there any opposition to the
amendment.
excuse me.
Okay we we do have a proper
motion proper second for the
adoption of the amendment is
there any opposition.
If you have opposition please
raise your little zoom hand so I
can stay up we have no
opposition so the amendment has
been adopted back on the bill
Representative.
Thank Representative of the one
fifty seven is a safe have
enough to and we're making
changes to the state fair haven
act relating to children
allowing persons to leave
infants in the safety device for
the surrender of infants under
certain conditions of the permit
will criminal prosecution for
abandonment or abuse the child
allowing the installation of and
operations safety Weiss's for
the surrender of infants
providing limited immunity for
operators of those devices we
provide the public education to
promulgate rules declaring an
emergency madam chair.
Will stand for questions.
We have anybody in the audience
that would like to make a
comment.
There's one hand madam chair.
This spring.
A real quick.
I'd like to be my expert
witnesses.
And also a Senator Gallegos from
attendees to panelists.
It'll be
will have your expert witnesses
available if we have questions
okay right now if there's
someone that wants to make a
comment bring them
Representative small.
I just saw those hands go down
madam chair well I I see miss
Barbara Vigo
madam secretary the hell.
I don't see any other hands that
are up in the attendee room.
Okay well we're it is so Miss
Vigil did you want to make a
comment.
Share this is Barbara B. hill.
Hello sorry I.
I was directing and I stopped.
To comment on this particular
bill first of all thank you for
allowing me the opportunity to
speak.
I have spoken to at least two
sponsors with respect to this
bill and we support having
our system of care that would
enable.
Parents who are struggling with
the engines to have support and
and alternatives to to that
struggle and to give them the
support they need however I must
say madam chair and members of
the committee as secretary of
Tony's and families department
we cannot stand in support of
this particular piece of
legislation for some is to.
Is that we believe the existing
bill adequately provides those
alternatives to parents and the
support they need for parents to
parents who are struggling with
their infants second I believe
that
Language in the bill that allows
for anonymity of the person to
deliver the baby and not be
Held accountable or required to
give any
identifying information might be
used by parents against other
parents of for reasons that the
bill doesn't contemplate in that
would be can be used as
retribution up by one parent
against another.
And second
I think that we need to build
out our existing system under
the existing bills children
youth and families department is
responsible for outreach and
education in this area we have
certainly begun doing a better
job at that I I dreaded Lee it
meant that we haven't done well
in that area thus far but will
of following the two incidences
where you know parents were at
with standing could not deal
with their child so with that
madam chair I I believe in good
faith that
this particular bill would not
resolve the concerns
that the sponsors have with X.
with respect to the existing
bill but would actually cause
more harm and then
that benefit in this area so
thank you madam chair and I can
stand for questions.
Thank you.
He also wanted to make a
comment.
Committee for questions.
Okay but you Representative Lara
Representative Crowder yes Sir.
Thank you madam chair a thank
you Representative Castellano
for bringing this forward I was
going through the through the F.
I. R. and there is section
towards the back of what was in
regards to CYFD and there's so
there's something in here about
liability piece of it one of
these devices were to
malfunction and I are wondering
Representative madam chair if
you've already up it you you've
already discussed this or this
is our something that's in been
on in a considered in this bill
because I'm I'm concerned for
your we place an infant in one
of these in one of these
containers and and they're not
safe for their not up to to park
that there would be some some
injury to the child.
Representative Castellano or any
of your experts respond
Madam chair Senator signals is
here for you like to respond on
the ones.
Thank.
Thank you thank you
Representative so in the
discussion we've had there are
multiple options so this is a
this safe haven box has multiple
alarms it's got heating air
conditioning and all to do that
tenet as the door closed it is a
large twice since notification
to nine one one so they know
there's child in there and also
notifies the fire department the
only chance that there might be
is it the mother it but child in
that had a pre existing
condition but so far.
Nation the longest state they've
had a child in there's around
four and a half minutes tops
it's usually around two and a
half minutes from time the alarm
sounds cool or one of the fire
station attendants are there
we're hoping that'll cover any
the concerns we have.
Thank you senator a thank you
madam chair yet this I'm glad
you on but that is part of the
discussions on I'm very
concerned with the with the
safety of the child thank thank
you thank you senator thank you
madam chair.
Representative Crowder.
Thank you madam chair
Representative sure was unclear
secretary B. hills circle kind
of broke up well she was talking
and I wasn't sure issues of.
Support of the original bill one
fifty seven before it was
amended and the amendment was
the issue or I just need
clarification on that I I
couldn't really understand what
you're saying about that.
Okay
good back to Barbara detail can
you please respond.
Yes madam chair.
Representative Crowder members
of the committee
I.
I don't have any.
The objections to the amendments
I have an objection to and can
are not recommend supporting at
the bill even as amended for the
reasons I stated and I'm happy
to go over that if you wish but
my answer to your question
Representative is that the
amendments do not touch your the
concerns I have with respect to
this region that the bill as
originally drafted or even as
amended thank you madam chair
thank you thank you madam chair
that answers my questions.
Representative Hochman Vigil
thank you madam chair I just
have one question and this
probably go to
secretary the help but as a
reading through this bill I just
can't seem to figure out from a
legal perspective whether or not
I termination of parental rights
would occur if there were a baby
put in a box and if not you know
why not and if so what would
that process be I it just can't
seem to get my head around that
point madam chair thank you.
Representative excuse me
Barbara B. hill please can you
answer that thank thank you
madam chair
and representative Hochman Vigil
and members of the committee.
The bill in my in my do you it.
Is about giving a parent to sat
with and.
The option to leave a child in a
safe place as described by
Senator guy a goes.
Of so that.
The child to be cared for and
and that in interventions can
occur with respect to the
situation we have an existing
bill already in place that
allows for that and I believe
adequately provides that.
Mechanism for providing that
recourse to a parent to can no
longer take care of their child
so the way the process would
work generally is the child
would be left then a law
enforcement and or.
Our CYFD would determine who the
parent is and proceed as it in
the in our system with filing a
petition for abuse or neglect
and Alton met Lee at the causes
and conditions that led to that
situation we're not remedy that
it would be a petition for
termination of parental rights
and our legal process that takes
place to accomplish that so the
bill in my estimation.
Is really about giving parents
with tiny infringe.
A mechanism whereby they can
leave that child in a safe place
rather than abandoning the child
in a dumpster god for bed or
other places where that child's
life would be put at risk to
that in the bill is good what I
and we currently have
legislation in place to
accomplish that what I don't
think is is good is a lack.
I always think that parent to do
so without
and being and.
anonymous in doing that because
I could foresee that it could be
used by parents of for reasons
that are not designed that the
bill is not designed to to
accomplish so those are those
are my views and and the views
of of folks that I had visited
west about this bill we believe
we need more more resources to
help parents in that in that
situation we have a current bill
in place today and we will
continue to do more outreach and
public education about what's
available to them.
When they do find themselves in
that predicament.
I hope that answers your
question Representative.
Thank you thank you madam chair
thank you I still want to call
you chief justice be health.
Secretary Vigil at I think it's
enough of an answer for me thank
you I'm still trying to wrap my
head around at all thank you
madam chair.
Representative Dixon.
Thank you madam chair
Representative Castellano two
questions what was the at.
Policy Committee that first
heard this bill which committee
was that.
Representative madam chair was
on a health and Human Services
okay thank you madam chair and
representative second question
is regarding in the FIR at the
what was identified as the
recurring appropriation and is
out we.
Efforts still how are those
going to occur with the
appropriation removed.
Thank you Representative enter
one.
Thank you.
Yes all of your question order
center guy goes.
Thank you madam chair and
representative so in the
discussion that we had as far
from moving the.
Appropriations so ceremonials
and I've talked and he will make
sure the money is in on the
Senate side he has no fear that
it's there it was in and out
house bill two is a came over
but he is part authorized
corporation for so we'll still
have the money for the install
of the boxes and also the
education piece I want to tell
you that seventy thousand is a
lot for education but in twenty
thirteen when Representative
chamber amended the state pay
been built at that time it only
allowed for a drop off in person
for hospitals she amended at the
fire station police stations
with an in person.
had all this bill is needed
because this would be a point
that if we continue so the
governor offered some money for
us to put five boxes statewide.
If we did that it still puts
mother liability because it's
not in in person the deposit so
one of the.
Please fire or Hospital
attendees so this gives us an
opportunity that the mother as a
last resort what have some
workplace that child instead of
the dumpster that they used in
this and so we're hoping that
the education for the public ed
which are teaching our kids and
of your high and high school
that this is an option in in
thirteen CYFD was supposed to
take that and they have it you
have to dig through their
computer system to find it so we
want to simplify that for IPR
students would know it firsthand
and recall that this is their
last option we don't want them
matter of fact on the front of
the safe haven box it's got an
eight hundred number thank you
can call and they will walk you
through the process.
They would prefer that if the in
in person hand offers this.
The last.
I hope that helps.
Thank you so much as a grant
based and thank you madam.
Representative Anderson.
Representative okay are very can
you meet your commute computer.
Representative Anderson thank
you madam chair of chair I had
the opportunity to hear this
bill in the health committee and
I'm familiar with it I'm
this evening anxious to move
along as the funding Senator guy
a goes up points out he is
prepared to the manager on the
Senate side I think that that as
we we ponder some of the
legal ramifications of of.
These boxes.
I think boy this is classic.
Read government when a child's
life is quite a somewhat behind
important discussions about
parental rights and anonymous
versus non anonymous I just
think this has to go and I hope
we can move it along this
evening thank you.
Representative Brown.
Thank you madam chair.
I think this is.
Your muted.
There we go madam chair I am
members I think this is a really
important piece of legislation
and I can see of the concerns
that secretary Vigil has
expressed I think she is correct
about them but I would like to
see this move through this
committee to the house floor in
the mean time I believe the
Sanchez could make some
adjustments in the bill that
would satisfy some of our
concerns so that would be my
hope that that this moves
forward thank you madam chair.
Thank you Representative Garcia.
Thank you madam.
Representative Castellano want
to mention on the boxes here
choose the going to be placed on
fire departments rural the so
departments.
A lot of a rural New Mexico all
of the fire departments are all
on then they're all volunteer
the the drop of box in front of
one of those there's nobody
there to attendance is that.
Your consideration.
Senator Gallegos.
So thank you for that question
great question madam chair and
representative so the thirty is
it would be put in a twenty four
hour facility basically it's set
up in their living quarters of
the inside glass is clear
plexiglas shield they would be
able see the child in there
let's see a large systems up
originally we had someone ask
for the daycare centers but that
was amended out and the reason
that was meant to down the state
did not have twenty four hour
care of someone at the
distillery so
we have a lot of our rural areas
that maybe this may not work for
what we want to put me in in the
twenty four hour care facilities
for I do know Mr chair and
representative was they've got
the camera system and a dial up
system that at worst case
scenario would alert of someone
on call but we want to make that
the very last resort we prefer
the twenty four hour facilities
first.
Thank you for a madam chair in
order to put the legislation to
concern me of our rural New
Mexico
from again dropped off in a box
in their body there too well
attended in our it will be done
like a lifeline type of deal of
managing that put you working on
which is good but even that
didn't in rural New Mexico to
get from point a to point B. if
the law allowed hundreds of wild
and I support legislation from
what I saw on TV that one day
one day two of even a growth in
the dump.
That that's that's only of those
can be a real.
Two of Representative question
thanks for bringing this up.
Representative Trujillo.
Thank you madam chair you know
I'm a co sponsor on this piece
of legislation and I have a lot
of conversations with
Representative Castellano about
it before I signed on you know
I'm very strongly liberal and I
read all of the legislation pro
and con about it regarding the
the legislation how the boxes
are made aware there may where
they'll be placed so and so
on and so forth the issue for me
to help me stay on is the the
amended pieces number one but
the other issue is it gives
parents an option that they
don't have now and I understand
very completely that the that
the the secretary has strong
concerns about liability is that
all of those other issues but
right now it gives young women
an option that they don't have
and that's why supported madam
chair.
Thank you.
Representative Ezzell.
Thank you very much.
I too am in favor of this but I
understand the concerns that.
The chief justice secretary I'm
sorry did bring because there
could be an era.
Retaliation associated with this
particular bill and whenever the
another Eric might not be aware
of what is happening to their
child.
Of.
That gives me great concern but
in essence I do support this but
there are still concerns thank
you madam chair.
Okay everybody else's hand up
for questions was through the
committee.
Madam chair I would move a do
pass on house bill one fifty
seven as twice amended second.
We have a motion and a second is
there any opposition to that
motion.
Hello do passed as amended thank
you very much.
To the next thank you madam
chair thank you.
and what I have in front of me
is house bill sixty six.
Is it my understanding bill was
supposed to be tabled or tell me
what's going on.
Madam chair I was not able to
contact Representative Chatfield
about this bill however it's
just a straight appropriation.
And there is our meeting special
money of the in house bill two
already.
Okay Representative builder
money in the budget already so
what he wanted to.
He's working on here.
Madam chair I'm a co sponsor.
Phones off Representative
Chatfield if you unplug them
from the computer it we probably
get you unmuted.
Okay he shaking his head Madam
chair is going to representative
Armstrong us billion.
Thank you madam chair I'm a co
sponsor with the Representative
Chatfield and the money's in the
budget like you said and we we
can table this bill.
The motion representative
Armstrong I move to table madam
chair house bill sixty six.
Representative Anderson any
opposition to that tabling
motion saying none the bill has
been tabled thank you very much.
The next one is house bill what
I've gotten from his house bill
one twenty eight.
Representative you know.
Okay madam chair I think
Representative night we're
should be presenting this.
This is the here.
I don't see it Madam.
Representative Ezzell go ahead
madam chair our house bill one
twenty eight is asking for an
appropriation of course they
infrastructure projects for
certain portion of the US.
Three eighty leaving Rossell
going the Texas state line.
Waiting room that wants to talk
about this Representative small.
the commissioner okay let me let
me talk a little bit about this.
This bill is right is requesting
forty six million dollars is
appropriated been in preparation
contingency fund DOT for
expenditure in twenty twenty
three to twenty twenty five.
We do have.
The representative Nibert but we
do have money in house bill two
currently.
For road projects.
But we do not have a specific
set aside I don't believe for
this project.
Thank you are you double check
that or do I need to look it up.
Small I don't think this project
was listed in the majority.
Projects.
That's correct Madam okay.
Madam chair yes R. I. to sponsor
and just wanted to add that we
have been working diligently on
this there's a companion bill in
the Senate Kerry by Senator
Pirtle and in the our our
process
the the DOT has identified this
as a.
Priority for the district hello.
Ciation and I believe that of
that is where we are this
evening so I I'm not here nor I
do I believe Representative is
our neighbor is necessarily
feeling as though we're going to
get a do pass and be gone but
none the less we feel that this
is a vitally important our
transportation infrastructure
project in southeast New Mexico
and DOT has recognized it and I
believe we're in the
process of moving forward after
a couple of.
Large district to projects are
completed or or move more
towards completion but I believe
that the the funding is already
in place district to to do some
of the very preliminary work on
this great in US thank you.
Madam chair I might add you're
going to do something a little
different on this road whenever
we do get the money to do it it
will be considered eight two
three line highway is that
correct.
highway and the.
When the tourism is behind it as
well thank you.
Okay do we have anybody in the
waiting room that wants to make
Madam is DOT in the waiting
room.
Your retirement do we have
anybody DOT I don't see any
hands then okay so what would be
the appropriate action on this
bill that is that it would be
tabled because it's already it
sounds to me based on what the
Legisla- members of staff is
that this is and that district
budget already and it's been
identified as a priority.
Because the only thing we would
do with it district the
appropriation which is the
entire section one so maybe we.
We're not going to just send a
bill out with the title in it
so.
The.
Much as we like to we can't do
that
So is there any question about
what we need to table this bill.
You have any concerns.
Okay Representative small madam
chair I move to table house bill
one twenty eight.
Okay.
Second
second.
Okay we have a motion and a
second.
Yes Representative Nyberg
Knowledge share we table the
bill because it's got an
appropriation of forty six
million dollars and it but in
your your highway district
there's funding that's already
set in their through our budget
process so there's there
wouldn't be a reason to send
this bill forward because it's
already and are you guys in
district four I'm not sure what
your and
your district to go in the
district two budget this will be
already set aside you there our
regional transportation
infrastructure plan so we were
not going to stand this bill for
it since it's already inside the
budget for that districts.
We have a proper motion a proper
second is there any opposition
to the tabling motion.
They know the bill has been
tabled so next thank you madam
chair thank you all right let's
go to
House bill ninety four
Representative Hochman Vigil
thank you very much madam chair
US house bill ninety four is the
judicial
The judicial prevalent of the
magistrate judge bill that I
brought a couple days ago madam
chair it's for appropriation and
fusion of of funds into their
retirement I also makes
adjustment of their credit hours
for retirement which is why we
need to preserve the language in
this bill madam chair but I
would like to strip out the
amendment as there is some money
and house bill two for this
purpose at this time there might
be additional monies added on
the Senate side but we do know
that there is money in it right
now just not at that amount.
Okay reduce your amendment.
I'm madam chair hello it's
freezing on me.
I think it's section three is
the appropriation section I just
want to strike.
No we're gonna look at page one
we're gonna start with whining
forty.
Making appropriation.
And then it will turn to page.
Well.
Section right on page nine.
Distracted tired a of section
three.
So amendment has been brought
forth we have a second.
Second.
Representative Dixon.
All right let's go back on the
bill is there any questions for
Representative Hochman Vigil
fail.
The committee.
Madam chair I would move a do
pass on house bill ninety four
as amended.
Second in.
Okay we have a proper motion
proper second reduce passes
amended it is there any
opposition to that motion right
now the bill has passed thank
you as amended thank you the
last bill on here Representative
Trujillo.
House bill one fifty five.
Thank you madam thank you madam
chair this bill is one that I
have asked to table.
Okay.
Ocean madam chair I move to
table this bill.
We have a motion and a second to
table Syrian opposition to that
motion saying the bill has been
tabled.
All right bill that we got
anything else that we need to
table.
The madam chair not before us
now not that has been scheduled
okay.
This bill the committee on a
little bit on where we're at
we're we're yes we're getting
these bills dribbling in.
So my my intention is is and
what we would typically do is
our chief of staff goes down and
talks to the Sanchez explains
what our process is and a lot of
times the bills are tabled at
the request of the sponsor
that's why we just roll through
them.
But it was not my intention to
pull the full committee together
we've got a couple of bills just
dribbled in you know I want to
make sure that we've got you
know pretty good agenda before
we pull everybody and.
So we don't have a meeting
tomorrow because we don't have
very many kids and
it looks like we'll probably.
It is great.
We did created a.
Schedule for tomorrow.
Okay the bills on what Senator
should be able as we go.
Okay so if we could get all
those get into may and then
we'll know exactly how many are
going to be tabled.
But the point is if we've got
twelve built an eleven are going
to be tabled give me a break you
know we need to have we don't
have a little bit more on the
agenda here our committee dinner
is also on Thursday.
I think that's supposed to start
at five thirty so I'm gonna make
sure that the speaker and
everybody knows that five thirty
to seven thirty if we need to
take a break and and your
relates to go do that.
And my understanding if you
could bill give us an update on
where we're at with junior.
Madam chair we
have been improving the bill
today not the bills are requests
with the council service I think
we're ready to go at this point
and what state senators passed
there are the to your real.
Then we will be able to add
those items to the to that bill.
And move on.
Bill tells me is that we didn't
have very many folks that didn't
do it right and I was one of the
we didn't do it right so you can
then and maybe fill up my form
for.
So we got that straightened out
that everybody else lines to
build it all out right so we're
we're good to go on our junior
we didn't have to have a hearing
on it staff was able to take
care of all those questions that
anybody had.
So we'll be taken that up too
soon and I want to thank you for
good meeting today and we'll see
you all tomorrow thank you.
So.
