Representative but the last
year.
Here.
Your.
Representative.
Representative.
Here.
I.
Here chair.
Here.
Okay we have a quorum members
we're going to we have a number
of exciting important things
here today especially focused on
education it's great to see
Terrel meadow terror Lara here
we're gonna first go back and
ask Representative Trujillo
we're on house bill three eighty
one is amended.
and Kate what's the staff.
To pass out of the amendments
for house bill three eighty one
members we had a conversation
about this yesterday
And.
Were.
Thank you good to see you so
Were yeah we're gonna go to hell
why the house bill three eighty
one members this will remove the
one million dollars
appropriation that was put on in
the house Education Committee
Also it strikes on the first
page here line fourteen making
appropriation.
And it makes it insures that
this is subject to
appropriations so Senator
practice can we have a motion
for House Appropriations and
finance committee amendment
number one.
Okay it's been moved by
Representative brown second by
Representative Chatfield members
is there any discussion on this
amendment.
And of course the thanks to all
staff and also thinks that Mr
merry for catching this at the
end of yesterday Representative
I don't think that we have to go
through anything else I think we
know that this is important are
there any at first let me is
there any
Opposition to adopting House
Appropriations finance committee
member number one.
Saying
That's been adopted.
Is there any discussion on house
bill three eighty one as
amended.
And I will go for a motion
Representative Jeff.
Okay it's been moved do passed
by Representative Chatfield
second by Representative Dixon
is there any opposition to that
motion.
Saying on.
Thank you for your help that was
yes state and one thirty four
that's another let's just keep
it going.
Okay
Thank you so members that brings
us to house bill one night we're
going to have house bill one
ninety nine and house bill one
thirty again we're really
appreciate having chair a medal
here members we're going to take
our time going through these two
bills and there's going to be
some amendments that we talk
about also members we're gonna
make sure that there's ample
time for members of the public
to
To participate here.
We're very pleased to have our
own Representative Baca.
Here and Representative whenever
you're ready let's go we'll go
to you for explanation of house
bill one ninety nine.
Thank you Mr chairman thank you
committee
I'm actually honor to be here
with my co sponsor and chair of
education Representative
Hernandez Romero and our expert
witness among with other folks
in the Tallahassee is Dr Gwen
Perea Warniment someone of Mr
chairman and committee I'm gonna
get just a quick overview about
what house bill one ninety nine
does
and then as far as for some of
the details regarding questions
about the
As far as some of the other
components of that will do this
so Mr Chairman before I get
started we actually have an
amendment to house bill one
ninety nine I believe it is
being.
Passed out to you
To the committee.
Getting that one.
There should bring a person.
The.
I will read it two to five
number to make sure we're on the
right one.
Okay Representative Baca do you
have a copy of the amount I
don't Mr chairman I don't have
the the the.
Can you answer the three to five
number Mr Chairman is.
Your.
Is to to I.
Five zero eight point one two
two five five zero eight point
one.
Okay and can you
Can we move this ammendment
discussion Cates been moved by
Representative Sanchez second by
Representative thank you and
they look Cruz okay
Representative if you could take
us through this amendment and
also please go free any
additional comment on the
amendment thank you Mr chairman
thank you committee
The this ammendment really just
reduces the
that risk index
from a point two zero three five
two point zero three three okay
that is actually in line with
the LFC recommendations for the
at risk in this bill that had we
had
Initially put it as a point zero
three five at risk index factor
we're actually gonna re building
reducing that two point zero
three three factor.
Thank thank you very much
Representative Baca director
chairman remit of anything that
you want to add to that no Mr.
Representative Parke explained
it well okay thank you very much
okay so
And will probably we might ask
Mr Philly if I come up.
Yes so and members
As we.
Will also be proposing an
amendment amendment I've shared
with you Representative Baca
chairman role metal
our it is the first part of the
amendment is the same going from
the point three five to the
point three three.
So
In order to maybe discuss these
so we let me raise the in order
so we can discuss and I think
we're going to move the
amendment now read that.
It's point two two five.
Eight three eight.
Point to.
This is essentially the longer
the more substantive and.
can we have a motion to discuss
that Mr chair are we going to
approve the first on first and
then look at the second
amendment we're gonna look at
them both at the same time I
think in order to make sure that
we're on this thank you
Representative sciences I think
in order to make sure that we're
on the same page I'd like to
move at the same time but we'll
take approval one by one.
I move for this rate the movie.
We're not going to ask for a
we're thank you Representative
through we're we're moving them
for discussion in order to be
able to discuss with the
committee and discuss with the
public sort of what what the
committee is looking at.
So so we're not going to we're.
Is there a second for discussion
okay it's been second by
Representative electors thank
you thank you Representative
sciences so members the first
part of amendment two point two
two five eight three eight point
two is the same there are some
additional pieces which we'll
discuss as we go through this
later and it's a I think the
point is taken that adopting
both of these without any
changes would sort of be
implicated but it's just to say
that we're on the same page
entirely with the the first part
which is.
On page two line fifteen
striking point three I am going
to point three three so slightly
lowering the at risk index with
that is there any can I ask for
a motion on how some of
appropriation of finance
committee amendment number one
point two two five five zero
eight point one have asked for a
motion to adopt that amendment.
Okay as we move I represent the
second by Representative Herndon
okay is there any any more
discussion on house
appropriations and finance
committee amendment one
researcher so I'm asked the.
I see we have to amendments
And we usually ask if different
here Fendi.
What we're Representative
Sweetser we're gonna get to that
they got the second amendment
okay but any other questions
Representative Brown.
Mr Chairman just as a matter of
clarification when we this for
people on the webcast when we
started talking about the
proposed change the decimal
point was I think
mispronounces should be zero
we're going from zero point
three five to zero point three
three I thought I heard point
zero three three a couple times
we just make sure everybody
listening knows thank you
Representative we always
appreciate your attention to
detail okay so going from point
zero three five to point.
Point three five seven point
three five to point three three
we have a motion and a second
for the amendment is there any
opposition to adopting a house
appropriations and finance.
Kate singing and.
Have amended the.
Okay back to the bill
Representative Baca
Representative Romero director
Kate do you want to take us
through any other parts of the
bill now yeah yeah thank you Mr
chairman thank you Canadian I'm
gonna give just as far as really
the goal of this bill of house
bill one night is that this is
the state equalization guarantee
bill basically this is how
schools are funded okay the
purpose of this bill is really
to identify and address three
areas of need with our schools.
The first as the amendment
addresses is the at risk index
which would be of additional
funds to help address as far as
of you know the students of a
number of different areas
the as we've talked about
previously in some of our other
discussions but also students
that may be in need of
intervention it's not just the
of folks that have been
addressed before.
The second part of the bill
which I'm really excited about
is the fine arts factor which
would actually allow and bring
more money for the fine arts to
our school districts hi
as you know when the
we had a downturn.
Some of the first programs to be
cut with our finance arts
program so this house bill one
eighty nine one ninety nine
would actually increase the
factor up there and have
additional monies about four
million dollars that'll be going
out to the school site and the
third area is the principal
responsibility factor and the
primary this is leadership
matters and we understand that
the challenges of leadership
this this
this area would actually address
both the principal and other
administrators that are schools
that are having the additional
duties that are kind of brought
before them so those are the
three areas at this bill
Attempts to address alternative
much of co sponsor of
Representative Romero if he has
any a dip the additional
comments.
I thank you Mr chairman and
thank you committee so
Representative boxes Baca had
captured it well
I think as far as a fine arts
pieces having a broader more
holistic education for students
making that available to all
students around our state is
critically important as far as
the principal.
Factor we've experienced
compaction when we've gone
through in given educators
throughout the tears raises we
have an what we've been
experiencing it is a lot of
districts with compaction we
have an issue not only
recruiting and retaining our
educators which we've been
trying to solve but also
recruiting retaining our
principles our leadership at the
school because when we pass
policy here at the state level
it's really those school
principals the school assistant
principals that are implementing
utilizing the tools that we're
giving them to fit the needs of
their particular school within
their particular districts so we
think that's critically
important that we do that for
our principal population as well
but with that Mr chair.
I think we can professions thank
you very much Representative
Baca terremoto let's go to the
audience is there anybody who
wishes to give comment on house
bill one ninety nine.
Mr rounds.
Okay yes please district I think
right there for you okay yes Sir
Mr chairman members of the
committee on stand rounds on the
executive director of the state
superintendents association and
the college of education leaders
Representative every principal
every special ed director anyone
who doesn't administrative work
in New Mexico we appreciate this
bill we support this bill and
the amendments that you have
before you first of all the at
risk we understand if you try to
modulate at risk what impact
that has on our schools we hope
you will continue measuring the
impact of that as we go through
time we may come back later talk
about more tests secondly in
fine arts this is something we
started years ago Mr chairman
you know especially on this and
we never got to the finish line
and so we're now recognizing
that this has a huge opportunity
for local school districts to
continue moving forward with
finance programs finally here
the ministry of indexing is a
critical point Mr Chairman
indicated the issues we have as
we try to recruited new
administrators and retain
existing ones for finding less
and less incentive for them to
do that job.
Realise with that when you leave
the classroom and you go to an
assistant principalship as an
example you go from the golden
life of being loved by your
friends two black to the dark
side we often say.
And I'd say that flippantly but
what I do tell you is you bring
a whole series of issues that
now they're confronted with a
very hard to handle we're having
a harder and harder tend to get
folks to make that commitment
what's being proposed here is an
excellent step Mr chairman
moving that forward we thank you
and we support thank you thank
you very much Mr rounds.
yes.
These.
Mr chair members of the
committee my name is Matt Paul
with public charter schools of
New Mexico we support the bill
that's before you today and
thank the sponsors for the work
a lot of what I could say is
just reiterating what Mr rounds
just said but I will spend just
an extra additional enrollment
on the responsibility factor our
school principals are like the
hinge point of all K. twelve
education they hear from parents
they hear from kids they hear
from teachers they hear from
district administrators and they
get they bear the brunt of many
of the the new mandates that
come from the legislature I
think it is right to continue to
incentivize making that a place
people want to be in their
professional career and stay in
their professional career so we
appreciate that particularly in
this bill thank you thank you
very much.
Mr chair members of the
committee in and out of one of
the executive director New
Mexico kids can't and we stand
in strong support of this bill
particularly increasing the at
risk index no one know that we
would have as we would love in
the interim to have further
discussions about how we might
be fine the way that we
calculate that risk index and
move towards a school based at
risk index as opposed to a
district based one thank you
great thank you very much.
Okay anybody else
in person seeing none let's
we'll go look online.
Anybody there either.
Okay
Great so committee I think
let's go if there's any
questions on house bill one
ninety nine and then we're going
to take a House Appropriations
finance committee amendment
number two.
Any so we we have that we change
the at risk index.
I want to see if there's any
questions on.
The bill as is and then we'll
discuss house appropriation.
Correct correct Representative
Pettigrew Mr chair you open.
If I understand correctly you
open both of them into for
discussion so we can't deal with
the bill until the second
amendment is done.
With thank you for that.
Okay then let's we'll discuss
the second amendment we're gonna
ask Mr Saly to come up.
And members this amendment is
it duplicates again the first
part of this.
From point three five going to
point three three for the at
risk which is.
Which is already been
accomplished if this is adopted
it would merely do the same
thing twice and so it's not
really an conflict it just does
the same thing twice will ask Mr
so we to explain the rest of
this ammendment and then we'll
sort of take that up in
conversation.
Thank you Mr chairman and just
so the committee knows the
amendment will change the
weighting factor for at risk is
to align what you funded and
house bill two that's the the
purpose behind that the
the second part is
another approach at the
responsibility factor for
principals and assistant
principals the bill currently as
it sits before you raise is that
by point I for each of those
factors the amendment proposes
to cut that in half for the
across the board raises and then
ties the other half of the
increase to the family income
index so that you and get
additional minimum pay bumps for
principal serving at a high
poverty schools and smaller
amount of bumps on top of the
across the board for for.
as it's delineated through the
family income index with that Mr
chairman I'd be happy to answer
your questions great thank you
very much Mr Saly wrecking
member Armstrong admits Mr
chairman if I may because of
Representative Sweetser had
mentioned of us if the amendment
survives only at absolute it
will go to you know is there is
this ammendment from Mr chairman
of Bach.
Thank you Mr chairman thank you
committee I do appreciate the
the language in here but the
amendment the second amendment
is unfriendly.
And is there anything else you'd
like to say in response that
before we go to.
Sessions I mean I mean Mr
chairman I think the reason
there are several reasons why
this is on friendly primarily
because we're trying to address
compaction among all schools in
turnover amongst all schools not
just some schools like the
proposed amendment I think the
other thing is that it's tied to
the
The family income index which is
a pilot.
in the pilot had certain
constraints on it that did not
allow for the school districts
to get the money you where they
needed it to address their
students needs so we're trying
money in this proposed
amendments to a pilot project
which we're currently trying to
study to see if this may be a
better way of targeting funds to
particular schools thank thank
you very much chairman thank
representative Baca ranking
member Armstrong please thank
you Mr chairman and and thank
you for all the amendments
apparently but
I have a really simple question
on the second amendment.
How many schools are low low
poverty considered of low
poverty and.
Are there both of these this is
the final of both of these
amendments in the budget.
Mr chair Representative
Armstrong yes both of the
current bills principal
responsibility factor and the
amendment before you're both
funded and house bill two
the number of schools the
schools are actually ranked
separate from the family income
index program fund by an actual
ranking of their levels of
poverty so it's just a ranking
system and that would be tied to
the responsibility factor.
So the school act that is ranked
with eighty percent of their
students
that are high poverty that
factor would kick and and a
little bit higher level than a
school that has twenty percent
on the income ranking.
Thank you Mr chairman thank you
Charles for that.
Can I ask why you would want to
do that what what is your
thinking behind them your madam
chair Representative Armstrong
but what we've seen through out
the years including with
discussions with the Martinez
Yazzie is that school leadership
really matters and school
leadership at really challenging
schools can matter even more to
getting better student outcomes
and this is the the proposal is
to start moving in a direction
to help incentivize your best
leisure to be your most
challenging schools.
Thank you Mr chairman and and
thank you for that
And when what do you consider
some of our best leaders what's
the definition of some of our
best leaders.
To the.
I mean there's if it's hard for
me to simply say definition of
best leaders but it's not in and
of itself going to ensure that
the best leaders are assigned to
the schools but it does start to
steer resources towards giving
those schools the additional
resources to hire those
particular school leaders at the
discretion of the local school
district.
Thank you Mr chairman and and
thank you Charles for that you
know I I I think probably the
whole state every school is high
poverty I don't I personally
don't care for that just because
Mr chairman I think it.
I'm levels the playing field a
little bit and you know I'd
rather see the whole have to see
it all dispersed personally in
rural New Mexico frontier New
Mexico we try to grow our own.
And that doesn't necessarily
mean it's.
They will stay because it's a
higher paying job but I
appreciate you all all the
travel all of you for
addressing.
That's all Mr chairman thank you
very much.
Additional Representative
please.
Thanks for the explanation
because I wasn't sure exactly
why I have a school my district
where people Administration is
eight and that's cool is it
not function well at all it has
a for several.
I'm not sure about the rest but
I do believe we need this to get
good people into those schools
to state they need incentives
so I do.
that is the only thing I I this
is so critical to get the right
people in the do need incentives
because there are schools where
not only the administration
believes the teachers we because
it's such a hard school to teach
and I started it when that
fourteen teachers left in the
broadest I was brand new and it
became an we're only teachers
and by the end by the time I
left there was only like five or
six still there because it's
such a hard school so incentives
like this for not only
principles but I think Senator
teachers would make a difference
to get them to stay at the
school because.
will have no chance it's point
there there and there they live
in a community that it's really
difficult to get out of there
and their success is very low so
this is very important thank you
for thank you Representative
setting on it Representative
Chatfield and Representative
Lujan the roofs of Herndon.
So.
I've got a problem with the suit
with this amendment act to from
the the first problem being that
We started out dealing with the
school at risk index and we wind
up giving a raise to the super
to the principle I.
If I could just clarify their
perception Representative
Chatfield Representative Baca
Representative Romero included
in the at risk index is also the
principal accountability factors
so that in the underlying bill
also the raises principles.
Thank you Mr chairman of and
thanks for the question
Representative Chatfield yeah
and in the house bill one ninety
nine as it was presented for you
there is a we're principal
responsibility factor so that is
included in our bill in the in
the second amendment it actually
as additional weight which was
not originally in our bill for
two purpose was working at
lowincome or R. or school so our
bill does address that the
second amendment actually
goes above and beyond that and
Mr Chairman representative well
that that could it leaves
question is what is defined as
hi I need a high roof you know
though poverty so those are
those are things that Mr
chairman and representative I
think are somewhat it may on the
you may not have a level playing
field with the principal salary
Mr chair in a way that was not
foreseen in the original bill is
that correct Mr Chairman
representative toppled that is
correct Mr chair you know I
spent my good breakfast time to
get up and go to the Education
Committee review this bill and
thought it was a good bill voted
for passed out and then it comes
to this committee and it looks
different whenever it.
Comes up for a vote to pass out
and so that I'd rather look the
same as it did.
Mr thank you very much
Representative Chatfield
Representative Lujan and
Representative Herndon the
representative here
Representative Lujan please
thank you Mr chair
Thank you for the the bill
coming for us and it's going to
so we're on the amendment Mr
chair yes.
Amendment house appropriations
and finance committee member
number two right thank you so
what in this bill is in this
ammendment excuse me Sanchez.
Because there's a lot of the
amendments here
are you.
Is that the entire.
The first.
And then the rest of this is
unfriendly are there any parts
of this that are amenable to
search of.
Mr thank you Mr chairman and
thank you Representative Lujan
the first part of the bill
actually is in line with our
bill and again that comes from
the belly of the State
recommendation I I also Mr
chairman and Representative
Lujan
during the interim process
through the L. E. S. C..
These matters were considered as
we begin to study this and I do
want to say of Mr Chairman
representative Lujan that this
is part of the L. E. S. C.
endorsed legislation house bill
one in the one ninety nine as
was there of these amendments
the in the to to.
Five eight three eight point two
were were additional thousand of
kind of go beyond the initial or
original intent of the bill and
To okay thank you Mr
Because we are looking.
Out of these members that are
directly I mean the first part
of it is where you get from
point.
To.
Ten all with the SCG is that
correct Mr chair.
Thank you Mr chairman and thank
you Representative all all this
whole bill is about the funding
for me it is all about the SCG
and it right through the
providers in your
Mr Chairman representative Lujan
it was that in some ways it
actually looking lower factor
for the principles if you if you
kind of read through it as far
as well so it is for that reason
Representative Lujan I I do
appreciate the intent that I did
as I looked over I do appreciate
because I think that we we need
to look about this but rather
than make.
The members like this Mr
Chairman representative I do
think through the much
legislative education study
committee that may be something
that would be expanded at a
greater in depth level so Mr
Chairman representative and Mr
chairman and Representative
Lujan I think the the real
problem is that we're gonna try
increasing factors for
principals to a pilot project
which we are still we just heard
a bill in house education two
days ago to further refine that
pilot project and extend the
date so we'd be time our
principles to a big question
mark whether it works.
Currently and I think that's
where we need time to study the
differential issue yes family
income index in order before we
start going into differentials
thank you Sir appreciate that
response and and I hear you and
you know as a as a that is a
with the advisory to L. E. S. C.
during the interim impeded to
all this so my question is with
that with that noted what is
the.
What would be the the the
dollars a difference of by
implementing I guess because the
Charles would be that the
difference between implementing
that the current bill or the
image as opposed to the
amendment excuse me.
Mr chair representative for the
principal responsibility factor
which is outside of the the
money goes in.
It's not part of the funding
formula it's just part of like
the base minimum.
So both bills increase the
funding for the increasing
principle salaries minimum
salaries by little over nine
million dollars both of these.
Would fund.
The bill that you have before
you would fund that an across
the board way everybody would
get equal amount regardless of
what kind of school they're
teaching.
The LFC have been studying the
same issue through a
subcommittee that's had for the
past two years
and it recommended time all of
the proposed increase to the
responsibility factor to the
family income index not to the
program the to the that index
calculation the proposal you
have before you split the
difference says everybody gets a
certain pay bump and then for
payment on top of that it would
be dependent on.
Mr chair and thank you Charles
for that explanation that that
clarified what's going on for me
here so that nine million
dollars using fifty percent of
it now would be a cut and
everybody across the board we
get to the four point five and
then four point five would be
divided with those districts are
the districts are they its per
screen Mr chair per school and
how many of the how many schools
with that to I think it was
already asked but I I'm just
clarifying thank every school in
the state Mr Chairman
representative has a family and
income index score.
And so that that amount of the
bonus.
Mr chair and and trust thank you
so how does that tie in with our
title one schools is it is it
the same reference Mr chair.
Term chairman Representative is
actually the family income index
itself is more precise than the
calculation.
PED is actually time that two
families actual income.
Using Community Survey data or
other.
Thank you Mr I appreciate that
so how many so this to be
specifically a bump in and to
the principal's salary that's
correct thank you thank you Mr
chair thank you trial so then
what what what are the benefits
are going to our title one
schools at this time due to the
principles are or staff or get
any kind of cell remote because
our title one schools chair Mr
Chairman representative that's a
separate.
averaged.
This proposal is specific.
Thank Santa Fe is an example of
the.
The school principal on the
south side we get.
Thank you Mr rose challenge.
Thank you thank you Mr chair
thank you Charles I mean I I
really do appreciate that and
the thought and and all the work
that we did during the LFC
sub committee but
I'm just hearing two different
you two different versions are
I'm so contemplating and how I
will vote on this to be quite
honest with you Mr chair and
Sanchez and it's just think
that.
I understand both sides of this
argument so this is it this is a
little difficult for me
but because I think what's
weighing on me is that we do
have a pilot project in place
we're studying this
and in the the work is
continuing so I.
I just I think I would have more
questions but I'm gonna be stuck
on this the other question I go
to visit this ammendment we get
to
eleven level three licensure
track for teachers what is
different in the amendment that
and what is in the bill
the provision right now the
principal salaries are linked
every time you're raising the
minimum salaries for a level
three teachers your boosting
principal salaries as well what
we found is that it's still not
enough of the separation because
principals tend to work on a a
ten sometimes eleven month
contract with teachers work on a
nine month contract so from a
daily basis you know you're
you're not better off
financially sometimes by moving
up from being a teacher leader
to a school leader.
Understood I remember this of
any of the family index pilot
program is where the state is
using this family income index
to determine how much money
should go directly to a school
for a certain set of services.
But the family income index
itself can be used for.
Thank you Mr chair thank you
Charles for that explanation I'm
going to continue to read a
little bit more into this Mr
chair thank you for the time
thank you very much
Representative Lujan great
questions we're gonna go to
Representative Herndon
Representative Garrett
Representative Trujillo thank
you Mr.
Thank you Mr chair of and Mr
chair panelists.
My question to you is
With respect to determining an
additional funds for the
principal as we've been talking
about is is is that historical
we've done that the principles
bump would be determined on the
income of the school.
What other options are.
Starkly schools are all of the.
very rarely.
Higher than the minimum salary
for a principle of liquid
Mr chair members of the panel.
Of the.
I I agree that the the principal
should get additional money but
I I guess I'm really confused
about why you would tie it to
the family income of the school
that they're going to thank you
Representative Kernan perhaps
that and we also have Mister Liu
director and hold what we're
gonna this is an important piece
we might ask for maybe a summary
of the family income index and I
know we have Mister Groginsky in
here as well.
Yes Representative in.
If you all out all over we will
ask Mister Liu and vote for
chairman and director anything
to add.
Sort of how why the family
income index is being proposed
as a way to understand which
schools or perhaps higher
poverty schools Mr Liu and turn
the microphone your yeah please.
And thank you Mr chairman
members of the committee so the
family income index.
Sorry I'm sorry go ahead.
Sam Mr Chairman representative
the family income index is.
Pretty new in the sense that
it's helping us identify each
individual school.
Poverty level and.
Before with title one in the at
risk index you could only look
at the poverty level of it
districts by being able to tie
it to the school level you now
have the ability to potentially
target resources on a school by
school basis which has been a
complaint by the plaintiffs in
the Martinez Yazzie lawsuit that
even though you're increasing at
risk funding there's no
guarantee that that at risk
funding is being directed to the
schools that are hi I just need
to have the most at risk
students including low income
students so this is a
potentially you could direct
funding to those school
districts by establishing
differentiated minimums for the
parents will pay levels I hope
that answers your question Mr
chair.
Mr chair and and.
Representative thank you that
does explain to me how you
determine the schools I guess my
question Mr chair representative
was why we would base the
principles additional bump on
the on the basis of the school
income and if I understand you
correctly if that range of.
Family income was say ten
thousand dollars then you go to
base the principles Bob based
upon ten thousand dollars based
upon some of them maybe I'm
misunderstanding what you're
saying.
Mr chair representative so.
The index is higher for a higher
poverty schools so if the
family's income was very low.
In the principles minimum salary
would be higher okay that makes
sense thank you thank you Mr
chair of.
Visit our I understand that now
I I I two other quick questions
so we have these two amendments
and one is unfriendly by the
sponsors of the bill one is from
the Lake who's present and for
the men thank you Representative
Herndon the committee is
bringing those and this is in
consultation and then this are
in discussion with her role
metal Representative Baca I
guess I'm I'm bringing them
forward for discussion purposes
and then one last question Mr
chair.
panelists so when we had house
Bill to that with the five
percent bump for teachers and
now we're looking at about four
or four other principles and all
of those are really good but I
we've never had this discussion
I'm just asking why what about
the other people the janitors
the school maintenance people
the cafeteria workers I haven't
heard how we ever bump in their
salary and they're working to.
For jobs that's my question Mr
chair representative on.
Are we get the and.
And then this is one of the few
targeted increases above that
because of the reasons that the
Sanchez talked about all of the
way.
Around the importance of school
leadership.
Make sure that pay levels are.
Challenging position so that we
can recruit.
Thank you thank you very much
Representative for new great
questions we're going to go
next.
And it just before of course if
there's anything at the offer in
response Chairman remember
Representative Baca director
please don't hesitate to do that
Representative your thank you Mr
chair I have a couple questions
about people entering the
principalship I know a lot of
teachers national board
certified teachers tremendous
teachers when I was an
instructional coach at a school
that had.
Eight five certified staff only
two considered becoming
principles and the reason was
that there was such a little
difference between being a
teacher being a principal would
you say that to the bill in its
original form with the amended
point three three
Percent at risk would you say
that that addresses some of the
concerns of people considering
to enter or not enter
administrative roles.
First I would thank you Mr
chairman thank you
Representative here I think we
did
It is intends to do is to
address two things one the
compaction issue because as we
as we know and again I support
the increased teacher pay we had
teachers that work and working
nine months of the year making
seventy thousand and we had
principals working two hundred
forty five days a year making
seventy five thousand so part of
the thought behind this would
potentially would create the
compaction issues that occur
because of the of the distal
teacher pay the second Mr
Chairman representative there.
Is a responsibility and that is
recognizing that a school
leader.
has additional duties that have
you have me the job and also the
pool two of the pool of
applicants so we look for those
jobs it's made it much smaller
as a as a person who's recruited
both teachers and principals for
twenty years I can tell you that
the number of applicants for
principles is greatly reduced so
this madam chair Mr chairman and
madam our by triggers is really
to address both of those
compaction issues and also try
to address the the additional
responsibilities of the school
year.
Thank you very much and Mister
chair I understand that about
two thirds of our
superintendents actually turned
over in the last twelve months
so I think building the pool
excellent attracting the best
teachers to become principles
guess what I said to be
principal some of the students
were the best teachers they just
know how hard it was to work in
the classroom and they thought
they assume that being a
principal with easier which I
would say it's not so thank you
for answering that question and
and I just want to say one other
thing Mr chair people sometimes.
Looking at the poverty index is
one way of looking at things but
I think of places like la Cueva
where there was so many
overdoses with heroin it's like
that kind of childhood trauma
that principles deal with well
it seems more obvious at a
school with poverty there's
tremendous problems that some of
our highest social economic
places and I think it's
important to realize that so I
do support the bill with the
first amendment because I feel
right now we have to build the
overall pool of principles but
thank you everybody for the
discussion it's really important
thank you Mr chair thank you
very much Representative Garrett
Representative Trujillo.
Thank you Mr thank you gentlemen
for.
I'm looking at the second
amendment page two.
And the the I guess it's a new
section level three licensure
track for teachers is that a new
section.
I'm.
I guess I want an explanation
about what.
This means in terms of comparing
it to the existing level three.
Licensure track.
Thank you Mr chairman actually
turned over to and Senator okay
think I'm gonna turn the to
trials to two of explain why
that may be part of the second
amendment.
This is the mechanism to have
half of the
responsibility factor be tied to
the family income index score.
But Mr.
Chairman and
And Mr slowly section C..
Says that.
The minimum salary for a level
it three a teacher is seventy
thousand isn't that what it is
now.
Mr Chairman representative yes
and then the principal
responsibility factors piggy
back off of that minimum salary
for what's the minimum principal
salary and then this provision
on page three would be in
addition to that principle
responsibility factor the other
part of the the pay increase
would be tied to the family.
Solar only together.
Why is it then include but why
does the car via.
State provided that teachers and
then extended learning time
program or K. five plus
programs.
Confused I guess why they won't
get that if they're not in the
extended day Mr Chairman
Representative Trujillo that's
current law
that Mr chairman of
Representative Trujillo.
Way to reach the amendment is
that what it's doing is amending
current law current statutes so
beginning on page two section
four that's what our current
statutes says it's it's it's
currently leads that we have
available to create a licensed
teacher and then the way that
principles actually are funded
is based off of where those
level three educators are at so
what the amendment proposes to
do is then take from right there
where level three educators are
and amended by doing the things
that trials is describing by
proposing to change it with the
responsibility factor that's
attached to the family income
index so it it that's why
current statutes actually part
of the amendment.
Mr chair it I.
I think you should just leave it
alone right now with all due
respect thank you Mr chairman
thank you very much
Representative Trujillo we're
gonna go to Representative Dixon
and Representative Pettigrew
then I have some questions
Representative.
Thank you Mr chair and
Representative Baca.
Michael.
My apologies should they be
exclusively on the amendment.
So.
Mr solely.
The new the proposed.
Percentages for the principal
responsibility I'm interested
in.
what do we have
typical dollar figures that
would be associated I see in the
FY are we're given a range to
look at
Based on the percentage
increases in the bill.
And.
What I'm wondering is.
What the dollar figures are
because you know it does this
proposed amendment.
Negate.
for how does it affect the
concern with compaction I mean
it we're still making an
increase overall
But I'm just wondering.
Mr Chairman representative at
the point of I the way that the
bills.
About thirty five hundred
dollars across the board.
That would be split up.
Between an amendment they're the
half of that would be across the
board and the other half would
be based on the index so
somebody at the higher poverty
schools could be above the
thirty five hundred.
But nobody would be below it.
Thank you Mister chair Mister
solely
Can you address
Is there data.
That shows that it is more
difficult for more challenging
to recruit and retain.
Principals at higher poverty
schools.
Mr and it and I think that Mr
the.
and of course anybody else.
Mr Chairman Representative Dixon
yes there is some and we can get
some of that research for you to
show that this school districts
to have challenges with some of
their most impoverished schools
retaining school leadership.
The lack of the ability to
retain school leadership is
representative Sarinana talked
about can have a devastating
impact on being able to retain
your best teachers or teachers
at all and increases the
likelihood of turnover there as
well.
Thank you Mr chair and thank you
Mr solely and I guess I was
unaware that through the typical
process of the SCG and the other
methods that we have that
increases go to districts and so
the at risk index goes to is
based on the district as opposed
to individual schools.
That's correct Mr chan so Mr
chair and Mr Saly.
Given me are there other ways
that we're able to.
incentivize principles to work
at.
High poverty schools or the more
challenging school.
Representative Dixon
theoretically a district could
be using those increases that
they're getting from the at risk
factor for rate differentials
for both teachers and other
school personnel and principles
we've not seen the move in that
direction.
Thank you Mr chairman and and
thank you Representative
decision I think thanks and I
think that's what my point is is
that I think that the need to be
study because it's that's
presidents we're talking about
rate differentials and we're
talking about you know as far as
with teachers and we talk about
administrators and as you said
before that that has been a
you know something that's talked
about but I would say that
through the process of the alley
ASEAN and the federal that we
look at that look at the data
more and see what is it because
it the the deciding factor may
not be money you know it may be
something else it may be you
know so I think that's what Mr
chairman and Representative
Dixon or by production.
I think they're looking at this.
Throughout the interim maybe a
better way to come up with some
recommendations and or next
steps in our process of of
school leadership.
Thank you Mr chair thank you
Representative my last a sort of
question is.
I think to Mr solely or Mr Leo
and you mentioned the Martinez
Yazzie lawsuit and.
Based on the conversation thus
far it seems to me that this
amendment is intended to.
Proactively address a concern
that has been raised continues
to be raised
with Martinez Yazzie
is that correct.
Mr Chairman Representative Dixon
yes the the central part of that
lawsuit was that outcomes for
low income students are quote
unquote dismal and the state
needs to make investments in the
things that will turn that
around and.
Thank you Mr chair I don't know
if that Representative for the
chairman of our.
Mexico would like to.
Thank you Mr chairman and vice
chair Dixon I'm just going to
comment on a couple of key
things and I think it's
important particularly from the
role the director of the L. E.
S. C. in terms of this amendment
and the family income index in
the history of the family income
index
in terms of research I think it
is very important that we look.
Holistically at all research
that's out there around
leadership not just in terms of
low poverty but particularly
rural remote communities I think
there are particularly all
different types of those schools
trauma impacted schools where a
factor could be meaningful but I
do feel like some research needs
to be done in terms of the
Mexico comprehensively
addressing it for the entire
state I think also in terms of
Martinez and you know as a and
our response as a state to this
lawsuit there are students in
every single district that
represent the ASU.
Thank you Mr chair.
Representative at the by
projects and we're gonna go to
Representative Pettigrew we're
gonna go to Representative Lujan
for a second time and I have
some questions Representative
please thank you chairman and.
Chairman that I think the first
thing I want to say is I think
we've already.
captured the fact that L. E. S.
C. put together piece by piece
of legislation that was approved
on a bipartisan level and Kerry
to us on a bipartisan level and
then they brought an amendment
to this on a bipartisan level.
Mr chairman what concerns me.
I read this.
Two five five eight three eight
point two correctly.
Says this is a house
appropriations and finance.
Mr chair and vice chair and
committee I don't recall us
reviewing this bill and having a
debate and voting on whether or
not all the members on this
committee agreed with this for
the majority of the members of
this committee.
Therefore Mr chair I'm wondering
who is very.
Here because I know out was of
one of the ones that voted on
it.
On top of that Mr chair.
As I understand the way.
This legislative body works.
Yes we have people
representatives or senators that
represent and defend the piece
of legislation.
And if somebody brings an
amendment as a representative or
senator the defense that
amendment not.
Witnesses.
Today Mr chair in this.
Civically for this bill I would
just a multitude of times where
we're asking the witnesses
questions not the person that
brought the ref the legislation
and I believe.
We're very concerned some rules
with respect to how we're doing
this.
However it is if it's the
committee voted think want to
bring that thank you that should
be the person in the chair as we
clarified I'm bringing the
amendments forward I want to
have a very fair clear and open
process where the committee can
ask questions on the amendment
on the bill in the committee can
to I think what we're doing
today dive deeply into this
which is deeply appreciated and
then the committee will be able
to make that decision Mr chair
on that.
On that point.
Then that.
The should have.
Nathan small name here not which
it does thank and Representative
roof you turn to page three of
the.
I still think the way we're
doing this.
Those against so many different
rules thank you.
Okay next we're going to
Representative Lujan.
You Mr chair thank you for the
second round
So as I'm reading more digging
in a little bit more as you
asked us to do
I'm gonna kind of frame my
question or my information
around it I don't know how long
ten years ago or so when we did
a similar type of approach with
our teachers and we thought we
gave them a pay increase based
upon whether they go to schools
where the higher needs and what
we saw was an adverse negative.
It is so.
I'm very cautious now the it and
doing the same thing with this
without further information from
you know I think if we're going
to be addressing the poverty in
the the issues this is distinct
issues we have in our schools as
we all know I think.
More counselors more more sh
social workers TA's.
Except our our a better way to
go addressing those those needs
but as far as what we're looking
at principles of leadership into
our school system but I I just.
Talk to in our members here and
tell everybody that this is
there's a historical lesson to
be learned from that what
happened then and what it
appears to be happening or being
asked in this ammendment again I
mean this is just
Wants.
Principles going to to the
schools of need and then and not
and then having less
representation where the the
communities and the needs of all
of our communities I think that
it needs to be a little more
holistic and how we're doing and
approaching this so I think that
Mr chair I just want to ask is
if the of our members here
remember that and if they could
add to that information and what
happened at that time Mr chair.
Mr Chairman representative Lujan
just as a point of clarification
what was done some years ago was
a pilot program that provided
bonuses for educators based on
teacher evaluation data.
And
there was potentially some
adverse effect in terms of we
did see you
higher vacancy rates for
educators as a consequence or
what we did we don't know if
it's actually correlational cop
the causal but there's
definitely potentially
correlation to it when we look
at data and we study the data
research
for that reason I do feel like
differentials are very important
for us to consider is the state
very important to pretend
particularly to to retain our
workforce incentivize it and
really recognize a different
needs but to do so
Wisely and also with input from
state.
Thank you Mr chairman thank you
for that response again you know
I I really understand what we're
trying to do and get the money
to our principles and really
build that leadership in those
models but I just feel like
again I'll just say it again
putting more money toward to
what we're doing Torrez in our
counselors or social workers and
behavior health experts we need
in our schools so so desperately
right now
that.
I will lean towards making sure
we have more data information so
that we are not having these
adverse effects Mr chair thank
you thank you Representative
Lujan representative of one type
please.
Thank you Mr chair and
I guess Charles pride you or
your team
be best suited to.
To to answer this question but
I'm trying to figure out based
on this discussion.
Because I mean of the one the
one problem I have with this
amendment is really kind of
coming to us.
Putting a new concept in the
middle of this process.
And I don't I'm not
understanding if we're talking
about is schools of a similar
size.
But we're talking about one that
is.
Higher poverty.
And then considering that I
guess I'm what I'm assuming is
that would be higher workload.
But or would it be all schools
starting at a certain point and
then adjusting based on the
poverty level.
Because to me it's point pay
someone more it's based on in my
mind based on workload.
And a so
Thousand student school and a
five hundred students school are
already that.
In my mind it's not quite double
the workload but it's
substantially more for that
thousand person.
Thousand students school.
So are we are in in this
differential we talking about
similar size schools are for all
principles of all schools and
then the differential.
Because I I think we can't we
can't.
Exclude.
The idea that there's more staff
more students and higher
workload at a at a larger screen
in a smaller school Mr Chairman
representative
A practice my route response by
saying that the this isn't a new
proposal it was actually
endorsed by the LFC it was part
of the budget recommendation
that pot of money that you
approved in the budget was left
either you know the LFC
recommendation was to have all
of the pavement go to the
principal responsibility factor
tied to the family income index
knowing that there was other
competing proposals from L. E.
S. C. that we could be funded at
the same level and so this isn't
a new concept I think what the
chairman has brought before you
is how to meld both of them
together the principal
responsibility factor does
differentiate
based on the type of school
whether it's elementary maybe
higher high school neither
proposal deals with
the population size of those.
And that's something that I
think over the the next interim
we should probably also revisit
so if your principal and a very
small high school the the
minimum salaries would be the
same regardless of.
Very large high school neither
neither proposal addresses that
disparity thank you Mr chairman
and Representative and
representatives and and Charles
I'd if it's not considering
that you're you're you're you're
a larger screen you are you're
managing more people you have
more could still be in to have a
greater risk you have more
students I I if it doesn't
include that I I'm not sure that
this is the the time to to move
forward with this proposal I
think it's probably a blending
of the two obviously
a high poverty school brings it
significant work
that maybe a
a
A school where the where the.
where there is the student
population is is more wealthy.
There's just different problems
that come along so I think that
is one factor I don't think
that's the only factor.
and if and and as I'm
understanding it this proposal
doesn't consider.
The other workload factors and I
and I and I have a hard time
supporting something that
doesn't take all of those work
load factors in play I think
high poverty schools that is
something that we need to
consider but if it's not
encompassing all of that I I
don't think I can support it
thank you Mr chairman Mr
chairman thank you
Representative monthly just to
clarify the bill as it sits
before you before being amended
doesn't deal with that disparity
of five hundred students school
verses.
Thank you very much
The of Representative Chris
please.
Thank you Mr chairman.
This ammendment is is is so
significant to me.
That it's it's it's almost a re
write.
Of the bill itself and I almost
think that that we need to.
And subcommittee or somewhere.
Really study this because I I
just feel very uncomfortable
voting on such a substantive
amendment that.
To me is is I I think it's it's
I would imagine is difficult for
for the bill's sponsors Mr
chairman thank you.
Thank you very much
Representative del Cruz okay
thank you a first and and I am
deeply appreciative a taken time
we wanted to schedule these
bills together to be heard in
order to take this time
The second I'd like to say
chairman Romero's leadership
director today at one of months
leadership of course
Representative Baca.
It is brought us incredibly far
working in conjunction with the
LFC there's been I think more
unanimity and more agreement if
not on every single detail in
large buckets than we've ever
seen which is great and a
tribute to really outstanding
leadership
second I'd like to just briefly
ask why.
This bill tracks but for
changing one thing with the
principal accountability factor
why is principal why is the
position of principle wise that
leadership so important at
schools because we're both
investing obviously substantial
making substantial investments
why is that position so
important.
And maybe we can start with Mr
Saly and if if if director
Chairman representative you want
to answer great if not that's
okay too.
Mr chairman I would defer to
the.
Just how important it is because
of their.
Okay thank you Mr chairman
thanks committee I'll give it a
shot I've been a school
administrator since two thousand
five.
I've been responsible for not
only observing school leadership
evaluating school leadership but
also in recruiting school
leadership if you look Mr
chairman and representatives of
the committee
Many of the folks when asked in
their exes surveys it's not
because of the money that they
leave it's not necessarily
because of the workload is
because of leadership and that
Mr Chairman is really the just
of this leadership matters just
like a good coach matters just
like everything matters so as
we're talking about recruiting
and retaining.
In trading on our leaders.
Okay an effective principal.
Working in collaboration with
their teachers it directly
affects our students and I think
that's what we want our best and
brightest in the classroom and
we want those who are able to
work together with our teachers
and stuff because we realize it
learning goes beyond just your
classroom teachers it's your
classroom assistance it's your.
Librarians other folks so we
want folks are leaders in their
that is able to communicate a
vision.
Build relationships with not
only students and staff but also
with parents or community that
is going to support the needs
both academic and social
emotional needs of our students
and stuff so that's why Mr
chairman that this bill attempts
to look at that responsibility
factor of our principles and I
as I say before I think that we
should set leadership matters
and I think that we need to look
at in greater depth about how
that affects our students in the
classroom Mr Chairman thank.
Mr chairman I mean I couldn't
have said it any better than
Representative Baca I mean the
school principal school
leadership assistant principal
is all set to come for the
community for parents for
students for everybody around
being the number one to turn.
We're school.
Or not.
Thank you.
Okay thank you very much I I
really appreciate it and
And I think that.
Incredibly well said and and the
number one determinant in that
leadership math matters so I
guess
The to to reiterate then just
briefly
The the family income index sort
of currently the the metric that
was endorses the LFC process
that is the sort of a
measurement that exists
independent of the pilot program
that will considers how to maybe
bring different funding is more
different funding the schools
the measurement is independent
of the pilot program is that
right or not.
Mr Chairman the measurement is
independent of whether the fund
schools directly with their dad
income index Mexico thank you
and I think for the its courses
for this year but education is
an ongoing thing right this is
we're working closer together
think it's a fair you know it's
a good question for us to ask is
the family income index or other
measurements are those
measurements that we should be
looking at in the future are
they not sounds like this one is
one that we can consider.
And pay attention to go on into
the future
separate from the pilot program
in third.
The if this this takes a sort of
a both and so every principle
will get a an increase
understanding its importance and
there would be a higher increase
for
principals who are at or choose
to go to
schools that have higher
poverty.
The service agent.
Thank you Representative
chairman made on the facing
committee conducts data however
has not been evaluated that's
something that we see in the
bill that's moving through is
part of is to evaluate that data
to me to describe what it is if
you could please director just
to go thank you for that please.
So Mr chairman and members of
the committee the family income
index is to determine the
following way the first thing
that the state does a public
education to the Department does
is sends information on each
student to Human Services and
they look at where each family
is in terms of their income
whether or not they receive snap
benefits.
a party that's the second step
the first step is actually taxed
revenue and then they look at
that taxed revenue and they look
at where school each family is
in terms of their income then it
travels to the Human Services
they look it's not budget and
then they look at the scope of
all of the students and they're
still probably about less than
ten percent of students in the
state of New Mexico whose family
income is not accounted for that
ten percent is looked at
geographically using census
data.
And then they send it back and
there's a huge list of all of
the students in the state of New
Mexico.
The public education department
and takes that list all the
students across the state of New
Mexico they account for it by
school in all the schools are
structured.
As you heard but is just silly
talk about in terms of this
index and the higher you are in
an index the more poverty your
school has that's why it's a
high index right so can be a
little misleading when you
listen to it but you're a high
poverty school there are
actually five designations in
terms of poverty if your highest
then you're on high up high
reflective high reflected highly
on the index again as a chairman
Romero suppose said we haven't
evaluated this it is a pop it is
a tool that we're currently
using in terms of a pilot
program with funding attached to
it some of the aeration might be
required in terms of whether or
not and how that does support a
better understanding of poverty
for the state of New Mexico I
think it'd be really important
because I do think there is
potential to use as a tool
widely in the future thank you
very much director
okay
I I don't think that I have any
other questions members I wanted
to make sure that we have this
conversation because we are in
it is a point of pride that I
think is shared incredibly
widely that we are finally able
to make the most robust
investments in our K. twelve
education system I deeply
appreciate the partnership and
this is a conversation that will
continue to extend because we
will continue to have resources
to invest in as we should
because there's nothing more
important what we're also going
to do again in knowledge and
members that this is been
considered unfriendly is we're
going to ask for a motion for a
do pass
And if that fails then we won't
come back to this amendment
which is okay also we'll go on
the house bill one thirty
so with that
please feel free to vote.
Based upon the conversation here
today.
Vice chair they're in let me let
me go chairman Romero is there
Representative Baca director is
there anything that you'd like
to add before we go to that vote
on house bill one ninety nine
for the amendment Mr chairman if
I just may ask a procedural
question are you taking a vote
on the amendment yet yes what
we're taking into a vote on the
amendment and then we'll move to
the bill okay
Thank you Mr chairman and
committee I think it was a great
lively discussion I think as far
as the amendment time things to
the family income index as
you've heard is very premature
this is something that we need
to conf continue to evaluate as
I mentioned we have a bill
moving through to continue to do
that and once we get a handle on
family income index then we can
open up this discussion about
differentials at different
levels but as was mentioned also
we've tried that in various
forms in various forms on it is
not worked out as intended so we
would like to keep house bill
one ninety nine as intact as
policy.
Education thank you Mr thank you
very much.
Thank you very much chairman
okay vice chair Dixon Mr chair I
would move a do pass on house
appropriations and finance
committee amendment number two
to house bill one ninety nine as
amended.
The second for the.
In second by Representative
about.
Mr Vegas can you please call the
vote for house appropriations
and finance committee amendment
number two.
It yeah.
Strong now.
No.
No.
No.
Yes.
Yes okay by a vote of fourteen.
The fifteen fifteen to three the
amendment does not move forward
any further discussion on house
bill one nine nine.
Great it's been moved and second
let's call the roll on that
please.
This is the so.
The.
Yes.
It's awful yes.
That.
This.
Garcia yes.
Yes.
Yes.
Yes.
Yes.
Yes.
K. by a vote of eighteen
formative thank you
Representative Baca house bill
one and ninety nine this past.
Chairman thank you committee.
Okay we're going to now go to
house bill one thirty.
And members we're going to have
we do have to amendments for
house bill one thirty will go
through the process will will
speed it up I will we're going
to have a full public
discussion.
please chairman Romero go ahead
on house bill one thirty thank
you Mr chairman I guess before
agreeing to this session of like
put in the cabinet for bathroom
breaks but I think we are if you
if you need to step out or or if
we want to that's the case it's
fine Mr chairman I'll be alright
if anything happens I'll make
sure to go.
I think I I think I've been
trying that well.
When I appreciate it Mr
chairman.
so health bill one thirty this
is the instructional hours built
so you all are familiar with the
programs K. five plus extended
learning programs the issue with
those programs is we've had for
the past four years very little
uptake in the K. five plus
extended learning time programs
I should know very well I was a
primary sponsor of the house
bill I four years ago and if you
all remember any of the floor
debates it was that if we
realize that these programs are
not working out we would come
back and change them so that's
something that has been a joint
issue for the legislative
education study committee as
well as the legislative finance
committee.
House bill one thirty would set
the minimum instructional hours
at eleven forty.
Also in the bill you define
instructional hours we've never
had a definition of
instructional hours before in
statute so this was the attempt
at doing so so we school program
much like think of your typical
class
enrichment programs focus on
problem solving cognitive skills
development for students content
that provides technical
knowledge skills competency
based applied learning for
students
social emotional and academic
interventions which we heard as
part of the conversation in the
last bill are desperately needed
for our students and I think I
saw reserves this morning I
didn't have a chance to read it
all but that on some school
districts in the Midwest that
had implemented strong
interventions and math programs
saw huge gains in their students
Academic improvements and then
instruction occurs sametime is
breakfast things like that.
Here's the thing that's unique
about house bill one thirty is
that and it's going to be the
topic of discussion is that we
also in that eleven forty are in
betting sixty hours of
professional work for educators
because we keep hearing.
More is not better better is
better and how do we do that is
by providing imperative
professional development for
teachers why isn't that it's so
important because much of this
work that.
Professionals educators in the
field do is within the work day
if you're mentoring somebody if
you're coaching some body if
your.
Retrieving students to work on
them individually this needs to
be held in the school day for
these professionals things like
home visiting parent teacher
conferences I do parent teacher
conferences with my students
with my parents as a way to
engage the family let them know
what we're working on in my
classroom and bring them into my
classroom so they have a direct
line to me and the direct line
to their student and we can kind
of compare notes as to how we're
reaching the students
educator training professional
development so that's teachers
educators can further develop
themselves as professionals and
the mentorship coaching
collaboration between school
employees I mentioned the
importance of doing that
so in the bill we would repeal
the K. five plus extended
learning time programs move to
these new anymore CENIC and we
have Dr Bennett one amend
director of legislative
education study committee as
expert.
Thank you very much director
please.
Mr Chairman I think that the
sponsor of was very eloquent in
the main synopsis of the bill I
will say that there are four
major objectives but I'd like to
highlight for the committee that
this bill does
the first is this bill is aiming
towards closing are very
persistence.
Achievement and opportunity gap
in the state of New Mexico we
all recognize that we do need to
raise instructional hours for
all of our students given both
where we have been historically
in terms of our children data as
well as what we have
indoor to the pandemic the
second thing second major
objective of this bill is to
provide both flexibility for our
students students and schools
and administrators to an
employee this as well as clarity
to do so the way that really
allows them to understand how to
do it the third is again you
heard this very richly through
the sponsor to support educator
development is that is maybe the
most fundamental piece of
actually changing the dynamic
that is inside of schools right
now
our educators are the most
important piece of the system
and then the fourth is.
Incentivizing schools and our
districts to go ahead and add
more days should they so decide
it's a local choice but we do
know that hoping schools reach
students is important piece and
so that is in there as an option
as well.
Thank you very much director
okay let's go to
let's go to the public anybody
who wishes to speak on house
bill one third the surrounds but
please go ahead and and line up
will ask are excellent
attendance.
Thank you okay great thanks
chairman again stand around for
the superintendents in the
college of education leaders.
We support this bill will vary
greatly we understand the need
to increase student learning.
We also understand the balance
we have to have and how do you
do with professional reading has
to be in the classroom with
club.
This bill takes us to that point
Mr chairman we believe the local
districts through their
administrative process and
whether boards are the best
persons to decide what that
looks like how that activist is
already differentiated between
R. eighty nine districts now we
believe that needs to be our
continue to practice in New
Mexico Mr chairman I don't know
if level after talking about the
minutes as they come
we will will provide that
opportunity so this terminal
stopped there with my just ask
we we support this bill as
presented we request of the U.
approve thank you thank you very
much.
Good afternoon chairman small
and members of the committee
thanks for the opportunity to to
speak briefly I'd have stood
twice for one thirty and support
bill and the but there is you
know there is a concern I would
really like you to hear and and
know what we really we really
need and hope for and and that
is that those districts who
stepped out first the ones that
agreed to do those early
implementers for K. twelve plus
K. five plus for the other
extended year we sold it to our
communities we went out and made
the commitments we made it work
and much of that is still you
know
we still are continuing to
they tend to have that
foundation we just want to be
sure those early implementing
districts will have their funds
covered thank you so much in
would you please identify
yourself I'm I would you please
introduce yourself I'm so sorry
yes I'm still Cleveland and I'm
a superintendent Rio Rancho
district thank you very much
different and.
Mr chair members of the
committee my name is Matt Paul
from public charter schools of
New Mexico we're in support of
house bill one thirty we think
it lays out the appropriate
incentives to provide extended
learning opportunities for
students a number of our charter
schools over half actually meet
these requirements already and
most of those schools are high
performing schools as they stand
right now we think that serves
as the key as the test case for
why this is a good policy for
the whole state to endeavor upon
so thank you for that thank you
sponsor thank you very much.
Mr chairman Chris balls on a
with laws on government
relations with Representative
Los crucis public schools and
was arrested it perfectly by the
previous speakers here in a
public comment we stand in
support of house B. one forty as
it is we work through in New.
We work through the beginning
the session this process and I
believe the way it is right now
should be the way that this
committee should fault and
passage of this.
Thank you Mr chairman members of
the committee my name is JD
Bullington speaking on behalf of
the greater Albuquerque chamber
of commerce the chambers in
favor of the flexibility that
this bill encourages this will
not only enable all of our
districts and schools to get on
board with extended learning
it'll support the info
innovative ways our districts
and charters are already
implementing longer days and
school calendars for the benefit
their students both for the
greater gains during the year
and less of the summer slide
however the chamber does lean
toward supporting the other
version of extended learning
instructional hours should mean
hours that children spend in the
classroom and the chamber
believes we're not going to get
the budget we need if we allow
instructional hours to mean
other things and that's not
truly provide children with the
kind of substantial uptake and
learning time that they need
thank you.
Thank you very much.
Thank you Mr chairman members
the committee to under two and a
half to New Mexico we're here in
support of house bill thirty as
it's currently written and has
been presented this is by far
the most consequential bills and
for the legislature this session
in regards education and as we
had discussions with our local
throughout the state we told
them about the local flexibility
local options and what they
could envision without adult
time to vet it into this process
their minds went wild with the
possibilities of what that meant
for their community and what
that meant for this so we we
fully believe that this is the
right way to go we're just
committee to support as it was
presented thank you thank you
very much.
Mr chair members of the
committee of an outgoing
executive director New Mexico
kids can we are in strong
support of many components of
extended learning both extending
our the instructional hours for
students as director of director
Perea Warniment mentioned to
make up for your normal summer
slide to make up for the
learning loss that happened
through COVID and to make up for
our perennial Lee.
Poor learning outcomes that
we've had since I was in New
Mexico public schools we agree
with some of the committee
before of instructional our
should mean instructional hours
and while we very much value the
time that our educators need to
develop their skills and to
collaborate we think that that
should be separate from
instructional hours and the
third piece that we have really
heard I'm not Paul mentioned
which is a lot of our schools
and districts and and
superintendent Cleveland have
already done this and we want to
make sure that the schools that
did it first the schools that
led the way the schools that did
it before it was required are
compensated for the full reality
of what they've paid for out of
their operating funds
historically and so we are very
much hoping that there is some
level of compromise between the
components of all of the
proposals I'm being reviewed by
the legislature thank you thank
you very much.
One my name is Jonna burn on the
superintendent of miscarriage
school districts I would like to
stand in favor of house bill one
thirty as it stands currently
we really look forward to the
opportunity of the creativity
and the things that we can do
with the professional
development hours embedded in
the current hours as presented
we believe that we can
Bring a lot more to our students
and our ability to to take a
look at those hours in a more
creative way as opposed to
mandated we also are big
proponent of better is better
more is not better and so we
appreciate house bill one thirty
as it stands thank you thank you
very much we do have one online
we're going to go to Kevin
summers.
Kevin go ahead whenever you're
ready.
good afternoon determines all
members of the committee my name
is seven summers and the
superintendent of Aztec
municipal school district we
were in favor house bill one
thirty as Representative meaning
the sponsor as well as the only
SEC for their communities were
on this bill and I would just
like to reiterate with the
community that learning doesn't
always just take place in just
or just eat as I think all of us
have experienced ourselves
throughout our our lives and in
our own learning experiences so
with that I will stand out but I
I do want to reiterate our
support house bill one thirty
thank you great thank you very
much Mr summers
okay we we've had our comment is
there don't see anybody else
online okay members we're going
to go move in the first of two
amendments.
We have
and all.
This is point two two five eight
three seven point one can we
make sure that this is been sent
to chairman Romero can we make
sure you have the hard copy and
director and Dr Perea Warniment.
There is a program request from
Mr rounds will have brief
comparably comment on the the
two men.
we're gonna ask Mr Liu.
To come up.
The so yet it point two two
five.
Eight three seven point one can
we have a motion to discuss this
so it's been moved by
Representative Sanchez second by
vice chair Dixon.
Mr loop can you explain it then
we'll go to you chairman and
director and then we'll go for
brief public comment before we
go to the committee Mr lugar
had.
Thank you Mr chairman so the.
House appropriations and finance
committee amendment one to house
bill one thirty.
Basically splits the difference
it says thirty hours cannot
count up.
Sorry we're on
We are on point two two five
eight three seven point one.
This is the K. twelve plus
factor tears calculation.
I apologize Mister chair thank
you for the correction so the
amendment to house bill one
thirty before you raises the K.
twelve plus factor two point
zero two two which is nearly
double what the.
Factor is in the current bill
and then as a separate factor of
point zero three three which is
about three times the amount for
schools that choose to go above
one hundred ninety days so that
they would generate a larger
amount of funding through the
formula and that's pro rated for
charter schools that one fifty
two for the first factor and one
sixty for the second factor I
would also associates some of
this funding for the factors
particularly the first one to
out of school time programs
professional work time programs
to improve attendance percent to
the attendance for success act
the school leadership and it
provides associates the second
tier factor to career technical
education programs and community
school initiatives and I'd be
happy to answer questions about
the amendment okay thank you
very much Mr Lowe thank you for
explaining it.
We're gonna go to chairman
Romero and Dr today of Warniment
is the amendment friendly and is
there anything that you want to
offer in concept.
Thank you Mr chairman so like
the other amendment this is an
unfriendly and.
Part of the factors you heard
from.
Some of the audience members
that this point zero one two
that the legislative education
study committee has we keep
those districts at the level of
funding that they have if they
implemented K. five plus
extended learning the other
thing is that we see is an issue
with the amendment is that.
The legislature's allocated so
much money to this K. twelve
plus programs that school
districts that would get these
this initial pay bump would
obviously get more money if they
have a hundred eighty hundred
ninety days but if school
districts are adding more and
more days it would start
diminishing the returns of those
already in the program unless
the legislature continually puts
money into the K. twelve plus.
Fund if we do not we could have
another potential problem in
terms of funding of some of the
schools in these districts and I
think that's the lesson that we
learned and certainly I did as a
sponsor of the K. five plus
extended learning time programs
is that before we ramp up the
factor we really like we talked
about with the family income
index we really need time to
look into that issue should we
ramp it up is there more intake
in terms of schools being able
to implement this or are we
reverting millions and millions
of dollars as we have with K.
five plus an extended learning
so I think the point zero one
two factor is most appropriate
it's most prudent to those
looking to enter into this new
program or for those that have
already achieved these numbers
but before we go to doubling and
tripling the factor we really
need to look at what the uptake
in this program and what the
appetite of the school districts
is before we do that so it's
unfriendly Mr chairman thank
thank you very much chairman
role metal okay we're if there
is a request to be able to offer
public comment on this
ammendment
is there anybody who
wishes to offer comment on house
appropriations and finance
committee amendment number one.
Mr rounds.
Mr chairman members
communications stand allows for
the six.
Mr Chairman.
We believe that this may be a
factor from a policy standpoint
you may want to contemplate
here's the here's the playing
field a little bit of that order
we have several local early
implemented districts.
And I was trying to Romero's
description of the poor one to
multiplier it is an opinion of
a large part of my membership so
we would like to be sure there
sufficiency in this particular
case and so we would support Mr
chairman this particular
amendment Mr Chairman however
the one issue that we're the we
simply hang our hat on and we're
concerned about we've been
talking hours across all of this
eleven hundred and forty hours.
We're now in this in this
ammendment we switch today.
We differentiate between those
are five day weeks those are
four to eight weeks Mr Chairman
share that's a change of logic
gonna change what's in statute.
I would say order equals one
hours Mr chairman thank you
thank you very much Mr rounds.
Go ahead.
Good afternoon speaker members
of the committee Steve Shani is
within the New Mexico government
relations director on behalf of
our members we believe that this
amendment is and in the words of
a representative from metal not
conducive to what the purpose of
this bill is so we we oppose the
amendment thank you.
Thank you very much.
Is there anybody online who
wishes to speak on this.
Okay and state of Mr summers has
received go ahead Mr summers.
my apologies are the the only
notification there chairman
again my name is numbers
Representative yes agreements
because I to I I am opposed to
this
this is an imminent for all of
the reason that have already
been isn't it.
Thank you very much.
Mr Paul please.
Mr chair members of the
committee Matt Paul public
charter schools of New Mexico we
if we were to see additional
changes to one thirty we think
it should further incentivize
ours our highest performing
schools have longer school days
not more schools As and so we've
seen that more hours as an
incentive is better and so for
that reason we like each B. one
thirty as it's written without
this additional amendments.
Excellent okay we will there's
one more start we have a Lauren
Copeland.
Hearings in Dallas public
schools and a former teacher
and.
I would like to echo that if we
are going to be adding hours
funding increase happening isn't
hours not days district is
really struggling to figure out
what our calendar he and our
community is struggling given
that this is set to be
implemented this coming school
year and they're already trying
to plan summer programs and
things like that it is much
easier to add hours that is days
without disrupting the rest of
humanity thank you thank thank
you very much miss Copeland
Copeland I apologize any other.
What time there you go state got
it thank you okay at any other
public comment on house
appropriations and finance
committee amendment number one
before we go to the committee.
Mr chairman Chris falls on with
losses public schools
as the state we support house
bill one thirty relief as it is.
Opted out as it is we do have
the sufficient funding.
Speaking with fourteen us this
we see that if they get well I
does increase.
Thank you very much.
The superintendent Cleveland.
Hopefully I'll get it right this
time money none.
We have supported what thirty.
Like to share with you is is
perhaps just briefly
and understanding of the fact
that we were approached to do
its than the year and we.
We sell the torque.
We were the foundation for a lot
of those moving forward the time
one of the questions a lot of
our superintendents us was if we
get into the.
Are we going to get into this
and then all of a sudden you're
gonna put the money back the
left hanging and that's one of
my colleagues didn't do that but
we were assured that if we if we
made that commitment and.
So my concern is however it
works I want to be sure that
there is sufficient funding for
those districts that were the
Spaces gaps that their name Rio
Rancho I've been going through
the whole list we want to be
sure that next year when this
comes through that there is
sufficient money so that I have
to go back to the community and
say I didn't tell you the truth
these wonderful programs with
put in these things because I
want.
So I want to be sure the factors
a sufficient level so that we
can continue the work that we
set out to do and I I you know
and please forgive me because I
don't want to sound
Representative I don't want a
situation where we have that
number the the one
that we made that commitment and
we believe the state.
And we just want to be sure that
all of those early implementer
District.
And in fact hopefully will be
even worse a little bit for
having stuff that is my last on
this thank.
The other thing.
I just want to it's hard to
find.
And I African school I've been
here.
She probably and I have watched
the applicant will shrink year
after year every school yes.
Thank you.
Thank you very much
superintendent Cleveland okay we
do have one more person online
we're going to go to this Bonnie
Lightfoot then we'll go to the
committee for questions.
By go ahead whenever you're
ready please okay good afternoon
Mister chairman members of the.
I'm not happy with you today I
am us superintendent and houses
school and also president of the
New Mexico says a little
different anticipation and I
just wanted to let you know also
that I stand opposed to this
amendment as well thank you
thank you very much.
Okay I don't see any other
public comment we're going to go
to the committee for questions
any questions Representative
Lujan.
we have a list Representative
Chatfield then Representative
Sanchez and Representative
Trujillo Representative
Chatfield thank you Mr.
Thank you Mr chairman Mr
chairman we have debated the
subject long ignored we started
a couple of years ago
I opposed adding days I opposed
ELT.
And I was told that I better get
used to it because it was the
coming thing I was going to
wear.
And I did.
They passed it.
they put it out there for
everybody to have a to.
Get to be part of so Mr chairman
I would just.
Mr Chairman.
How many schools are there in
New Mexico.
Roughly Mr Chairman.
Mr Chairman eight hundred fifty
somewhere in that are Mr
chairman Mr Chairman how many of
those schools participated in
the out the.
Who.
Mr Chairman representative a
fraction forty percent and forty
percent of the Mr Chairman a
what Mr chairman of small about.
Mr chairman we decided that
program was not successful
that's Comey participated we
decided it was not part
successful so there were.
Was another attempt to bring
forth this program.
It once again was negotiated
long and hard the
superintendents association of
school boards association all
those people involved with our
schools had a chance to read
this legislation talk to their
constituents to the people that
that push them forward and come
up with something that they all
agreed on one of the basic
tenants of that new agreement
was it would be hours and not
days.
The first thing I see about
this.
Amendment it is days of not ours
that is a basic tenet on the of
the agreement that made.
House bill one thirty.
Passed in Education Committee
passed approval of the
superintendents association and
this built trips that
immediately.
So I I was just so management I
oppose this amendment.
And
I'll have to say I can't speak
on the other amendment you have
but after I read it I feel kind
of ambushed you know we we
worked on all this for three
years.
And at the last minute we get
this thing so Mr Chairman I
stand in opposition thank you
very this amendment of Chatfield
Representative Sweetser please.
Yeah Hey it's an from consider.
Hey Representative Trujillo
please.
Mr chairman and the committee I
I.
I agree with Representative
Chatfield thank you
Representative Trujillo
Representative Garcia.
Thank you Mr chairman that you
have one question for Sonny.
How much how much school
district lose.
If this amendment of the local.
At the role of.
Mr chairman if I might get some
contacts this ammendment doesn't
require any schools at days it's
simply increases the an amount
that schools that have added
days would get from the formula
for grants and all the the point
zero one two factor that's
currently in the bill would keep
them flat.
by doing this amendment that
would increase their funding
substantially by because grants
is doing K. five plus.
District wide so they would be a
benefactor of a higher weight in
the formula.
The funny what what you meant by
higher wage you have a dollar
amount.
The chair representative I can
follow up with you that if you
just give me a minute and maybe
I can respond to that on my
spreadsheet you can get that
early as is their time but Mr
Chairman representative Garcia I
do have that in front of me for
grants.
Right now it looks like for next
year with the factor point zero
one two the district would have
thirty eight point five million
dollars which is an increase
from this current year at thirty
four point zero six two so that
would be able.
At that point zero one to your
questions on the amendment a
point to to what is that Mister
Liu Sen Mr chairman I actually.
Apologies director the.
Requests school districts would
actually see a decrease of about
three hundred thousand dollars
under the current bill as
written would you would see a.
Two million dollar increase
under this new weighting factor
at forty one point five million.
Mr chairman of one one more time
twenty so currently grants gets
thirty eight point eight million
for K. five plus extended
learning under this bill the we
get thirty eight point five so a
decrease of three hundred
thousand and then under the
amendment they were C. forty one
point five so an increase of
about two.
A little less than two million.
Thank thank thank you very much
representative Garcia
Representative Lujan please.
Thank you Mr chair for should
the time again and getting into
this bill I want to you know if
first state thank you to
Representative Chatfield for he
said as we were working this
through LFC during the interim.
And I to stood in in agreement
with him and and not full fully
on board with adding days and
times that having gone through
the process to this point in
working actually with
Representative joined Garrett
who actually sat down and spoke
with with educators here in my
own district I said I want to
thank her for it for that and
walking us through a lot of this
information also with Mr chair
and getting to us to the point
where I house bill one thirty as
it is I want to say thank you
because adding anymore time
anymore days as I've been
talking working with my school
district is it was hard enough
for a school district to come to
terms or other factors I think
we're still gonna have to work
out with regarding
transportation and scheduling
and so forth and I understand we
have some or memorial to study
that put we're not here without
here with on this this bill in
this ammendment and just to
reflect what my screen just
where my school district is here
in Santa Fe and also
understanding and supporting
other school districts and a lot
of what they have to say but I
want to say Mr chair.
When other school and other
schools are types of schools of
arc stand in front of us and
asking us for compensation for
the apartment doing I want to
say all of our schools across
all districts have been working
at some level of this and that's
just what we are we're about
finding a way forward that we
are on an equal playing field so
I just to to those comments that
were made today that to me is
just not acceptable in this and
asking for that sort of
compensation I think that we're
all here to do better for
schools we know that we are
schools need a lot of help and a
lot of focus and I and I just
want to say that this this bill
the work here as as we are
contemplating what we're going
to do with this are really
essential moving us forward and
I just want to ask a couple
questions regarding maybe one
comment that was made by our
school superintendent Rio Rancho
when she's asking about the
fully I mean the sufficient
factors physician sufficient
adequate
funding moving forward what what
I'm reading here in the fiscal
F. I R. implications is that.
The new costs of the changes is
expected to range between a
hundred sixty nine point seven
million and two hundred and
thirty eight point five million
that is with the current
language in house bill one
thirty is that correct.
Representative Lujan that sounds
correct thank you so what with
the neck the change in the
amendment due to that factor
sure.
Mr Chairman representative it
would.
Sir currently there's three
hundred and seventy million
dollars in the budget for this
proposal whichever goes through
as house bill one thirty stands
right now without the amendment
it would only spend about a
hundred seventy million of that
with the amendment it would
spend about two hundred thirty
and in both recommendations the
intent was to leave additional
extra funding in case schools
decided to add days and take up
some of that additional funds so
the new amendment could be
absorbed by the current
appropriation does that answer
your question does thank you Mr
chair thank you senator that
really does and I just want to
make give assurances to the
questions like that that we are
we are fully aware of what we're
doing with our budget so thank
you for that
but again I'm just going to I'm
gonna say Mister chair I I
appreciate the the amendment
that is been put forward but as
I am.
A representative of a Santa Fe
school district here and.
I would I would stand the I
would support H. B. one thirty
as it is at this time thank you
share thank you Representative
Lujan vice chair Dixon.
Thank you Mr chair and
Thank you chairman my question
on the amendment I guess would
be to Mr Liu and.
I just want to make sure that
I'm following the amendment
correctly.
The is the amendment trying to
address concerns from school
districts that have already
enhance their services and
stepped up for extended learning
or K. five plus.
Mr chairman Representative yes.
The
House bill one thirty as it
stands really tries to get those
schools that are ready did
extended learning to a break
even point the amendment simply
just give some additional
funding for already
accomplishing that essentially
giving them more funding to do
more services.
Thank you Mr chair thank you Mr
live so no schools would be
punished under this proposal
it's just
additionally recognizing added
services that school districts
can do.
Mr chair representative of a and
if I understand your question
right it there are some schools
that would see less funding.
Notably some charter schools
given how much they were
receiving from K. five plus
extended learning in and how
much this bill would appropriate
based on the current weight of
zero point zero one two now it
might be.
Impractical in some
circumstances to cover every
single penny for every single
school under this proposal but
the vast majority would see an
increase would be at breakeven
under the bill as it's currently
present.
Thank you Mr chairman thank you
Mr live.
Thank you very much bye Sir
Dixon Mr Liu chairman director
house bill one so how much money
is in the K. twelve plus
line item.
How much for both proposals.
and Mr chair the current
appropriation for K. twelve plus
in the budget is a hundred and
eight million from the general
fund and then additional sixty
million from the reform Fund so
hundred seventy eight million.
The budget also includes two
hundred two million for the
eleven forty requirements and
some of that will actually help
pay for K. twelve plus it's all
relatively fungible within that
pool okay thank thank you very
much and and really the
The to the amendment is budget
neutral the bill is budget
neutral it both works with the
same amount of funding correct
Mr chair yes although under the
bill as it currently stands.
If it were to be implemented
today you would revert about two
hundred million dollars versus
the amendments which would
revert about a hundred and forty
so it really just depends on
at this point how much you're
anticipating take up will be
across the state.
Thank you very much Mr Liu
anything that to that director
chairman.
Okay after that so I and I think
that's a particularly important
point for us as a committee
think when we see revert
obviously we want funding when
we appropriated to be utilized
were sort of expecting
reversions in both scenarios I
think there's a slightly higher
reversion in of.
What percentage is that.
A a higher reversion under
without the amendment and
Representative Mr Luo chairman
director one of the reasons is
because for those districts that
are statewide from the northern
part of the state to the
southern part of the state under
the amendment there instead of
being sort of cap flat.
Or and as we heard with requests
potentially seeing funding cuts.
Based the promises they've made
to their community to their
teachers saying it cut four cap
flat there is an and an initial
larger flow to districts that
have already extended their time
correct.
Mr Chairman in theory a higher
weight would draw down more
funding and you'd see a lower
version so yes that that's what
we would anticipate from this
ammendment okay director please
anything that they're Mr
chairman I do want to just also
add that of the three hundred
and ten million two hundred and
two should not revert because
that will be going to support
all districts across the state
to support the eleven forty so
we would be
we would want to watch the
reversion of the hundred and
eight million and then the
addition additional that's
actually being funded for the
public education reform reform
Fund.
Thank you very much said thank
you for that point but do you
differ in terms I I think I do
want to get clarity because it's
a this is looking down the road
and we think we acknowledge that
some of this is based upon the
citizens that external state of
significant amount of this is
based upon what decisions
districts make following this
legislative session are based
upon what happens this
legislative session I want to
have at least clear projections
understanding that they're just
that of what the reversions are
under either scenario so Mister
Liu if you could yeah go ahead
please Senator I just wanted to
also clarify that house bill two
L. as was substituted by this
committee contains language that
requires the funding to cross a
certain threshold before it can
be drawn down from the reform
Fund
And as it stands the the bill
also requires two factors which
this bill in its current state
does not have so there would
need to be some reconciliation
between the budget language in
the appropriation and this bill
if the amendment is not passed
thank you for that and just
briefly go back and there are
there others with questions I
want to go back go to those
members.
Under do we have a Mr Liu can
you give us sort of a best
projected scenario for
reversions if we adopt House
Appropriations finance committee
substitute number one and I'll
ask the same with chairman
Romero and director today I
Warniment.
If we don't adopt how it and
frankly offer.
On both I think it's important
for us to hear and to be very
clear that this is not holding
you to something this is that
experts for their analysis.
Mr chair is very difficult
question but I'll try my best.
Our projection is that you would
see about sixty million dollars
revert.
Which is the amount that's
coming from the reform Fund so
the and the anticipated uptake
rate is to use up the entire
general fund amounts and leave
the sixty million which is
already a nonrecurring source
intact that that would be our
projection of the uptake rate by
the end of fiscal year twenty
four it under adoption thank you
Mr though under adoption of the
amendment Mr chair is this
correct okay and director Mr
chair again either under either
scenario I want to if you don't
want to answer however you want
to answer I appreciate.
Mr Chairman our calculations
that we did as a staff looked at
any and all school that was
already at a hundred and eighty
days or above and the amount
that we got after for a few
different scenarios was
somewhere between fifty and
fifty five million dollars.
So our original recommendation
as in L. E. S. C.
staff and to our committee was
the two hundred and two million
dollars for all districts as
well as.
Just under fifty five million to
support those that were already
doing it just to ensure that
those who were above a hundred
and eighty days were supported
the slate
Therefore reversion again is
hard to determine but if you
went with those that we're
continuing to do so so grants is
a good point here then reversion
might be about forty fifty
million dollars given the
current budget right now and
then on top of that the fifty
sixty million dollars in the
public education reform coming
from the public education reform
Fund okay but that could change.
Thank you Mr and the only thing
I want to add is in re emphasize
the the factor that we have is
the most prudent and something
that can be tracked and if we
decide to come back later to
ramp up based on uptake we very
much cut but I think this is the
most prudent to go to for those
school districts that both have
and those that are looking to
enter into the program.
Thank you very much Mr chair.
Thank you chairman and Mr Liu
and if if the amendment is not
adopted by is there any I think
what we heard roughly director I
think is a hundred to a hundred
and ten million combining
recurring and non recurring is
that accurate under H. B. one
thirty as it is without the
amendment is that correct yes Mr
chairman thank thank you very
much Mr though you gave a number
a Representative it fifty to
fifty five I guess sixty under
adoption of the amendment
without adoption of the
amendment.
I want to open up for the
opportunity do you have any
analysis or projection of what
the reversion might be.
Mr chair if this is implemented
today and the existing calendars
stayed the same you would be
reverting two hundred million
without equipment.
I'll also add that the current
factor of point zero one two is
very similar to the existing K.
five plus weight which was point
oh three and if you divide that
by twenty five days it's about
point oh one two per day.
a lot of we heard from a lot of
small districts that that factor
was a little too low for them to
generate enough funding operate
their programs and so there was
low participation rate from some
of them in that case and so just
nothing to consider as you
evaluate the weights
Representative today thank you
very much Mr Deputy thank you
for the and now I important okay
we're gonna go to Representative
Garrett then we're gonna go to
Representative through.
Thank you Mr chair.
What.
Here's my first question Senator
districts said that they were
promises were made many was
given some.
People are saying it's going to
be an adequate with point zero
one two.
If we just change that factor
what would have to be changed to
be on all the fancy stuff my son
was a boxer his Golden Gloves
advises to say fight sexy I feel
a lot of fighting sexy offering
a lot of little.
Advantages of this bill but I
want to know if zero if point
zero one two is not enough to
sustain the current programs
witness.
Mr chairman Mr chair
representative.
There's two variables you have
to consider here which is the
weight itself and then the unit
value.
So alternatively you could dump
a bunch of money into the SCG
raising a value significantly
and then the weight would be
sufficient or you can raise the
weight and you can have a lower
unit value and have the same
results
the right mixture is somewhere
in between it's around three
hundred million and its ranges
between.
Point oh one to the final.
Point oh one eight.
From the initial budgets that
came out of LFC.
really would depend on how much
funding you put in the SCG that
would probably be the best way
to answer your question.
Thank you
because what concerns me first
of all is Mr chairman this was
not vetted during the interim
and suddenly we're getting some
sizable changes want to make
sure we meet the needs of
everybody but in the other hand
I think it's important to have a
public process where
stakeholders can publicly
contribute but my concern is
we're going in amendment section
three B..
with the point to two factor if
you have a hundred and eighty.
two one hundred and ninety days
based on days and it has a five
in a four day thing and then all
of a sudden we're going to if
you're gonna have a hundred and
ninety.
Of the two two hundred and five
instructional days it jumps up
to point three three and there's
a lot of bills and whistles
offered do says if you do
section B. E. you're gonna
generate additional funding for
out of school time program
opportunities programs to do
this professional work hours is
provided which some of this
relies on earlier parts of house
bill one thirty which we haven't
dealt with and then he if the
do session C. you can use it for
high quality career technical
education program security of
forty million for and community
school initiatives which we also
have many separate plans for so
I'm just concerned about how
certainly all these things are
on the table and we're not
talking about ours and I just
want to express that concern Mr
chair because we're betting
really important things all of a
sudden and I don't know if
Chairman Romero or executive
director of the pay of Warniment
can add anything to that.
Mmhm Mr chairman and and
Representative
I think it's important that we
do look at the vetting all
legislation bills this is
something obviously we've worked
on three legislative education
study committee and LFC has had
a version of this and has worked
on it in the interim and we've
had many discussions throughout
that in around on
This initiative I think for for
me the the fact that we have you
know bills I mean to remind the
committee this is the third
committee for this piece of
legislation which if you've
noticed past few years to get
three bill referrals has been
particularly rare but it's past
health education unanimously in
its current form passed the
house Judiciary Committee in its
current form unanimously and how
we sit in front of the
legislative finance are the
house appropriations and finance
committee which is fantastic but
we have a thoroughly vetted bill
as is from the interim through
even the standing committees
during the legislature the
reason why I stand by the bill
in its current form without this
amendment or the next amendment
as well.
Representative you're just I
wanted to see if the executive
director wanted to add anything
Mr chairman.
Mr Chairman representative
there.
I think you bring an interesting
question to the committee in
terms of.
The amount of language in the
amendment that is beyond simply
the funding.
There's I actual.
Components to this that I'm
reading through here that have
to do with.
Supporting school systems.
And I think it's an interesting
question in terms of the you
first asked around sufficiency
and funding period
and
My colleague the.
Very deeply respect Mr Leo
brought up the fact that many of
our districts have said that
point zero one two is an
insufficient amount
and I think that's a deeper
question for the committee this
committee in our of the
legislative education study
committee to take up in the in
terms
in terms of what is sufficient
and adequate funding in general
Because of point zero two two is
supposed to
Support an actual factor for a
school day that above and beyond
it may also be used for all of
these things.
And what is the correct amount
of funding for things that are
also outside of the scope.
Of a typical school day.
If we have historically looked
at.
Other than the past couple of
years underfunding our public
schools.
Thank you Mr chairman I have
just one question is how
sustainable is that.
Of people say this bill passes
and everybody wants the point
three three how sustainable is
that over time.
Mr chair representative so the
amount that's in the budget
which is three hundred seventy
million currently.
Would be sufficient for every
single district and charter to
add a week to their current
calendars and then some so we
don't anticipate take up to be
that universal and so I think
that it is safe to assume that
the amount would be sufficient
if the amendment was adopted.
Thank you Mr chair you just said
to add a week but they can't at
ours right it has to be K. is
that correct by your calculation
that you just said Mr Chairman
representative this amendment
does not require them to add any
days this is only if they chose
to add days
The formula would then generate
additional units and they can
all add about a week or three
days drawdown funds from this
amount and still have funding
left over to expand further okay
thank you those are my questions
Mr chair thank you very much
Representative Garrett
Representative Pettigrew.
Thank you Mr chair and.
I think I've got to run through
if you would.
Allow me to ask a few questions
to make sure I.
I got this right.
Mr chair and representative.
House bill one thirty as it
stands right now would through.
Well yes see through the summer
and have bipartisan support.
When you all LESC committee
would that be correct Mr chair
representative.
Mr Chairman representative
Pettigrew yes those through the
interim with the legislative
education study committee.
Chair representative were you
aware that the verbiage and
house bill two did not support.
House bill one thirty.
Mr chairman and representative I
was aware of that and that's
where is hoping to be able to
have the discussion here as this
cumulatively with the bill is a
smaller part of the budget
overall.
Mr chair representative.
Bill one thirty didn't have all
all the money in it.
Or was it set up to where it
needed to be to be consistent
with for region house bill two
but we waited till today to fix
a after turning on through to
committee.
Mr chairman and Representative
that's how the process is played
out so far.
Correct.
All right Mr chair and
representative that.
Confuses me a little bit but
I talked to over.
Well now eight superintendents
and and the majority of them
don't like this one of them
does.
For your at half of them don't
like to K. five plus an here
and.
To be honest with you have a Law
School on where we stand right
now we have LFC standing Mr
chair on on one side of the
fence with this is what we want
to and we have a budget the.
I guess I slept through when.
when we're sharing this because
I didn't realize that there were
were built that we're going to
conflict that they were coming
from the education so many and
and and I I just when I I slept
through because we've much will
repair and I don't think any of
us to.
So but the conflict.
Concerns me especially when Mr
chair and representative we're
looking at a potential loss of
the funding this is this in the
bill somewhere between a hundred
million and hundred and fifty
sixty million depending on page
seven number you look at how
supplies in I just think is
government we probably could
have done.
Thank you Mr chair.
Great thank you very much
representative Representative
we're gonna go to representative
Garcia for second time the order
representative chat field for
the second time that I have a
but representative Garcia please
chairman on
The extended on the days extent
how many days are we talking
about this ammendment.
miss Mr chair representative of
under the L. E. S. C. house bill
one thirty as it stands any
school that's a five day school
week that goes over a hundred
eighty days gets additional
funding any school that's a
forty school week that goes over
a hundred fifty five days gets
additional funding there's no
ceiling on that.
This ammendment.
What is it was a member of the
choir readable the next ten days
of learning time.
Mr Chairman Mr Chairman
representative the amendment
here would put a cap the
district could not go over two
hundred five days but if they
went above one eighty they would
get.
Point to two point zero to two
units if they went above one
ninety they would get point zero
three three in it so they could
add about twenty five days to
all one hundred eighty day
calendar of thank you for us on
the Mr chairman you know I just
got off the phone much
superintendent of of my district
and I we talked about it in Mr
Germany said that if they have
to go ten days the two million
dollars through giving extra
that they will gain would not
cover their expenses anyway do
they want more flexibility on
learning time.
Not.
Trying to force people to do
what this administration my
making any sense at all Mr chair
representative if I could
clarify if requests did nothing
different today next year.
They would under the current
bill has not amended would lose
about three hundred thousand if
they did nothing different and
the amendment was passed they
would get two million dollars to
date they don't they're already
doing two hundred days of
instruction this bill would
simply provide more funding for
what they're already doing
Mr Chairman why would they do
this three hundred thousand
dollars nothing.
Mr chair representative based on
the level of the weight as it's
currently in the bill point zero
one two that's what we
anticipate the amount of funding
they would generate would come
down to.
Thank you for the no Mr chairman
you know I like buying support
Dennis said that to them it's
not worth their own extended
learning time already but our
they were not mine but days it
just was not feasible former
door that's exactly two minutes
for so with that Mr Chairman
thank you.
Thank thank you representative
Garcia Representative Chatfield
thank you Mr chairman for giving
me a.
I just wanted to.
I just wanted to clarify
something that was brought up by
by Representative Pettigrew.
And Mr chairman my question is
is there money in house bill two
to cover one thirty as it stands
Mr Chairman representative yes
so Mister.
Mr chairman of education is
there even more money than
what's required to fund House
Bill.
One thirty as a stand in house
bill two.
Thank you Mr chairman thank you
very much of Chatfield
Representative Dixon for a
second time then I'll have less
questions.
Thank you Mr chair of mistruth
up was the concern and concept
of making sure that we were not.
Indifferently punishing schools
that have already chosen to
extend learning was that
discussed during the interim and
built into the LFC framework.
Mr chairman vice chairman that's
correct and if you recall L. E.
S. C. and LESC jointly presented
that of committees during the
interim thank you Mr chair thank
you Mr Liu for confirming that
this was discussed in the
interim and built into the LFC
framework that was passed
unanimously by the LFC which was
the preceding Committee thank
you Mr chair thank you very much
Mr Dixon
okay so thank you very much
The Mr Liu I think we've for we
were able to talk about specific
districts right now under the
current under one thirty
unamended if grants stays the
same does no changes to their
calendar they'll lose three
hundred thousand dollars that
your that your testimony Mr.
Chair representative what are
analysis shows okay and again I
think we have to acknowledge
that things can come up school
boards can make decisions on
uptake or changes or not but we
have a unique opportunity on
this committee to set policy and
then to see how that policy is
implemented that Mister Liu do
you.
I I think for Los crucis public
schools a higher factor will
bring more money to Los crucis
public schools as it will for
Rio Rancho public schools and
the other districts that have
made this decision correct.
S. Mr chair the amendment would
reward those districts that
currently do extended learning
or K. five plus significant
thank you and secondly Mr chair
chairman Romero director Mister
Liu doing the passing the
amendment will not take away
money this year from districts
that choose to expand in if they
so choose.
With the will that take money
away from districts.
If they if they choose to expand
in the the new K. twelve plus
system.
Mr Chairman no it would not take
away money okay the thank you
very much
So for the I think those are
very important we're talking
about taking money away from
districts potentially that have
affirmatively chosen to add more
time through a local process and
we are conversely.
Not what if.
In doing so if we choose not to
do that if we do if we choose to
give those districts a a
slightly stronger reward we will
not be punishing districts that
have
chosen not to they will still
have every opportunity to thank
for that and
we've heard testimony on
reversions and I think that is a
something will be able to
discuss next year.
What money it what will lead to
higher versions are not I I
appreciate that and I also want
to acknowledge the substantial
and again stronger collaboration
as is been detailed where none
of this has been on vetted
through the end from there are
different perspectives and
that's totally respected but it
is been discussed at a very
appropriate and substantive
level with staff and members
there are different conclusions
that can be rates which is
always fair but it has been
substantively discussed at
appropriate levels both from the
staff and the member level I
don't think there any other
questions chairman will go to
you and then last for a vote on
amendment number one thank you
Mr chairman and I just had a
question if I may first sunny
briefly the LFC in our bills
that it have the current factors
in the amendment or where the
different.
Mr chairman
Mr chairman the LFC bill house
bill one ninety four has two
factors similarly structure to
this ammendment however those
factors were point zero one six
and point zero two four this one
this amendment has factors that
are higher than the LFC a budget
budget recommendation the amount
was determined to find that same
incentive for schools that went
above and beyond to provide them
additional warrants and funding
to do more services.
Thank you Mr chairman thank you
Sonny I mean so we're talking
about different factor numbers
weren't necessarily part of the
originally endorsed bill however
the factors for the O. S. C. are
the ones from the endorsed bill
to the bill that we have now one
other thing that I think Mr
chairman that hasn't been said
yet is that through this
ammendment we're further trying
to incentivize behavior so we're
further trying to incentivize
behavior could call minimized
here
further trying to incentivize
behavior which we have already
and the problem has been there's
been forty percent of taking the
LTP even less in K. five plus
I'd mentioned that if there were
lessons learned in doing house
bill five years ago was
incentivizing that behavior was
something that we need to
monitor to see what the uptake
is and I think that's what the
original bill does and does well
thank you Mr thank you very much
chairman room okay members we're
gonna go for it will ask for a
motion on the amendment number
one.
Mr speaker I move to pass on
house appropriations and finance
committee amendment number one
to house bill one thirty.
In a second.
let's can you please call vote
Mr Jenkins.
Nope.
Representative.
No and I would explain my vote.
No.
Yes.
Yes.
For.
Okay.
Go ahead please to explain
about.
Representative Garcia than
Representative gear thank you Mr
chairman the reason I voted yes
on the for the school district
just called me and told me that
they don't they can not afford
the three hundred thousand
dollars and I will downline Mr
chairman the developer Committee
to change.
What they're going to that right
now we know as you all know my
district is one of the poorest
they got hit hard comment
generating station shutting down
the far function now move we're
having a struggle for regional
the three hundred thousand thank
you thank you very much
representative Garcia
Representative Garrett thank you
Mr chair of the fact that the
LFC endorsed bill had the
factors of point zero one six
point zero two for a new factors
were introduced that hadn't been
endorsed by LFC affected my vote
thank you very much for your
okay Chairman okay members I
think we have a number of other
bills we're we're not going to
bring the final amendment
members this ammendment
would essentially adopt the L.
E. S. C. framework of sixty
hours in bed of wild
targeting those I think members
course chair remember Romero
director Perea Warniment have
that
that is but I I think we don't
need to waste the committee's
time on that
with that let's go for a motion
on house bill one but any let's
go to discussion on house bill
one third.
So we'll ask any other I have
questions Representative
Chatfield.
West.
All questions great we're gonna
go to vice chair Dixon for
quest.
Thank you Mr chair on house bill
one thirty.
Thank you chairman Romero in
house bill one thirty can you
walk me through
what it what it means to in bed
that for the sixty hours of
professional time.
Mr chairman and madam vice chair
yes so if you set the time at
eleven forty you have time that
is instructional time with
students but I'll use the
example for me as a high school
teacher
the time that some I teach
social studies so the time that
mon may a lot of my students
have for me it's seventh period
my colleagues in other
departments will be teaching
their classes hi however during
that school day and working with
my collaborative group on lesson
planning on looking at data
sometimes calling parents things
like that but it's all done
within the school day so that's
what we're looking at with
in that it time it's different
at elementary school
could go into that one too Mr
chair and and chairman so what
is this how does that affect
with the students to and what is
the student doing during this
time Mr chairman and madam vice
chairs taking their other
classes at the high school level
at the elementary school level
the same in middle school the
elementary school level my wife
is a specials teacher she
teaches fine art so she is that
time for students they're
learning arts and fine arts.
Students are doing that.
Meanwhile the other teachers
staff are collaborating on
grading doing various things
during that half hour time
window.
Mr chair and chairman of.
Do in service stays also count.
Mr chairman and madam vice chair
so under this test you could to
use in service at some of those
hours Mr chair and chairman so
our students in school during in
service days Mr chairman and
vice chair are typically not now
so Mr chair and chairman then if
we are allowing for sixty hours
of professional time which I
don't disagree with that the
need in the you know valuable
nature of that what concerns me
is.
Students are not necessarily in
school and so while we say that
we're increasing the hours to
eleven forty if we're allowing
sixty hours.
during which they don't have to
be in school we are then only
increasing the average hours to
ten eighty.
worst case scenario.
Mr chairman and chairman.
And what what is the average
number of hours that our.
Schools.
Are are using right now what is
the average number of
instructional hours.
Mr chair and vice chair Dixon in
elementary it would be about ten
seventy.
I'm in Mr chair and director
what would that be for
secondary.
Mr chairman and vice chair to
extend its already at ten eighty
that's the minimum the current
minimum for secondary.
So Mr chair and chairman my
point is this.
I am not convinced of that house
bill one thirty is significantly
moving the needle by including
the sixty hours and embedding
those I think that's a it's a
policy discussion that has been
going on for for a long time in
the interim in the different
committees and I respect that
house bill one thirty is trying
to increase the number of
instructional hours for students
I think the situation is so dire
in the state of New Mexico that
I do not believe that it should
be included I believe that it
should be separate and
I have no further questions
thank you Mr the vice chair
Dixon on go to Representative
Lujan.
Thank you Mr chair so back of
the bill I have a question I'm
looking at page.
Two of the disk of FIR and.
The the section says K. twelve
plus programs and it reads the
bill creates a new formula
factor that provides additional
programming it's the schools
that have a longer school
calendars the K. twelve plus
formula factor would generate
point zero.
Twelve one two program units for
student for each instruction
there were cool I'm sorry I got
ahead of myself.
I'm gonna go to the paragraph
above this Avenue it's on both
sections are
Line item eight of the FIR
Ians.
Other sub.
With some substantial of a
substantial issues so on that
paragraph I do apologize it's
been a long discussion Mr chair
the last sentence schools must
reserve twenty percent of our I
funds for evidence based
extended day comprehensive after
school summer and range
enrichment or extended school
year interventions to address
learning loss for at risk
students Mr chair.
Was this what was given as a
recommendation from the federal
government.
Mr chair
madam chair.
and Representative Lujan it's
not a recommendation that is
actually a requirement thank you
I appreciate that I appreciate
that distinction distinction
madam chair
With H. B. one thirty the
extended school year
interventions is to.
To add learning time by alors
and or days is that correct.
Madam chair representative on
yes so if you can create I know
by that reservation of the
twenty percent.
that's been
stated.
What part of that percent is
left for after school summer
enrichment programs as opposed
to adding to this the school day
with hours or days.
Madam chairman.
Question sure so there's a
twenty percent.
Of our preference that are to be
used for extended day
comprehensive after school
summer enrichment or extended
school year interventions what
what.
H. B. one thirty has done is to
make the record the
recommendation to the extended
time is that correct madam
chair.
So what.
If any are there any
requirements from that the
required twenty percent are left
for after school or summer
enrichment programs.
Certainly Mr Chairman
representative behind I think
what you're getting at is a
really
important point that school
districts and charter schools
should leverage both pockets of
funding for the same thing.
Mr chair does HB one thirty do
that.
Mr Chairman representative on
yes.
And madam chair have.
What is the difference if you
could calculate that difference.
Mr Mr chair.
Mr Chairman representative Lujan
we have to get back with you
with each school district and
charter schools allocation from
their federal dollars to know
how much they have point that
are from that as well as this
that Mr chair think Sonny has a.
Mr Chairman representative I
could just give you some
ballpark figures that twenty
percent set aside is about two
hundred million dollars and what
you're finding in the current
budget is three hundred seventy
million so they're comparable
well let's double the other
thank you Mr chair thank you
Senator really do appreciate my
very last question is I'm
looking at the.
The list of all of our schools
here.
District and charter days in
hours I'm gonna specify Santa Fe
school district.
Where I see.
just a listing of Santa Fe and
then understand a fait academy
for the for technology and
classics.
Can you tell me is.
The county for technology
classics just the only school in
the Santa Fe school district
that has to.
The difference in time use for
their school for the school day
madam chair Mr Chairman sorry.
Mr Mr chair representative.
The academy for technology and
classics is a chartered local
charter school within Santa Fe
public schools and so they have
a separate calendar than the
district itself and so that's
the difference outline of this
table Mr chair thank you for
that so there's just one school
in Santa Fe school districts a
district that has a different
school
Today's date time the entire
district Mr chair let's see Mr
chair representative there's
also also some other state
charter schools if you go
further down that list.
The two H. thirteen
I might point out that request
trail charter school as a state
charter that is also in Santa Fe
but has a different calendar
than the district.
Thank you Mr so the and I'm
sorry to to stay stuck so I
there are two schools to charter
schools in Santa Fe school
district to have two different
time schedules is that correct
Mr chair.
Mr chair representative there's
more than that those are just
two examples I provided the guys
up with the number I would
appreciate that I was just
wondering why what was the
difference on the schedule thank
you so sure that that's all I
have the.
Thank you very much
Representative Lujan.
Representative Montoya R. we're
gonna we're gonna go to R. L. E.
S. C. members and educators for
our the motion I do have a
couple of quick questions so
The.
Director.
Mr Liu chairman will we be able
to what when will we know sort
of how
districts have chosen to
approach this we've heard sort
of the conversation around
the there's lots of different
ways to implement the sixty
hours there are some that could
lead to more time learning for
kids there are some in fact they
could lead to less time learning
for kids perhaps when will we
know what route are different
districts have to.
Mr chair that's great and maybe
the most important question.
We will know of fairly soon it's
budget season for school
districts right now and so the
public education department will
be collecting all of the school
calendars as part of the budget
approval process and once we
know the school calendars in the
district calendars it will be
incumbent upon us as good
partners the LFC is closed
ourselves I know we're very
Very invested in this to do some
very good research in terms of
all of the different models out
there one case in point is
according to the National
Council state legislatures in
there no time to lose report
high performing countries
demonstrate teachers have a
lighter teaching load in fact
some of them teach only thirty
to thirty five percent of their
time and in fact the rest of the
time is for collaboration this
will provide a really beautiful
point of evaluation for all of
us to really look at how our
school districts creatively and
innovatively set up their
schedules thank thank thank you
for that and and in terms of do
you think that will be that that
will happen during that while
we're still here and session
went when did the calendars come
into Mr Liu this is.
Yeah.
Mr changes.
The bill itself says that no
later than November fifteenth of
each year the department shall
notify the Legislature of the
number of students participating
in K. twelve plus school so that
would be drop deadline that that
that deadline.
For us knowing how many schools
have generated additional
funding for those calendars
thank you for that Mister Liu
thank you director so.
While we may know anecdotally
sort of.
Here soon as but districts adopt
calendars is Elsie PS is adopted
their calendar remaining with
the balanced calendar
There is not a statutory
statutorily we won't know until
essentially November of this
year as we get into sort of the
end of the LFC and LESC process.
Okay great thank you very much
for that okay let's go to
Representative Garrett for the
motion Representative setting on
a for the second actually we're
gonna Representative Garrett and
then we're going to go to
Representative up please.
Thank you Mr chair I move a do
pass for house bill one thirty.
A second Mr chairman.
Okay please call of of.
Representative yes.
Pass.
Yes.
Yes.
Yes.
No.
No.
Yes.
Members to explain their vote.
Thank you Mr chair
There were I I voted for this
because got a lot of comments
from my local school boards
however it was stated several
times that
More is not better better is
better sometimes more is better.
and I mean I could throw a few
examples out there are more
money more engine us more
there's more a lot of sometimes
more is better.
but.
Because of the process that was
take that had taken place this
year and the work that was done
and all of the people who had
put into the work I support this
however Mr chair
I I did to me this is a wait and
see.
because we we've not had good
educational outcomes in New
Mexico.
And if we don't do something
substantially different but I
I've been asked by
superintendents and school
boards across the state to say
give us the flexibility but
Mister chair if we give them the
flexibility and we don't see
improved outcomes
I will like to see just picked
this up again Mr chair that we
are an oversight body.
And I would say that we bring
this back
if if the outcomes don't improve
thank you Mr chair thank you
very much Representative Montoya
ranking member Armstrong please
thank you Mr chairman
I voted no on the original piece
of the Public Education
Department and the main reason I
I did is because I don't like
mandating anything and so my
school districts some like it
some don't it's about fifty
fifty but Mr chairman when we
don't have an Avenue to what
when we tried extended learning
extended days and it didn't work
we decided to mandated when not
very many schools took advantage
of it so that's why I voted no
and will continue to do so but
do appreciate all your hard work
in trying to solve the problem
thank you Mr chairman thank you
very much for making member
thank you
I apologize Representative
replace.
Thank you chairman
But I Representative Montoya and
representative Armstrong
my comments are the same million
a duplicate of.
One of the stresses that exists
and and one of my districts is
the K. five plus.
And
I personally I I think I voices
when we started going through
this I don't believe in putting
mandates out there that have.
Intentional outcome.
Other than the hours.
That brings that brings the
struggle for me as well.
So with that.
My district to my area will
split.
Happy to see where this goes
looking forward to seeing where
the where the data brings us
later on thank you thank you
very much Representative
chairman Romero thank you very
much director thank you Mr Liu
and all those here today thank
you very much thank you Mr
chairman thank you.
Okay members we know we're sort
of racing the clock for the
floor we do have chair Lara here
with us that he come up and
present House Bill five thirty
three.
What.
and members this is House Bill
five thirty three the generic
bill this is been posted on the
website as my understanding is
being passed out Representative
Lara is here to explain this
legislation thank you Mr speaker
Mr chairman members of the
committee.
House Bill of possible version
by committees of fruit of House
Bill five thirty three
is a part of the insurance issue
that we were trying to tackle
this the session for educators
and I would like to just say
first of all that that insurance
and as personally coming one
hundred percent of the insurance
is of utmost importance to me
and to many of our our our
teachers and other school
employees around the state and I
wanted to make that that that
statement and that this is just
what I believe is a bandaid on
that issue but at least we get
we get the the needle moving and
at least we get that
conversation started moving I
would also like to say Mister
Mister chair members of the
committee this bill is of this
bill has the unallocated and H.
B. two that's the thirty two
million dollars for the
insurance so.
What this does is it basically
it it enables the the is the the
enabling legislation for us
utilize all star two million
dollars that are being H. B. two
and Mr speaker Mr chair members
of the committee I also have two
experts with me today in case we
need them we have more thinking
done with them see a and the
same in terms of the DFA and
without a separate questions Mr
chair great thank thank you so
much Representative Lara great
to see you both
and as you mentioned this is an
H. B. two is there anybody who
wishes to speak on house bill
five thirty three.
Please.
Thank you for the opportunity
chairman members of the
committee gender to they have to
New Mexico we obviously
supported house bill two but we
think that this is a good
decision by this body to protect
the gains that you have provided
on insurance coverage so that we
can continue to work on it we
agree with the the Sanchez
comments that this is sort of an
incremental approach and and so
we would like to suggest that as
you consider looking at issues
of insurance on page seven line
line you could replace the word
eighty with one hundred which
would allow local districts to
continue to incentivize it's a
permissive change but it's
something that we I will
continue to advocate for but it
is a simple fix that would allow
local control should districts
want to incentivize retention
recruitment in that way but we
do urge your support on this
legislation thank you thank you
very much okay anybody else I
don't see anybody anybody
online.
I don't see any hands that are
raised will go to the committee
for questions.
Senator please.
Mr chair clarifying question I
think we just got reference to
page seven line line the doesn't
show that number on online ten
eighty is actually crossed out
and one hundred percent shows a.
Mr chair R. the original bill
the original substitute two two
five five nine five point one
was one that was posted online
and that is the one that the
that the that the public has
access to there was some missing
information most notably the
last page it would page number
eight and so now two two five
five nine five point two has
been uploaded to the website and
that is the the bill that that
we have in front of us.
Mr chair and representative the
concern that was just voiced by
one of the public members has
already been addressed Mr chair
representative correct thank Mr
chair thank you Representative
the following question thank you
very much Representative group
any other questions I don't see
any will go by your Dixon for
the motion.
Thank you Mr speaker I would
move house appropriations and
finance.
I would move a do not pass on
house bill.
At five thirty three and they do
pass on house appropriations and
finance committee substitute for
House Bill five thirty three.
Their second so I am a
Representative Pettigrew okay
let's call the roll please.
Yes.
Yes.
After.
Yes.
Representative.
Yes.
Yes.
Representative.
Yes.
Share small yes.
Graduations Representative lot
and thank you for your
extraordinary leadership on this
issue thank you Mr Kirk thank
you members of the committee
Kate we're gonna ask
Representative Trujillo on house
bill one thirty four.
Okay in the past.
Representative Trujillo please
go ahead feel free to introduce
your expert we know we're racing
the clock to try to get as much
done before we have to the Mr
chair this is a simple
the simple we part of this bill
before it this is a simple
request for a change to bring
to take the tabled motions back
to the out of wait wait thank
you Representative Centria we
don't we we did not table this
bill it was inadvertently not
taken up it was included in a so
so we don't need to remove this
bill from the tech okay so we
would then I.
Have an expert witness who would
like to briefly explain what our
bill is regarding Mr products in
school bathrooms very short
thank you Representative and
thank you Mr chair committee my
name is.
So if the only and I am one of
the high school seniors as we're
working with Representative
Trujillo on this bill you've
heard me speak a few weeks ago
regarding its funding when
you're passing HB to so I
promise I will make this quick
you've already appropriated one
million dollars for this project
HB to today we're not asking for
more we're just asking you to
use that money through the
provisions outlined in H. B. one
thirty four.
The money HB to is simply
finding it doesn't outline where
to go or how should be used it's
contingent upon passing H. B.
one thirty four four and five
students like me had to miss
class because of their period
today you have the power to
change that what this bill does
is use the money for H. B. two
to assure that the right
products and public elementary
middle and high school bathrooms
are accessible to anyone has a
period.
To be here I was a biology lab
so that that for and I don't
have to anymore.
Representatives today you were
giving New Mexico students what
they deserve we're providing
drugs emergencies you're showing
the pop the positivity and
natural bodily function and
you're giving them an equal
equal opportunity in education
thank you thank you very much
with them okay we do have an
amendment this amendment
members we it
house appropriation of finance
committee amendment number one
this strikes on page one line
thirteen making appropriation
and on page two strikes section
two in its entirety think it's
misli and noted there is funding
in the legislation R. and H. B.
two can we move that amendment
Mr chair as well by
Representative Lujan.
Say my Representative Garrett is
any opposition to adopting this
amendment.
Seeing none is there anybody who
wishes to speak on this here
today.
The and and please we were a go
ahead.
Okay I'm being reminded by my
fellow members that we have had
public comment so respectfully
will go to members will go for
the motion to Representative
vice chair Dixon and
Representative Lujan for the
second thank you Mr chair I
would move that the house bill
one thirty four as amended do
now pass.
Thanks in we thank you
Representative Dixon thank you
Representative Lujan is there
any opposition to that motion.
Okay please.
Okay Mister tree is just in
order to make sure that we're on
sort of things can you please
quit call the call the roll and
then we'll be able to explain go
ahead.
Yes.
Yes.
Yes.
Yeah
yes.
Yes.
Yes.
Excuse me for those members
would like to explain their vote
first representative from.
You Mr chairman hi I did a look
the sponsor know in advance that
I would generally I support what
we're trying to accomplish here
but for me I cannot support the
part about putting these drugs
in the men's bathroom so with
great respect to the sponsor I I
vote no on the bill for that
reason thank you very much
Representative Brown others who
would like to explain their
vote.
Representative please.
Mr chair thank you and thank you
Representative for the for the
bills
I voted yes for this because the
appropriation is there and all
the waited on the house floor.
And I like Representative Brown
have an issue with.
This spans our bathroom.
Thank you thank you very much
Representative group okay thank
you very much for surgery thank
you for your efforts okay
members we're gonna continue
going I've asked that we be
excuse from the floor session we
may not need that but we will
keep on Truckin so that thank
you to Representative Figueroa.
We're moving now members to
house bill two six Committee
substitute for House Bill to
sixty two.
And we have a thank you to our
staff for passing out an
amendment.
Representative great to see you
here.
we have also your experts we see
miss colours label.
All right.
Representative Mr chair.
You know the director Kelley
Slagle this bill is a broadband
bill it is to coordinate efforts
between the connect New Mexico
act passed in two thousand
twenty one and the establishment
of our office of broadband
access and expansion.
Want to go through the amendment
for the upgrade yes thank you
yeah this the amendment deals
with language on page nine of
the committee substitute it's
removing the brackets online
through and also on page ten
this is due to a conflict with
HB two that has already passed
so we need to make sure this
bill is in line with HB to.
Thank you and.
Thank you Representative monthly
to do number and point two two
five eight to five point one
that's a wee bit thank you
Representative someone to a
second by Representative Garrett
questions on the amendment.
If they just to confirm
Representative Representative
Figueroa you work with LFC staff
thanks to director Avid for
meeting on short notice and
thank you director Slagle that
correct yes great okay is there
any objection to house
appropriations and finance
committee amendment number one.
I don't see any we've adopted
that let's go back to the bill
is there anybody who wishes to
speak on the bill here in the
audience.
Briefly.
Chair members of the committee
I'm Graham on that volunteer
lead provided advocate with a a
RP New Mexico.
And we strongly support this
bill
expanding the availability of
broadband is a very important
job policy for a a RP nationwide
unfortunately we have a large
part of New Mexico this does not
have access to high speed
internet and the that includes
our members particularly in
rural areas these two groups
have the responsibility of
trying to deploy a over a
billion dollars of money for the
purpose of getting broadband
just pull out throughout the
state and this bill helps to
coordinate how they work
together and in doing so well we
believe further the ability to
get this project done which is
monumental thank you very much
appreciated thank you very much
okay we'll go to the committee
are there any questions
Representative Lujan.
Mr chair thank the special thank
you to repeat this this is free
money for so that we can match
it to federal dollars.
Mr Chairman representative this
is not just for any additional
appropriation but the compact
New Mexico funded exists is for
that purpose yes thank you they
are Representative replace.
Thank you chairman thank you
Representative.
Representative for bringing the
I do have a couple questions
Mr Chairman representative and
director director what what your
title with the state of New
Mexico.
I thank you chairman and
committee members and
representative for that question
my name is Kelly Slagle and the
director of funding for the
office of broadband access and
expansion and pointed by the
governor made July.
Thank thank you for that answer
and that chairman so as I read
the the committee substitute.
The star soften act relating to
broadband amending sections of
the connect New Mexico act
transferring implementation of
the grant program from connected
Mexico counsel to the office of
broadband access to expansion Mr
chair Representative and
director I will.
That would be your office
correct.
So.
Chairman
Representative and director.
That would give you.
What what and the fact given the
executive office.
Distribution abilities with
respect to funds rate and that
would take that Mr Chairman
representative of away from the
ledge
hundred would that be correct Mr
chair and representative that
connect New Mexico council is
still in effect if you read
through the bill that is what we
created in house bill ten and
that body is now of the advisory
body to the office of broadband
access and expansion because
that Advisory Council meets
monthly and has the broad
overview of what the different
broadband projects are in all
the different departments across
the state they give the pull
together that advisory play and.
The office of broadband access
and expansion has to implement
it and they have to respond
quickly to federal grant offers
and proposals coming in and out
so they're the implementing that
advisory policy.
Thank you.
Thank you Mr chair thank
representative for that answers
I read through page five which I
have read the bill
I can't eight.
At least eight of the members
that are appointed by the by the
executive office.
granted they are confirmed by
the Senate but at the same time
they're appointed that ways of.
It's that Mr chair those my
questions and that gave me my
answers thank you very much
Representative Pettigrew there
any other questions.
Ranking member Armstrong please
I'm sorry I was just trying to.
Go through the.
Amendments that and I don't see
a page.
Ten.
In my book.
Mr chair I definitely have a
Page ten on the Canadian side
okay that's the problem okay
never mind I'm sure it's do you
what does everyone else of the
committees so thank you ranking
member Armstrong we we have a
committee substitute that skips
from.
Our rate goes from nine to
eleven.
Three.
Agent we're not.
Okay.
There's our answer.
Are we can make copies I have it
yeah right well please so with
its online what we're going to
ask just a hold we're going to
hold this off let's get copies
we see Representative Nanda is
here selling credible amount of
patience so Representative if
you could get those copies
mislabeled and let's get that
squared away thank you to
ranking member Armstrong for
pointing it out thank you thank
you Mr chair Kate members I'm
gonna ask for a motion to bring
back for a remove from the table
House Bill three seventy seven
as amended.
Okay it's been moved by by or
disincentive by Representative
Sanchez we're making at its next
order of business is there any
opposition.
Stating that and to.
Representative sons
Representative Hernandez it was
second by Representative Sanchez
Representative Hernandez great
to see you Secretary great to
see you here today we wanted to
bring this back members because
Your working through
we have an amendment here.
But thank you we wanted to to
bring you back
We can we have a motion for
House appropriation of finance
committee amendment number one
some of okay it's been sect move
by ranking member Armstrong
seconded by Representative Lujan
point two to five numbers point
two two five eight one four
point one.
can you explain briefly do you
have the amendment
Representative around.
Half a second hydrated in my
phone which was a good and bad
idea.
Okay
So what this does is takes out
districts house sorry Mr chair
strikes the house commerce and
economic development committee
amendment number four which
change the effective date from
twenty three to twenty five and
then.
Changes that from twenty twenty
three to twenty twenty four.
Great thank you for that
Representative great Canadian
conversation around sort of
twenty twenty four still be in
our purview
Representative Montoya the.
Got I've got a great okay we got
that any questions on committee
substitute
Okay let's go for a motion.
We've got them in the past was
it'll be the house commerce and
economic development committee
substitute as and as amended
twice as.
Yes okay we have a motion for a
new path.
And it by Representative Montoya
for House commerce and economic
development committee substitute
for House Bill three seventy
seven as twice in and with.
I'm going to try to go a little
too fast too.
Okay Representative Montoya
you're right the first time
House Bill three that can you
make the motion for house bill
three seventy seven as amended.
Advertisement and now Mr chair.
The amendment to house bill
three seventy seven as amended.
Okay okay it's been moved by
Representative Montoya for House
Bill three seventy seven with
our amendment second by
Representative Garrett is there
any opposition to that motion.
Seeing none thank you very much
for percent and on this we do
pass.
Okay.
Yeah we're gonna ask.
And that was on the bill to that
was on the bill to.
Representative Dixon complete so
we thank you Secretary great to
see you.
We had adopted the amendment by
acclamation if we.
Let's go back.
As twice amended.
Right down there second second
by by two Dixon
the mystery is can you call the
roll on this phone this.
Yes.
Yes.
Yeah.
He just likes pushing.
Yes yes.
Yes.
Kate thank you very much thank
you thank you Mr.
Okay
There.
The yes please so we're gonna go
back to house bill two sixty
two.
Like this to be a Nicholas cage
movie the third phase with the
phone.
Okay thank you Representative
Figueroa.
Members will take our time here
so we're on house bill two sixty
two.
Kate members let's go back to
the amendment it's point two two
five eight to five point one.
If.
Yes.
The state.
So.
Thank you okay let's hold off.
What we've got here members is
are amendment applies to page
nine and played Page ten we've
got Page ten here in front of
us.
OK Representative Figueroa I
think you explain that the
amendment was made to conform to
house bill two.
We're on.
More on and questions on the
amendment page nine intend which
fortunately we do have a ten.
Any questions on the amendment.
Okay I don't see any director
Avid to confirm this conforms
with House Bill to.
Okay is there any opposition.
No no that's great.
I thought I had an.
The headline is there any
opposition to adopting house
appropriations and finance
committee amendment one to
committees house government
elections in Indian Affairs
Committee substitute for house
bill sixty two.
Two sixty two thank you okay
seeing opposition we've adopted
that amendment.
director is there anything that
you'd like to say on the bill
before we go to members for any
other questions.
I'm just just a quick summary
and that that New Mexico connect
council is.
Members of broadband sneeze and
been very very helpful and where
they're like our sister
organization but they meet once
a month and their volunteers I
don't have any hands and feet so
this just gives us the power to
be in the hands and feet to do
the grant making and get this
good state money out to real
meaningful projects across the
state thank you director
questions on the bill before us.
Thing then we'll go to for.
We
were on the bill could add up to
the.
Okay Representative Garcia
please.
Thank you chairman of small
thank you for committee members
and thank you representative
Garcia for that question that
thank you so we've had many
thanks Representative Garcia
it's it's a process okay I know
you wanted immediately and total
lie and they feel for everybody
who's struggling with that but
at the same time by the time you
grant the money and you do the
right to lay and you do them
very mental surveys and utility
everything that's needed do that
things order the fiber and all
that it's it's literally like a
three to five year process you
and once the money is is
allocated or granted.
Thank you very much
Representative Garcia.
Any other questions.
Okay we're gonna go to the
committee for a motion.
Mr chair I move the do pass for
House Bill to sixty two as
amended sorry sorry sorry
K. Mr chair.
I move a.
I do not pass for House sorry
hold on okay.
We we have a we we are not
making a substitute this is the
bill that we're on is the house
government elections in Indian
Affairs Committee substitute
you'll make a motion based upon
us that yes okay Mr chair I move
we do passed for House
government elections in Indian
Affairs Committee substitute for
House Bill to sixty two as
amended second okay it's been
moved by Representative Garrett
second by Representative brown
let's call the roll on that
please.
This.
Yes.
If.
Yes.
Representative.
No.
Yes.
Yes.
Yes.
Kate thank you thank you
Representative for the euro
thank you director K. members we
have one final bill by your
Dixon is going to present house
appropriation of finance
committee substitute for House
Bill five fifty.
Okay yeah we're getting it out.
By their Dicks and if you could
read also the two to five number
on the bottom make sure all of
our members have.
Thank you Mr chair at the two to
five number is point two two
five six six six point one
that doesn't bode ill this.
Okay and great to see miss raven
the advice Sir would you please
tell us about the
thank you Mr chair and just as
an FYI we do have an expert
witness on the line on zoom
should he can be needed to
answer any questions is with the
Albuquerque police department
Jeff Bernard.
Could commander Jeff Bernard
House Appropriations finance and
finance a committee substitute
for House Bill five fifty
is corresponding language that
will help with the distribution
of funds that are in house bill
two to allow jurisdictions law
enforcement jurisdictions are
to
pursue outstanding warrants and
with that Mr chair will stand
for questions.
The vice chair Dixon and great
to have somebody online is there
anybody the anybody wishes to
speak on this bill here.
The content and okay
and online we have our expert we
can go are there any other hands
race.
Okay we'll go to the committee
Representative Lujan
Representative Montoya then
ranking member Armstrong
Representative Lujan.
Thank you researchers of reading
to the bill so this.
This fund will.
Health law enforcement go out
in and arrest individuals with
outstanding warrants and it also
has a section on page three line
for that.
It also to allows for data.
Data cleanup advertising in
conducting safe surrender vents
at which a person with an
outstanding work may result in
outstanding workplace safe
surrender what kind of.
Kind of warrants I mean kind of.
Point are we looking at here
Mister.
Mr chair this might be a great
opportunity for our expert
witness who is on soon to
answer.
Give us a real life example of
that would work they they vice
chair Dixon can we.
Okay
and commander did you hear the
question it is the could one of
the questions commanders to sort
of get some examples of how this
would be used.
Thank you guys for allowing me
to see it at all it is not able
to make it and I'm going to
answer any questions you have a
limited general art I'm the
deputy commander for the
investigative services division
and a lot of the teams that work
for me this actually is actually
under his chin
so what we would be doing with
this as we when we look at our
UT a hundred visitors what was
already and those of interest we
have a little different here
that we're looking at eight
eight that all the time I was
always looking at on the side
and there's this section and
there's
and in the other area that we're
looking at is you just have old
Lawrence some people to have a
lot of.
Trafficking works
things of that nature and maybe
process between the two as a
recent example to this we had a
gentleman is one of the units by
the New Mexico Civil Rights you
had twelve and auditability once
the times are audited human
contact with him and then he
proceeded to those that is we
were able to apprehend him a
couple weeks ago but that's kind
of an element that we're looking
to add for you so we can prevent
further criminal acts nineties
offenders.
Thank thank you Mr chair thank
you thank you presenters so
these are felony warrants that
you're going after
and you're gonna for it seems
like there's a privatization
which I'm grateful for I
appreciate this getting tires
her thank thank you very much
Representative Lujan
Representative Montoya then
ranking member Armstrong.
Thank you Mr chair.
And Representative
I'm not exactly sure why
the departments are not going
out.
Warrants currently I'm not what
what is the reason that what
what what makes this legislation
that's necessary.
Mr chair this may I ask our
expert witness to
Find an answer please commander
and and if you could speak a
little bit as loudly as possible
commander are sound systems a
little quiet.
So we are going to do these
offenders I think that right now
which is our resource so the
idea behind this is that this
will give us additional funds
where we could have teams
working overtime shifts you try
to a.
Address the backlog in the city
I mean right now to give you an
idea losses I think that we were
over five thousand.
In the accounting area now a lot
of those some of them are a
little bit early anymore others
the the rest in other
jurisdictions on we believe that
eight hundred number is some of
our most active individuals area
and I I'm resources you have the
backlog it will affect.
Mr chair if I may add to that
one of the advantages of
allowing this type of targeted
and in depth the work to be done
in
Sort of.
Mexico identifying people with
the outstanding warrants in
these.
Criminals of so to speak
the police departments for the
law enforcement agencies because
of course this
This funding applies to all and
law enforcement around the state
it allows the law enforcement to
build a strong case going into
the arrest and apprehension of
this individual so that they're
more likely to stay behind bars
once they are arrested.
Thank you Mr chair so we're
we're we're getting this today
so there's no FIR so what is the
fiscal impact what is the amount
that we're talking about Mr
chair representative.
Mr chair there is seven million
dollars in house bill two and
original originally there was
actually a bill that tied to
this however when it came to
have House Appropriations a week
or so ago the language was too
complicated to simply amend and
so as a result it was brought
forward as a substitute.
So Mister chair and
representative of I actually
like to see
an amendment on the floor
because this seems open ended if
there's not a dollar amount
that's requests it does.
I mean the money was set aside
what happens if we exceed that
money.
Mr chair may miss raven answer
that for provide companies.
Thank you Mr chair
representative the money that's
it included in house bill two is
a definite amount of seven
million dollars to the
department of finance and
administration for felony
warrant enforcement all of this
of this proposed substitute
States the money this
specifically applies to money
that was appropriated pursuant
to the General Appropration Act
of twenty twenty three from the
general fund to DFA for felony
warning him enforcement shall be
distributed and then it provides
the additional conditions
throughout the rest of the bill
thank you Mr chair and
representative one last question
there's a safe safe surrender
provision in here what how does
that work is it would that would
a letter go out to the.
To someone who has a warrant out
and encourage them that they can
come in I I I mean I'm sure
they're not gonna be reading
this law Mr chair thank you Mr
chair could are deputy commander
of answer that question perhaps.
Yeah so so far we've and just a
reminder I apologize to go
through the chair.
Through the Airways.
Thank it go ahead please just
add sorry deputy commander go
ahead please.
My apologies so we've had some
communication with some of our
partner so what we're looking at
just one to choose to return it
is in addition to what we're
looking at to give an idea of
how we would anticipate are
working as we're working with
our clients and probably the end
of the measure of all in on to
consider here and advertising
the chairman for areas once
that's still being discussed I
would have would we be looking
out for that in the different
things that go over there what
it would basically be giving
people the option to turn
themselves in other words and
and then depending on what the
words are for various relief
options and things like that so
it's just a way so we can deal
with a large portion of the log
and allowing people the
opportunity to move on from the
it is the or they want to get
some sort of resolution for them
and also for the victims of
crime.
Thank you Mr chairman I'll
support this going forward I
would like to see an FIR on the
house floor with this because as
it is there's nothing.
The company in this thank you Mr
thank you Representative Montoya
ranking member Armstrong thank
you Mr chairman I'll be quick
and to the point I'm really
happy that for oil county is is
named in here but it's
unfortunate that all the other
counties are not specifically
named that says you know county
sheriff's offices within any
county but the also the title of
the bills for felony felony
warrant enforcement and so I
think madam Mr chairman of
Representative that some are
there may be some confusion and
I was curious how was the money
allocated as a grant is that an
application it how does that
work madam Mr speaker Mr
chairman thank you Mr chair and
thank you ranking member
Armstrong for that wonderful
question before I answer that
however I would like to assure
Representative Montoya and the
rest of the committee that there
will be an FIR on the floor
available to them it can't be
made available until the
substitutes adopted so
Back to your question Madam
ranking member so there is
actually laid out in the bill
really good criteria on how
these determinations are gonna
be made so I'd like to turn it
over to ms Ramon but I would
like to commend
LFC and our wonderful staff for
working with law enforcement
agencies and DPS to come up with
criteria for how the money is
distributed as well as reporting
back and so if I may miss raven.
Yes Mr chair members of the
committee
Representative Armstrong on page
for us subsection seed describes
the.
Criteria that the department of
finance and administration so
consider with regard to how to
distribute the funding
and subsection D. subsidy also
provides for that.
And Mr chair and ranking member
the other nice thing about this
bill is it does accommodate
additional needs from
participating entities like the
courts
and district attorneys so this
is not just a one.
Little part of the criminal
legal system puzzle really
supporting all of it thank you
Mr chairman thank you for the
answer I apologize for not
seeing that so.
Thank you Representative and
ranking member.
Representative Pettigrew
Representative Sweetser in rural
Simmons with for second time
Representative Pettigrew please
thank you chairman and thank you
for.
For the bill.
our ranking member on our side
of the I stole my thunder
I've just why.
Chairman was it necessary to
name Bernalillo county.
Why was it necessary.
To name the public defender's
Department and burn Bernalillo
county when the public defender
is the address again and nine
thirteen of page three and I can
go all the way down there I just
don't understand why we're
separating that.
Chairman.
Mr Chairman Representative had a
group so in consultation with my
experts mistreatment one of the
data points that I think would
help understand that is the fact
that Bernalillo county is
approximately twenty five
percent of the state's
population and actually about
fifty percent of the crime and
so really calling out that
necessity.
However.
Mr chair and representative if
you would like.
I wouldn't you know welcome the
floor amendment to call out Lea
County as well if you'd like.
Mr chair and and and madam vice
chair.
This isn't.
About calling all the counties
out there so that I just don't
understand why one gets called
out I understand the problem
that exists within Bernalillo
county
I think that we can blame
hundred twelve people for that
in the in the in many ways.
and so with respect to that.
Chairman.
Madam vice chair.
What I would like to see inside
the FIR is from live on section
one AA.
One through to.
Seven page two exactly one of
those departments are putting in
initial percentage to the seven
million that they will have
available to request thank you
chairman thank you madam vice
chair thank you very much
Representative Pettigrew
representative sciences and
resentment Representative
Sweetser Representative Allison
and resentment with for second
Representative senses thank you
Mr chair I'm glad to see that it
sounds like Bernalillo county's
pushing this and other fully
aware that this money is going
to be available how are you
ensuring that other counties
like Cibola Valencia Rio Arriba
I got to know about this Santa
Fe
Mr chair the past a lot of
things and there's a lot of
programs for there's money if
people don't know about them so
how are these counties or
municipalities that I know that
this money is available and I
guess my second question and my
last question is a is a first
come first serve how are you
gonna make sure that I guess
Bernalillo county doesn't use at
all and it's available to
everyone else thank you thank
you Mr chair and thank you
Representative Sanchez I think
that's a really great points
that I'd like to to flag one of
the things that I think we
learned last year was that
perhaps without providing very
specific criteria the.
Sharing of information and
application forms
I think what we saw is that they
could have been done better when
the funding last year was
distributed for law enforcement
I'm not calling out Los crucis
my.
But
I just had to get that I think
that those those are very great
points and also there may be
There may be a really good
reason not to call out specific
counties and so I think that's
something that we can look at.
So.
Mr chair I guess I know uses
petition.
How how is early above a orders
Santa Fe County that I know that
this money is available.
Thank you Mr chairman thank you
Representative one of the things
that I would hope is that the
department of public safety
would coordinate well with all
of their law enforcement
partners at every level and have
a very thorough distribution and
dissemination of information
about how to apply and and
sharing the criteria
That is not specified in the
bill exactly how deep yes we'll
be doing that Mr chair
representative but
one you know I think we can.
Hope that it would be done that
way.
Mr chair I guess is there some
way we can ask them to
disseminate that information
made in this bill and I guess if
we say.
I I see a Bernalillo county
using also the million.
Right away thank you Mr chair.
Thank you Mr chairman thank you
Representative and yes we can
actually go ahead and specify
that up Mr chair I know that
there are a couple other folks
with questions and so we would
certainly welcome them one of
the things in consultation with
I expert it might behoove us to
actually present another
substitute that addresses that
addresses some of those issues
but if it would be valuable to
continue the discussion to see
if there are other items that we
should incorporate
that that that sounds good let's
uh so thank you Representative
Sanchez we're gonna go to
Representative about us and them
so Montoya and we're now it's
sort of the Sanchez asked for
any other potential suggestions
where we would look at a a
slightly updated versions
Representative Allison and
questions any question Mr chair.
Representative Dixon my question
is on the first page where it
says the general fund to the FAA
for felony warrants for Smith
shall be distributed by DFA to
the following these and then all
page two of line nineteen of
bracketed Lum number nine county
sheriff's offices within any
county so I'm reading that to me
that this could be an accounting
including San Juan County in my
district area.
if that is correct I hope that
is correct because of we have
some fellows thank they have a
safe haven on the Navajo Nation
because of sovereign.
Mr chair and.
Mr chair and representative
Allison so the San Juan county
sheriff's office would be able
to apply for funds for the
outstanding warrants.
How that works specifically if
the
The person that they're looking
for is on tribal lands that
would be a.
Outside of my scope of knowledge
and sort of outside of the
purview of the bill if the.
Okay Mr chair and Representative
Dixon.
There have been times that I
have called the sheriff's
department like for example
during the of the hemp shoes in
the four corners area and they
told me that they do not have
jurisdiction because of
sovereignty issues so in a way
that makes the felons think that
they're in a safe haven when
they're on the Navajo Nation.
Thank you Mr chairman thank you
Representative and that's
something that we can actually
work to get to a better answer
on.
Thanks for that thank you Mr
chair thank you very much
Representative Allison
Representative Montoya thank you
Mr Representative Allison on
that point I understand that
there's some memorandum of
agreement between Navajo Nation
police and the sheriff's office
in San Juan County that they've
been working on.
But I understand there's some
collaboration Mr chair
Representative Dixon
a couple of times Representative
of you mentioned DPS of putting
together criteria and I don't
see DPS in this bill at all it's
all DFA my apologies Mr chair
and representative Montoya you
are correct it is DFA out of
habit from the law enforcement
recruitment and retention fund I
was thinking DPS but it is DFA
okay Madam chair one last thing
I might suggest that we hold off
on this we're not going to hear
okay we're where we want to take
action now okay thank you Mr
chair because I know at the
speaker has made it clear he
doesn't like.
Force thank you okay we're gonna
go to Representative Chatfield
Representative Chatfield and
representative Garcia.
So Mr chair thank you guys just
spoke to a little bit of what I
was thinking about it I just
hope that we don't hold off on
it so long that it doesn't have
time to get to the Senate
because I think it's very
important we clean this state up
thanks gonna take a little extra
focus to do it and I didn't know
about the aversion to many
things on the floor so if that
doesn't happen that I hope that
we can get back to it quickly
here.
Thank you
okay so well we're we're going
to go back for a second time
Representative Garcia and then
we'll go back to Representative
Sweetser Representative Garcia
thank you Mr chairman thanks for
the presentation you know my
concern are on the streamlined
to Representative Allison and
Representative I just have you
know we need to make sure local
might my district is sixty five
from native and we need to make
sure that these funds are
distributed equally for
everybody benefits from a fifth
of good deals Representative
Chatfield said we need to do the
state up.
But if we don't dispersed as
money properly.
Some of the state's going to get
cleaned up in response to the
same just a thought thank you
thank you very much
representative Garcia
Representative Sanchez please Mr
chair I don't have the rest of
the committee feels but if we
have a commitment from the
sponsor to get amended in the
Senate I don't have a problem
passing and now because I think
what will what will I think we
we can bring this back tomorrow
we've got twenty more bills I'm
just kind.
no we we can bring this back
quickly I I think we've had a
very good appreciate very much
folks taken through and madam
vice chair will ask if we can
just come back with a new
committee substitute Mr chair
that would be wonderful these
are great suggestions and my
experts is raven is going to
work on the language with regard
to tribal law enforcement we
think that there's a path
forward on that and so the the
feedback is very much
appreciated and will be like a
split when we come back with the
bigger and better substitute Hey
thank you very much vice chair
members thank you very much for
a good day thank you we're Jr.
