The first.
Representative Armstrong.
I.
Around here.
Have.
For.
Your.
This year yeah.
The first
one.
Here.
Your.
Yeah.
Representative.
I'm here.
Representative.
Yes I do
Here.
I'm here thank you so much this
would just excellent we we
absolutely have a quorum thank
you everyone thank you committee
we have a full schedule today
one item we just do want to
mentioned in this is something
that's been discussed we are
going to
Ask for and and be excited for
public input of course the
budget is the most important
document for one of the most
important policy statements that
the state can make we're because
it's a little new we're gonna be
working with some different ways
to find the right approach we're
gonna start off with twenty
minutes at the end of the
meeting the public comment will
concern the agenda items that
have been discussed during the
meeting we're gonna ask folks to
keep it to a minute
but really excited for this
opportunity.
okay with that we're going to
follow for committee members
we're going to the way that we
conduct these hearings and it'll
be similar for all of the
agencies that we're going to
hear over the next couple weeks
we have two analysts they'll be
an analyst from the legislative
finance committee and an analyst
from the department of finance
administration sort of the
legislative and the executive
we'll have the analyst who
present followed by principals
from the various offices then
they'll be a chance for us as
committee members to ask
questions there's a legend
there's a budget framework that
the legislature has passed in a
bipartisan fashion coming into
the session we are tendency is
to accept the lower
recommendation to stay within
the framework there may often be
times where we need to identify
members to work closely with
staff and agencies to maybe
address discrepancies or
differences that might arise
during the presentations will
take a little bit extra time
over these first couple hearings
so that we can point folks to
the right places and all of our
volumes
and with that we're gonna start
with agency code three five six.
And this is going to be the
office of the governor we're
going to ask Miss statesman and
Mr minor and of course miss
because some of those who to be
up there at
the table starting us off.
We'll go ahead and get started
the statesman when you're ready
and so point us to HSD code
three five six members we'll go
ahead and get over there.
Third.
Thank you to okay by your text
it's point out the third packet
under our first tab this is a
different state we'll take a
little bit of time as we sort of
work through this assessment is
holding it up.
Okay I think most of it we're
getting to that point so this is
me if you can give us to get us
started thank you Mr chair
members of the committee again
my name is Jessica hits then I'm
the LFC analyst for the office
of the governor again HSD three
five six if you are interested
in following along in your
volume to the thick book in
front of you you'll find the
governor's budget on page one
thirteen and one fourteen.
I will go ahead and start Mr
chair by reviewing the agency's
Revenue at this time both
recommendations both the LFC and
executive recommendation and I
can hold off a moment Mister
chair if you'd like yet given
thank you with the quick moment
members we're going to and madam
pulling up the large volume to.
The absolutely the rate will be
at the bottom of the page
number.
I think we're ready please take
us on thank you Mr chair so
going over the revenue for the
office of the governor of both
recommendations at this time
support equal revenues from the
general fund this constitutes a
one point one percent increase
over FY twenty three the agency
does not receive additional
sources of revenue but you can
see that the agency was
recommended just under five
point five million dollars again
in general fund revenues not
handed over to it Mister miner
for our comments on the base
thank you Jessica good afternoon
Mr chairman and committee
members again I'm Andrew Miner
of the DFA analyst for the
office of the governor in terms
of the bass expenditure
recommendations both the
executive and the legislative
recommendations support agencies
requested expenditures in all
categories and that includes a
sixty point two thousand dollar
increase for slight risk rate
increases for person with that
I will turn over to miss out of.
Great thank you very much good
afternoon Mr chair madam vice
chair members of the committee
I'm Theresa because all those on
the governor's chief operations
officer it's really great to see
you guys all in person today and
I just want to say hello and
look forward to working
collaboratively with you over
the next four years so I'm
excited about that as you can
see there's a presentation that
you were provided the office of
the governor continues to work
on statewide initiatives one of
the initiatives that we're doing
this year is the Mexico food
farming hunger initiative that
initiative helps identify gaps
in services it provides funding
to support food banks and hunger
relief organizations it's
working with local farmers and
growers in the New Mexico grown
initiative to find locally
produced fruits vegetables and
meals to schools senior centers
and preschools initiative also
continues to the program for
double up food Bucks which
incentivizes purchasing at
locally grown fruits and
vegetables at farmers markets
and farm stands.
Another statewide initiative
we're working on is the family
focused initiative which
continues to reduce or eliminate
child care costs to over thirty
thousand New Mexico families and
expanded child care assistance
across New Mexico.
I also want to make sure all of
you are aware of the new child
care center that we opened up
for state employees at the
Montoya building and a small
space of the look let me
building currently we have
thirty nine children enrolled so
if you haven't had an
opportunity to go by and look at
that new statewide center I
encourage you to do so.
Our office continues to
prioritize the need of all
constituents across the state in
addition to the nearly forty
thousand plus emails and phone
calls we received last fiscal
year we're continuing with our
cabinet in your community
initiatives so this will resume
following the legislative
session and members of our
cabinet and our staff will be
going out across the state to
listen to the needs of
constituents in every community
and find solutions to them on
site.
additional initiatives which
we're working on include housing
and homelessness health care in
behavioral health education and
child well being and also as you
all aware public safety so the
request that you have before you
was a one point one percent
increase since submitting that
increase we have reviewed the
priorities of the governor we've
looked at legislation and some
of the statewide initiatives
that we're currently doing and
today I'm here to request that
that increase be considered at a
higher range we are looking for
an increase of about ten percent
as opposed to the one percent so
I apologize for not getting that
to you sooner we've looked at
other ways that we can funded
these initiatives in our office
and continue that work
I know that we've made
significant investments in
education that was a priority
for the governor when she took
office and it continues to be a
priority of hers today we've
hired Scott Groginsky as our
education adviser and I think I
saw him in the audience maybe
not
but Scott comes to us with
extensive policy a legislative
experience would you bring to
our team however in order to
recruit and retain what we're
finding just like all other
state agencies if we're not able
to do that for the same dollar
amount that we were able to do
it two years ago or three years
ago it's taking more money to
find qualified candidates it's
taking that additional funding
to bring them on board and we
want to make sure that we're
able to then retain those
individuals once we bring them
in and they're on board with
getting the agencies up and
running so.
After hiring Scott it let us let
us to some compaction issues
within our office that needed to
be addressed and so we are
working on that and that's big
reason for the additional
assets.
But I have no doubt that call
Scott will complement what we're
doing with the public education
department is doing and we'll
start to see benefits for
students across the state.
Earlier I spoke to you about the
New Mexico food farming hunger
initiative I'm not sure many of
you have met Kendall Chavis but
she leads this effort for our
office she was hired through a
grant that went to DFA we want
to make sure that when this
grant ends at the end of June
that we're able to continue that
work that candle brings on food
initiatives we've also hired Amy
Whitfield which I'm sure most of
you have met because she's out
there talking with people and
doing incredible work on housing
insecurity and homelessness this
problem has become exceedingly
visible in New Mexico and was
exacerbated by the pandemic Amy
is working in creating a cross
service approach that integrates
public health behavioral health
and support services Amy is
solutions oriented and I look
forward to seeing great results
from her hard work these are
just three of the positions that
we've added to our office in the
last several months we still
have other policy positions
vacant that we're looking to
fill and want to make sure that
we have the funding available to
fill those positions with people
who are qualified right now in
the work force to come in and
make the best possible choices
for the constituents of the
state of New Mexico.
So that's the reason for today's
increased requests I hope that
you will give that consideration
our total amount of our budget
for the governor's office comes
in just shy of six million
dollars it's five point nine
nine four and would stand for
any questions that you might
have with respect to this
request thank you Mr chair thank
you very much was because they
get to the analyst we're gonna
go straight to questions
Representative Sanchez Mr chair
my first question what was the
the budget last year compared to
the request this year I
graduated last year Mr chair
Representative Sweetser our
budget last year was five point
four.
It was very close to six.
Five point nine nine.
Thank you Mr chair.
Thank you.
Mr chair can I please comment on
that I just want to clarify that
the request as it came into the
LFC and the executive at the
time of the deadline of
submission which is September
first the request was five point
four nine so just under five and
a half so really the difference
in the request between last year
and this year was that sixty
thousand for insurance as Andrew
Miner mentioned but again with
this additional ask that she's
coming with you all today on the
LFC has not received that
request in advance that's being
requested today so we would go
from a difference of just sixty
thousand from last year to five
hundred and sixty thousand.
Thank you the next we're gonna
go to Representative care.
Thank you Mr chairman thank you
for the presentation I certainly
agree that Scott Groginsky and
the other two people are really
needed the governor hasn't had
education point person so thank
you for doing that how many
constituent services employees
are there and you keep track of
it says hundreds per day our
address requests from
constituents how many are on
that staff.
Mr chair representative Garrett
we currently have two full time
employees working on our
constituent services we have one
vacant F. T. E. which we are
currently recruiting for and yes
we do keep track so requests
that come into our office come
in either through internet forum
which we use that we can track
those requests and we can track
how long it takes us to respond
to them and we also have a
system on our telephones where
we monitor the call they get
transferred into our
constituents services as well
okay thank you and Mr Chairman
just one more question is
is it possible to get a print
out of who's in the governor's
office I mean I've been here
I've never received a list of
people I would I would just
think it's helpful Mr chairman
of the final question is
thrilling to hear about the
state employee child care center
is there a vision for that in
the future just.
Just briefly.
Mr chair representative Garrett
yes absolutely we can get you a
list of the staff in the
governor's office that is not a
problem at all and with respect
to the child care center I think
the vision for that center is to
make sure that there's not an
individual who wants to go back
to work in state government for
full time employment who has
difficulties with child care we
want to make sure that that's
available for everybody so as
they're returning to office they
have that opportunity the state
day care center operates the
same hours is normal state
employee hours so it opens up at
seven in the morning and pick up
is at six so people can get to
and from work and it is only
closed on state holidays and so
people have that opportunity
right now it is at capacity
there's not any conversation at
the moment to expand that we're
really working towards expanding
daycare in private sector
working with I think there's
been some interest from some
large firms and in Santa Fe that
are looking to do that which
hopefully will then open up some
of those daycare spots in other
areas for state employees.
Thank you very much our they are
so very Mexico Representative.
Okay.
That we have.
Working.
Thank you chairman
Thank you Mrs for here Trujillo
this I'm sorry this this is a
sorry I apologize for that
And I think my first comment is
to Representative Gareth would
be great to have a list of all
the employees
with their.
Office numbers in their state
cell phone numbers the work
under this.
Proposed five point nine nine
four million dollar budget.
and what their capacity is with
the role of chairman my My one
question goes to the childcare
facility that was opened up here
With the capacity to that
facility.
Chairman if you know much please
Mr Chairman representative
pedigree the capacity of the
child care center is forty two.
According to.
Mr chairman presenter
Many state employees to have an
local located in Santa Fe.
I'm Mr Chairman representative
Pettigrew I am not sure of the
number in Santa Fe alone I can
get that number for you and get
back to you we have just over
eighteen thousand state
employees right now but I don't
know isolated to Santa Fe.
Thank you Mr chairman thank you
for that answer out I'm aware of
what our state number is I'm
just curious what was the budget
for that child care facility.
Mr chair representative had a
group on the funding was used
from ECECD that they received in
federal funds to open child care
centers so these there wasn't a
budget per se for that
renovations were covered under
that and there was a small
amount of reserve rate
manipulations that were covered
by General Services Department
we have a private provider who's
running the center and the bill
the parents separately for the
cost of the center which is
supplemented if they qualify
through ECECD.
Chairman thank you for that
answer so what do you think best
guess.
The state spend was on that
facility.
That's a.
Mr chair representative
Pettigrew I would have to get a
figure from ECECD to see what it
was on federal dollars versus
what we did on speak spent state
spending but I'm happy to get
that figure for you.
Chairman I would love to have
that answer
One of those and when this was
announced what everything came
together on that
the least out of my district and
several different districts in
the southeast part of the state
for saying how does that help
us.
What does that do for us we're
going to fund this how does this
help us we actually have state
employees down there as well we
have beautiful we have so many
other things and we were able to
supply something for
For Santa Fe for state
government up here the house how
does that help the rest of the
state and and I guess that's a
bigger question I I see all the
state buildings around here and
and if we put all of our focus
in the to the facility that has
forty two.
Children the
Curious of our spend is in the
right place thank you Mr
chairman but thank you very much
Representative group Mexico
Representative a Cruz.
Thank you Mr.
I have a question regarding the
ten percent increase roughly
what categories in that increase
our.
Are are you for and then what.
For lack of a better term clumps
really fall into are the more
for within office operations to
the reach out to the
constituency if you could help
me with that.
Mr chair representative dela
Cruz the total amount of those
increases are two hundred and
personal services and benefits
it is not for any additional FTE
ease it is to fully fund the
FTEs we have it's one of the
positions that we're currently
recruiting for is a constituent
services representative so that
individual will work with
constituents across the state
but as I mentioned it continues
to fund the housing initiative
that we're doing which is a
statewide initiative continues
to provide but the the hunger
initiative it will help us
identify and bring in somebody
to help with public safety
initiatives so the initiatives
of those FTEs fund are statewide
and deal directly with
constituents thank you Mr
Senator chairman effect of the
secretary should have some.
End of the positions that you
just cited roughly how many I
have director constituency
impact on public impact.
Mr Chairman representative Dylan
Cruz of those just cited I
believe all of them have direct
impact with constituency thank
you Mr so thank you chairman
thank you very much
Representative LA Cruz listening
go to Representative heard thank
you.
This.
Sources
well still.
Mr chair representative Herndon
the children in the daycare
center are from six weeks to
four years.
We are.
These other items and then.
Mr Chairman representative
Herndon yes that was part of the
R. F. P. process that would that
would be an educational aspect
for those kids and age
appropriate education for
individuals participating.
Hey.
This.
I'm Mr Chairman representative
Herndon test for the older
children there is age
appropriate learning and did you
stay there all day it's open
from seven to six.
For.
Mr chair representative her did
we're looking to fill the vacant
F. T. E.'s that we have in our
office which I believe is seven.
Thank you very much of severed
in next ranking member
Armstrong.
Thank you Mr chairman and thank
you I was taking a look here in
the volume three on the
reversions and I noticed that
you were reverted seven hundred
sixty six thousand dollars last
year can you talk a little bit
about that and and with because
it's a little hard to give you
more money when you reverted so
much money.
Mr Chairman representative
Armstrong I understand
completely a lot of those
reversions I think as I
mentioned before in a previous
hearing we had difficulty during
the pandemic recruiting and
filling positions we still have
seven vacant positions so not
all of that five hundred
thousand goes to fill vacant
positions there is still money
in our existing budget to fill
those were just saying that
we're needing additional funding
but we are currently recruiting
to fill all the positions which
during the pandemic it's really
difficult to do we were part of
that time working home and it
was people were just taking on
the duties and running with the
and everybody was kind of job
sharing and picking up the slack
of not hiring employees and now
we're recruiting and trying to
get all of those positions
filled thank you Mr chairman
thank you so much ma'am and then
also you know that looks like
there's a twelve point two
percent funded vacancy rate.
Right now and so is that just
additional money that you'll
roll into two not the F. on here
shows funded vacancy vacant F.
T. is four point three.
And so you're so you keep saying
ten.
Is there can you explain how
many vacant positions do you
have and how many more you
looking fell Mr chair
representative Armstrong I
believe we have seven current
vacant F. T. E.'s and we are
looking to fill five of those.
Okay thank you Mr chairman thank
you ma'am Mr chair just comment
on the PS walk in your guises
pocket I do just want to note
that this is as of this is a
little outdated this is as of I
believe September and so the a
number of vacant positions may
have changed since then just so
you know but I do want to point
out that you're correct
Representative Armstrong in that
a column F. on the PS cope notes
that four point three positions
that are vacant are currently
funded and so the HSD eight
noting for vacant at positions
for your radically the LFC
recommendation should fund those
vacancies the LFC provides full
funding for personnel and so
theoretically that should be
funding adequate to support
those for vacancies thank you
for your your member Armstrong
this Representative Lujan.
Thank you Mr at thank you for.
Because I just wanted it more of
a COVID in on the the family
focused initiative I just want
to thank you thank you the
governor's office for really
focusing in along with these
other initiatives the that we
are.
working on and looking to fund
better are we looking to expand
any of these Mr chair
Senator Mr chair representative
Lujan I'm sorry expand any of
like a family focused initiative
at the childcare
cost and expanding even within
the state with the the child
care the state operative Hawker
it Mr chair representative Lujan
I know that ECECD is looking to
continue with the the funding
and the incentives that they
have and I believe that's worked
into their budget as far as the
additional state operated day
care center we've looked at that
we're looking at areas and this
also goes to Representative
Pettigrew is question and areas
where there is not day care
readily available for
individuals in their community
which was the situation in Santa
Fe and you just couldn't find it
so we're looking at other areas
and if in fact there's a problem
where people just don't have
access to daycare centers we
will work first with those
communities to see if there's a
community based organization the
department through federal
dollars can help to stand up
child care centers and we did
look at you know opportunities
maybe in some of the larger in
Albuquerque or Los crucis for
optional day Kerr said our state
run day care centers but want to
see first given this one at
least a year to kind of work out
some of the Kinks and see how
that's working and then see if
it is something that is needed
in other communities I really
appreciate that Mr chairman
thank you for that for that
because I know that's directly
affected my constituents and to
I think what Representative
Perry was us to pass the number
of state employees when I think
in my district I have the most
state agencies and employees in
my district here in Santa Fe and
I just want to say thank you for
those efforts in what you're
doing and I look to to find out
more about that so that we can
help these working families
thank you Mr chair.
Thank you very much
Representative Lujan we're gonna
go now to Representative
Trujillo.
But.
No words if you need to we can
come back to okay.
I have to.
All of this.
I apologize I forgot your name.
Recent because all those this
because some of those the five
point nine nine four that you
asked for an increase in the
budget is specifically for that
one particular person.
Give me Mr chair representative
to here no it is not so it is
specifically to fill the but
some positions and specifically
those
Those three initiatives are
we're using funding as was
pointed out the LFC has funded
FTEs in our office but not
necessarily for those specific
because I said
candles position we order grant
funding and that expires June
thirtieth and so that would
continue to fund her but it
would also fund some of our
policy advisors whose funding
has kind of been shifted to do
some of these initiatives so
just billing Bacon FTEs and then
as I mentioned with Mr begin ski
you know bringing him in and had
to increase the salary to bring
him which then caused an issue
with compaction for some of our
other policy advisers who have
been serving on the roll for
four years so so they get Mr
chairman might point to I guess
a clarification is this five
nine nine four is a new request
for an increase right.
And and the reason I'm going
there is because.
Open.
When Representative arms I'm
sorry ranking member Armstrong.
Asked for information regarding
why are you asking for
a moment for more more money if
you didn't spend what you had.
That other money was it is it
specifically allocated for the
things you just for last year
and it can't be used not all in
a big pop right it you can't
just.
You can't just use within that
pot to put to.
Find everything you want
Mr chair representative to heal
that money is all in the two
hundred so it's used for
personal services and benefits
you mean two hundred Mr chairman
the line item yes okay and so at
the end of the fiscal year
that's for salaries so if we
couldn't fill the positions and
it didn't get expended in
salaries it gets reverted.
I see so I that's the
clarification I wanted that's
what you need to come back for
that five point nine nine.
Nine four my correct.
Mr chair if I could clarify so
they're coming but also there of
so their budget last year was
about five point four million
and all of that five point four
they reverted about seven
hundred thousand from personnel
selection as she mentioned
person that they were able to
retain or higher now they've
come back this year basically
flat at the five point four
million but now a miss because
how does is coming to you all
today to ask for an additional
five hundred thousand that would
get them to the five point nine
four nine that you all are that
she citing are the nine nine a
five point nine nine and so the
difference in what the
legislative recommendation
provides for on your sheet today
and what agency because this is
asking for today is that five
hundred thousand and she's
saying that that would cover the
cost of those three staff for
the housing the food and the the
I believe the PED a staffer as
well as to fill additional
vacancies how does that help
clarified yes it does because
when you use the actual money
rather than the percentages that
confuses me thank you Mr
chairman thank you excuse me
thank you very much
Representative thank you to our
analysts thank you miss because
of this I just have a couple of
quick questions first
members on the back of our first
she we can see the performance
measurements as messages and
mention the
Our analysts will work with the
the legislative analyst will
work with the executive analyst
for the center for performance
metrics and also nor note
previous years performance
metrics this because all of us
here you're exceeding your
either at or exceeding all of
your performance metrics
including the ninety nine
percent of constituent services
cases closed within thirty days
of initial receipt the the
target is ninety five so thank
you for exceeding that
I want to briefly touch on
something the ranking member
Armstrong looked at and that's
on the following page page three
this is the white page.
we see the funded vacancy and
again we were told this was in
September of two thousand and
twenty two so back agency
because all those actually looks
like
a few folks have departed the
office since the snapshot in
September is that accurate.
Mr chair apologize I tried to
run through my head who is still
there and who is left
Yes we have had.
I can't think of anyone who the
lord sorry not to put you on the
spot it just as a as a way as
we're sort of members as we're
working through this we're told
that there are four point three
vacant positions roughly of a
you know we can have a third of
an employee but we are and and
so now we see it's a little
higher and then members really
quick when you go down to the
park to the budget calculation
if you look at column L. that's
how much money is budgeted for
personal services column and
that's how much was spent those
are the field positions and so
column and is essentially the
leftover money the the resources
that are there but but
unutilized
Okay so I I don't think we have
any more questions I'm gonna go
to vice chair Dixon Mr chair can
I have.
Representative thank you Mr
chair
Just curious there a couple of
items in here that are
initiatives that are included in
the governor's budget and I'm
not sure why outside of FTEs and
the base work that the
governor's office does.
Why there are other initiatives
that frankly could be just in
the budget quite where the
building the governor's budget.
outside of full time employees
outside of constituent services
but some of the.
Initiatives I was curious as to
why there would be a daycare
that was.
Even funded through and maybe
I'm missing something that I
knew I am new to this committee
but it was discussed as part of
of this
appropriation so maybe maybe I'm
wrong that that could be very
well the case but if not I'm not
sure why why there would be an
initiative funded out of the
governor's office rather than
just graduated.
Mr chair representative Montoya
so the funding for the daycare
center was not out of our budget
that was out of ECECD's
graduated from federal funds
they receive and then some money
out of general services for
capital improvements out of
their budget for some of the
renovations it was just an
initiative that started in our
office that then moved down to
agencies and state personnel
office did the R. F. P. and they
hold the contract with the
provider to provide the services
so thank Mister chair so why why
would the initiative started the
office rather than through one
of the other departments that is
requesting funding.
Mr chair representative Montoya
many of the initiatives when we
get calls from constituents of
who can't find daycare and we're
working with them on return to
office and so a lot of the work
that comes into our constituents
services was based on the
inability to get child care and
funding and so we looked at the
opportunity we worked directly
with those agency partners which
is something we do constantly in
our office and work with our
departments to then rolled that
out.
Thank you Mr chairman just one
last question so when that when
those initial calls came in did
the initial funding come out of
the governor's budget or out of.
early child care budget.
Mr Chairman representative
Montoya no money for that came
out of the governor's office
budget okay thank you Mr chair
thank you very much
Representative Montoya.
Eight we're going to we're going
to go to Representative Dixon
for a motion and then I'll have
some a couple of quick Mrs Mr
chair I just wanted to provide
information to the committee I
believe that we we just check
the spot latest beau report and
of out of the thirty five
authorized positions we see that
twenty seven are currently
filled as of January so that
would equate to a total of eight
he can seize.
And so that is our in comparison
to the four that were provided
for on the list in September
just to give that information
thank thank you very much Mrs.
Okay by Terry Dixon.
Thank you Mr chair I move that
to.
I move the executive
recommendation is provided in
our different sheet of five four
nine four point two.
Hey there's a motion.
Ocean second by Representative
daylight Cruz this is for the
executive is contained in the
different see is there any
opposition to that motion.
Okay let's go ahead and call the
call the roll briefly.
Representative Allison.
Representative.
Yes Representative I have.
Brown.
Representative Chatfield yes.
Representative approved yes.
Representative Garcia.
Representative dear yes.
Representative.
Yes.
Representative
yes.
Representative I.
Representative Montoya.
Senator question.
Yes.
Representative.
Representative I just.
Representative setting at yes.
Representative Trujillo.
I hear exam yes.
Yes.
Briefly Representative
explained.
Thank you Mr chairman
as I recall are two thousand
twenty three budget for the
governor's office was five point
four three.
In dollars and I think we should
stay with that the reason for my
vote I do not see recent
increases with based on the
fence I received to the.
Thank you very much
Representative group okay miss
because I think you were going
to I'd like to ask staff given
some of the new information that
we've gotten today
to to visit a little bit more
with the DFA with the executive
staff especially around some of
these core initiatives the
committee spent a great deal of
time on Friday talking about
public education for instance
and there is a need to partner
there so let's have staff talk
about that
and will thank you very much for
your time Mr service and.
Okay next we're going to go to
HSD code three sixty.
For this them through here a
little bit.
And invite.
Our lieutenant governor to
join agency it's men and Mr
minor.
But.
All.
The governor please take it away
when you're ready.
Good afternoon Mister chair
madam vice chair ranking member
and members of the committee
it's so good to be here and for
any today and appreciate all the
work that you do I understand
the challenging decisions that
have to be made being on the
finance committees and
understand that there's a lot of
possibilities within our states
that can come out of the session
and and you will be directly
involved in those decisions as
the Senate governor it's been an
honor to serve in this role as
we continue to move beyond that
pandemic and continue to get out
there and every community that's
been something that from my
office that we've want to make
sure that we are out there
listening to constituents every
part of the state not just one
wants to committee but several
times I think this is very
beneficial in making sure that
we can bring forward whatever
those needs are so grateful to
be in this role as a state
ombudsman and to be able to
present that I'm I graduated as
an analysts will we'll discuss
those sure both the the
executive and the legislative
recommendations but I I do want
to share that one thing that I'm
extremely proud of within my
office is that every member that
I have a initially came in five
years ago is still with us today
we have an increased any any
positions we have been very
efficient to to make sure that
we're meeting the needs of what
the residents of the state but
at the same time is
understanding what the fiscal
responsibilities are to make
sure we're utilizing taxpayer
dollars in the best way possible
so with that Mr Chairman I'm
going to have the analyst given
the the break down what those
numbers are to be available for
any questions thank you very
much for sitting governor Mrs
thank you Mr chair members of
the committee I'm so again this
is for HSD code three six zero
for your volumes if you have it
open from the last presentation
it should be at one page it
should be paid one fifteen I'm
so you'll see those numbers are
reflected also both in the
different she and the volumes
inverters regards to revenue
both recommendations support
equal revenues from the general
fund for the office constituting
a three point nine percent
increase
Over FY twenty three on the
agency does not receive
additional source of revenue and
so is just general fund it and I
will hand it over to drive Miner
to discuss the base expenditures
thank you Jessica Mr chairman
committee members for base
expenditures both the executive
and legislative recommendations
support agencies requested
expenditures in all categories
and that's just a twenty three
point seven thousand dollar
increase to support slight pay
increases for staff retention
and the in terms of performance
measures analyst to come to
consensus and so I will through
committee for questions thank
you very much Mister miner
Committee questions.
Representative Montoya.
Thank you Mr chairman in that
ten a governor I'm just looking
at your budget your trip you're
spending like a drunken sailor.
Gotta admit the this is probably
one of the budgets that I've
seen over the last several years
it's kind of remained through
several years.
Even.
I would suggest that as the
Since the office of lieutenant
governor the role as ombudsman.
in fact in the future I'd really
like to see instead of
constituent services running
to the governor's office it
seems like it should be running
through lieutenant governor's
office.
and that staff should be.
reporting you
I have no idea what you put
feelings you have on that but
the governor's office the role
is not ombudsman.
And I think the the.
As I heard Mr chairman and
lieutenant governor in a
presentation you gave last week
that the rules that that the
relationship between the
lieutenant governor's office the
governor's offices a decent
relationship relationship.
I do believe sense
constitutionally.
To the governor's office is
responsible for constituent
services I I think that entire
budget questions
from the governor's office
really should roughly ten
governor's office and I think
that frankly I think it would
allow the governor's office to
focus on some of the things and
and your budget would increase
dramatically and then you could
as I suggested earlier spend
like a drunken sailor do you
have any thoughts on that
Thank you Mr chairman and thank
you Representative Montoya that
we do having much experience
lieutenant governor's office and
know what the role is in that
office in part as well but it's
been work I think that that's a.
Recalling so you understand that
from a personal perspective you
know fortunately because we do
have such a good working
relationship with the governor's
office we do see that you know
that we want to make sure that
we're being as efficient as
possible not overlapping any of
those constituent issues but the
reality of it is that
constituent issues are all over
the state and so the governor's
offices is maxed out with the
issue that they do with what
that response the they need to
give just as well as our offices
as far as a combination I I
don't think that that would be
necessary at this time with the
ticket and then for future
discussions but at this time I
think that is work even through
a one and one hundred year
pandemic we were able to make it
work between both offices.
Mr chairman I I would just like
to state when
when lieutenant governor Sanchez
took care of the office twelve
years ago now
the previous Montana governors
office had I believe thirteen
employees and I am just was
expecting that that that the
numbers might increase again but
and I appreciate the.
Of all the budgets I can vote
for this is one that I.
See that the that there's not
that much extra fluff going on
there and I just would like to
say I would would like to see
the rest of state government
find a way to to live within
their means when we to the
governor's office has thank you
Mr chairman thank you very much
for listening Representative
Cruz.
Thank you Mr chairman first a
comment and then a question if I
might.
R. J. governor.
It would be nice if we could you
know put our constituencies into
little boxes and that the only
go to this box and never that
box.
Mr chairman I was helping a
constituent that is actually and
Representative Garcia's district
although I did copied on the
mail it happens.
the to the governor.
Orderly increases for salary
increases can you explain to us
how this differentiates from
regular employees different
state employees different
categories because I I think
that's a natural question thank
you Mr chairman and and
Representative as a cruise as we
know that the governor's
executive positions that we we
manage whatever duties are
called upon as I stated earlier
in my in my opening remarks with
my staff to stay with me for the
very beginning through the
difficult challenging times I
think it's been something that's
a testament to the commitment
not only to the office but to
the state of New Mexico and also
recognizing that a decision that
I made when I came into office
was that I was not going to have
a chief of staff which is would
be the highest paid extremely
highly paid
position in my office instead I
chose to spread that out to have
more people within our staff and
again with the staff that we
have they remain in place and I
believe that those are warranted
increases especially scene the
results they were able to show
what the metrics are in place.
Thank you to the governor thank
you Mr chairman thank you very
much Representative Cruz
Representative bound please.
Representative Brown perfect.
Thank you Mr chairman.
Governor good afternoon to you I
just have one question it's
regarding the performance
measures for your office.
there's an output that's
the title is its number of town
hall meetings this is on page
one of one five of the down
volume the number of town hall
meetings economic forms are task
forces lieutenant governor has
participated in in fiscal year
twenty twenty two you
participated in twenty four of
those I guess in toto of however
for the coming fiscal years it's
down to ten or even fifteen
could you explain to us is there
a lesser need for you to
participate you think of why
that reduction in numbers Mr
Chairman so thank you Mr
chairman thank you for that and
and it doesn't mean that we have
done in the last obviously is
that we did make a shift when we
were in during the pandemic a
portion of it so that obviously
kept us from being in person and
being available would like in
your community or advanced
several times so that was it so
that's where we see when we go
back into this next fiscal year
that that'll once again review
of the fact that because that is
probably what I enjoy more than
any part of being that it's in
another just actually being
communities to listen to the
needs of people we've done some
virtual town halls with every
part of the state when it comes
to senior citizens to veterans
to other important components of
constituencies across the state
but in person we do see that's
going to be picking up just as
we did in our first year.
Mr Chairman and Mr would have
governor so what I see for the
budgets of less participation in
my missing something I guess I
am Mister chair Mister chair if
I may
so on the so the FY twenty two
number that was the actuals that
we're pretty you were correct in
the twenty four then the next
year the agency requested and
received a target of ten
trainings and so it's the
expectation that in twenty three
they would likely exceed that
target and then you can see in
FY twenty four they've actually
moved that target out and so
that's to kind of show that the
agency has been successful in
exceeding their target for years
it for consecutive years and so
this year instead of a target of
just ten but we actually do say
twenty four we're moving that
target target closer to the
actual and so the target is now
going to be fifteen whereas
again last year it would have
was only ten so the target was
only ten now the target this
year would be fifteen if the
committee found that that was
still too far off from what the
agency has been actually doing
there could be a request to
increase that target and make it
again closer to those actual
numbers so you see it's kind of
compacting towards the actuals
but you're correct that the
twenty three budget of ten is
much lower than their actual
performance that I think we've
seen them do twenty four
trainings when they their target
was only ten.
Thank you that's very helpful Mr
chairman thank you and the
tenant governor you're always
welcome in my part of the state
so please come see us again.
Representative Brown
Representative Sanchez.
Thank you Mr chair I just want
to thank the Montana governor I
know the last two years have
been tough and I really
appreciate you coming to our
communities and on your down to
the Espanola valley numerous
times
and you love that there and just
thank you for just showing up
and not showing up this
administration cares enough for
everything you do.
You very much represents census
okay seeing no further questions
let's go to Representative
Dixon.
For the.
Mr chair I move the executive
recommendation.
Okay it's been moved by
Representative Dixon second by
Representative Garrett is their
opposition to adopting the
executive recommendation.
I see none we've adopted the
executive recommendation thank
you Mr tentacle you Mr chairman
members of the committee thank
you okay.
Well just.
Attorney General.
Sen.
Of the wrong schedule I
apologize we're gonna ask State
treasure Mestis please.
Montoya.
Which.
We're.
This is the okay.
During.
Roger Montoya I apologize it is
great to see you.
Easy to look at it too many
pieces of paper up here
we're we're gonna go ahead and
get started
We are look and yeah we're gonna
go ahead and get started with
you and then go to our analysts
Please treasure.
Thank you Mr Chairman good
afternoon Mr Tate I am very
excited to be here with all of
you and I appreciate this body
allowing me to go first so that
I can participate in the FIC
needing so thank you
it is an honor to serve New
Mexico as the first female state
treasury New Mexico in the first
like the in in this country's
history we received our office
keys on January first after I
was sworn in and have had
fourteen work days of
awesomeness first I'd like to
introduce you to some of our
team members managing the
fifteen billion dollars under
the state treasurer's office if
they'll stand when I called
their names so we have deputy
state treasurer J. R. rated.
Director programs and outreach
director Jerry modest.
We overstate cash manager
director Steve Moore Sicko.
Our chief investment officer
Vicky is there she is.
Our chief financial officer
Dominic Dunn you.
We have are working safe
executive director Claudia army
whole.
One of the board members is in
the audience Mr Carter Bundy and
we also have our transition
chairman who is former treasure
in the state of New Mexico
treasure Douglas men's round.
I want to thank the legislature
for the opportunity to discuss
our budget request today I also
want to thank LFC miss Jennifer
and DFA analyst Simon Miller and
the city both for which they
took the time to visit with me
earlier in the month to get a
grasp on this year's budget and
I'm looking forward to working
with all of them so I'd like to
remind the committee that this
year's budget initiatives was
turned in prior to my election
the DFA in LFC recommendations
are less than what was submitted
by my predecessor however I
respectfully ask you to consider
funding the full request which
is sixteen point four percent or
seven hundred and fifty thousand
dollars let me explain why after
speaking to staff assisting
concerns and learning what
challenges and changes were made
from prior year budgets to this
year's fiscal year budget there
are items that need to be
addressed that we're not
budgeted for others that were
decreased and others well not
addressed at all.
I personally would have asked
for a larger budget increase to
fill the current needs and to
modernize and enhance the
services to taxpayers I will
work with the original budget
and come back to you next year
to show the return New Mexico
we're will receive on this
investment as the state's banker
we provide services in three
different areas that I wanted to
focus on today banking investing
in outreach programs the banking
division is responsible for
providing banking services to a
hundred and forty state agencies
with over one thousand forty
bank accounts this includes a
daily customer service customer
and agency outreach regulatory
training daily reconciliation
and adding new services the
investment division works
tirelessly to safely invest and
manage over fifteen billion
dollars with several agencies
and local governments and lastly
we serve every day New Mexicans
too focused in key outreach
programs so I want to start with
programs and outreach as
treasurer I want to expand the
programs that will serve our
most vulnerable and underserved
populations programs like able a
better life experience this
helps our community our
disability community safe for
everyday needs invest in a tax
free account and prepare for
future without losing their
state or federal budget it was
brought to my attention that a
contract was signed in November
to pay five dollars per debit
card per month per user and
getting a legal opinion to make
sure that that does not conflict
with the anti donation clause if
the opinion comes back that we
can pay this cost with the
current enrollees that program
will be approximately ninety
thousand dollars per year that
was not factored into the budget
working to save the goal is to
provide retirement options to a
working class individual and
work at a business with five or
more employees and do not
already have retirement savings
programs as you know this is a
program that is administratively
attached to the treasurer's
office and I do have the
director here as well for any
questions specifically with
work.
In safe there are two other
programs that have not been
funded that are near and dear to
my heart and I'd like to launch
them financial literacy a strong
financial literacy foundation is
key to better preparing for
life's goals and challenges like
saving for education and
retirement and debt management I
have years of experience
teaching financial literacy to
county and city governments as
well as you members but I'd like
to expand those services for
youth and small business owners
to help them better prepare for
their financial future an
investment in our people have
unlimited return and overall
betterment for states economic
stability last but not least on
our outreach programs as the
first female treasure in our
state's history and having two
female portfolio managers that
manage the money in the state
treasurer's office I want to use
does expertise to provide
financial empowerment for women
helping them build economic
stability with your investment
programs like these we can
partner together to provide
innovative services that are
responsive and reliable for New
Mexico families we can use these
programs as one method of
assisting our most vulnerable
and bridging the gap of
inequity.
So let's get to the complicated
part Stowe's initiatives for
fiscal year twenty four in
addition to the fourteen boards
and commissions I serve on the
treasurer's office is
responsible for the purple your
management of the local
government investment pool also
known as LJP today we manage
over one point five billion of
assets in that portfolio
providing critical investment
expertise to local governments
throughout every corner of the
state.
As a former county treasurer I
know that this fund has
potential to grow even bigger
and benefit more New Mexicans
I'm committed to adding
participants to this healthy and
growing portfolio we will reach
out to more local governments
and build a relationship with
our schools and our tribal
leaders my team will work with
all cities counties schools and
tribal entities to assist them
with diverse to provide their
portfolio we have skilled per
fully managers that can assist
small and rural entities with a
better return that they might be
able to do than what they might
be able to do on their own our
banking division servicing a
hundred and forty agencies and
has over one thousand forty
accounts this fiscal year we are
projected to oversee roughly
ninety three billion dollars of
inflows and outflows that
equates to an increase of over
eighteen billion in new
transactions compared to fiscal
year twenty to more staffing is
required to provide a high level
of service to the agencies the
staff has been working four days
from home and one day in the
office for the past three years
that changes to the new work
schedule going into effect next
Monday I will be focusing on a
couple of key areas with our
banking division we will develop
and maintain an audit and
compliance process for all A. C.
H. originating State Farm
originating state agencies this
is the new not sure requirement
national automated clearing
house and it will ensure that we
follow the federal rules and
regulations are followed by that
are followed needing to be
followed by the state of New
Mexico additional staff will be
needed to develop and manage
this new process that was not
factored into the budget the
state treasurer's office we need
to develop a process of
centralizing and automating the
collection of cash flow
information from the various
sources and uses of funds this
system will maintain a cash
position of forecasting database
to be used for cash and income
projections and investing
maturities by other state
agencies and provided I.
I know it's committee currently
this process is being done
manually.
With the increase in funds it is
critical to have an automated
system to assist projections
this request was not listed in
the current budget in front of
you with over fifteen billion in
managed assets does investment
trade and money management
processes need to be modernized
to keep pace with growing
portfolio sizes and high
transaction volume this ever
will enables does investment
accounting and cash management
division to process transactions
while minimizing financial risks
effectively and efficiently
additional resources will be
required to develop develop and
maintain the new process this
was not factored into the budget
from fiscal year eighteen of
fiscal year twenty to the volume
of trades has increased by
seventeen billion dollars
additionally the treasurer's
office will be inheriting
operating expenses of over a
hundred thousand dollars
beginning in July as a result of
the board of finance completing
a contract for administration of
overnight repo this was factored
in by LFC but not in the DFA
budget before you.
Now this staff will be returning
to the office and the lease
agreement was signed last year
for additional three years I
team safety of our team members
are a priority funding will be
required to update our security
systems and comply with the
current lease agreement
these items were not factored
into the budget and for anyone
who has questions about the
safety issue I'd like to talk to
you privately instead of
publicly about where we're at on
our safety concerns it is
something that I definitely look
at especially with current
events and I also have two women
who are on maternity so it's
very important that we keep our
staff state in closing the team
as the treasurer's office are
small but mighty and they are a
wonderful group of individuals
and I am so excited to work with
them the increase in financial
transactions in both our banking
and investing divisions have
directly increased workloads
year after year.
Yes we have not seen an
appropriate correlation and
resources by not adequately
funding these divisions we're
putting ourselves in a
vulnerable situation as it
relates to staffing internal
controls risk assessment cross
training and continuity it is
critical to be competitive in
the employment market to attract
skilled employees to join our
team an increase of seven
hundred and fifty thousand for
budget is a small investment
that will promote safety
economic prosperity and
financial security putting this
into perspective even if you
look at one million a day in
interest earnings we can't
afford to have a stagnant budget
to control and manage this
magnitude of funds thank you for
your consideration in fully
funding our fiscal year twenty
four budget initiatives and all
stand for questions or give it
to
If you are an.
Thanks Mr chair members of the
committee my name is Jennifer I
in a communist in the budget
analyst for the state
treasurer's office for your
reference for looking at agency
code three nine four and you're
going to it's on page one thirty
eight and I'm here with DFA and
listening Montoya issues pinch
hitting for Simon Miller today
he was over double booked so
published avail the answer some
questions if not I spoke with
Simon about the budget.
So just to go over the
difference in LFC and DFA is
budgets the LFC recommends one
hundred thousand dollars or
twenty three point seven percent
budget increase for contractual
services over the FY twenty
three operating budget and
that's us Roger Montoya
mentioned for costs associated
processing The Daily repo
investment the executive
recommends a flat contractual
services budget.
Moving on to personal services
employee benefits the LFC
recommends a flat budget and
that's mainly because of the
large funded vacancy rates and
the DFA analyst and executive
recommends one thirty eight
point eight thousand dollar
increase which is a four percent
increase over last year's budget
and primarily to reduce the
unfunded vacancy rate in office.
Lastly the LFC recommends a flat
budget for other uses from the
FY twenty three operating budget
and the executive recommendation
only one point six thousand
dollar increase or ten percent
and that's primarily to support
a variety of small increases for
day to day operational expenses.
Overall the LFC recommends a two
point two percent total budget
increase and executive
recommends a four point six
total budget increase.
With that I'll pass it over to
Cindy if there's any additional
comments.
Thank you Mr chairman and
members of the committee as the
counter have the as the LFC
counterpart stated the executive
recommendation reflects the
general fund pick increases with
approximately two hundred and
ten thousand dollars or five
percent general fund increase
over the FY twenty three
operating budget the breakdown
is approximately a hundred and
thirty eight point eight
thousand in the person services
to allow the agency to hire
current vacant positions and
reduce their vacancy rates the
remainder of the funding which
is seventy one point six is to
increase the four hundred
category or the other cost
categories for daily day to day
operations also in regards to
nonrecurring the executive
recommendation as treasure which
weighs stated or mention to the
work and state program the
executive recommendation
includes a special appropriation
of approximately six hundred and
seventy one thousand dollars to
start up for start up costs for
the New Mexico work in state
program with that I will turn it
over to the committee for
questions thank you very much
thank you very much Pressman toy
let's go to questions from the
committee we're gonna start with
Representative.
Thank you chairman and thank you
for.
The presentation.
Chairman I think my first
question relates to.
Probably our best friends from a
statewide standpoint and I
understand fifteen days in the
and and that office but can we
talk a little bit about how much
money we lost last year with
respect our investments.
Mr Chairman what was the
question how much money we lost
last year with respect to our
investments are short term
investments.
Portfolios.
I'll defer to the chief
investment officer.
Members of the committee
chairman.
investments did not lose any
money last year
if you were following the
markets at all.
the interest rates went from
zero percent at the beginning of
two thousand twenty two all the
way to today's interest rate of
four and a quarter to four and a
half percent by the federal
reserve.
And as a result when interest
rates go up prices go down on
fixed income securities which is
what we predominately holes in
the portfolios we do have some
floating rate notes however we
do have benchmarks that we
manage the portfolios against.
So basically what happens is
when interest rates go up a
portfolio of fixed income
securities will react with a
negative mark to market
versus where they were
originally purchased so if you
purchase a bonded is zero
percent interest rate
environment so you're buying a
bonded maybe it has a quarter of
a percent coupon on it because
that's the current market price
of the bond let's say it's a
year quarter of a percent for
one year investment and all of a
sudden you're fed funds rate
goes to four to five goes from
zero to four quarter percent
you're going to your quarter
percent bond is now going to be
priced in relation to four a
quarter percent current market
environment so just by default
your bond is going to not be as
attractive as a bond issued in
the current interest rate
environment where interest rates
are much higher than they were
originally so unless we're
forced to sell those securities
we are not absorbing a
we are not actually realizing a
loss on those securities so when
you say a mark to market on
realized loss that's as a result
of market movement on a fixed
income portfolio that can't be
avoided as regular market
movement the way we mitigated
that is by active management
which is what we do with the
treasurer's office now mind you
in two thousand nineteen we were
managing about six billion
dollars.
And now we're we we're managing
about fifteen billion dollars so
you can see that we've had a
huge influx of cash over those
last few years during the
pandemic
so in that I know thank you very
much for the the want to keep
that responses start appreciate
the detail miss Bobby on
anything and send them back to
yeah I would just note the case
lined up perfectly
but there is a kind of an
accounting practice where those
unrealized losses do get booked
to the general fund and so the
losses you might be referring to
there is a hundred and about a
hundred eighteen and a half
million dollar loss but to
general fund those were not
realized but the general fund
still does take that hits.
Mr chairman I'd also add in I
think it's a great question
because of the fact that the
cash flow
sport a software that we're
trying to implement wanting to
implement with contract services
would help us to make sure that
we always have enough cash on
hand so that we never do have
unrealized loss because of the
the heavy influx of floor fund
so like for example we all know
that the constitutional
amendment just passed that's
approximately five point eight
billion in transfers out of the
general fund investment pool to
either the tax stabilization
reserve for the early childhood
trust fund us being able to have
that without having to manually
do it allows us to keep keep
control of the cash flow so that
when Vicky invest we're able to
invest with the right ladder
based on on your needs.
Thank you Mr chairman and thank
you for the details.
Answer
I knew what the answer was I was
just wanting to hear it.
I appreciate the LSS are very
much with respect to that
Mr chair
I appreciate the presentation
and and where you want to take
the HSD I think the
personally I look at stuff.
We have a budget that was
approved in twenty twenty.
Chair and for the twenty twenty
three and you know I think our
our new treasurer has the
opportunity throughout the
summer through the interim
committees to defend the new
positions as this as they go for
and and we have the opportunity
is appropriations analyses to to
vet those things and so with
that I do appreciate the
presentations I'd still stick
with the twenty twenty two but
thank you the representative
Representative Lujan.
Thank you so much Mr chair and I
want to welcome to our new
treasure it's a delight to have
you and it's it's a relief to
know Mr chair that we have such
a competence you know the
treasurer's office and I speak
with a little bit of pride
because that's the office I left
to cope to to come in to become
a Representative.
For our state so I want to say
thank you and got to see you
back on task there Vicky it's a
it's a really for really for
state and I really want to the
state that it's really important
we have you there and in in this
degree of
Increases in everything that we
see that are going on for state
and with the technology I want
to say thank you as you're going
through that those scenarios
when you will what's the answer
to resolving that you know if
for the general fund taking the
hit you said was a hundred
eighteen million dollars is that
correct Mr chair.
Thank you.
So with the technology.
thank you for bringing that
forward and and for already
coming to that result I just
wanted to touch base on working
save up project
that you are that you are moving
into right now if you can tell
us what that means for state a
little bit more and you're
saying you're asking for is it
six hundred thousand dollars in
appropriation for that.
Mr chairman that special
appropriation is for six hundred
and seventy one thousand five
hundred dollars and I do have
the executive director here to
explain what that is for.
Body armor.
Thank you Mr chair members of
the committee Representative
thank you for your question I
brought my notes for the details
on that request
but it does require a little bit
of background information so
when we made the request we had
a projection of the steps we
would be taking to move forward
to launch the programs there are
two programs the retirement plan
retirement place market
retirement plan market place
excuse me an online portal for
employers in the state to shop
for qualified plans that they
could sponsor and then the
second program is the IRA
program which is a payroll
deduction
auto IRA program for employers
that do not offer a retirement
savings plan for their workers
and as most of you know in her
performance there are roughly
about four hundred forty
thousand New Mexicans working
today that do not have access to
a workplace retirement plan.
So when we made this request we
anticipated.
Getting under contract with the
website developer to develop our
platform we the work in state
programs cannot operate simply
as a web web page on the
treasurer's website we need a
platform because we need to have
specific functions to interface
with different providers
different networks and we need
Bester practices security so
we'll have a platform for those
two programs we did hire a web
developer unfortunately we had
to terminate the contract with
the web developer in December
for non performance we did that
we went through legal processes
and and did that
So now we have to re issue and
get bids for the our website
developer that has pushed back
what we will be using the funds
for
coming up and so originally when
we provided this budget request
we anticipated launching the
market place the retirement plan
market place in April if we go
back in March and get a web
developer on contract again by
April we anticipate now the
market place being launched not
till July which of course moves
into the next fiscal year.
The other funds that we needed
were for program consultant and
investment consultants I
anticipate those being pushed
back as well because we require
program consultant and
investment consultants when we
launch the program so we don't
want to.
Get under contract with them now
and then not really need them
until the next fiscal year so
what you're looking at was for
marketing and outreach for both
programs the estimates that we
need to get these programs out
there via regular marketing in
outreach also social media is
actually on the cheap side three
hundred ninety five thousand
four to programs
I will tell you that in the
other states that have launched
a similar programs their
marketing budgets are much
higher but we think that we can
make that work in New Mexico
particularly if we're able to
enter into a partnership with
another state and get economies
of scale and get a program
administrator that will put
marketing dollars into the New
Mexico work in state programs
that we thank you I.
That's excellent thank thank you
thank you Mr I appreciate the
answer I wanted to say thank you
for The presentation today and
everything my last just one
thing is on the cybersecurity Mr
chair what I have a question on
that
Where are we with that Madam
chair Mr chair and I've been
told that the state treasurer's
office has been ranked one of
the highest and the best for
cyber security for the seventh
year in a row.
Thank you mistras Representative
Montoya.
Thank you Mr chairman
I'd like to go back I have some
other questions but the like go
back to this work New Mexico
work and save.
I'm unaware Mr chair was is that
a bill that was passed into law.
And it was assigned to the
treasurer's office that is
accurate okay thank you that's.
That's helpful
Mr chairman and madam secretary
at this is a the second
Budget in a row that that not in
a row not yours budget but we've
had to budgets where there are
significant increases from what
was before us I stepped out for
just a second Mr chair and I did
have a just a constituent
someone who's in the room here
who caught me outside and said
why the.
Bills are going on the portal
that they can read but budget
numbers are not on the portal
and so as we're talking it's
we're mostly talking to each
other but folks out there who
are not presenting a specific
budget and are just here
listening in or people who are
watching on the on on the
website have no idea the numbers
were talking about so is that is
that thank you very much of
Madam where all of the the
different seats including the
are the excuse me the LFC and
DFA recommendations are in our
volume three which is online and
we can make sure again and
highlight those here on page
we're sort of pointed towards
each of those for us volume two
page one thirty eight that is
the volume
That is on line and we have here
the agency requests the LFC
recommendation for FY twenty
four okay thank you Mr chairman
and I thank you for for the sake
of transparency I I and I'm just
curious it does appear so far
there's been a little bit of a
trend that the numbers that have
been presented
That have been printed in the
and as online that that there's
been significant really
significant over five hundred
thousand dollars for in in two
of the budgets that part that
we're just now getting that the
public is just now getting as
well so any houses to concern
just to thank thank you very
much for the concerned any
action the committee takes in
these are preliminary actions
that as we go through the house
bill two process the action that
the committee takes
preliminarily is limited to what
is publicly available again
mainly through the LESC website
thank you Mr chair just one last
and this is a COVID
really for the committee more so
than the presenter but
going forward there's going to
be a a number.
Of the instances for I'm going
to be voting against the the
presented number and it really
has nothing to do with the
concerns that are being brought
forward which illegitimate
concerns my concerns are really
over the last four years that
we've increase the budget
dramatically from six billion to
nine billion approximate
recurring and and I'm I'm just
concerned on how unsustainable
that is so it's really I just
wanted to say to the presenter
in the future presenters this
has nothing to do necessarily
with americorps not merit of
things you want to get
accomplished it's just the year
over year over year spending is
very concerning and so rather
than explaining every vote as we
go forward and really just
wanted to explain to the
committee when I take future
action that I don't have to to
explain to everyone thank you Mr
chair thank you very much we're
gonna go now to Representative
ranking member Armstrong thank
you Mr chairman and and welcome
nice to see you here I was
curious I have.
One question pretty much if on
the work and save act.
So this this isn't it says on
thin volume two page one thirty
eight it was house bill forty
four that was a voluntary
savings program for New Mexicans
is there any.
Notion to make it mandated.
For on all businesses Mr
Chairman yes okay thank you very
much session okay I was a I was
of a carrier on that bill and I
sat I just need to the body then
I'll send for the Hispanic
chamber of commerce in
Albuquerque and we were promised
that it would never go be
mandated I just need the members
to know that.
Thank you Mr chairman thank you
very much Representative
Armstrong next Representative
Brown.
Yes thank you Mr chairman and
madam treasures thank you for
your presentation and all the
panel well my ears perked up
when I heard you mention
financial literacy I've kind of
known as a person who advocates
rather strongly for that
Mr chairman treasurer so could
you give us a little more
information about what you plan
to do it before you do that and
I know very brief about it I
just curious to know if you're
working with the public
education department we have
students who are offered
financial literacy as an
elective but only eleven percent
of students take that course
might position for you several
years now and I've run bills it
is to make it mandatory for high
school graduation it would take
it out of the electives column
half a credit of the students
would still have six of six our
elective credits that they could
take I just think this is vital
to to the welfare of individuals
and families so Mr chairman and
editors are also want to ask you
if you are thinking of perhaps
having some funding for adult
literacy centres which offer
many offerings besides just
literacy ever maybe financial
literacy would be offered there
as and offered for adults who
wish to learn more I will also
say Mr chairman that of recent
poll I believe establish that
ninety percent of the people
interviewed said they wish they
had had a financial literacy
literacy course when they were
younger so Mr chair Madam chair
if you just give us a little
more information site please.
We appreciate chairman I'm
absolutely supporting the bills
that are coming before this body
and will work with whatever your
this body decides as far as a
core curriculum class or or how
they determine that I know there
are a few different senators and
reps that we putting that
forward I'm also working with a
lot of people outside of the
legislature to put together
ideas of how we can incorporate
fund projects of financial
literacy within our schools and
particularly in our rural
communities as well then we
wanted to use the empowerment
program for women to also
include financial literacy and
then try to work with the
governor's office with the the
state agencies that already work
with our small business groups
as well some of our our business
organization so that we can not
not do anything this duplicate
but fill the gaps of where there
might be some resources that are
needed currently there is no
funding in outreach for either
one of those programs
and so that is something that I
would definitely be interested
in Mr chairman if you wouldn't
mind I'd like to briefly say on
the two hundred three hundred
four hundred like this is the
easiest way I can I can put this
out there it was three point
five million dollars that is for
a person and we're asking for
three point nine when I got the
to the the transition packets in
December I found out that I
think I out of eight or three
out of five of the positions
that are vacant right now are
underfunded so I'm coming into a
position where I don't not only
have ten employees working but I
also don't have the funds to be
able to put them in so LFC is
flat that means they're going to
still be on funded when you're
talking about checks and
balances and internal controls
and you only have to staff under
certain division that puts this
for higher risk when you're
looking at the contractual
services it's four hundred and
twenty two thousand five hundred
I thought oh my god where
contracts so big one R. F. P.
that we're looking at right now
is between a hundred and fifty.
And in three hundred and fifty
thousand that wasn't factored
into this and in fact the
difference was only on the
repose that is coming up there's
two other contract that we're
looking at for cash flow
analysis and for this other item
that is expensive it's an art
piece we can't really talk about
it but that already takes me we
far exceeding what I can afford
and the other item was seven
hundred and seventeen thousand
two hundred that sixty five
thousand that DFA put in it was
because there was an error on
our lease agreement for some
reason somebody decreased to
sixty five thousand even though
it's been the same dollar amount
for the past five years so
that's to fix something that is
already an agreement that I have
to comply with for our buildings
I'm the Czecho street so I know
it's easy to say let's just stay
stagnant but the reality is is
that well everyone's been
working at home four days a week
we do not have the staffing
needs to comply with the amount
of influx of flows in revenues
that are coming in and the worst
thing that we can do when you
talk about investment having
seven hundred fifty thousand
dollars more to do the job
versus being in the paper
because we didn't do our job and
the risk that comes with not
investing that we were supposed
to is it's more expensive to do
it that way so please keep that
in mind.
Thank you very much New Jersey.
Eight I don't see any other
questions from committee members
we're gonna go to by production
for the motion Mr chair I move
the LFC recommendation.
I think it's been moved it's
been second by Representative
and Jana for the LFC
recommendation can we go ahead
and call the roll.
Representative Allison yes.
Armstrong.
Representative I got.
Representative Brown yes.
If you have kids.
Yes.
We're created direct.
Representative or not.
Representative.
Yes.
Representative Lujan.
Representative one for that.
Representative for.
Representative dispatches.
Representative Representative
cutting out.
Representative Trujillo.
I share expense yes.
Share small yes.
Yeah they're in their property.
Great thank you this would be a
state this is preliminary I'd
also the understanding that the
treasure really came into this
budget perhaps will ask the
staff to look over things
including with the special since
we're working to integrate those
thank you very much madam chair
and we're now you're off to here
the investment counsel for our
state thank you.
Okay now we're going to go ahead
and ask
a jury Attorney General todas.
To come on the.
Attorney General it's great to
see you thank you for being here
today if you can start us off
and please feel free to
introduce anybody here from your
team Mr chairman and members of
the committee thank you for the
opportunity to present the
agency budget today joining me
in the presentation is Carla
Martinez the chief
administrative officer of the
attorney general's office and
Melissa Spangler the chief
financial officer I know it's I
know that the committee's time
is precious and you have a
number of agency requests to
consider so I will try to be as
brief as I possibly can I want
to first start by thanking
director Avid and his staff and
affording us the opportunity to
Presents some revisions on the
budget that was presented by my
predecessor as many members of
this committee may be aware
while the the budget request the
base budget request and that a
presentation was flat it was
actually an expansion request
that order thirty five million
dollars and expansion of two
hundred twenty one FTEs I know
that that is effectively a
doubling of the agency rest
assured I I am not coming before
you today to ask for anything of
quite so large but I do have
some expansion request that I
would like the committee to
consider and I think it it
probably works best if I move
through these sort of in in
sequential order members of my
staff have provided a handout
for each of you to to walk
through each of these requests
in before I begin one of the
things that I would I want to
make abundantly clear is that I
am stepping away from an agency
that while it had significantly
more volume in terms of the
number of cases it did not have
the size and scale and
complexity of the portfolio that
now sits before the attorney
general's office that said
The attorney general's office
needs to substantially increase
its capacity in a number of
critical areas if we're gonna
fulfill our or legal obligations
to to serve and and protect the
members of our community so with
regard to increases to the base
budget we have asked for of
increased to the civil appeals
Division of many members of this
committee may be aware that as a
matter of course the attorney
general's office handles all
criminal appeals in the state of
more recently we have been
engaged in civil appeals and
challenges to agency work that
ends up for either the court of
appeals the Supreme Court for
the tenth circuit on a lot of
that work is highly complex you
need highly skilled and trained
staff to to engage in that work
and so there is a a request to
increase that aspect of our
operations with respect to the
constituent services division I
actually didn't realize quite
how many complaints and
enquiries came to the office
every year but it's something on
the order of ten thousand
complaints and enquiries into
the attorney general's office
every single.
Ranging from violations of the
open meetings act of violations
of the inspection of public
records act increase about
possible criminal prosecutions
concerns about the way border
commission is conducting its
business all of those things
have to be funneled and and and
move through the agency with
speed efficiency and I can tell
you that in my traveling across
the state last year and a half I
heard from a number of community
members on a variety of
different issues that are HSD
simply wasn't moving for quickly
enough to address acknowledge
and respond to those requests in
a timely fashion
that said there or additional a
request that I think need to be
moved thoughtfully considered by
the committee in terms of
affording the type of protection
that we need for citizens win of
thirty or forty years ago many
of my predecessors Attorney
General Barchi Attorney General
Udall and others would routinely
have a dedicated unit of not
only utility attorneys but
natural resources or water
attorneys right now the agency
only has two utility attorneys
to handle all of the potential
rate increase cases coming from
all the utilities that we
currently regulate the
recommendation in this budget is
to add an additional two utility
attorneys and one dedicated
water where it would surprise
members of this committee I
think given the scale of the
pending litigation that we have
with the state of Texas that
there is not a single designated
specially trained water lawyer
inside the attorney general's
office that is focused on
nothing but water issues we rely
heavily on the counseling
guidance in cooperation with the
state engineer but also we are
too heavily reliant in my
judgment on outside legal
counsel I think it is far past
time for this agency to have not
only the utility attorneys we
need to make sure that consumers
are protected from one
justifiable rate increases but
also natural resources attorney
because as you all know.
So Water in this state and
access to water in this state
will be a defining
issue politically not only with
how we deal with relative
constituencies but how we
navigate the relationships with
other states.
Anti trust
historically speaking and if you
look at most attorney general's
offices across this this country
there are robust antitrust
divisions that would examine
carefully the mergers of various
corporations and price impact
that that would have on market
stability market access and
consumer protection we currently
have no dedicated antitrust
attorneys inside the building
that is something that I think
the committee should very
carefully evaluate again that's
something historically that the
agency provided but it doesn't
currently have the staff
available to conduct that kind
of work done a new division
which has not existed but it's a
the.
Really comes out
because of conversations that
I've had with tribal leaders
across the state is the creation
of a tribal or Indian Affairs
division what we have done
historically is when we are
managing government to
government tribal consultation
we rely on issue area experts to
engage with our tribal partners
and tribal leaders what that
does however residents of
sending multiple lawyers in
front of the same government
that are unable to to develop a
relationship so that they truly
understand how these how these
different issues interact with
one another and so a commitment
that we've made in keeping not
only with a moral obligation but
frankly a legal obligation to
engage in tribal to tribal
government consultation is to
establish a travel fares
Division which would be staffed
with two attorneys and one
paralegal given the size scope
and complexity of the tribal
communities in the state I think
you agree with me that that is
not it is an outlandish requests
for this committee to consider.
By far the biggest request
however is what we're calling in
enhanced civil litigation
division civil litigation of
covers a wide range of the
issues that we're responsible
for from consumer protection
natural resources litigation
environmental protection but
there are a number of things
that we are trying to do in
terms of providing direct legal
services not outsource legal
services but direct legal
services to the citizens of the
state for a long time we have
grown accustomed to the idea
that the attorney general's
office will manage substantial
amounts of its legal work by
handing out contracts to out of
state for arms or even in state
firms that I don't think it'll
be a shock to members of this
committee do not work for free
what they typically do is
require a contingency fee
recovery split on a lot of the
biggest settlements that we have
in this state and I want the
committee to carefully consider
the extent to which we would
potentially be revenue positive
if we brought more of that legal
work in house specifically with
respect to consumer protection
and generated more revenue at
lower cost to our consumer
protection fund.
This by the way is also of the
proposed location for a new
bureau that I am working with
other members of the legislature
to create a bureau of children's
justice that bureau would be
responsible for protecting the
civil rights of the most
vulnerable members of our
community children in state
custody children who have been
subject to discrimination
children who do not have
adequate resources for their
education this is a place where
I think we need to make a
substantial effort if we're
gonna lower childhood trauma and
have a positive impact on public
safety.
Speaking of public safety the
special appropriations that I
would like to draw your
attention to most importantly is
the night been crime gun
intelligence center any of you
who have been following the
recent events in Albuquerque the
political shootings that were
directed at members of of this
body you should know that most
of the most significant breaks
in that investigation came from
analysis from spent shell
casings were recovered at the
scene of the crime those shell
casings were turned over to the
bureau of alcohol tobacco and
firearms to run through a
specialized machine and that
machine can effectively detect
when the shell casing from us a
specific locations connected to
a shell casing recovered at
another scene it's a way
effectively of doing a forensic
for DNA analysis for better or
worse of showcasing so that you
can connect a specific crime go
there are nine millimeters for
example in the City of
Albuquerque that have been used
more than twenty different times
at twenty different locations
here's the bad part we only have
the capacity to engage in that
work in the City of Albuquerque
and Santa Fe leaving most of the
state on cover and most of our
rural jurisdictions on covered
by that technology I've met with
United States Attorney the
special agent in charge of the
ATF they have a grease and have
recommended that we deploy for
additional machines one in
Farmington wanting Gallup one in
Los crucis in one Rossell if we
did that the state of New Mexico
would be comprehensively covered
by this technology and we would
certainly be able to stitch
together and link together
casings recovered from crime
scenes are crossed county lines
and across very stripper
jurisdictions so the gun used to
commit a crime in Albuquerque it
also used in the in the village
of west blue would be identified
located forward.
As of as a qualified lead to
local law enforcement and
thereby increasing our chances
at apprehension in addition to
the crime gun intelligence
center in coordination and
working with Senator Campos we
have included a special request
for a dedicated unit for the
hermit's peak calf canyon fire
recovery efforts as you know
this is a complex issue that
will be facing our state in our
community in northern New Mexico
for a very long time and the
proposal was quite simply to
provide for two attorneys one
paralegal and to constituent
service coordinators right now
in Las Vegas we have people from
out of state.
Who are advertising legal
services without properly
disclosing that their
advertising legal services we
have people signing up members
of that community to facilitate
the paperwork that needs to be
seats submitted to FEMA and
asking for a contingency fee
recovery on that work that this
this disaster is ripe for
predatory behavior if we do not
have the proper outreach
coordination and and frankly the
possibility of litigation with
FEMA and the for service if they
do not make those communities
whole last but not least and I'm
joined here today by Maggie Hart
Stebbins
the natural resources trustee
she has asked us and we have
agreed to submit a four point
three million dollar request for
the natural resource damage
assessment process this will
support litigation efforts for
groundwater and soil
contamination associated with
cannon Air Force base and NASA
white sands test facility there
is a substantial amount of
legacy waste and pollution that
has impacted
those natural resources and we
do this work in coordination
with the natural resources
trustee there are other matters
is as I've noted here but with
that I would turn it over to our
analysts and stand for your
questions.
Thank you very much Mr Attorney
General let's go over to Mr
great and to get us started from
the analysts Act afternoon
Mister chair members the
committee my name is Brandon
gray LFC fiscal analyst
I will briefly cover the
differences between the LFC
recommendation and the the
effect the executive
recommendation
and I'll just get right into it
the LFC recommendation increases
general the agency's general
fund revenue by five point four
percent the executive
recommendation increases general
fund revenue by five percent and
both recommendations increased
agencies use of consumer
settlement fund revenue by
fourteen point six percent.
I'm turning out to the first
program of the agency this will
be on page three of your
different she packet like to
turn there with me this is legal
services the LFC recommendation
increases general fund sorry can
you turn them yes
Sir is that going to better
okay.
As a page three this is legal
services program of the agency
LFC recommendation increases
general fund revenue by five
point two percent the executive
recommendation increases general
fund revenue by four point two
percent the primary difference
between the LFC and Executive
recommendations and this program
is that the LFC recommendation
includes three hundred and
eighty nine thousand dollars for
an expansion to the agency's
internet crimes against children
division that is not included in
the executive recommendation all
now have IDFA counterpart Mr
cynically at present the
recommendations for the Medicaid
fraud program.
Mr chair committee thank you Mr
right thank you AG Torres on the
executive budget analyst at the
FAA Maria Maria I'm excited to
be here with you all and look
forward to working with you all
the session I'll be sharing the
executive LFC recommendations
for the other program that's
house within the office of the
Attorney General the Medicaid
fraud program the executive
recommendation increases general
fund revenue for this program by
nineteen point two percent all
the LFC recommendation increases
about eight point nine percent.
Both recommendations direct most
new general fund revenue per
person the executive
recommendation increases general
fund for personal by eight point
zero percent well the LFC
recommendation increases general
fund revenue for personal by
four point nine percent in this
category both recommendations
are the same so Mister Charlton
about over the committee for
questions thank you thank you
very much Mr so make that Mr
great okay first we're gonna go
to Representative Sweetser has
not and will come back to him
Representative Chatfield.
Take care
Register on the national
reporter for the source of the
vans
currently the bosses not listed
by the federal government the
harmful substance even though
the band is banned from selling
governments County withholding
band this band from selling the
meat is Gail including the
business the
alternative drinking water plans
of local residents because it
has a zero tolerance for a few
games.
What do we do about that what is
being done about it deceived.
Hi the while the the budget
created the problem and.
The question is is harmful they
have and it apparently is
horrible.
This is horrible can you speak a
little bit about what you're
offices.
Mr chair representative
Chattfield appreciate the
question with respect to the
natural resource damage
assessment I will actually
deferred to the next resource
trust the regular Stephens to
see if she has more specific
information pertaining to your
question.
Mr Chairman Representative
Chatfield my name is Maggie Hart
Stebbins I services states
natural resources trustee and as
it pertains to Canada for space
in the P. five contamination we
are waiting for the federal
government to declare
P. faucet as a hazardous
substance that will allow the
owner to to pursue a natural
resource injury case for the the
damages the injuries that you
have just described
under the we at one R. T.
operate under federal law at
this point time federal law
restricts us to cases where they
have designated something is a
hazardous substance you may have
heard that that I administration
is planning for is in the
process of designating people us
as a hazardous substance but
that has not yet happened so
what we are doing it and R. T.
is preparing our doing our
research preparing their case so
when that does in fact happen we
can bring the natural resource
damage claims.
The gentleman the.
Mr Chairman representative at
this point time that is correct.
The lawyer.
Mr Chairman representative field
so in preparing our case we will
we need to prepare to go up
against the Air Force and so we
print we
our damage assessment process we
quantify we use EPA data for the
environment department's data to
quantify the injury the amount
of ground water that has been
injured the amount of time that
it has been injured and then we
come up with an estimate for
what it will cost to restore
that resource we would then
reach out to the Air Force and
attempt to settle
this claim if not we have to be
prepared to go to litigation.
Seven this is.
See so federal funds in the.
There are responsible for the
fire we're having to provide
it expertise to deal with the
aftermath of the fire.
Mr chair representative
Chatfield the current funding
mechanism that that has been
established by Congress and is
administered by FEMA does not
provide for the recovery of
these particular kinds of costs
to the state of New Mexico that
said I just about a week and a
half ago had to face to face
conversation with the
administrator here who's been
designated as the lead from the
from FEMA and expressed to them
my concern that we were paying
for everything from the
deployment of the National Guard
to as you rightly point out the
the employment of legal counsel
to trying to support these
efforts we don't know yet if
that is of cost that's going to
be recoverable but it is
certainly something that we are
prepared to litigate on behalf
of the state of New Mexico and
our citizens.
Thank you very much
Representative Chatfield Mexico
Representative Sweetser thank
you Mr chair apologize for
stepping up.
Mr Agee have a quick question a
couple questions response.
Regards to the utility engineers
I know we have the PRC that a
lot of those issues on I guess
can you tell this committee
What exactly these utility
engineers are gonna do versus
what the PRC currently does.
Mr chair representative such as
these are at these are actually
engineers there are there are
charges outside parties yes so
so what these attorneys what we
do right now is whenever a of
rate cases filed in the PRC and
there's one recently been filed
by PNM
we have basically one client and
those are the consumers and
citizens of the people of this
state who will be sharing the
cost of that proposed rate
increase and so what they do is
they actually engage with
utility economists and utility
experts to evaluate whether the
costs associated with the
proposed rate increase or in
line or out of line with what
should be expected based on the
kind of services are being
provided by these utilities the
feedback that I have received
from those frontline attorneys
is that they simply do not have
enough bandwidth to dig into the
details of those proposed rate
increases or to engage with
those outside experts so that
they can adequately protect
consumers in the state.
Thank you Mr chairman so
basically
They're kind of doing what the
PRC should be doing that just
don't have the staff for the
expertise for the defense to do
this Mr chair representative sun
system it's it's not quite the
twenty general's office has
these has a separate mandate
right the the the PRC has its
own general counsel staff they
do their own independent C.
agency evaluation we are tasked
however with specifically
representing the interests of
consumers so we are tasked with
engaging in our own separate
legal analysis on our own
advocacy sometimes the
conclusions that are attorneys
reach are in alignment with the
PRC and sometimes they're not
and so it's important for the
consumers to have an independent
advocate that's the role that
we're intending to play thank
you Mr chairman my last question
some account co sponsor on the
bill to help the the fire people
the.
That are suffering a northern
New Mexico
part of the reason I side not to
that bill is that it has
language that we're going to try
to get that money back from the
federal government I guess my
question to you is
how far are we going to take it
to try to achieve that money
back because really they're at
fault and I know the.
I guess they're the process
takes forever and these people
need help right now and that's
why we're we're pushing this
bill to get the money quicker
sooner than later I guess how
far is the AG's office.
Really to go to try to recoup
that money which should be paid
by the the federal government.
Mr chair representative Sanchez
the that's an excellent question
it actually goes to
I think a good way to explaining
one of the first official acts I
engaged in as Attorney General
you may you may or may not be
aware that my predecessor had
filed a notice of loss claim
with FEMA that put female on
notice that the state of New
Mexico like other citizens was
going to submit a claim to
recover its damages I withdrew
the notice of loss specifically
because I didn't think we would
make the regulatory the time
line that's necessary to
document the totality of all the
costs that we have incurred
under regulation once FEMA had
recognized the notice of loss we
would have had a one hundred and
fifty days to calculate every
dollar that the state was owed
under that damage assessment the
problem is we are still
currently we're incurring costs
as we speak and we're going to
be incurring costs for a very
long time that's why I felt it
necessary to withdraw from that
process and in addition it also
preserves our right to file a
formal civil action against the
United States government if they
fail to come come with a
reasonable amount of money to
offset and make whole the state
of New Mexico and so we are
prepared to litigate to recover
every
costs that can reasonably
recover be recovered by
by the Congress and by the
probation that have been made at
the federal level.
Thank you Mr chairman I
appreciate that answer mystery
G. thank you thank you thank you
very much of Madam Sanchez next
we're going to go to
Representative heard.
Thank.
Thank you my question
Refers to a bill that was passed
last year with respect to the
attorney general's office
requiring an expansion to
include Division are section
missing and murdered indigenous
women with that included in this
but.
Mr chair representative hundred
I didn't hear the last forty
question how was that bill that
was passed with the X. expansion
of that division included in
this budget Mr chair
representative funding it's my
understanding that that initial
what was built into the budget
last year zoom touched we
haven't asked for an increase
but the funding for that
division has been at this it
will be at the same level that
was appropriated last year we
are looking to actually look at
all of our investigative
divisions and see what new
resources we can actually
dedicate to human trafficking
and that human trafficking
expansion will go to support the
work that we're trying to do in
with regard to missing and
murdered indigenous women in
addition to that we have asked
for and analytical component
that is included in the crime
gun intelligence center that was
initially built inside the
district attorney's office to
help us identify and deal with
in real time missing individuals
crime scenes of the locations of
weapons locations of tons of
been using connection with any
kind of activity our intention
is to take that capacity
statewide and then link that
effort with the work that we're
trying to do and tribal
communities so will be assisted
by this tribal Indian Affairs
division one of the first things
that they will be doing is
interacting with law enforcement
in Indian country in tribal
communities to make sure that
we're gathering real time
information and making sure that
our analysts understand what is
happening in terms of data
because we have a huge data
challenge when it comes to
missing and murdered indigenous
women when we did the initial
rollout with my predecessor and
and the U. S. attorney and
members of the FBI there was a a
lot of discrepancy in terms of
the number of missing and
murdered indigenous women and
relatives that were identified
in the initial.
Assessment that was done for the
committee the FBI has since
reduced that number and we need
to independently verify and
validate whether or not that's
an accurate assessment of the
number of people who are missing
from Indian country.
Okay thank you Mr chair Attorney
General tors as I'm looking at
the budget of the information
that was provided to us can you
tell us what was the source of
the reversion.
What wasn't performed potential
reversion occurred for this year
and I'd like to know what the
source so that was what what.
Aspect wasn't performed
regarding that.
Mr chair representative Herndon
I don't
I don't know that we can answer
that particular question because
we weren't actually
in office when the reversion
occurred but we can we can try
and make an assessment in terms
of giving you a the general
sense of where the money came
from and what category Mr
Chairman representative heard
and it's my understands the
Attorney General mentioned we
work here at the time of the
reversion made from my
understanding it was special
appropriation funds including
some COVID relief money and
other funds we can find out
specifically but that's my
understanding is that was
initially appropriate thank you
very much for that Attorney
General perhaps you can provide
that to the committee is sort of
a follow up to seventy tail but
understand that it was before
your time thank you Mr chair
thank you Mr trump.
moving on we're gonna go to
representative of your please.
Thank you Mr chairman thank you
for your presentation I think
that this does outline things
that are needed but there's
always ways to get in for
example legislators funded the
What are they called again.
The press tracks machines for
Albuquerque police so I'm
wondering if of police
departments in Farmington Gallup
was crucis in Roswell have they
requested capital outlay for
this machine when they're
proving to be so effective we've
any information about that Madam
chair representative gear if we
have I have not approached those
local law enforcement agencies
to provide that funding it's
this is a it can be a daunting
you all can be a bit daunting
for local law enforcement
agencies in terms of requiring
capital outlay but I'm certainly
able to engage with them to see
if they're more interested in
putting in capital outlay I
think the one thing that's
imperative is that these be
viewed as part of a statewide
network what we don't want is
for individual communities talk
to go and get and of of of
machine and I've been machine
start evaluating casings but
then you actually haven't done
the analytical work of bringing
all that data together because
what we're what we're really
focused on in hiring the analyst
if you look deeply into this
request we have a training
coordinator that covers the
entire state but we also have
three panelists what those
analysts will do is to make sure
that the data that's required in
Travis county is linked to the
data that's required in Dona ana
county my concern with that
separate processes of Dona ana
county gets its own machine they
may start thinking of it as a
machine that only serves the
needs of Dona Ana County what we
want to try and do is cover the
entire state and link it all
together yeah no I understand
and and Mr chairman I mean in
everything we do there's always
communication collaboration
integration
and then my other question is
also that collaborative piece Mr
Chairman does CYFD have
attorneys that are addressing
the sorts of things that you see
the chill.
Rents justice and civil rights
bureau doing do they have any
number of attorneys dedicated to
a similar purpose Mr Chairman
representative Garrett I know
that the lawyers at CYFD or
focused on issues on a range of
issues from
you know issues that may arise
with the certification of of
foster families to how to train
investigators to evaluating
potential lawsuits that may
arise from an action that the
department took that resulted in
harm to a child.
This bureau will not engage in
those things what this bureau
will focus on our is whether or
not we are protecting children
and whether or not those
children rights or secure so it
is an independent.
Approach but it is not
independent approach that
doesn't just touch on CYFD there
are other state and local
agencies that have contact with
children and those children are
falling through the cracks and
part of the rationale behind
this bureau is that they finally
have dedicated highly skilled
and highly trained
constitutional advocacy on their
behalf at every level of the.
And so while I'm hoping to have
a cooperative relationship
between members of the bureau
and CYFD attorneys or attorneys
at a school district that may
have a problem for example
providing children with
disabilities with adequate
access to meaningful education
that's a relationship that is
going to be independent so we'll
be looking at the same thing but
we will have different clients
and our clients will be the
children.
Thank you for that articulation
that's my question thank you
very much Representative Garrett
next from the Representative
look with.
Thank you Mr chairman first of
all welcome to our general and.
Welcome my former colleague on
the really a county commissioner
Mr Stephens.
Great to see both of you.
first of all I have I applaud
your efforts towards bringing in
much of the work in house I
think I think that's why that's
where the I think it has the
potential to save the state some
money.
But that being said how will you
determine at which point.
Work is outsourced first kept in
house.
Mr chair representative dela
Cruz that that's an excellent
question and it's one that will
be the focus of a pretty
detailed policy analysis and a
policy that we will actually put
forward for public review and
examination but to to give you a
general sense
lawsuits and litigation or a
little bit like bar fights
sometimes and when you're in a
bar and you're thinking of I
might get into a fight with
somebody and you look across the
room and you're dealing with
opioids for example.
The the people that they're
going to bring the lawyers that
they're going to bring basically
represent the biggest guy in the
bar you could possibly imagine
that's not a flight we're gonna
want to take on on our own we
don't have the resources we
don't have the in house
expertise we don't have the
ability to do that on our own
and there's certain forms of
complex litigation for example
some of the litigation that the
natural resource trustee just
outlined in terms of P. fast we
may be in a position to handle
them but we are more likely than
not going to rely on firms that
specialize in that litigation
and only that litigation not
just because they have the legal
expertise but here's the real
secret most great lawyers that
focus like that they have all of
a detailed relationship and an
ongoing relationship with the
most experienced experts in the
field those types of cases that
she outline for Representative
Chatfield are typically one or
loss based on whether or not you
have the right expert
so that's too big for us to
handle that's probably something
that we won't be able to do.
On the flip side there or cases
that and here's a prime example
of one I use repeated.
Visit solar was a company that
had the selling power purchase
agreements across the state of
New Mexico and they were
defrauding consumers they were
effectively telling consumers
misleading them about the costs
of the the you know unit that
they were installing on the roof
and how much power they gonna
get back and all that kind of
thing that that's not a hundred
you know that's a hundred pound
gorilla that somebody that the
state of New Mexico in a
litigator in house can take on
by itself end we can do it
without giving away thirty
percent of the recovery to an
out of state for so the Vivint
solar case is a clear example of
something that could have been
handled in house and frankly
should have been handled in
house in part because when they
settle the agreement.
They not only settled it for
recovery for the state two
things happened guess how much
money ended up in the pockets of
consumers who were harmed not.
No money and to when they were
done they stipulated to the
ceiling to the non disclosure of
all of the information that
would have assisted private
attorneys and helping private
clients recover that money so.
That out of state law firm got a
pretty hefty payday the state of
New Mexico got some money back
in its pockets but the consumers
didn't get any money and the
materials that would have aided
them in recovering money
privately were locked away if a
lawyer works in our office
they're working for salary you
don't have the same incentives
because you're not just trying
to settle the case you're trying
to do the best you can for the
consumers who have been harmed
that's the kind of case that we
can handle it house and should
handle that house.
Thank you Mr chairman I
appreciate the answer turned
general thank you thank you very
much of the day a cruise next to
representative Allison please.
Thank you Mr chair.
Thanks for the presentation Mr
Attorney General.
On your worksheet I'm glad to
see that you have a.
Under your tribal Indian Affairs
division having a debt dedicate
consultation I'm glad to hear
that I'm always looking forward
to making it a safer Indian
nations of.
I'm glad to hear that your
dedication some effort to the M.
M. I. W..
What a.
A few years ago and my district
there was growing of the legal
cannabis and I made some calls
to law enforcement people and I
was told that there is they
could not do anything because of
sovereignty issues and then
eventually we must call the
right person to get some people
involved in and that is just one
example of where the budget
would be if we established a
dedicated consultation
some parts of my district we're
still like the old little west
you know where the pavement ends
while west begins that's the
Navajo Nation I have families
that are threatening one another
with fire alarms and we're not
doing anything about it.
One of the reasons if we did
anything about it we arrested
the perpetrator we got no place
to put in because we don't have
jails so I'm glad to see that
initiative on on the one of your
schedules to to do something
about it so I appreciate that
maybe you can share with me
another benefit of your of your
goal of establishing of
dedicated consultation.
Mr chair representative Allison
thank you for the question
tribal consultation in
government to government
consultation has been the
predominant theme of every
conversation whether it's having
conversations with other members
of the Navajo Nation or with the
eight more than pueblos or with
the hickory
every tribal community has some
story of reaching out for
answers whether it has to do
with harvesting natural
resources
hunting permits criminal
jurisdiction and all too often
they end up in this fractured
system where.
Your call and don't call us call
someone else don't call us call
this agency the intention of of
this division is to
fundamentally solve that problem
but there's a challenge inherent
in it and I'm I'm glad you
raised it I am looking
specifically to hire into this
division members of the Navajo
Nation members of the public
communities members of the
Apache Apache communities
because I think in order to be
fully effective I need people in
those roles who have linguistic
fluency cultural fluency and
frankly of when they go out to
the nation it's a homecoming
they grew up there they know the
issues there they know the
problems with you know getting
locked local law enforcement
there they have an awareness
because they are from that
community of what's happening
with water and access to water
so they don't need to be taught
how what it means to to be there
to be present but I need them to
stop working for private law
firms at least for a year to
probably convince them to take a
big salary cut to come work in
the office and come into this
office so that they can they can
be a representative of the state
of New Mexico back to their own
community.
Mr chair thank you for that Mr
chairman general of this is a
very valuable information that I
will share with the new Navajo
Nation administration thank you
very much Mr thank you very much
Representative Allison next
we're gonna go to Representative
Lujan.
Mr chair thank you Mr Attorney
General welcome.
couple questions are regarding
your ask our for the.
The increase on the medical if
you tried.
What what is not being covered
now and I'm going to just
referenced a recent article I
read saying that we've we've
paid out no tens of millions of
dollars in settlements and fines
and then those those individuals
have these fines and settlements
I've been able to contract again
with our state is there anything
that you're including with this
ask it would cover some of those
those with those ways of which
we we incur those costs and then
allow for that is a recurring
contracts Mister chair Mister
Representative Lujan that's an
excellent question it was it was
I didn't get into detail because
we stopped at other matters but
one of the things that we
highlighted in in the proposal
that we put before the committee
is that we are not fully for
that the the recommendation I
believe the LFC recommendation
does not provide for funding for
the Medicaid fraud control unit.
The room the reason that is so
important is that it's a twenty
five seventy five match so by
not meeting the twenty five
percent funding threshold that's
that's requested in the budget
we're actually leaving on nearly
three hundred fifty thousand
dollars in federal and federal
matching dollars that we could
use to hire new investigators
hire new prosecutors hired the
civil litigators who will then
have greater enforcement powers
and be able to recover more
money on behalf of the state so
that's the one technical element
in our request that touches on
the Medicaid fraud control unit
is that if we can get that
bumped up well actually on walk
three to one federal matching
dollars which I think would
really help that you to go a
long long way thank you Mr chair
appreciate the answer I think we
need to talk about the other
part of my question later the
the the other question I have
is.
What are you are you.
Looking at the organized to have
Mr chair and organized crime
unit that you're you're you're
needing to fund even more now or
anything like that Mr chair
representative Lujan the might
my predecessor had helped to
establish the organized retail
crime task force and we've had
some staff turnover recently in
the last few months and so we're
still making an assessment of
how many dedicated personnel
that are focused on that it's my
understanding that we just one
of the investigators that was
leading that effort may have
transitioned on to the private
sector is actually been I think
it was recently hired by by lows
or home depot I can't remember
which in part because they pay
better than we do so we it's
it's a unit that we intend to
continue funding in fact it's a
unit that we would like to
increase its capacity but it's
something that I think we can
fund from the vacancies that we
currently have inside the
building or a number of on of of
unfilled vacancies right now and
we can use those dollars I think
to supplement the work of the
organized retail crime task
force thank you Mr chair and I'm
and I'm going to get back on to
get to the point of the opioid
settlement fund we have that can
you tell us what the fund amount
is Mr chair.
Mr chairman defer to the chief
financial officer the chief
administrative officer to give.
Chairman representative I'm not
sure I understood your question
to.
Yes Mr I'm simply asking what is
the amount of the opioid
settlement that we have for
state at this time Senator.
Mr chair I can address that
question if you turn to page
nine hundred different she
packet
Protection for consumers and.
That and on that document there
is a summary of opioid revenues
have been received in FY twenty
three and this is a snapshot
taken about December my
understanding is there's an
expectation of continued
Representative but this is page
line has the current snapshot
thank you Mr chair so my
question that goes to.
What what are you looking to use
any of that settlement fund to
help some of your
your units that you have.
Of the AG's office your office
Mr chair representative Lujan
opioid settlement funds for
slightly different than the kids
in the consumer funds so opioid
settlement funds are supposed to
be used for abatement for
treatment and abatement in
communities across the state the
current proposed split is fifty
five percent of those funds are
actually given back to local
communities to counties and
municipalities who have had
substantial impacts from the
opioid epidemic and forty five
percent comes back to the state
it's my understanding that this
committee is considering a
variety of different ways to
deploy those resources including
everything from you know medical
assisted treatment in the
context of county jails in the
department of corrections to
others for other forms of
upstream interventions I'm my
role in that is to try to assure
that it is come in compliance
with the purpose of the funds
right in terms of addressing the
form that was done to those
communities and not misuse
refused in some other way what I
will stop at the water's edge
and defer to this committee to
see how they would best
appropriate those monies in
general the consumer recoveries
that we get that are separate
from opioids for example medical
devices that have impacted
people or payday loans that have
paid the loan companies that
have been sued and deposited
money in the past those kinds of
funds will be used to offset the
expenses of this enhanced
investigate in litigation unit
and part of the argument is that
we will be with more attorneys
generating more revenue in part
because they can generate the
revenue directly without
outsourcing it and without
paying those hefty fees which
means a larger recovery to the
state so to a certain extent
some of the things that we have
proposed.
Artistry costs to this committee
the tribal affairs division for
example that's just the cost of
the crime gun intelligence
center that's just a cost I
think they're meaningful and
worthwhile costs the enhancement
of litigation is both a cost and
a revenue investment because
those lawyers will at some point
in the future start generating
revenue to not just cover their
own salaries but start
generating more and more revenue
directly back to the state to be
deployed in ways that benefit
everyone.
Great thank you Mr chair SO to
get back to that.
The statements that you just use
for revenue generation from your
office that would help our
state.
I would just like to have an off
conversation with you and
getting back to the you're
you're organized crime unit and
you know because of what we're
facing here with the the
fictional
epidemic and opioid usage and
all those sorts of things I'd
like to see if there's somehow
some way that we could maybe
manage that better through your
office and and then maybe
generate more revenues for state
if that is the bottom line we're
looking at
there's a lot to be to be on to
be said about that and I look
forward to working with you
thank you Mr thank you
Representative Baca.
Thank you Mr chairman and thank
you Attorney General for your
presentation like my college no
of the at a briefing just gonna
focus of really about the
expansion request and the
enhanced civil litigation.
Mr chairman Attorney General how
many cases per year do we have
to outsource would use or in the
last year how many cases were
outsourced
and what what types of cases
where they.
That's my first question.
And then the other question that
I have and I do appreciate you
saying that CYFD in protecting
children top priority for me and
I'll say this your other
requests are are very much
aligned because it talks about
access.
My final my question really is
the start the two question is.
How will this affect the medical
field and first responders if at
all.
So again.
Number of cases and will this
have an impact to the medical
field.
And first responders thank you
Mr chairman Mr chair
representative pockets Baca
thank you for the question with
respect to how many cases have
been outsourced this the simple
answer is I don't know I have
asked my staff to do an
assessment looking back over the
last several years to capture
and and and Representative dela
Cruz was asking you know
enquiring on the same line.
What cases have been outsourced
versus what cases happen on the
some of the biggest cases that
you're probably aware of in the
office rollouts will be with
litigation for one there's both
National Council and local
council the vote there was a
case against Volkswagen for
falsifying the emission
standards that one of the
vehicles was
was sort of sold as perform but
actually didn't perform at that
was our outsourced at the
national level with local
council the gold king mine spill
up in San Juan County that was
outsourced and there was local
council and I've asked for an
assessment of all of those cases
so that I can look
comprehensively to see which of
those might have been
effectively handled in house
verses which of those might be
might still need to be handled
by outside counsel
I can tell you right off the bat
cases like the opioid
litigation will always unless
there's one exception California
the California attorney
general's office I think has
close to a thousand people.
So often times you will hear
litigation initiated by
California and they actually do
it beginning to end the whole
thing.
But we don't have that size and
scale were relatively poor state
and so we're gonna have to
outsource cases like that well
we're gonna make that exact a
Cessna with respect to your
question about will this I think
the new children's justice
bureau impact medical personnel
is that correct but.
Mr chairman Attorney General I
asked about medical and police
and fire personnel.
Mr chair Representative Baca
It's hard to predict my sense is
that it's focused on government
actions right and so it's
focused on for example
classes of children who have
been harmed by a pattern or
practice of some government
agency that has failed to train
so I can give you a hypothetical
there was a any incident I
believe in San Juan County where
there was a school resource
officer who used a taser on a
minor child with disabilities.
I can tell you here
unequivocally that that's
exactly the kind of case that
this office is going to be
looking at however we are not
seeking and and have not asked
for monetary damages.
We're not trying to recover
money and we cannot stand in the
shoes of private counsel who are
representing that family so they
will have their own private
attorney and they will initiate
their own lawsuit for monetary
damages I'm not interested in
monetary damages I'm interested
in making sure that the police
department that allowed a child
with a disability to be taste to
not be in that situation ever
again so we're looking for
injunctive relief and that
injunctive relief will often
take the place of
Would you volunteer to go
through a new training regimen
will forego the possibility of
litigation meeting we're not
gonna have a District Court
judge order you to do this will
you come to the table and
negotiate with us yes all right
great now we're going to then
we're gonna engage in it
supplemental training so that we
stopped doing this because the
larger problem that we have in
this state with these government
agencies that are dealing with
children is children are harmed
or children or kids.
Their families and their loved
ones hire an attorney they file
a lawsuit to retrain recover
damages for the agency that led
to that harm.
There's a risk attorney assigned
a settlement is reached and
guess what happens we go right
back to the same pattern of
conduct without meaningful
changes and I'm looking for
institutional reform across the
board thank you Mr of chairman
and thank you turning Jennifer
answers thank you they are
present Baca I Representative
Trujillo this I didn't notice Mr
chairman members and and
Attorney General of.
Lotus that you had aspirin
crease.
Increases in funding for a
consumer protection laws
Firefight not and and I'm I
guess I'm.
In sort of a medical debt
specifically.
UP Mr chair representative
Trujillo when if you look at
what's number four on page two
of our hand out forces enhance
the civil litigation division.
It incorporates not only the the
children's justice bureau that
we were just talking about with
Representative Baca but it also
includes consumer protection of
the sort that you just outlined
and one and I will raise because
you you touched on this issue
it's an example of what happens
when other elements within the
legislature or not coordinating
with appropriators last year the
legislature passed a bill that
sought to protect indigent
patients from aggressive
collection actions on behalf of
hospital organizations and other
health care providers the
problem is and it's it's a I
think a good and and and
laudable objective the problem
is there wasn't any specific
funding mechanism to make that a
reality so the very first
lawsuit to protect indigenous
people from those kinds of
collection action wasn't brought
by the attorney general's office
it was brought by the New Mexico
Center on Law and Poverty.
That's the kind of work that
should be done by the attorney
general's office and often what
we find is we provide
substantive bills that are
happening in other committees in
the building and the very last
line one of the favorite lines
in a lot of these bills is and
the foregoing shall be enforced
by the Attorney General.
Problem is nobody told you
about.
Which means that when it comes
to us I have to pick I have to
pick somebody from the Medicaid
fraud unit to work on it or
somebody to pull off of water K.
to work on it or don't do this
utility action to work on it we
shouldn't do that there needs to
be better coordination between
that kind of substantive work
that's happening elsewhere in
the building and the funds that
we have to enforce it I actually
had them printed out all of the
references to the attorney
general's office in the code and
it's.
Thank and what that means is in
this building people are
routinely adding to the
authority of the office but you
know what they're not adding to.
The budget of the office that's
what this expansion request is
intended to address thank you
thank you Mr twenty general
thank you Mr thank you thank you
very much for Senator here okay
I don't see any other questions
we're going to go to
Representative Dixon promotion
but before we do that Mr Terry
general I think.
You've noted a number of fairly
aggressive and and fairly well
thought out sort of expansion
areas a number of Representative
touched on how that connects to
other parts of the state and you
just went into that in detail so
we'll go for our our
recommendation but we're gonna
appoint a working group to ask
them to collaborate with you and
with staff from the executive in
from the legislative
as we sort of start a new in
store for us we can get.
Mr chair I move the executive
recommendation.
Okay it's been moved and and
second by Representative
daylight Cruz from by
Representative Dixon the
executive it's slightly lower
but I think as we all anticipate
that this will grow through the
collaboration of this committee
are there any objections to
adopting the executive
recommendation.
Okay well so Representative
Pettigrew and Representative
Montoya in objection to that
amongst members okay and then
members this is going to be
fairly long I apologize
Representative Dixon Garrett
Herndon Allison and Sanchez
along with Representative and
ranking member Armstrong brown
Chattfield and Baca fairly large
but there's nothing more
important than both public
safety the consumer protections
as you've talked about them
protections for New Mexico's
children and so we're gonna
delve deeper into that thank you
very much Mr Turner general
thank you Mr chair.
Okay we are the fish we have
three agencies to go thanks
everyone for their patience
thanks especially to members of
the audience and those who are
tuning in.
We're gonna now ask our state
auditor state auditor my Estes
to come on up.
This is the HSD code three zero
eight members we can turn to
that.
And we have miss Anderson is
Montoya
this router thank you so much
thank you for your patience we
would like to kick it over to
you and please feel free to
introduce any members of your
team thank you
Mr chair members of the
committee it's a pleasure to be
with you Joseph Maestas state
auditor I want to introduce a
few folks that have accompanied
me here today my deputy state
auditor Ricky but had no.
we also have I don't think he's
in the room but pressed for
hallways here my my assistant
general counsel we also have
shown back in the back he is
Division director for special
investigations we also have our
budget director lower month
where where are you were there
she is.
Before I get into the the slide
deck Mr chair members of the
committee as you know my
predecessor submitted the FY
twenty four budget so in a way
I'm kind of inheriting that
budgets a middle
in summary we're we're not
requesting any major departures
from that request however I will
near the end of my presentation
summarized and special
appropriations that we're gonna
be pursuing so with that Mr
chair and and I think the to
summarize the presentation I'm
just going to really go through
the basic functions of the
office give you an idea of kind
of what the work load is
In in the we have numbers on the
slide but we have a slide here
that speaks to the authority of
the state auditor of we're
tasked with ensuring that the
financial affairs of every
agency shall be thoroughly
examined and audited each year
that also includes financial
affairs and transactions that
must be audited in whole or in
part.
As a snapshot we're talking
about a thousand public entities
between five and six hundred are
subject to a full financial
audit the remainder are what we
call small political
subdivisions I'm talking about a
sick as mutual domestic water
associations soil conservation
districts
We also regulate independent
public accountants we go through
an approval process and the way
this works is
these independent public honors
a com IPA if you're of a beer
aficionado I'm not talking about
that I'm talking about
accountants
they go through a a kind of a
pre certification or approval
process once we put them on the
approved list that's the green
light for them to engage with
all these public entities and
perform audits the public entity
ends up paying for the for the
audit.
In certain instances we might do
the audit in house.
Right now we have about fifty
three
approved or pre approved
independent public accountants.
There's many of you are probably
aware there's a very different
and new function that we've been
tasked with going back to twenty
twenty one and that is we're
tasked with reviewing
conservatorship Reports we in
partnership with the state
Supreme Court and the
administrative office of the
courts we basically receive
these annual concert Reports we
have full discretion to review
and if we have probable cause to
to audit them then we audit them
and so you know in the past this
office have been dealing with
public financial information now
we're dealing with private
financial information.
But I submitted a organizational
chart I'm not going to go into
any great detail but I want to
focus your attention on the
bottom there's a summary box
there we have basically thirty
five thirty five classified
employees and six exempt and one
temp
that last bullet is we have
about fourteen vacancies for
thirty four percent.
In terms of our workload I think
I pretty much already mentioned
that we this is probably the the
the biggest function that we
performed and that is reviewing
audit reports and we typically
get them in the second half of
the calendar year as I mentioned
we do do some on its in house.
If you look at that last bullet
on the financial work load slide
we we process thirteen hundred
line conservative reports in FY
twenty two and
That is expected to grow we
expect about sixteen hundred.
The next slide is entitled
special investigations which is
what the special investigation
during the course of these
financial audits the engaged
public accountant may provide
potential criminal wrongdoing.
By statute they're obligated to
report it to us and so what we
do in special investigations we
either tell that engage public
accountant accounting firm to
investigate that area of concern
that comes in through our fraud
waste and abuse intake and we
get a variety of methods of
these confidential complaints of
fraud waste and abuse we're
talking phone web email walk
ins.
And so
What's amazing here Mr chairman
members of the committee is
Out of all those cases have for
actionable and we make some type
of referral to an appropriate
prosecuting authority it could
be a the district attorney in
that certain area it could be
Attorney General.
For law enforcement.
And so I think this is a very
important function right now
we're in the process of
reforming our intake method of
if you can believe this if if
you look at that pie chart the
big takeaway is the lion share
of intake of confidential
allegations of fraud waste and
abuse are either through the web
or through email we get a very
small fraction by by telephone.
So just to summarize our our
legislative initiatives as I
mentioned before we we do have
some expansion is and I'll go
through those in the past but
not not in the FY twenty four
budget
we're gonna be requesting some
amendments to the uniform
probate code with regard to
conservatorship audits the time
lines that were allowed to
conduct an audit is insufficient
because we have to request
additional documentation from
these private parties many of
them reside out of state and so
if we legislation some kind of
potential wrongdoing you can
understand their hesitation.
So we're gonna ask for a longer
time line we're also going to
ask for a an amendment to the
audit act regarding the
confidentiality of a fraud
hotline tips an audit work
papers work papers are
confidential information that's
gathered in the course of an
audit and when you're dealing of
of allegations of fraud waste
and abuse you have information
on these tipsters and so we want
to make sure that these these
working papers are confidential
to protect the identity of these
tipsters.
The third request is we're going
to aspen appropriations special
appropriations of a hundred
thousand to study that to study
the feasibility of conducting a
single audits of all state
agencies we're one of the few
states in the United States that
does not have that each state
agency does individual separate
audits.
The fourth request and this is
This is I think the big
revelation that I've had since I
since I've been in this in this
position we're going to request
one million dollars in the form
of a special appropriations for
these small public subdivision
assistance grants
I asked my staff I said will you
know we have this at risk list
and some of the inadequacies go
all the way back to fiscal year
twenty ten and so we tallied up
all the missing certifications
of the small political
subdivisions.
It tallied over two thousand and
so our average small public
subdivision assistance grants
the average about two thousand
dollars.
That comes out to a total of
four million dollars and so
that's why we're going to ask
for a million dollars to really
be much more aggressive to help
the small public entities
because as you know if if
they're not financially
compliant they're not eligible
to access their capital outlay.
And just to give an idea and
these are of the entities that
are in our system of.
After looking into just a sec as
and and Representative Sweetser
you pry would appreciate this
there's about six hundred forty
as sick as we have to twenty
five this in our system and of
the two twenty five but forty
five percent our compliance so
you can see just getting as sick
as in our system is a big
challenge so what happens is if
you have a sick it is not in our
system and not fill it
financially compliant once they
get capital outlay they're
shocked they're told you can
access it because you're not
you're not financially
compliant.
So we see this as a big of
hurdle.
To get over it and I my goal is
to completely eliminate all
those entities on the at risk
list to allow them to access
their their capital outlay.
I just wanted to summarize and
it's not it's not part of your
packet but some of my priorities
as I mentioned before is to
advocate for a single state
agency audit
I think you know when when you
all look at financial risk you
look at where the money is and
so my office is going to
continue to do that is to be
aggressive in focus on the
higher financial risks where the
line chair of the public money
is.
You know my office it's forty
one forty one FTEs and so we
have very limited resources and
I think it's incumbent upon me
as the leader of this office to
partner with key stakeholders
that have a.
Have a stake in the success
especially of the small public
entities and so I intend to
partner with the a secular
Association
the school board associations
and other entities that advocate
for the very public entities
that we regulate.
I'm gonna this is this is going
to be expansion related you're
going to be hearing about this
over the course of the next year
one glaring I think
issue in my office is we lack a
real concentrated focused
function on training and
education as you know we have
that function the office in the
past is conducted about
seventeen hundred or so training
sessions to various public
entities and I think we need to
do a heck of a lot more to
prevent fraud waste and abuse.
we've had several meetings with
the legislative finance
committee
I think they're program
evaluation unit can be a very
very productive partner with the
office of the state auditor and
so they've committed to work
with us a lot closer to identify
those areas that we can jointly
evaluate.
We're going to streamline
improve the process of reporting
fraud waste and abuse and reform
the case management system I I
kind of mention that before
we're gonna we're gonna ask for
a special appropriations of two
hundred ten thousand to reform
our case management system we're
also we could phase out the
services associated with intake
fraud waste and abuse hotline
intake through the telephone.
And the last thing I think is a
little more general doesn't
really apply to the budget but
we're going to ensure that there
is cost effective use of office
space and work with the General
Services Department to see if we
can move the office of the state
auditor a little closer to the
capital were where the heck out
there by Kohl's probably never
ever come see my office but my
door's always open to you of and
so with that Mr Chairman I stand
for any questions a.
Thank you very much Mr oddity
I want to start out briefly one.
Thank you for mentioning the.
Training sessions right now we
have a consensus target that's
been it fifteen
sort of back at twenty one
twenty two levels is it your
sense that maybe that fifteen is
too low and you in fact would
like to see that higher I do I
do great thank you very much and
we'll look forward to staff
work to see because if you're
coming and saying you're ready
for that number two and then
we'll go
I apologize I was cut.
Before we do any questions would
like to go to our analysts I
Go a little too fast there.
please miss Anderson and then
miss Montoya Senator.
Good afternoon everyone you Mr
chairman members of the
committee.
this afternoon I'll just briefly
review the differences in
between the executive and the
LESC recommendation for the
office of the state auditor if
you're following along in your
volumes again they are agency
code three oh eight.
And they're going to be on page
sixty three and sixty four of
the volume.
so the so the legislative a
recommendation for the general
fund revenue was a hundred and
sixty eight thousand below the
executive recommendation and the
LESC recommendation is a four
point three percent increase
over the FY twenty three
operating budget.
the two main differences in the
in the base recommendation
was that the LFC recommendation
was a hundred and eighteen
thousand below the executive
recommendation for personal
service and employee been a
budget because the LFC
recommendation applied a
slightly higher vacancy rates
than the executive
recommendation
and the executive recommendation
included two hundred and ninety
one thousand to US bill beacon
sees.
the only other key differences
between the two recommendations
was that the LFC recommendation
funded fifty thousand dollars a
below the executive rack in the
costs to small political
subdivisions and the executive
recommendation increase that
amount by seventy thousand so
other than that those were the
two main differences in Iraq so
I'll turn it over to a DFA
analyst to add any comments.
Thank you Mr chairman and
members of the committee miss
Anderson did a wonderful job on
P. at differences and I have no
other comments great famous
Anderson thank you miss one
Toyota
mistrial so we talked about the
trainings the the funded vacancy
rate is relatively high again as
we know this is a snapshot in
time from last year really prior
but analysts if we could sort of
understand if that funded
vacancy rate is still in that
twenty eight we're so in twenty
eight and a half percent here
call me
As we sort of sort through it be
great to understand that with
that will go to other committee
questions will start with
Representative Pettigrew and
then go to Representative
Chatfield.
At thank you Mr chairman and
thank you.
Sir are there for your.
Presentation.
Chairman.
The.
Little bit about the private
entities that were audited that
because of government
relationship or what was the
what was the basis for that
without getting into detail
Sorry desiring the statutes I
don't see that as part of the
purview that come from the state
auditor's office of help me help
you get there yes house bill two
thirty four was passed in twenty
twenty one and effective on July
one of that year we were tasked
with assisting the Supreme Court
and the administrative office of
the courts to review all annual
conservative Reports
As I mentioned the volume's been
about twelve hundred we expect
that to go up to sixteen
hundred.
you're right
Mr chairman Representative
Pettigrew this is something very
very new it's a very different
function for this office
relative to the historic
Historical function of dealing
with public financial
information and so really we're
we're mandated by state
and we were granted three full
time equivalents along with that
legislation to assist with the
sheer volume of processing and
reviewing these conservative
reports on an annual basis thank
you thank you very much and.
With that.
How many of those positions
chairman stronger have you been
able to fill.
I believe we filled two of them
we have one vacancy is that
correct yes.
Thank you however I just want to
ask part part of our expansion
is then include and total
assessment of our our capacity
for legal services because as I
mentioned it's a challenge to
review these and once we make
the decision to do a full audit
we don't have enough time
there's some legal hurdles with
respect to subpoenaing these
professional conservatives
versus a non professional all we
have is a chief general counsel
and Assistant so we make it be
coming back to you and for the
course of this year to revisit
that to ensure that we do have
the legal resources to fulfill
that New a state mandate.
Thank you for that.
I have to go back and read house
bill two thirty four now because
that there's there's a piece of
that the based on statute
chairman auditor the.
Concerns me a little bit I'm
sure it does that other people
as well.
Chairman just a couple more
With respect to the small public
entities the the the you deal
with that.
Alright compliance.
On your from your offices
standpoint.
That and therefore can't receive
capital outlay.
Chairman I would like to ask
that we get a list of the
organization so that as
legislators as we receive our
capital outlay requests we
understand whether or not
they're in a position that they
need to be dealing with you.
Obviously most of them probably
already in communication with
your office but the other side
is you know.
For a very limited amount of
money that we're.
We're given and to allocate that
to an entity that can't receive
it.
For whatever reason that is just
a paperwork issue that take time
verify issue whatever it is it's
still an allocation that that
didn't make sense.
Yet Mr chairman Representative
agree that's a just very
important issue and again that's
why I think it's incumbent upon
my office to work with those
advocacy organizations because
they have a stake in the success
of the public entities to ensure
that their financially
compliance so they can receive
capital outlay and so I'm in a
share that responsibility with
them formally to assist me in
getting them compliance but it's
through the small grants that we
really can make that happen
we're just going to be more
aggressive about not just
allocating these but procuring
and gaining the interest of
accounting firms to go out in
the hinterlands an audit a small
soil and conservation district
we may do it on a cluster
basically.
Geographic cluster basically to
make it attractive to public
accounting firms.
And I appreciate that answer but
chairman once again I'd really
like to have that list
and maybe provided by district
maybe find I don't know how to
how you.
Perceive that from your
standpoint the I'd like to know
if I'm receiving capital outlay
requests requests from companies
are companies from from
entities.
Whether or not they can actually
receive the.
And chairman my last question
How many.
Of the forty one FTEs the you
have right now.
Are you feeling the the empty
spaces right now with with
consultants.
From are you media meeting
that's we have very little Mr
Chairman Representative
Pettigrew we have a very modest
contractual services budget
some of the primary functions
that we have are stop gap
measures the chief general
counsel left a couple of months
before the end of the county
here so we needed to hire
outside counsel to deal with the
and if the case is in litigation
We're gonna need contractual
services for I. T.
What other contractual services.
Yes
we need some some staff
augmentation resources to review
a lot of the public audits as I
mentioned
we get those five hundred at the
end of every county here and so
it's a challenge to get those
all reviewed within a certain
time frame.
Thank you for that thank you
chairman I know but thank you
very much Representative
Pettigrew next Representative
Chatfield then Representative
your.
Thank.
Of course.
Thank you all special.
As the.
The very.
All of here that I just needed
to.
Are you the
well.
That the border.
All of the.
well a lot of.
Still is a problem because
of the.
Thank.
Yeah.
Well.
Step down.
The.
Our house
The staff to water the.
Okay what is the sure a hard
question.
Mr Chairman Representative
Chatfield of the just briefly
explain in the other rule it
explains in detail that the
tiered process the tier process
is based on the revenue levels
for the smaller
political subdivisions now my
understanding is that the
capital outlay that they
received does not count toward
the annual revenue that could
kick them into higher tier
that's that's my understanding
of and by the way every year we
conduct a rulemaking and allow
all of these entities to review
the audit rule and make
recommendations for improvements
about how we gonna do this a yes
we're going to we're going to
get these these small as we come
S. PS grants a small political
subdivisions requests and put it
out there put a call for for
audits but I think we instead of
procuring these audits at two
thousand dollars a pop we need
to stimulate more interest by
public accounting firm so we
might cluster them
geographically that way maybe
the profit margin might be a bit
more attractive for these
accounting firms to do a series
of these are are.
We column agreed upon procedures
but the smaller lower level type
audits for these small public
entities.
No Sir I I a summarized a
special appropriations request
that I'm gonna make for a
million dollars to add to this
S. P. S. financial assistance
grants
we did a projection and based on
our projection we need about
four million dollars in these
these requests to completely.
Completely allow all these
entities that are considered at
risk and on our list and
financially on complaint to get
them compliant.
Paul.
I.
If you.
How job.
Going to work with those
advocacy organizations and work
directly with them to raise the
awareness about the availability
of these requests in fact it's
completely discretionary to the
state auditor to conduct
multiple opportunities for these
grant applications but we have
very limited funds to do that
and so you're right it's
education awareness of in fact
we may not you make it
discretionary we may set aside
some of these requests and say
these are for those small public
entities that are already on the
naughty list is someone calls it
and I'll give an example yeah I
I had a two thousand dollar
grant for the Rehm water
district and this is only for
twenty thirteen I mean they're
non compliant going all the way
back to fiscal year twenty
thirteen so at this rate will
never ever make a dent or move
the needle in reducing this at
risk list and get the small
entities off that list
financially compliant.
Of the state for.
Or they were just people that
came together that the if we
became.
This very worthwhile.
how we can.
I did not.
You want to give folks off of
that is.
Thank thank you Representative
Chatfield we're gonna go to
Representative Dixon by critics.
Thank you Mr chair thank you Mr
auditor I also am very
interested in this grant program
for the small political
subdivisions that you're talking
about my question is would
entities that are on this list
or that have been flagged would
they be at risk for not
receiving federal grants as
well.
Yes my deputy says yes.
All right wonderful well as we
know there's a lot of federal
money out there are you guys
coordinating it all with the
states the grants bureau that
that DFA.
Not not just yet but I I have I
have been working with the a
second as I attended the recent
Congress so I've met with the
municipal league and we're gonna
continue to aggressively meet
with all these advocacy
organizations that can partner
with us to get this done to
really get this money out there
and get these these folks off
that list.
Thank you Mr chair thank you Mr
auditor thank you thank you by
your Dixon
mistrial thank you very much
I think we see a lot of strong
yes miss Anderson please.
Mr chair members of the
committee could I add that we
just had some follow up
information because the the LFC
team did confirm that the twenty
eight point five is still the
current vacancy rate and nothing
has changed since this last I
think September when the report
was pulled and then I just
wanted to point the members to a
little the bottom of page sixty
three has a little bit of
information and additional
details on the FY twenty two
data for the requests that were
distributed to the small a
public subdivisions.
I'm just page sixty three.
And it looks like they were able
to from the data that we have it
they were able to distribute
over thirty thousand in FY
twenty two in requests to the
small political subdivisions.
Thank you very much Senator
Steinborn thank you to the LFC
for gathering the information
and that's our volume two and
eight sixty three so
other masses
The the proposed special for for
one million dollars that would
be a very significant expansion
would.
Briefly on that do you
anticipate expanding that all in
FY twenty four in collaboration
with the small political
subdivisions I do but we're
gonna have to take you know
extraordinary measures Mr chair
members of the committee and we
have submitted a detailed letter
to you and the vice chair
experts police expanding on on
that request but obviously this
would be a series of requests
near that that level.
Thank you very much either thank
you presenters thank you members
of the committee I think we'd
like to staff to do a little bit
more digging and perhaps auditor
now that you're in place this is
a pretty high vacancy rate in
and as we look at I think a lot
of support from the committee
for engagement especially with
small political subdivisions
we've got to find ways to
collaborative Lee reduce and
consistently and sustainably
reduce the vacancy rate so
perhaps we can look at that
along side at the staff level
alongside the special
appropriation that you're
requesting with that we'll go to
vice chair Dixon.
Thank you Mr chair
I move the LFC recommendation.
Second it's been moved by by
your Dicks and seconded by
Representative Garrett to adopt
the LFC recommendation is there
any opposition to that motion.
Okay I don't see any opposite
opposition to that motion.
auditor thank you very much and
congratulations thank you Mr
chairman thank you for reading.
Now we're gonna ask are
secretary of state.
To come on up
This is gonna be agency code
three seventy.
The concern here in our books.
Madam secretary we have deviated
a little bit today bite with
starting with our like to
officials but let's continue
that practice for today if you
would briefly
introduce your team and then
talk to us and then we'll go to
misstatement as monthly thank
you so much Mr chairman and
members of the committee Maggie
Toulouse Oliver secretary of
state hello to members that have
been on this committee at and
worked with us for awhile it's
nice to see you again into the
new members on the committee at.
Percent of the liquor is my
former colleague again that was
the other Mandy and the magnetic
Bernalillo county
So it's nice to see you all
with me up here at the death
today is our CFO just initiate
so he will handle any specific
technical questions I cannot
answer I also have a here today
with us are deputy secretary of
station Pino our state election
director Mandy Vigil our CIO Rep
rock through our business
services director Christina
Chavis and Lizzy about men who
is our director of executive and
legislative affairs and here to
help you all with anything that
you need in order to our office
I'm noting the time and as those
of you who have been on this
committee before know that my
office's budget is.
Special and I don't mean that
always in a good way because we
have so many different funds in
different ways that we funded
the activities of the office of
course we have our annual
operating budget request which I
will give a brief more out we
also have the state election
fund through which we fund all
statewide elections just a brief
primer for those of you who are
new to the committee
one of the challenges of trying
to budget for our office and I
think we've gotten very good at
this and very good at estimating
our costs as we come to you
every year but one of the
challenges is that in odd
numbered fiscal years or excuse
me even fiscal years we have two
elections so for FY twenty four
we're gonna have the regular
local elections statewide
election this November as well
as the June primary election I
in the following calendar year
this previous year we only had a
single election the general
election and so a lot of our
costs and particularly when you
see the big variance in the
request between even and odd
number fiscal years that's where
that is coming from a statewide
election as a statewide election
as a statewide election in terms
of the cost it you know tends to
vary slightly around the edges
but again in this upcoming
fiscal year that we're talking
to about now we are going to
have to elections two statewide
elections so briefly Mr chair
and members our of requests to
you for our operating budget is
twenty two point nine million
dollars that is a twenty percent
increase over two fiscal years
ago so the twenty twenty two
fiscal year request and the
reason for that is we're like
every we're also across the
sectors and across government is
seeing increasing costs and the
administration of elections
we're going out to to R. P. this
year for most of our election
services the various contractual
services that are provided so we
we don't quite know exactly at
what those final costs are going
to be.
We are doing our best estimates
for you all we also we're seeing
an increase in the need to pay
our poll workers the folks who
work on the ground at our
polling places in terms of what
our county clerks need to pay
those folks to be able to
recruit and retain folks with
experience knowledge and frankly
and the.
Challenging political climate
that are willing to serve at
polling places excuse me I think
that there got older I really
quickly
so that's sort of the the the
the summary of our operating
budget importantly I want to
point out are requests an aching
you know one concern that I have
that I would you know hope we
discussed here today is you know
there there is a big difference
between the the LFC and the
Executive recommendations
particularly with regard to our
supplementals and our specials
are supplementals are.
We are asking for real
anticipated shortfalls that
we're planning to experience
this year why is that.
To be Frank with the committee
because every year we come to
you all and we say this is what
we're going to need this
up coming here to do our jobs to
run elections and unfortunately
we so we can never quite seem to
get where we need to go and so
we're always forced to come back
to you all had enhancing please
you know these are the real
expenses and and by the by the
time we get to July first we are
going to be out of money before
then by this amount we also have
real costs related to the
previous election that we're
asking you for to help us pay
the bills now last week I had to
go before the board of finance
because statute says that I
should when we have bills to pay
and what I'm talking about bills
I'm talking mainly about
reimbursements to back to the
counties that they have come out
of pocket to pay for real
expenses statutorily required
we're not talking about you know
billboards and other voter
informational things that are
really nice and really good and
really help voters know about
elections but we're talking
about actual costs of running
the election per statutory
requirements that have already
been paid out that we need to
reimburse so once again we went
to board of finance we were able
to secure one point four million
so need it has lessened in this
upcoming for this particular
request but we still have we
still do have an outstanding
request of about a million to
pay the bills from this last
election and in addition to
other other supplementals and
specials I'm I know you all can
read I'm not gonna get into all
of the specifics and details of
what those are unless of course
you have questions but bottom
line madam chair and members
We would really appreciate the
opportunity to try to get whole
this year on and not have to
keep coming back to you every
year to save we can't pay our
bills we're gonna fall short you
know and with that we get much
closer to what we anticipate we
need with the executive
recommendation and so with that
thank you madam chair.
Thank you madam secretary.
will now go to the analysts of
starting with ms has been
Mr chair members of the
committee so I apologize that
she did not have the page
numbers but I will tell them to
you in volume to it is page one
twenty eight thirty one thirty
two and your volumes again HSD
three seven zero.
I will go ahead and go over the
roll up of the agency and then
Cindy and I will go back and
forth on the P. on the program
codes but we'll go ahead and
start with the first page of
your different sheets this
orange page and in regards to
the agency budget as a whole on
the executive recommendation
exceeds the LFC recommendation
by nine hundred and fourteen
point two thousand dollars in
general fund overview take into
consideration differences in the
record recommended other
revenues you can see LFC exceeds
the executive by twenty five
point five thousand so combine
to the executive of results in a
total increase of eight hundred
eighty eight thousand seven
hundred dollars above LFC the
executive I'm sorry the
legislative recommendation
provides almost half a million
dollars above the FY twenty
three OpBud where is the
executive provides an increase
of one point seven million.
Both recommendations do move the
agencies regular local election
funds so that's that election
where she was saying you have it
in the even number fiscal years
the extra election every other
year basically the LFC and
Executive recommendations both
take those funds out of the
recurring operating budget and
instead provide some level of
nonrecurring special
appropriations to cover those
costs and all cover those in a
little more detail under the
elections program
I do want to also know that both
recommendations support requests
revenues for fund balances but
do not support the requested
amounts for transfers and
federal revenues we work with
the the CFO and the agency to
determine that those were
requests incorrectly and so the
revenues as reflected in the LFC
and executive budget should not
have requested transfers and
federal revenue so I just want
to note that that that's why
those were not recommended
and then for the expenditures
the executive recommendation
exceeds LFC by three hundred
four point three thousand a
person on basically the
executive produces the unfunded
vacancy rate and also provides a
million dollars over LFC and
other cost done due to
differences in those recommended
funds for general election cost
of those were as Maggie noted
additional election costs that
are covered in the executive.
the legislative recommendation
also provides four hundred and
seventy one thousand over the
executive for contracts and this
was again as mentioned for I'd
those contractual I. TV that of
the agency analysts have
couldn't come to consensus on
all performance measures and
targets for all purpose so are
we won't know those again but in
terms of expansions you will see
on the bottom of the first page
and expansion request of seventy
nine point three thousand for a
business trainer I'm sorry
parameters slash of Business
implementation specialist this
is requested in general fund
revenues the executive
recommends this expansion and
the LESC recommendation does not
however the LFC recommendation
provides adequate funding to
fill an additional two vacancies
within the intended purpose I'll
go ahead and handed over to
Cindy Montoya for the admin and
operations program I just want
to know quickly if it would be
helpful to anybody page seven is
an agency high level I think
usually those are the first page
so I apologize if that was in in
correct order but this covers
the HSD differences in the
recommendation for the general
fund amounts but I'll go ahead
and handed over to miss Montoya
for the admin and operations
program on page three.
Thank you Mr chairman and
members of the committee in
regards to the revenue the
executive recommendation exceeds
the let is that provided
recommendations by three hundred
and three hundred four thousand
three hundred.
The executive fully funds the
agency requests for general fund
includes and includes an
additional five hundred and
twenty thousand increased over
the FY twenty three operating
budget while the legislative
recommendation provides a
general fund revenue increase of
two hundred and sixteen thousand
both recommendations include
seventy eight point one thousand
in other revenues.
In the base the executive
recommendation exceeds the
legislative recommendation by
three hundred and four thousand
in personal services employee
benefits and fully funds the
agency requests to fill vacant
positions the legislative
recommendation provides funding
to fill two vacant.
For the program regards to
performance measures Alice have
come to consensus and in regards
to expansion the executive
recommendation supports the
agency's request of seventy nine
thousand.
In general fund revenues for a
trainer and business
implementing implementation
specialist which the legislative
recommendation did not support.
I will now turn it back to
Jessica.
For the next program.
Thank you Mr chair thank you
Cindy if you trust me a lections
program on page five and
comments on page six I'm so this
is kind of wearable could not
differences going to be from the
agency request as well so as
mentioned on the HSD generally
comes and requests of funds to
fund that just regular local
election however the executive
LFC both move those costs out of
the recurring budget into
specials you can see that in
this election program of the
executive exceeds LFC by six
hundred and nine point nine
thousand in general fund but is
lower than the legislative
recommendation by that twenty
five point five thousand in
other revenues for total
difference of about five hundred
eighty four thousand dollars
both recommendation support
requests revenues from the
agencies federal help America
vote act grant fund balances so
that's reflected in the fund
balance line rather than the
federal one because those are
grants that have already been
received by the agency.
I do want to note so if we can
take a second to discuss the HSD
special appropriations this is
going to be on the very last
page of your packet.
and so there's.
Members of the page eight what
we have.
and so on page eight Mr chair
members of the committee this
highlights the differences in
the recommendations for special
appropriations so you know
neither recommendation at this
time funds the requested amounts
for the regular local election
which occurs every other year in
the operating budget instead
both recommendations fund the
regular local election through
non recurring special
appropriations and that's what
you can see here on page eight
the legislative recommendation
is in lines two and three you
can see that the LFC find seven
point five million dollars in FY
twenty four and in FY twenty six
so the next two years were they
would have that election we
provide seven point five million
each of those years for the
regular local election this was
based on prior year estimates
aware of the executive in line
one on the special sheet
provides five point eight
million dollars and that was
based on projections
specifically are provided by the
agency on that were not
available at the time the LFC
did the recommendations so again
LFC based their seven point five
million figure on prior year
estimates on the five point
eight million from the executive
is based on a projections out to
for FY twenty four and so those
of us I want to know also on the
second line there's an
additional recommendation from
the executive to provide a one
time infusion into the election
fund of twenty million dollars
the LFC recommendation did not
include that at this time but
again provides a little bit more
than than what's being projected
for those local action costs one
note of for the the committee
although you all will not be
taking action on specials at
this time we do just want to
note that the LFC recommendation
aronie Asli directed that seven
point five million each year to
the state election fund however
of to meet the intended purpose
it should be directed to the
local elections Fund so it was
just incorrect error in terms of
the where the funds were being
distributed so.
That's something that the
specials committee will look at
and will have the chance to
correct if they decide to take
the LFC recommendation on
special so I do just want to
note that for the committee
again of the executive
recommends that twenty million
dollar one time infusion in line
to to cover broader election
costs and the LESC
recommendation of provides
additional capital outlay to
cover IT costs if you go a
little bit further down the
sheet in total the executive
provides about three hundred and
forty thousand for various I. T.
so you can see like for instance
of line five line six of why not
I believe nine ten and eleven
are all related to I. T. where's
the LFC provides that through
capital outlay.
I also want to mention that the
requested two point four million
dollars that US secretary of
mentioned is online nine so the
request was for two point four
million it was determined that
total obligations at this time
we're one point four million so
that was actually funded in
during the board of finance
meeting last week and so then
the agency at as mentioned would
have an outstanding need of one
million dollars for things like
equipment and and covering those
costs so I just want to note
that so you all can kind of get
this recommendation on a whole
because again the operating
budget is moving some of those
local election funds out and so
we just wanted to give the
committee of a broader picture
just lastly if we go back to pay
just five and six of your agency
packets I just want to know some
small differences in
expenditures the ever executive
provided one point one million
dollars more than the LFC wreck
in the other cost category this
is for things like ballot on
demand systems voting tabulators
of additional equipment however
LFC provided additional funding
and contracts above the
executive about four hundred
seventy one thousand I'm in this
was to support information
technology contracts within that
recurring operating budget the
last thing I just want to
mention is that both
recommendations supported the
agency's request for personnel
including the request to use
general fund revenues to cover
two previous analyst FTEs that
were previously funded via their
of federal grants so two
analysts that used to be funded
through federal grants are now
funded through the general fund
in both of these recommendations
I know those a lot to take in I
apologize I handed over to send
if she'd like to add any more
comments on this program but
that should wrap it up.
Thank you thank you Mr chairman
members the committee I just
have a couple of quick comment
in regards to the executive on
the basis in the elections the
it the agency or the executive
report recommended a higher
amounts to help the office
the cover the costs for the
statewide elections that we were
talking about earlier the fiscal
year you heard us secretary of
state mentioned that they were
running a deficit may have to go
to the board of finance we
believe that by recommending the
higher amounts that this
potentially would close that gap
and the agency would not have to
come and ask for deficiency or
over the board of finance for a
long.
Thank you very much Senator this
pandemic thank you madam
secretary sits and go straight
to questions we're gonna start
with Representative Trujillo.
Thank you Mr chairman thank you
madam secretary welcome to the
committee I was looking on your
presentation page
page nine you're talking about
increases to other can use can
you state you know they're
thirty nine new polling
locations and increasing voter
convenience centers versus
traditional precincts but
talking about sure and Mr chair
and Representative Trujillo so I
think let's let's talk about two
things really quick let's talk
about pulling locations and then
precincts
so.
Many in fact most counties now
have moved away from what we
call traditional precinct
polling places which would be
there is a single precinct you
have a single polling place for
that precinct where you go and
vote and that's where you go and
vote verses motor convenience
centers which most counties well
every county has convenient
Centers one degree or the other
now but where any voter can vote
at any polling location just
like any early voting location
the same applies to election day
the reason for the number of new
polling locations
Has to do with the fact that
concurrent with a redistricting
in those at.
I guess in twenty twenty two we
also saw a number of new
precinct splits that are also
mandatory by law following every
at general election and so we
had a tremendous increase in the
number of precincts and so when
you increase the number of
precincts than therefore by law
you have to increase the number
of at polling locations at voter
convenience centers or
traditional right and so that's
why we saw that increase Mr
chair and number and we should
Mr chairman
County clerk's complying.
With all the changes with a lot
of resistance and and are they
Are they filling the gaps in
terms of the need for poll
workers
Mr Chairman representative
Trujillo absolutely our county
clerks are doing amazing
yeoman's work on the front lines
of our democracy and one of the
challenges they are having is
recruiting and retaining Paul
officials and we've been hearing
that pretty consistently since
twenty twenty of course during
twenty twenty we were dealing
with the the pandemic and a lot
of folks who traditionally
worked the polls just you know
didn't want to put themselves at
risk or what have you and so you
know now we're dealing with sort
of new challenges that that come
along with being a poll worker
on they're doing their best
being able to help them pay what
they need to pay to recruit poll
officials for their training and
for their time will really help
help them do as much a better
job than they are now even doing
already yeah to my last question
Poll workers are now starting to
become to be there there might
well they've been there and
they're my age and older and
they have a lot of experience
but didn't want to be there
anymore.
What is your effort to recruit
young poll workers is that where
you were talking about paying
poll workers so Mr chair and
representative Trujillo poll
workers of all ages we we will
benefit from from better
retention through increased pay
but.
In terms of recruiting younger
poll workers it is like like for
anybody else it is an incentive
to it to make a little bit more
money especially actually for
older poll workers it is such a
long day for any of you who've
worked the polls I you know it's
it's a twelve hour plus state
and you know it doesn't hurt to
to acknowledge their work with a
little bit more money nobody's
getting rich off of being a poll
worker but it does help.
Thank you very much
Representative Trujillo
necklaces Census.
Thank you Mr chairman are.
Madam secretary how how is your
budget affected by the fires.
let's see Mr chair and
representative Sanchez that's a
really good question we were
able to get the needs met I will
tell you that.
One of the biggest challenges
that we had during the forest
fires and running the primary
election was that voter
information piece because we had
so many pull Fishel not
politicians voters who were
displaced and so being able to
create sort of voter information
programs targeted to those
individuals and or to create
additional new systems to be
able to address the challenges
of making sure those folks got
their ballots we were not in a
place where we had a lot of
money to work with in order to
do that I will give our county
clerks in those particular
counties you know more us and we
go especially a lot of credit
for the work that they did to
try to make that work but had we
been I think you know as I
always come to say have we've
been in a more whole place there
might have been more we could
have done madam chair are excuse
me Mister chair and
representative Mr chair out of
Secretary I think.
You might have mentioned earlier
that
There's some money owed to
counties for elections
to both our recommendations.
Fully funded making them all I
guess so I'm wondering these
counties really do some of them
really depend on what that money
to both recommendations fully
reimburse is counties for the
money a base there but I guess
for running help run is
elections Mr chair
Representative Sweetser so as
previously mentioned we were
right we were able to obtain the
one point four million from word
of finance to pay those
immediate reimbursements we do
still anticipate another one
million dollars the there is a
specific supplemental request
for that Mr chair representative
and that was not recommended in
the LFC a recommendation but it
was in the executive
recommendation thank you Mr
chair thank you very much of the
senses Mexico Representative
setting and.
Thank you Mr chairman thanks for
the presentation I have a couple
questions a special rate eight
on the I. T.
what we could do that and you
said it was gonna be paid to
capital outlay you go through
that the people Mr chair members
of the committee yes colleges
those trying to save you guys a
little bit of time and so there
was a variety of requests from
the agency for I. T. we.
Attempted to determine whether
there were some of the use of
our being requested that a could
be absorbed into the operating
budget so some of these Google
smaller of requests such as the
thirty thousand to twenty
thousand and the other thirty
online six five six and ten of
those were ones of the LFC
determined could be of likely
absorbed into the operating
budgets that's why those were
not requested on there were
additional requests first I
believe I may have the secretary
speak to the specifics of the
request but I do know that in
the LFC capital outlay
recommendation on there's a
recommended one point eight five
million dollars for various a
request however I personally
don't have the names of those
projects in front of me so and
that was I believe mostly to our
cover things like about I
believe ballot on demand systems
tabulators things like that so
some of some of the LFC
determine what might be a little
bit duplicative of some of the
special appropriations I'm I
believe the executive just fully
funded the requests where is
again we we try to determine
where would be the most
appropriate to fund those.
And yet Mr chair representative
Sarinana is that the specific I.
T. requests
we're looking to make greater
current business filing system
to newer servers at we are doing
a complete overhaul of our
business filing system so we
need those newer servers were
upgrading and user hardware at
because we have increased demand
on our end user systems so in
other words and the voter
information page that folks go
to it cetera and we also are
required to provide some
matching funds for those federal
funds we receive those have a
fund so that is a specific
request to help meet our state
our state level match for those
Let's see we're you will all be
happy to hear we are doing a
massive upgrade to our at our
voter registration system and
that's going to just help with
election administration in
general and some other as as
that just convention various and
sundry just much needed IT
projects.
Thank you Mr chairman when we're
so if you don't get the request
I mean there's a big difference
between you and the provided for
LFC what will happen to the
efficiency of the elections what
will happen.
I'm.
Mr Chairman representative so
you know our office has been
said that you know struggling as
it is to me all of the mandatory
demands of our office because of
sort of this you know.
You know hatchet patchwork way
of doing our budget over the
years it's been stressful it's
been hard to plan it's been hard
to initiate new projects that's
been heard to say okay we're
going to you know for example we
all know you all use the
campaign finance information
system we all have to do our
filing this have to do their
filing we're trying to upgrade
that system right and make it
much more user friendly and much
better we're in the process of
that right but and it's it's
very difficult to do without the
resources and particularly in
the nature of the work of our
office which I will use the
analogy you probably heard me is
a thousand times are always
changing the tire on the car
while the cars moving so we're
always to do this in the course
of preparing for the next
election right so I'm having
adequate funding it just means
we're going to be able to bring
the bodies in the subject matter
expertise to get the work done
things don't have to be put on
hold because she we have to stop
and pies because we have an
election coming up and that's
the thing that's on fire right
in front of us that we need to
deal with right Mr chair and
representative so you know
that's I think you know where
the big.
The biggest difference in terms
of the efficiency and the
effectiveness and getting these
projects done and enhancing our
systems generally.
Thank you.
Thank you very much of the
sending unit next Representative
Lujan.
Thank you Mr chair thank you
Secretary and secretary and your
staff everything you do for
states to really holding
the place where our democracy
there with our elections but
that's all that this office does
as we know but I just want to
say I'm looking through.
Information and and taking in
all this information and you
know we have a piece of budget
here piece of budgetary position
here and you put it all together
I see that you've spent your
budget efficiently.
That there is an to there was
nothing reverted in fact you had
to go and ask us for more money
based upon circumstances of
circumstances beyond our control
that we cannot see can you maybe
expand on is is that your
emergency fund is that correct
to where we are with that and if
that's addressed in this budget
so Mr chair and representative
what I think you're talking
about is are the special one
time requests that we made for
two twenty million dollar
infusion into the election fund
so the idea there Mr chair and
representative is that you know
we're running every statewide
election out of that election
funds so we know that the money
is always going to be there for
the anticipated cost of the
election we will always come to
you all and say please budget
this for us this is what we are
anticipating but the money is
there and then if something
unforeseen comes up if we have
the worst for forest fire in our
state's history if we have
another COVID nineteen pandemic
right yes
you know after the next
presidential election we're
going to go through a
recertification of our
tabulators we have new federal
guidelines coming down for
voting systems we may be in a
position where we need to very
quickly completely upgrade or
change over our tabulation
systems that we use for voting
and that is not inexpensive
right to the idea there is to
have that funding there to
always be coming to you to ask
to replenish that fund and to
budget that fund for us but that
it is there and it is dedicated
moving forward miss you Mr
chairman that's exactly get to I
was going to try to make a point
and how it's not just a state in
the opening you're taken care of
within local government always
or federal government needs for
our state's more looking at
elections alone and that is that
is probably one of the hardest
things to managing do especially
now yeah I want to really
address Mr chair now with some
of the the mandates in the in
the legislation that we even
done in the past.
With the same day registration
and those sorts of things.
In the cost of those things for
for our state and what that
means and how it was part of
some of the needs you have to
cover when you went back to ask
for funding Mr chair yes
absolutely Mr chair and
representative and you know as
as always we try to well
certainly estimate those costs
based on existing contract
prices at cetera and then you
know and and we do a pretty good
job of that but then again Mr
chair and representative you
know often we don't get the full
funding that we request right so
all of these especially for the
election from that what I really
want to reiterate is these are
all direct costs for elections
they either go to the counties
or to the vendors on behalf of
the counties for their costs
that's where that funding goes
it's not money that you know
we're spending for work that
we're doing in our office right
it's it goes straight to those
K. thank you thank you Mr
I just again all state the I I'm
looking put it all together like
the different pieces of the
budget and how they're matching
up with your request is it in
your vote regard to the LFC
requests and in again you're
you're doing an efficient job as
far as I can see here and I you
know would like to move myself
to say that we need to support
your request thank you Mr
chairman thank you
Representative huh unexpended
reps of rough.
Thank you Mr chair and secretary
really easy questions for you
today Kate for the election
cycle just concluded what we're
poll workers paid.
Mr chair and representative
Randy we have those.
And I thought it would be easy.
Do you want I'm sorry and when
we can ask clarifying questions
Mr chair at do you mean what
what does each poll worker maker
what was our total cost for poll
workers Mr chairman and
secretary per worker okay and
your.
I'm sorry if you mean what we're
getting here maybe you can
continue on and will.
Thank you Mr chair so the follow
up question is what do you
propose in the budget to pay a
poll worker.
For per worker.
And then the question after that
is is it really enough to entice
people to to come to work as a
poll worker so so Mister chair
and representative so right now
there is a range and in statute
and and why I wanted our state
election director is because
she'll get the numbers accurate
it's dated two hundred and thank
you and Mister chair and and
Representative so the statutory
maximum that we can pay for
election day is actually two
hundred dollars per day for that
entire day they're doing all of
that work for two hundred
dollars and I think the goal is
to actually move toward doubling
that so four hundred dollars per
day for each port and and Mr
Chairman representative where
that came from was what the
counties are telling us the
county clerks have said this is
what we think we need I in order
to adequately compensate
professionals.
Mr Chairman madam secretary so
it sounds like the counties have
some discretion the county
clerk's as to how much to pay
what will it take in that county
someone to help okay thank you
and that Mr chairman and madam
secretary.
I I know that poll workers are
required to have some kind of
training I believe before they
serve are they paid for the time
spent in training Mr chairman
that's correct Mr chair and
representative okay thank you
that's all I have thank you.
Thank you very much of Madam
brown secretary just a couple of
quick questions
over time has the state begun
picking up more and more of
local election of of election
cost probably yes Mr chairman
that that has been
the direction that the statutory
mandates of trended at a you
know one point in time Mr chair
counties were picking up all of
the cost of poll officials all
of the cost of ballots
statutorily now it it they are
state costs when the regular
local election was created Mr
chair there was supposed to be
a cake and if you will from the
local entities so the school
boards that municipalities at
cetera that typically ran their
own elections in the past and
then that was also changed by
statute a few years ago to be a
state porn costs Mr chair okay
thank you the
Appreciate that and you will
whether or not we like it madam
secretary you know the having
that sort of the those recent
and involving statutory mandates
is something that is you're
saying really falls on you all
the in terms of madam secretary
sort of the two elections in an
even year one election odd here.
You can see how that's a little
bit challenging obviously it's
challenging for you to budget
how do you see that evening out
over time understanding that you
don't have the same costs year
to year how does how does a base
budget help towards or help
address that or not Mr chair
excellent question so this is
sort of that the impetus behind
the concept of the you know
statewide election fund always
being at twenty million dollars
if you will because we know that
under our current estimates and
projections and what an actual
costs previous actual costs we
can pay for to a an early and a
primary in a in a particular
fiscal year without a now and
then we also know that covers
the cost of a general election
in in that next fiscal year and
if we're always topping back up
Mr chair then basically what
we're just coming to ask you for
is is to budget that amount for
us Mr chair so you know it's not
we are we're not going to see
such drastic fluctuation in our
operating budget we're always
going to say this is the amount
we need out of the statewide
election fund in order to
conduct elections this year Mr
chair thank you madam secretary
and that's the fully funded and
and yes Mrs from please Mr chair
started I just wanted to provide
so we've kind of talked
discussed with the secretary and
I believe this was brought up in
the the LFC budget hearing in
the fall both there's kind of I
believe this kind of two
approaches one would be the one
that madam secretary just
described where you would have a
fund where every year that they
have that additional action they
would graduated from that state
election fund from the twenty
million kind of savings account
then the alternative would be
kind of what LFC proposed in
this budget would be removing
the cost of that additional
election and having the agency
come and project those costs and
asked for that as a special
appropriation every other year
so rather than having a fund
that's just kind of there that
they can all graduated from they
would need to protect those
costs out and the request those
costs as again and.
Non recurring special
appropriation every other year
thank you very much Mrs Clinton
thank you thank you for sort of
D. telling that the differences
would what the fund preclude
requiring the office to project
the the future years cost.
Mr chair I don't believe so I
believe that there would be I
think the intention and I madam
secretary can correct me if I'm
wrong but I think the intention
would be they would recoup those
regular low collection because
they would still be requesting
those and as would be similar to
that five point eight million
that you see recommended but
then the twenty million would be
there for kind of a just in case
if the if that makes sense this
is that correct madam secretary
great.
Thank you thank you very much
for that I want to go to
Representative della Cruz
briefly as well.
Thank you Mr chairman I don't
have so much a question as I
just want to the point of
privilege to complement our very
capable secretary of state of
I've known Maggie Toulouse
Oliver for an awful long time
and she did an incredibly
competent job at Bernalillo
county I think you served almost
three terms because your point
at one time.
And so I have a great deal of
confidence I just want to share
that Mr chairman thank you so
much thank you madam secretary.
Thank you very much
Representative agrees okay madam
secretary thank you for that
this is one of the larger even
though we spent a great deal of
time inappropriately so going
through agencies this is one of
the larger discrepancies that
we've seen so I think we were
gonna just remembers to look a
little bit more closely first
we'll go to Representative vice
chair Dixon for the motion.
Thank you Mr chair I move the
LFC recommendation.
Second okay it's been moved by
vice chair Dixon second by
Representative della Cruz there
any opposition to that motion.
Seein Representative Pettigrew
Representative Montoya and
opposition to that motion
and let's go ahead we're gonna
appoint Representative Cruz
Representative Lujan and then
Representative Brown can we ask
you to participate as well the
work I think we have two
different approaches and there's
been a good dialogue and will
explore a little bit more along
side the local participation
thank you very much Mr chairman
members we appreciate it thank
you okay madam commissioner.
The sun may have set on New
Mexico's public lands but.
You are here for a.
Hey
this.
Yeah.
I.
Right.
At.
Well as seventy five thousand.
I don't.
Yes.
Right what.
While.
Okay.
The store will.
The one thing.
Madam secretary please kick us
off and please feel free to
introduce your team we know our
run and a little long but deeply
appreciate you and your team be
in here and appreciate your work
and secretary so that we Mr
chairman good evening everyone
I'm Stephanie Garcia Richard
commissioner of public lands and
a former a privilege member of
this committee and for the folks
new to the the body in new to
this committee there is no
better way to see the struggles
challenges and successes of
state government than to sit
here day after day in the
hardest working committee I
believe at the legislature Mr
chairman I brought a ton of
folks with me can I just have
them stand please because to
introduce them individually is
going to take
a lot of time so if if folks are
brought to justice.
So you have your represented Mr
chairman renewable energy oil
and gas royalty our accounting
division our legal division and
both of both deputies are here
as well.
Thank you madam secretary thank
you to your incredible to.
So Mr chairman and members you
know the hours late we're the
last between you and your dinner
so essentially I've got three
top line items I want you to
consider here today the first
one is we brought in two billion
dollars in revenue over two
billion dollars in revenue this
last fiscal year we're asking
you for twenty three million of
that to fund R. eight the
operations of our agency that is
a modest seven percent request
seven percent increase from last
year's operating budget.
No special snow supplementals no
C. two requests and the reason
is this committee has already
been generous in past years with
such things and we have as much
as we could integrated all of
the special request we asked you
for the past into our operating
budget Mr Chairman second thing
I'd like you to of consider
today is that.
For the first time in in my
memory the LFC and DFA
recommendations both fully fund
our budget yes and then the
third thing is that all of our
funding requests today.
Exactly matched with the
challenges that this agency is
facing and if I could Mr
Chairman just maybe even skip to
our challenges page if that's
okay.
So you go to page eight.
Mr Chairman.
As you probably have been
hearing and will continue to
hear of this challenge a person
is facing everyone right now
every single division we have is
at four above capacity.
we.
We need more folks just
essentially is is really the the
pitch you need to hear from me
we have you can imagine two
point four billion dollars
generates a lot of work for the
folks at the Land Office so
while we have a a dedicated team
of a hundred eighty FTEs we
could use more and not only more
but very specialized individuals
some of the economic development
deals that we put together and
and we have had a forty five
percent increase in those very
specific deals Netflix's is when
it comes to mind are for the
housing
some of our renewable energy
projects but a lot of those
economic development deals
require lots of hours of
analysis economic research and
then just basically hammering
out the terms with whoever and I
see isn't and those folks
include municipalities counties
and private individuals so so we
need more qualified and expert
individuals and then as has been
mentioned in in this hearing
already to date in just a short
time that I've been sitting here
the fires in the the northeast
impacted state lands as you can
imagine as they did private
landowners and federal and
federal land and we don't have
the capacity of State Land
Office at this time.
To entertain all of the millions
of dollars federal funding
that's available for restoration
and remediation of land so what
we're asking for some bar
language that will allow us to
provide some up front cost you
know they they work on a
reimbursement basis we don't
have the ability right now to
provide that upfront cost to be
reimbursed so we're putting
together a program at the State
Land Office take advantage of
the federal funds that are
coming down for remediation and
restoration but we need the
ability to pay those up front
costs and then later being
reimbursed.
I think that is really.
The challenges I wanted to go
over gosh I have such a
phenomenal presentation here
like people work so long on but
it's late and I don't want to
really get into the hold nitty
gritty so I I I I'll make one
final point page line has a
vacancy rates so I I learned a
few things on this committee and
learned
That really the the the biggest
asset and value to a state
agency is qualified well
compensated employees.
And we worked very very hard to
have a vacancy rate that's about
half the average of the state
but even that is about double
where we want to be and so we're
working very very hard to retain
and recruit and and part of our
budget request.
Goes to the tobacco as well.
Thank you very much medical
research
let's go to our analysts for
some quick analysis and with a
quick coming I'm telling us why
the LFC analysts for the State
Land Office
The state land office is agency
five thirty nine and you will
find the discussion of the LFC
recommendation on page two
thirty one of mine too.
As of the commissioner mentioned
the the LFC and executive
recommendation I support the
agency request for base budget
of twenty three point three
million up one point four seven
five million from the twenty one
point nine million they have
this year five hundred forty
thousand of that is to fill
vacant positions and six hundred
thousand is for a subscription
to a satellite service called
planet that allows them to track
change in activity on state
trust lands with that I'll turn
it over to Brian Chavis might
counterpart at DFA who will go
over the expansion and
performance of the Mr chairman
members of the committee in
Russia this executive analyst
for language sporty exit hello
seen executive retain ongoing
language concerning us and
coalbed methane production for
performance measures on both
analyst came to consensus on
performance measures and targets
and for the expansion the LFC
and exec recommend of the
agency's request for funding to
new positions needed to address
the workload.
And with that I'll send that
back over to Mr chair great
thank you very much let's go to
committee questions.
Senator Representative.
Thank you apparently I left my
speaker on the all time
Thank you chairman and thank you
Secretary for The presentation
can.
Please tell me about project
planet or whatever it was really
talked about this briefly yeah
absolutely I I I'm sorry that I
I didn't get in into detail Mr
chairman but you know I wanted
to be respectful of the
committee's time so maybe if we
could just piecemeal as folks
ask questions that would
probably be the best thing so if
you will turn Mr Chairman
representative to page twenty
two of my presentation.
It is Google earth on steroids
is what we call it was sensually
it is satellite imagery that
gives us resolution within three
metres of the ground we can task
certain areas of the state that
we want to look at over a period
of time
and so this this kind of
satellite imagery is cutting
edge in the country in fact our
folks R. GIS folks actually
presented at the as we
conference a couple years ago
before COVID on the way that
we're using it so you can see
some of these ways that we're
able to do change detection
essentially over a period of
time we can see spills of here
we can see trespass appear roads
that are not authorized gosh
we've we've run into all kinds
of unauthorized activity on
state land could you can imagine
with thirteen million acres
we've got about thirteen
individuals whose job it is to
be out in the field they've got
a million acres per person.
So this is helps greatly so
you've got a spill on page
twenty two of page twenty three
that's right you're not what's
there Mr chairman and and
Representative it's it shows the
remediation.
The cleanup of the spill that's
a change detection for the
cleanup of the spill the next
page shows mining trespass when
we had the incredible flooding
down a Travis county a couple
years ago we were able to look
at breaches in the levy by
satellite via satellite and then
if you look at the very next
page that's a dashboard that
runs basically a high detecting
matching where approved activity
is on state land and then with
the GIS is showing us and and
where the discrepancies are
between that so like if if
you've got a road that was
supposed to have gone down as a
certain pathway and the need I
it shows that it in fact went a
different route we can send
those out to our field folks for
for on the ground verification
and that's what this dashboard
is here.
Thank you.
Thank.
Thank you very much
Representative Pettigrew and if
you're gonna go to observe the
hunt.
Chair of the presentation.
Commissioner and for bringing
all your staff and being here
stay with the slate is our very
important things you are doing I
appreciate everything you are
doing
Right I'm gonna make it quick to
when we talk about the
reclamation and in the cost of
where we see where is it that we
are picking up that cost the
state is picking the costs were
the responsible party is not Mr
chair so Mr chairman that's
actually an excellent question
because right now what we have
is that the legislature I
believe in twenty fifteen passed
of statute that allows State
Land Office to use one percent
of our revenue.
And invested back in the ground.
However you can imagine that
that one percent is not going to
be near enough for such a
devastating catastrophe as a
once in a lifetime fire.
so we we are very much with
great interest following you
know all of the efforts to
recoup those costs from the
federal government to hold them
accountable for for causing the
fires in the in the case of the
Cookes peak fire that was not
caused by the the federal agency
but you know we we still have
the cost of the meeting that
landed and we can't do it with
the the one percent fund we have
now.
I appreciate that and and it
these are things that we don't
have control of to speak but I
appreciate you
Taking the responsibility and
really focusing in on this issue
here there are many other things
I want to talk to you about
anything you're doing last thing
is what.
Is there an increase in your
project projections of revenues
that you're are going to come to
the state in renewable this year
out so Mister chairman and and
Representative I'm I'm so
grateful for that question
because it allows me to
highlight the fact that this
office was called out four times
in a in a positive way Mr
Chairman you volume one so if
you have an opportunity to read
about public policy around
revenue and tax structure some
examples of of revenue
diversification that this office
is undertaking for the last four
years are actually mentioned in
a positive as positive examples
of that one of those Mr Chairman
is the the of revenue that we
enjoy from our renewable energy
projects tripling of renewable
energy to that end Mr chairman
we are trying to codified in
statute our office of renewable
energy so that a future
commissioner would continue that
great work update
diversification and a
Representative Lujan is actually
sponsored that bill that's HB
ninety five we appreciate
everyone's support on that.
Okay I really appreciate that
was not planned Mr chairman.
Comments we did not collude.
Hi Mr chair thank you thank you
very much representative of the
hunt next we're gonna go to
Representative dot.
Thank you madam chair madam when
commissioner so if
We get recruitment from the
federal government for the the
fires can we expect the
recruitment to end up back in
the general fund Mr Chairman.
Mr Chairman not if it comes to
our state agency I mean if it if
it comes in general as awards
from the federal government to
the state yes but Mr chairman
not if it comes to the State
Land Office becomes to the state
land office that will go
directly to use on state land
okay so Mister chair and madam
secretary yeah my district as I
understand it that if.
We clear some money above and
beyond the expenses the state
has occurred will that money go
to the general fund is a
basically a reimbursement to
the.
The general fund.
Chairman representative.
This is my W. here similarly
Stewart deputy commissioner of
operations what we're seeking is
because we would be operating on
a read reimbursement basis we
would encourage the money and
then we would see from the
federal government the amount
that we incurred for
reimbursement so it should be a
one to one in terms of what were
reimbursed and I think with
regard to the general fund we
are different than other
agencies because our budget all
of our operations are funded
through the money that we
generate I'm not general fund so
we don't we don't touch general
funds at all other than the fact
that the two point four billion
that we make goes to offset the
amount of money that the general
fund needs to come up with but
there should be a one to one
relate that relationship terms
of that reimbursement for that
fires Mr chairman and madam so I
I would guess since it's
reimbursement I would expect to
be penny for penny but sometimes
if things go up contract and it
it's a little bit lower than you
expect there might be some maybe
the federal government will take
that away that if you save it in
that process so I was just
curious so thank you Mr chair
thank you very much
Representative Brown
madam secretary we'll go to
Representative by projects.
Please.
Thank you madam secretary or
commissioner my apologies
I have just a couple quick
questions and potentially.
It you know you could just
follow up and if we don't have
the information do you keep
track and publicize or
Share and in any public way how
long it takes to process permits
through your office Mr Chairman
representative yes and we've
we've actually been asked about
that a number of times in the
past I don't think we included
in this particular presentation
we did talk about it in our LFC
presentation over the summer in
September November
but yeah that that is absolutely
something that's available and I
don't know if you want to sort
of top line answer right now
from the commercial division or
I'm you know what a follow up
would be great thank you and Mr
chair commissioner can you tell
me what the environmental
compliance office does and how
it's different from maybe what
already occurs in some of our
other state agencies absolutely
Mr chairman I am so happy to
talk about we call it eco
environmental compliance office
so essentially yes we do have
environmental compliance
statewide when it comes to state
trust land however because we
are working directly with our
lessees on clean up remediation
they have to actually provide us
project plans on how they intend
to clean up spills things like
that we actually need the
expertise within the office to
be able to look at these plants
tell if there of any good if
they're robust and so that was
the impetus behind creating this
this office we used to have one
guy responsible for
environmental compliance me he
actually he didn't quit Mr
chairman but he asked for it
sort of like a downgrade in his
position you want to go back to
just being a regular fuel person
because he was like and
compliance is way too big for
just one so that spurred us into
creating this this particular
office and and what it is right
now this one supervisor and to
environmental compliance folks
who have that biology background
they have that environmental
specialist background to be able
to look and when when we're in
you know Madam with with.
Folks for state trust land based
they personally have the
expertise now to be able to look
at those plans and give us
expert feedback on them thank
you Mr chair and commissioner
last question the up front
capital that you note as it
challenge in your presentation
are you asking for capital is
that something in the future
Chairman no we're asking for
borrowing which okay.
Thank you thank you Mr chair
thank you very much madam
commissioner
You know
I look forward and and encourage
you to post your presentation on
the State Land Office website
this is an exemplary job that
you and your team are doing from
the vacancy rate which is one of
the lowest as you point out the
funded vacancy rate which is
incredibly long
the innovative work around
things like produced water and
other things where you're
harnessing the power of New
Mexicos energy industry in
really unique and productive
ways I think speaks incredibly
highly to the focus that you and
your team bring I think it's
reflected in the support for
additional investment that the
LFC and the legislature and the
executive of really obviously
seen fit in this budget so
apologies for the short time
really a grateful just thank you
to you and your team for the
continued work and I think
looking to the continued work
for showing how innovation can
help drive and your help and
meet some of our unique
challenges and housing in a
number of different areas so
with that we'll go to vice chair
Dixon for the the most.
You Mr chair I move the
executive recommendation.
It's been moved by by a
disincentive by Representative
Lujan for the executive
recommendation is there any
opposition to that.
Eight we'll show Representative
Pettigrew Representative Montoya
okay members please state put
madam commissioner thanks again
to your in your team we've got a
couple of things again members
we're now going to transition
into a public comment.
the public comment should
concern the
six areas excuse me seven areas
constitutional areas of
government that we've heard
today.
Following public comment members
we're gonna have Mr Valdez he's
going to hand out our
subcommittee assignments which
will be tomorrow we will not be
meeting info committee tomorrow
we're going to be meeting and
subcommittees
As for our yes we do have a
committee.
Okay I have been corrected so
let's uh if there are members
here for public comment we're
going to ask if you can keep it
to a minute if there's only for
maybe two and it'll be again
concerning the seven different
agencies constitutional agencies
that we've heard today and
please feel free it no pressure
if you're here for public
comment please come on up if not
that's okay.
Going once.
Going twice so we want to go out
and look in the okay thanks of
things okay so now let's go I'm
gonna turn it over to Mr about
the.
March and on.
It and let me live we're gonna
conclude today's come.
