aka.
Representative Brown,
Representative Chatfield.
Representative Dell.
Representative Duncan.
Representative Garrett.
Representative Hernandez.
Yeah
Represented her.
Representative Herrera,
Representative Little.
He
Representative Lujan.
Represent
Representative Sanchez.
Representative Sariana.
Representative Silva.
Representative Vincent.
Vice Chair Dixon.
Chairs small.
OK. OK.
Great. All right, we, we do have
a quorum, uh, members and
audience, um,
The uh
Sorry.
Uh, just so folks know what
we're gonna do, we're gonna go
through our uh subcommittee
reports first director writing
will be up there and then we're
gonna go to workgroup adoption
along with compensation review.
Uh, as a reminder.
Well, uh, I guess let's, um, as
a, I'll keep talking just here
for a second as a reminder,
we're gonna hold off, I think a
few members are just about to
get here and we want to make
sure folks are here. As a
reminder to everybody, um, we
did all of our work groups in
public this year. We did all of
our subcommittees in public have
adopted catch-up cleanup related
to some of the subcommittee
items, uh, so we're gonna be
going through all of those here,
um, along with the
compensation in the work group
adjustments that will be part of
today, we'll still have uh what
many folks are used to or what
we're used to with the catch-up
cleanup that uh won't take place
today, uh, but we'll take place
very soon.
Um
And then we'll invite uh our uh
chair de la Cruz.
Uh, along with Secretary Serna,
uh, to come up for House Bill 3
and House Transportation and
public works capital
improvements Committee.
Uh, OK, let's go ahead.
Um, director, maybe we can start
with subcommittee A.
And then we'll keep on going
through. Sure, Mr. Chair, um,
good afternoon, members. Good
evening members wherever we are,
um, just to orient you a little
bit, uh, just like the chair
said, this is all stuff that you
have already adopted when we did
the halfway ketchup cleanup, so
in front of you, you have a
collated pile of subcommittee
reports that looks like this.
Uh, we're gonna start with
subcommittee report A with Cha
Sainana, but on top of your
binders, uh, your white binders,
you
Also have a similar looking
document that looks like this.
So this document shows you
everything that was changed in
ketchup cleanup, um, there were
changes from all different
subcommittees, so this will
include everything from all the
subcommittees that was changed,
but for right now, we will start
with subcommittee A, and I can
hand it over to Che Sarignan.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Subcommittee A heard agencies
including the Board of Medical
Examiners, the state fair, and
the Border Authority.
Several agencies referred to
staff to make additional
recommendations on of those
agencies referred the full
committee adopted the following.
Game control board, gaming
control board added 87,000 from
the general fund for a senior
gaming auditor position.
Racing commission increased
general funds by 238.9,000 to
fund two veterinary FTE
positions, and the Office of
Military Based Planning, an
increase of 100,000 from the
general fund for contractual
services to enter into
intergovernmental agreement with
political subdivisions with
military bases.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Great. Uh thank you very much,
subcommittee Chair Saranana,
Director of writing, uh, are
there any questions about
subcommittee A?
Um
I don't necessarily see any, uh,
and so that was, um, roughly a
total of 387,000.
Recurring general fund that was
added in subcommittee A.
OK, great.
Um,
Mr. Chair, would you like to
move adoption of the
subcommittee report? Yeah, let
me, I'll go back and we'll
summarize um just for members
who are just getting here, uh,
we're going through our
subcommittee reports with the
subcommittee chairs, uh, then
we're gonna be taking on
compensation in the work group
reports and a big credit to
members. All of these were done
publicly, all subcommittees as
long as well as working groups.
We've adopted these changes in
catch-up clean up we're now
adopting these reports.
And, uh, subcommittee chair
Saana Director Bri, you shared
that, uh, in the subcommittee A.
Um, agencies, there were
increases for gaming control at
87,000
for an auditor, 200,000 for the
racing commission for two
veterinarians, and then 100,000
for the Office of Military and
Base planning.
Pencil work. OK. Uh, with that,
if there are no questions, we'll
uh take a motion to adopt the
subcommittee a report.
So moved.
OK
OK, it's been moved by Vice She
Dixon, seconded by
Representative Sanchez. Is there
any opposition to adopting the
subcommittee A report?
Seeing none, it's adapted.
Great. Thank you very much.
Right.
OK, uh, thank you, Director
Briding subcommittee Chair
Herndon will go ahead and turn
it to you to explain uh
subcommittee B please.
Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Subcommittee B heard agencies
including commission for the
Deaf and Hard of Hearing,
African American affairs in the
miner's Hospital. Several
agencies were referred to staff
to take a second look at of
those agencies, the full
committee adopted the following
changes Commission on the Status
of Wyman, funding was held flat
at FY 25 levels adopting the LFC
recommendations with performance
measures. Minors hospitals.
We added 675,000 transfer from
other state funds that was in
the original LFC recommendation.
With that, Mr. Chair, we'll
stand for questions. Great. OK,
uh, thank you, subcommittee
Chair Hernon, uh, any questions
on subcommittee B.
I don't see any que oh
Representative Garret you, Mr.
Chair. I think my only question,
which maybe we can't answer.
Is the ultimate destination of
the Olmsfo for special
education.
Which will come, I just, I want
to tag it for our
Uh
Future.
OK.
Great. Thank you for flagging
that.
And members, that's maybe uh as
we start this, this, when we
start to see legislation that is
connected to things that we've
done in the budget, that'll be
something that we'll start to
kind of cross reference the
different pieces. So thank you
for that flag. Uh,
Representative Lujan, did you
have a question?
um,
And the governor's commission on
Disability so um.
I was, I was part of this
committee, Mr. Chair, um, and I
think.
I
There was an additional ask for
um.
And try to recall, but I had
this flag and in parts and.
Let me look at my notes, Mister
Mister Mister Chair, but I
believe there was some
additional recommendation on
that, uh.
Regarding the bill as well that
would be needed to be funded if
it was to pass, um.
And also the division of
vocational, I think, I think
everything else is looking OK.
Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Great, thank you, uh, Roxanne
Bohan, and I will see some more
and catch up clean up, uh, as
well, so.
Uh, Representative Little,
please.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Um, Mr.
Chair and uh representative
Herndon, I was just wondering if
the
I
The developmental disabilities
planning would be the location
for the um supported decision
making funds or is that in
another area that I'm not here.
Uh, Mr. Chair Representative
Little, the uh DDPC
Developmental Disability
Planning Council would be the
home of that. Um, I know there's
legislation tied to that, but
that wouldn't be reflected in
the subcommittee report that
might be reflected in another
place. Thank you for that
clarification. Appreciate it.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Thank you
very much, Representative
Little.
OK, uh, I don't see any other
questions. We'll go for a motion
to adopt the subcommittee B.
OK, it's been moved by Vice
Chair Dixon, seconded by
Representative Saraana. Is there
any opposition to adopting the
subcommittee B report, seeing
none that's adopted.
it.
OK, uh, uh, thank you,
subcommittee B Chairwoman uh
Garrett, uh, if you could please
walk us through some excuse me,
subcommittee seats. I apologize.
Thank you, Mr. Chair.
So this subcommittee heard
agencies, including the public
regulation Commission,
Department of Military Affairs
and the livestock board.
Several agencies were referred
to staff because we wanted to
take a second look at them.
Of these agencies, the full
committee adopted an additional
721,000 for the Liar, excuse me,
the livestock board.
To stand up their meat
inspection division and the
economic development work group
recommended additional recurring
funding for the public
regulation commission.
We also adopted an additional
220,000 with the Department of
Homeland Security Management for
3 full-time employees. The full
committee also adopted
additional one-time funding.
For the Department of Military
Affairs for their summer
challenge program. Additional
money for the sentencing
commission's crime reduction
grants and $1 million for the
crime victims reparation
commission for Victims of sexual
assault.
Great. Uh, I don't, are there
any questions? I don't see any
uh ranking member Chatfield with
the motion for a due pass, uh,
seconded by Representative
Saenana.
OK. Um, any opposition to that
motion?
Hey, we've adopted subcommittee
seat.
Thank you. Thank you.
Chairwoman Luhan, please take us
through subcommittee D. Great,
thank you, Mr. Chair. Uh,
subcommittee, do you heard
administrative insurance
agencies, including the State
Investment Council, Ethics
Commission and state personnel
board.
Uh, a few agencies were referred
to staff for a second look, uh,
of those agencies, the full
committee adopted a revenue
reallocation for the ethics
commission totaling $1.2
million.
And recommended additional
one-time funding for the ethics
Commission and the Department of
Information Technology.
Great.
OK, thank you, Chairwoman Lujan.
Uh, any questions on that?
Representative silver
Thank you, Chair, and thank you
Rep Luhan for our subcommittee's
report. I, I did want to double
check on the ethics commission
that um they did request the
65,000 and the 400s. Um, and I
just wanna make sure that that's
also reflective on their uh HAFC
recommendation.
Thank you.
Um, Mr. Chair, uh, rep so we
gave them a one time
appropriation.
Rather than if you're if you're
referring to recurring, we
didn't do the recurring, we did
the one time. OK, thank you.
Thank you. Thank you. Thank you
very much, Representative Silva.
OK, uh, in, I don't see any
other questions. We'll go for a
motion to adopt subcommittee D
recommendation.
OK it's been moved by Vice Chair
Dixon, seconded by
Representative Silva. Is there
any opposition to adopting the
subcommittee D recommendation.
Seeing none, we've adopted that.
Right
Thank you to the subcommittee
chairs. Thank you to all the
subcommittee members, uh, this
year.
one more time, we asked you to
do a lot of work in public. We
ask you to uh work with staff
and the executive, and we see, I
think, more changes, uh, and
we've done those in an orderly
way. So I want to really extend
a big thank you to all the
members and especially to the
subcommittee chairs.
And Mr. Chair, I just want to
express the gratitude of all the
advocates and constituents
because it, they didn't feel
like it was a secret behind
closed doors, especially
education. Thank you. Thank you
very much, Representative.
OK, members, now we're going on
with our agenda.
This is gonna be 2 pieces, our
final work group adoption,
again, which we've done in
public and a big thanks to
everybody for a lot of extra
work, um, including later nights
along with the compensation
review, Section 8.
Uh, we'll go to director writing
and director Sali to start us
off and go from there.
Uh, yes, Mr. Chair, thank you.
So Marty is about to pass out a
very large packet for you, um,
in the first page will be
yellow, so while he's getting
those out, um, we'll talk a
little bit about what's in
there. So this is gonna be again
a very large packet because it's
going to represent everything
that the work groups did, uh,
not just this last Saturday, but
in weeks previous to that as
well.
Um, director Cely and I will
walk through the first, uh, your
first top page here that you
should see, uh, that has a sort
of table of contents, which is
really helpful. So thank you to
LFC for putting that together.
So we'll pass that out and then
we'll go ahead and get started.
Mr. Chair, on the inside of the
Uh, on page 2, you'll see the
sections that will constitute
the general Appropriations Act
and where all the different
pieces that you're adopting will
go in the actual bill.
All right,
thank you for that, uh, it
reminded Vice Chair Dixon for to
thank uh Representative Brown.
Thank you for the suggestion.
This is a very good suggestion
and I think helps us and will
help and thanks to the vice
chair.
Excellent. All right, members,
uh, Mr. Chair, so we will go
ahead and move to page 3 now,
and this is where we're gonna
start in our work group
recommendations.
So if you all are on page 3,
your first section is gonna be
the public safety work group.
Uh, this work group was one of
the first ones to meet, and one
of the concerns that this body
showed was that newly elected
district attorneys didn't have a
sort of fair shot to make the
request for their office, so
these adjustments, um, increase
those offices by some amounts in
areas that both DFA and LFC
analysts concurred on. Um, there
also is, there's again, lots of
sections of this bill, so.
There is a recommendation for
increases for the lowest paid
court personnel. I know that was
a concern of the work group as
well. You'll just see it later
in another section because we do
compensation in a different part
of the bill.
All right, so if you keep moving
with me, we'll start on line 8
here. Your next section is for
the economic development and
general Government Workgroup.
Uh, this is where a lot of
agencies sort of fell into uh
that work group met on Saturday
and decided on a few changes,
including, um, additional
personnel for DFA totaling
$458,000 to help them build
capacity as we give them more
money for things like local
match fund, uh, grant fund, etc.
Your next one, item 9 is for the
Secretary of State for
personnel. Similarly, that was
their highest priority. Uh,
number 10 is for the economic
development department, $1
million for additional personnel
capacity given the massive
amount of special appropriations
and economic development
investments that this body's
going to make there.
Uh, number 11 PRC also for
personnel, same reason, lots of
new demands on PRC, so a little
additional, uh, general fund for
personnel there. And then your
last line in economic
development is line 12 for the
Department of Cultural Affairs,
and that's $500,000 for
personnel in the museum and
historic sites division.
Keep it rolling, Mr. Chair.
Yeah, let's, uh, try to, we'll
go through, uh, page one and
then. Great.
Actually, uh, let's uh flag is
as folks have questions, we're
going through a lot, so this
way, um, it shouldn't take us,
yeah, we don't have to stop if
there are questions, folks can
uh flag it, uh, director writing
to confirmed these were all
discussed in the work groups
which have happened over the
last week and a half. Yes,
that's correct and all publicly,
so a lot of this work was done
by you all on Saturday. Great.
OK, we'll go back to them.
Great. OK. Your next section.
Mr. Chair, is for natural
resources starting on line 15,
uh, your first edition here was
300,000 for uh the state parks
division personnel, and then
your next item in natural
resources was for the resource
management division at enemy D,
uh, that's 670.8,000. If you all
recall NMED requested a flat
budget, uh, LFC sort of
reorganized that a little bit.
This just brings them back up to
that.
that budget that they requested.
Um, Mr. Chair members again,
there is another portion of this
that you'll see down in
compensation, the natural
resources group did recommend
additional funds in personnel
for the Office of the State
Engineer, so that is included in
this document, just not until
the end in section 8.
Representative Saana.
Um
Did we address in enemy D the
the area where they took 2% from
the the lawyers and that do we
address that somewhere, Mr.
Representative Saana. That's
exactly what this 670.8 is
right. Thank you. Thanks, great
question. Rearrett.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Um, I have
a question just on line 3. I
know the 6 judicial district DA
wanted to ensure there was
adequate funding because of
border issues. Does that meet
Uh, the increase, is that going
to at least partially address
his concerns.
Mr. Chair Representative
Garrett, um, this is in line
with their request and again
approved by DFA and LFC. If you
recall when we did specials and
supplementals, there was about
$10 million of uh local public
safety capacity in there and
some of that money would be for
Luna County, so I think they'd
have access to some of those
funds, even if it's not included
in this 18,000. Thank you.
Great. Thank you very much for
represent Silva.
Thank you, Chair, uh, and thank
you both. Um, I am wondering
with the 3rd judicial district
also, um, or the 3rd, judicial
district DA. There was a
request, um, for 400,000
increase because that budget was
flat.
Um, I know that there's a 244.7%
increase. Um, can you remind me
of the justification for that.
Thank you. Thank you, chair.
Yeah, uh, Mr. Chair,
Representative Silva. So both
analysts looked at this. Um, I
think the idea is again given uh
this body's restriction on
recurring funds availability.
This is the biggest increase of
the DA, so get them towards
those goals, um, but keeps it
within the 6% target this body
has set.
Excellent. Thank you. Thank you,
chair. Great. Thank you very
much Representative Silva. Let's
keep on going. Oh, sorry,
Representative Dow, did you have
a question? I apologize. Thank
you, Mr. Chair and thank you,
Amanda. On the, can you explain
to me what all inclusive care
means.
On online 23, it says, and the
program for all inclusive care.
Mm
Mhm
This is, we haven't quite got
there yet, Mr. Chair, but that's
OK. We, I think that's next. We
went through ECCD, so let's go
ahead and explain the healthcare
authority and that'll be
inclusive to representative
Dall's question.
Do you want me to do the whole
thing for HCA, uh, please. OK,
so if you turn to.
Page 11.
There is a new Medicaid forecast
that brought down.
The estimate for how many people
would be on the program, the
next fiscal year and thus
providing a significant amount
of potential cost savings. Those
cost savings were reallocated to
the department and the
committee's other priorities,
and you can see those
highlighted.
Uh, in yellow on your yellow
page.
And they came out a little bit
more yellow, but basically, uh
it allows you for that
particular program within
Medicaid, which is for, I
believe, elderly and disabled
people, uh, to get in-home
living services, uh, rate
increase in line with the
executive.
Uh, same thing with assisted
living facility rate increases
could go to the executive.
The nursing facility rebasing on
line 11. This would get them
halfway there and I've had
discussions with them about
phasing that in, and they were
fine with that.
Um
Did the administration had
wanted more uh.
Administration in line 20.
Uh, we're able to increase
The provider rate adjustments
and the DD program.
On line 32.
On line 44.
Able to uh keep the
Uh, behavioral health provider
rate adjustments at the LFC
level.
And then on this page 12, you
can see under income support,
starting on line 66, able to
find all of the executive
priorities for income support.
As well as replace some fees in
line 94 for the division of
Health Improvement.
All within the LFC wreck of an
increase of 78.9 million.
Thank you, Mr. Chair and thank
you, Charles. Can I, I, so did
you, did I understand you
correctly to say that all
inclusive care, the 5.3 million
is home health for seniors.
I believe so.
And it's a small program of the
Medicaid. It's a pretty big
increase.
It's integrated care for uh
people at the assisted living
facility level of care.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. And then
on page 12 line.
68 still vacancy, what is, what
is this?
What is this additional funding
for personnel hiring personnel.
OK, thank you. Thank you, Mr.
Chi.
Great. Thank you very much for
send it down.
Um, any other questions?
Reset.
Uh, thank you, Mr. Chair and Mr.
President, can you just remind
me where the reimbursement for
the birthing centers are?
Mr. Chair, the infant maternal
Health rate increases.
are on online 4.
This.
Are you, Mr. Chair, uh, Mr.
Preer, are you on page 11?
Yes.
And Mr. Chair and Mr. Presenter,
uh, did we ever come up with a
Will reimbursement rate for the
vagus nerve syndrome.
And the uh
epileptic seizures that some of
our children and families are
going through.
Mr. Chair, I think the
discussion was that this program
is so large that if there are
cost increases and flex needed
flexibility within the budget
that the department will be able
to address those.
Um, Mr. uh Mr. President, I want
to make sure I heard you. The
department can deal with those
adjustments, Mr. Chair, this is
a $1.3 billion Medicaid alone,
um.
Appropriation.
OK. Thank you, Mr. Chair. Thank
you, Mr.
Great. Thank you very much from
San Fernan.
Hey, I don't see any other
questions, so let's, and I wanna
actually really complement the
work, the healthcare authority,
as we heard a number of
different asks, uh, many of
which like to provide the
rebasing that had been building
up for years and years, thanks
to really good work in the
committee, the work group, and
staff, uh, we've been able to
address that, which is really
fairly remarkable compared to
where we came into the session,
so.
So on line 19, just a technical
adjustment moving funding from
the categories to give the
department more flexibility, uh,
and in line with trends for
Uh, where they're spending their
fit, uh, money.
As well as language to
prioritize uh childcare
assistance. The next line is
$101 million in other state
funds. This would come from.
The early childhood, uh, trust
fund.
It would also be contingent on
legislation passing to increase
the distribution of that fund to
support those appropriations
that you can see on page 13.
Highlighted in the far right
HAFC over under column.
And see childcare assistance
online 42.
This gets closer to the
executive, um, line 53, their IT
infrastructure gets to the
executive wreck.
55
56 for Medicaid, um, fit, as
well as home visiting.
That gets to the executive line
58.
That gets to the executive.
61 educator incentives, goes to
the executive and 64 pre-K 25
million gets closer to the
executive re, that I'd be happy
to answer. OK. Uh, all right,
let's keep on going.
Oh sorry, Representative
Garrett, Mr. Chair, so we did
not run the gully part in
imagination library, or is it
someplace that's line 63.
I thought it was I thought it
was some place, but.
It's not in recurring.
So it's in non-recurring.
And we need to check, but it's
not in recurring, you know. OK,
if we could check. OK, we'll
look at that.
OK.
All right, let's keep on going.
So then on schools.
There was a recommendation to
add 10 million to the SEG on a
recurring basis, but if we want
to turn to the school's work
group.
Um, page 6 and page 7.
We put all of these funding
items on a single line,
regardless of which lending
source. So in that other more
technical sheet that you can see
behind it.
We have to keep track of which
fund the appropriations are
coming from, but in this
particular case, we, we did what
the work group asked, which is
put them all on a single line
and to see what's happening. And
so the recurring total would
increase the unit value by 10
million, uh, geared towards
secondary education reforms.
There would be a funding formula
hold harmless for 10 million.
There's not a need for that K-12
plus appropriation anymore given
the school finance lawsuit is
not requiring schools to go, uh,
have a longer year, and so we
anticipate schools will not do
that, so there's not as much
pressure on K-12 plus.
3 million for steam initiatives,
2 million for special education
initiatives, we addressed all of
the
Education acts that the
committee talked about.
Indian education moves out of
the group into a multi-year
appropriation, uh, with an
increase, uh, that would be at
30 million.
The wellness room pilot at a
million.
Uh, universal school meals cost
overruns for next fiscal year at
5.
summer in Richmond brought up to
10 educator fellows brought up,
uh, to
20 career tech at 40.
And panic buttons up, a half a
million, and then a total uh Ed
reform fund because we're moving
money out of the.
A reform fund for um
Indian education initiatives
goes down.
You can also see that uh some
shifting to get closer to the
executive.
And the LESC on page 7.
Out of the public ed reform.
OK, great. Uh, thank you for
that. Thanks for this work
group. I know you did a great
deal of work, um, and this is a
good way to be able to see
everything. Uh, questions on
Uh, this, OK, we'll start with
Pettigrew and then go to
representative Lou Hunt.
Thank you, chair.
Charles and Amanda.
On page 6, the career education.
that
Can you explain to me what the
uh
Language is gonna tie this stuff
together is gonna be because.
I, I have huge concerns with
The original intent of career
type money, and the fact that
it's now being spread so widely
and controlled by
controlled incorrectly.
So it would be broadly for CTE,
the next-gen CTE as well as
innovation zones.
There's also additional Mr.
Chair and representative,
there's also additional language
requiring the department to meet
current law and providing a
report to us on the effects of
these pilot programs.
Mr. Chair and and.
Carrs Amanda Sunny.
We've had this conversation for
the last couple of weeks. The
original 40 million was intended
for career tech. It is now
spread over 7 different CTSO
organizations. Thus we added
innovation zones in next gen.
A number needs to be 70+, not
40.
When you look at
That, uh, everything that this,
this goes to from DECA skills.
Forte
Um, FFA.
All the way through.
Mr. Chair, I, I, I just contend
that, and I've said this for 3
weeks, that, that number is not
high enough if we're gonna, if
we're gonna spread career tech.
Education money, CTE money.
Um
To all CTSOs. We're not covering
it.
Thank you,
thank you very much,
Representative Pettigrew. Um,
we're gonna go next to
Representative Lujan and then
Represent Garrett.
Uh, thank you, Mr. Chair. That,
that goes to the question I was
asking for, um, so we can on
that same line item, same page,
uh, career tech education next
gen in innovation, which is
consolidated those those lines,
Mr. Chair. Some of the
recommendations Mr. Chairman had
started splitting them out.
And this is just collapsing them
all onto one. They were split
out because there's money from
different.
Funding sources and this is just
clarifying here's how much it is
for these particular items. And,
if, if I'm not correct, please
correct me. Did, did we see any
reversions from like the the CTE
or movie, uh, funds moved around
to pay for other things
throughout the budget, Mr.
Chair.
Yes, Mr. Chair, the, uh, part of
that recommendation includes 10
million from the CTE fund. Those
are, that, that was the balance
from reversions from prior
appropriations. Thank you. Yeah,
so I think I just needed some
clarification and and better
understanding. I, I think this
is.
A better value for me. Thank
you, Mr. Chair. Thank you very
much for Mohan. We're gonna go
to Repent Garrett, Repent
Verrera, and then rope some
little.
And
You know,
Um
Mr. Chair and um,
Staff
So steam steam initiatives. Is
that now including the stem
network.
Which originally was a 6000
requests, who controls the steam
initiative's money.
That would be, uh, the
department, and this reflects
what the work group was
presented with on Friday. If
there are other changes that.
The committee is making those
may come, but I'm specifically
asking because we talked.
We talked about steam money and
there was steam for PED and
there was this stem network.
So what I'm really asking is can
some of this be used for the
STEM network.
Very specifically, uh, Mr.
Chair, Representative Garrett, I
think we still have a couple of
items on ketchup cleanup for
tomorrow and we'll note that as
uh something to look at.
Thank you. Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Good answer. Thank you,
Rep Representative Herrera, and
then Represent Little.
Uh, thank you, Mr. Chair and
thank you. Can you, um, can you
go over this 30 million for the
uh secondary education reforms.
This went to PED as I recall, a
one time allocation. Yes, that's
correct.
Um,
I had expressed, I, I hope we
can like this in um.
Kitchen clean up. I always want
to call it catch and release,
excuse me, catch and clean up.
Uh,
uh, because I think that's, I
think that's a huge amount of
money for for one time
allocation and um I think we
could spread that out and some
other things that we want like
uh the STEM network.
My comments.
Thank, thank you very much
uh, OK, we're gonna go next to
representative Little and then
represent Baca.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Thank you
so much. Um, would you help her,
uh, would you please clarify for
me, Mr. Chair, the, uh, I just
wanted to.
Check and see if this was the
closest that I see the Indian
education initiatives of 30,000.
That was good. And then I see
below and there was an
explanation for down below the
indigenous education initiatives
of 15,000,500.
Uh, that is not included, uh.
Please help me correct, uh, uh,
uh, let me know if I'm
incorrect or incorrect. Uh, my
question, Mr. Chair, is that
this, this, uh, is this getting
as close.
To the um $50,000.
150 million sorry I see the
comma there, Mr. Chair, I think
the idea was to pivot from
trying to save money, which is
what a trust fund would do.
To try to make more available
for today's initiatives and so
this 30 million would be rolled
out 10 million a year over 3
years to the tribal departments
of education to build capacity
and get that programming going.
I'm sorry, yeah, you said, uh,
thank you, Mr. Chair. You, you
mentioned 10 million over 3
years each year for 3 years. OK,
thank you. That's up from 5 in
LFC.
All right. Thank you.
Great, thank you very much,
Representative Little. Represent
Baca, please. Thank you, Mr.
Chairman and thank you for all
your work on public uh school
support.
Uh, including the SCG group,
including all of these groups,
so I also want to thank the
continued investment in public
schools. I've been here 4 years
now, and the investment that has
been made is
It is definitely shows that we
um are kind of standing behind
our schools. Uh, Mr. Chairman,
my question really is, we have
this money here for career
technical education. Is there
also money that's coming over
from the capital, uh, outlay
side. Is there moneys I know
like in the past that we had
kind of a pot of money that was
between Kinder or preschool, uh,
security and that could you
speak to that real quick, Mr.
Chairman and uh Charles.
Yeah
So if you look at page 10, line
158.
There's an SB 9 distribution
from public school capital
outlay.
For security, CT and other
maintenance costs as the
district see fit, so yes, that
lane 158, so there is an
additional 50 million for that.
Kind of equipment and getting
the classroom space set up.
As well as security issues at a
school district may want to
prioritize or regular
maintenance.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and I
do appreciate you guys kind of
putting all of the funds
together so we can kind of track
that and then also recognize
that there's money is also
coming to support CTE from the
capital outlay side, so it was.
Great. Thank you very much from
San Paca.
OK, I don't see any other
questions, so let's keep on
going.
Oh, I apologize. Represent
Brown, please. Sorry. Thank you,
Mr. Chairman. I, I just want to
reiterate comments, um, I made a
couple of days ago about her
technical education and um I
know it's scheduled for 40
million, but by adding in these
CTSOs which I agree need
funding, I'm afraid we're gonna
Somehow not meet our
coordination of standing up
programs around the state and
the schools that want them. So I
just asked that maybe we
Do a career tech appropriation,
but then a separate line for the
CTSO so we can actually track
that directly. That would be my
Thank you very much,
Representative Brown. And
regardless, I think we can
absolutely track. It sounds
like, uh, with a great deal of
um detail what uh who and how
these are being used and getting
them into one line, um, maybe
we'll make it easier for folks
to apply, but we can absolutely
track that detail and adjust
accordingly.
Thank you very much.
OK
Let's keep on Mr. Chairman, on
page 4, these were not in a
subcommittee, but these were
things that were flagged in the
higher education here. Would you
like me to go over?
The first one is for adult
education.
Adding another million dollars
uh to go to $4 million for adult
education using uh federal funds
uh in this case, TANF that would
come over from the HCA. This is
line 29. That's correct. This
other one is revenue neutral. It
just cleans up the earmarks for
uh these different programs and
collapses and no money change
overall.
And then line 31.
Uh, some technical clarification
for the language around the
opportunity scholarship.
So overall for section 4, that
would be a spending increases of
13.9 million from the general
fund to 101 other state funds
and 1 million from
Transfers.
Continuing on to uh
compensation, Mr. Chairman.
You've got a sheet on page 16.
That goes over the two, you've
not taken action on compensation
yet. So as part of this packet,
you'll wrap that up.
The differences between the
executive and the LFC uh
compensation recommendations as
the LFC has a an average of 4%.
Or
The judicial executive and
higher education.
That would be in section 8 of
your bill for public schools
that's rolled into what you just
saw into the SCG.
The executive has got about a 3%
increase, a little bit less, but
they built in uh some longevity
pay.
As well as some extra subsidies
for state health benefits that
you can see on that.
Executive column.
Overall, they're non-K12
compensation totals almost 72
million, whereas LFC is 134.
Part of the rationale for the uh
compensation plan behind LFC as
well.
is we're looking at for both
schools and uh public employees,
10% healthcare premium.
Increase. So we think it's
important to make sure that
we're
Some of that compensation is
gonna get eaten up, not all of
it, but from some of the lower
paid people, it'll be really
important.
Um, there's also 17 million in
the LFC recommendation to
implement the new single pay
plan.
Um, for the state personnel
office in case people fall out
of the new pay bands.
Finally, Mr. Chairman, our
compensation turning back to
page 4.
There was a desire to have some
additional targeted compensation
above those packages, first for
the state engineer.
As well as the courts that would
add an additional 2% for the
lowest tier of court employees,
and we would write those amounts
into section 8, and then the DFA
can work with the state engineer
on how to distribute it across
those.
Uh, different programs. There
was some discussion about how
with that, Mr. Chairman, I'd be
happy to answer any questions on
compensation.
Great. Uh, and I want to thank
Doctor Minor, um, for being here
with the executive and others.
Any questions on compensation?
I don't see it. OK.
Um, and Mr. Chairman, one more
thing.
OK, great. We're, so we're gonna
start with Representative
Guerra.
Thanks, Mr. Chair. So Charles,
on what we concluded then was
the public school raises her 3%.
That's Public school raises are
4%, but they're in the SCG.
OK, I see they're in the SCG and
then the line 17 is the money
that balances out to 55, 65, 75,
and that's in the SCG. OK, thank
you. Yes.
And then there's, there would be
17 million for uh risk premium
increases as well. Those get
charged against compensation, so
that would be in section 8.
OK.
Uh, all right, I don't see any
other questions there, um.
And that concludes our the work
group reports as well and the
work group changes as well as
the compensation.
There's Mr. Chairman, there's a
couple more on the bottom of
page 4, if you'd like for me to
go through them quickly, please.
Um,
The first is uh line 40. This
would be language included in
the general provisions as a
safeguard in case the bill.
Uh, outlining which funds are
part of the general fund
reserves. This would clarify
that for FY 26, the row would be
part of the general fund
reserves. That's an important uh
provision to ensure that you
meet your 30% target.
Um, line 41, there was
discussion about uh the
cybersecurity, uh, for higher
education institutions being
identified as up to 7.5 million.
Sure there will be further
discussion about that in the
Senate.
Economic development, uh,
there's
Uh, technical language that was
not in the specials that you did
last week.
There's a couple of uh ads that
came in before ketchup cleanup
on lines 43, 44, 45, like.
That you discussed when we were
doing specials like transferring
some money into the Kiki Savager
fund the 5 million.
Bringing up soil and water
conservation districts.
By another 6 million.
There's technical changes for
the bar authority for tourism,
um,
Cooperative marketing grant
program.
And there's technical language
for the transfer authority in
case revenues aren't coming in,
uh, operating reserve will be
very low and so the backup to
the operating reserve is to
grow, so, uh, just adding that
in as well.
I think you'll have more items
on ketchup cleanup tomorrow for
non-recurring Mr. Chairman. OK.
Uh, great. Uh, we'll go for sort
of catch-all questions, start
with representative Pettigre and
then go to represent Brown.
Thank you, Chair, and thank you,
Charles. So,
This may not be the right time,
it may be for ketchup clean up
tomorrow. It does look like
The 20 million apps from cyber.
Didn't make it into this, and
Um
The 7 million asked for the two
programs from Thaksin Rev.
Doesn't seem to be in here
anywhere either.
Some of that we'll see noted
some of it we'll see on ketchup
cleanup. Thanks. Great.
Absolutely. OK, Representative
Brown.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Um, I
have a question about, um, wine.
40, uh, this is regarding the
grow money being included in
reserves.
Does it mean, Mr. Chair, uh, Mr.
Sali that if say we have a
For your project that in year
one we think this just isn't
gonna work, we can cancel it. Is
that, is that freeing up that
money then, Mr. this is the pot
of money that's the savings
account, not the spending
account.
That's counting in as part of
the reserves.
Remember there's like a savings
account that spins off 25% of
its corpus, and then there's a
spending account.
That you're making
appropriations out of for those
3 year projects. So, yes, if, if
you got into a real economic
downturn, and you had made
appropriate 3-year
appropriations the last session,
that would probably be one of
the first places you would go to
say, we don't need to lock up
this money in order to balance
the budget.
Thank you. Thank you very much,
Representative Brown.
OK, let's keep going.
So the, uh, page 15, Mr.
Chairman.
As some of the technical
corrections that we were noting
as we were presenting the uh
specials.
Last Thursday
Uh, the first one is DFA
testified they didn't need that
much money for
The um audit of share.
Uh, line two, because this is
non-recurring, limiting that uh
increase of 100,000 for the
ethics commission for their
security and other.
Um, equipment and leases needs.
Uh, we said we'd come back with
language on the Forest Health,
which would breed for forest
management restoration,
thinning, and vegetation, uh,
bringing the NMSU in line with
the UNM for the 3 year, uh,
special.
Fixing the
Um, NMDA appropriation, uh,
including working with NMDA on
the, the language for that.
Uh, cleaning up the fact that
the housing trust fund had been
zeroed out and moved into other
housing projects.
And then increasing the computer
systems enhancement fund because
you have some of those.
Listed on page 17 for the IT uh
subcommittee.
Uh, would add a couple of items.
Including 2 million for DPS on
intelligence-led policing. This
is page 17.
4 million for the chess project.
Um, using trust fund money for
early childhoods project and
saving general fund.
And then adjusting CYFD's, uh,
federal funds and transfers to
fit with the what would be
matching, and then there's just
technical language.
Amendments for those other ones.
With that, Mr. Chairman, I'd be
happy to answer any questions.
Great. OK. Um
Thank you for that. Uh, thank
you, members. This represents a
great deal of work again,
working to do, uh, well, this
work was done in public and has
been um I, I see a few different
folks in here who have
participated in different ways
in the audience, so want to say
a big thank you to everyone
who's been so engaged as
Representative Garrett said at
the beginning, I think it's led
us to a better process.
OK, we still have, um,
So we're, we still have uh the
DOT for this evening. We'll have
some ketchup cleanup for
tomorrow. Um,
I want, can we make sure and let
representative uh chair de la
Cruz now.
Uh, with that was not seeing any
other questions, we'll go to the
vice chair for the motion on our
work. We'd ask that you would
adopt the packet before you, the
HFC final package.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Um, I move
that the committee adopt the
HAFC final package that is
before us.
OK. It's been uh moved by Vice
Chair Dixon, seconded by
Representative Sanchez to adopt
the HAFC final packet before us
representing uh all of our
public work groups as well as
the compensation.
Uh, is there any opposition to
that motion?
Opposition.
OK. Please show representative
Pettigrew in opposition. And
with that, it's adopted.
OK.
Uh, members, we're gonna take a
brief pause until uh we'll have
Chair de la Cruz here, Mr.
Secretary, if any of the staff
want to grab refreshments, and
yourself, please feel free there
in the back. Uh, we're gonna,
uh, pause just for a quick
second, uh, before we take up,
All right
Uh, we'll go ahead and we're
gonna get back started
secret, um, feel free to come
up. We'll ask Mr. Simon to be
closer as well. Mr. Chairman,
thank you very much. Thank you
for bearing with us on a late
night, Mr. Secretary, thank you
very much and thanks to your
staff. It's great to see.
folks who are here.
Um, with that, we'll turn it
over, uh, we'll turn it over to
you, to Mr. Chair.
Thank you, Mr. Chair and
members, it's our pleasure to be
here presenting HB 3, the
transportation bill. So I'll try
to get through this narrative
fairly quickly so we can get the
questions.
Mr. Chairman, House Bill 3 as
amended by the House
Transportation Public Works and
Capital Improvements Committee
included the annual operating
budget for the Department of
Transportation reached through a
consensus.
Processed by a technical group
consisting of staff of the
Department of Transportation,
legislative Finance Committee,
Department of Finance and
Administration and house
transportation, public works,
and capital improvements
Committee.
Unlike most of the agencies you
hear on this committee, NMDOT
does not receive any direct
general appropriations.
Or it's operating budget, but
instead receives earmarked tax
revenues from gasoline, taxes,
fees on commercial vehicles and
other transportation-related
revenue sources.
For FY 26, total state road fund
revenues are expected to reach
562 million.
2.1% over the FY 25 operating
budget. The technical group used
information from the consensus
revenue estimating group to
identify available funds for FY
26 and NMDOT's budget request to
make recommendations for funding
FY 26 priorities included.
Sufficient budget authority for
personnel to recruit and retain
staff, especially hard to fill
positions like engineers, HB 3
as amended, includes 249 million
for personnel costs, NMDOT has
been successful at reducing its
vacancies in recent years, and
the proposal allows the
department to continue to fill
needed positions for revenue
planning purposes, HP3 includes
the 4% compensation increase,
included in the LFC
recommendation.
Within the constraints of
NMDOT's limited revenue,
providing additional funding for
road projects.
HB 3 as amended includes 547.3
million for planning, study,
design, right of way
acquisition, and road
construction and rehabilitation,
including $465 million in
federal funds and 109 million
from the state road fund.
The bill also includes 92.8
million for local government and
tribal road projects, 64.7
million for road maintenance
contracts and 37.7 million for
road maintenance supplies for
the department's modal program,
House Bill 3 includes 9.3
million were grants to local
airports for improvements and
33.2 million in federal funding
for transit programs statewide.
Finally, House Bill 3 shines a
light on NMDOT's budget.
by separating out individual
line items for major areas of
the department's budget.
This includes for road
construction projects for local
road projects and road
maintenance. This is the first
year HB 3, I'm sorry, House Bill
3 has included this level of
detail, provides additional
transparency to allow the
legislature and the public to
see differences in these
categories over time.
Staff has provided you with a
packet with additional details
on the department budget.
We will stand for questions, but
before we do that, Mr. Chair, if
I could introduce uh Secretary
of Transportation, Ricky Serda.
Great. Thank you very much,
Chairman de la Cruz, uh, Mr.
Secretary, thank you.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Thank
you, Mr. Chairman.
Um, if I can, we have handed out
this presentation and um.
I don't know if I have to do
anything to the laptop. Should I
put it in presentation mode?
Oh
Great. So, um, Mr. Chair,
members of the committee, I
wanna just move you through this
report and I, I know it's about
14 slides, but I won't, um, take
up too much of your time and of
course the, uh, I'll be open for
questions and and members of our
team will be open as well. Um,
page two, just to refresh the
committee's uh memory each year,
the associated contractors of
New Mexico works with a
third-party contractor to
complete what's called the trip
report, which um
identifies the gap in funding
between what's needed to
maintain existing assets uh
owned by the New Mexico
Department of Trade
Transportation and the funding
that we have available. And so
in 2025, the trip report
identified an unfunded
transportation project gap of
about $5.6 billion. It also goes
through the exercise of
identifying what um the, the
condition of our existing
infrastructure does to New
Mexicans and it's estimated that
the deter
the road's costing Mexicans
about 3.6 billion annually and
on slide one, you can look on
slide 2 rather you can look to
see how that cost, uh, to New
Mexicans is broken down from
operating cost, safety costs and
congestion costs. Um, looking at
the bottom right of page 2,
you'll see our payment
conditions, um, as per the trip
report, 33% of poor condition,
24 mediocre, and the sum of
about 43% in very good
condition.
On page 3, Mr. Chairman, we, we
provide similar data on New
Mexico bridge conditions, um,
and you'll see just to summarize
the data from the table on the
bottom right hand side, 5% of
our bridges in poor condition,
60% in fair and 35% in good.
Again, the measure that we're
really looking at between poor
and fair condition is our
ability to maintain bridges to
ensure that those in fair don't
move down to a a poor rating.
On page 4, Mr. Chairman, members
of the committee, just a quick
breakdown of all the salient
points that uh Chairman de la
Cruz pointed out here, um, in
simplest terms, the operation of
the op but for the DOT 1.2
billion is really the sum of two
major revenue sources, the first
being our federal apportionment,
and the second being the uh
state road fund, which is a
compilation of state tax
distributions um that uh
combined that total revenue
fund. If you're interested, Mr.
members of the committee, um,
after page 4, page 5, it's not
numbered. I apologize, but
you'll see here the uh slide on
those various tax distributions
and so just simply um for your
uh for your reading later on, on
the left-hand side in green
boxes, we have the various taxes
that contribute to the state
road fund. If you look at the
highlighted lines going left to
right from those green boxes,
those highlighted lines show uh
what percentage of that total
tax collection is distributed to
The State Road fund, and then on
the far right, you'll see what
that amounts to in millions of
dollars. So for example, if
gasoline tax of the 17 cents,
the state roach fund receives
about 13 cents, 76%, and in, um,
FY 26, for example, is estimated
to generate about $112 million
and then you can look to see how
the sum of our state road fund
is derived from those various
distributions annually.
On page 6,
Mr. Chair, members of the
committee, we kind of highlight
or roll this up into a simple
pie chart, underscoring that um
over 80% of the state road fund
is uh made up by 4 major
distributions, uh, gasoline tax
of about 111 million special
fuel tax or diesel fuel,
primarily 129 million. We
distance tax, 105 million and
vehicle registration fees at $87
million a year, you'll see that
coming in not too far distant.
us a 5th place here is motor
vehicle excise tax. Right now we
receive um a 12% of our state
road fund is comprised of motor
vehicle excise tax, that's about
$61 million just to give you
some perspective here of the
total motor vehicle excise tax
collected by the state of New
Mexico, the state road fund
receives just under 22%. On page
7, Mr. Chair, we thought it's
just uh beneficial to kind of
show how our reliance on gas tax
fares.
With this part of the nation and
so you'll see here in New
Mexico's reliance is kind of in
the middle road there about
46.5%, uh, reliance, um,
Colorado a little higher, Nevada
higher, and then, of course,
Utah and Arizona, uh, a little
lower and so, um, it's important
to note that, um, nationally,
the discussion taking place
across transportation officials
is a fundamental we have to move
away from our reliance on fuel
tax to drive transportation
infrastructure funding and so
there are a number of states.
that are working on a number of
uh pilots and studies that are
being funded by federal dollars,
um, Rock America is one of those
examples, which is road user
charges based on per miles
driven as opposed to fuel tax
and so that's an important
measure. It was just reported to
me by our economists that the
increased fuel efficiency of
vehicles over the next 5 years
is estimated to cost us an extra
$27.5 million of state road fund
revenue. And so again, that's
not, I'm not picking on
electrification, that's fuel.
Efficient vehicles, right,
everything from non-electric
hybrid, um, all the way up to
full electric.
On page 8, Mr. Chairman and
members of the committee just to
share with you, um, what the
state road fund, uh, long range
forecast looks like based on the
consensus revenue group, but
you'll see fundamentally what's
happening uh is uh we're showing
you those four major revenue
sources to the state road fund
and you'll look at the, um, the,
the largest ones, gasoline and
special fuel tax over the next
um 20 years beginning in 2030 is
going to take a dive and on page
9.
It'll be cleaner to see how
impactful the decrease in
revenues from those two revenue
sources will be to the state
road fund over time. And so
you'll see here on page 9, we're
comparing um the we're comparing
revenues to the state road fund
with rising costs of
construction, so you'll see
there construction costs are
expected to grow 160% from 2023
to 2050. If you look at state
road fund revenues relative to
that, we're going to see a small
6% increase between now and
2030.
But then a 20% decline in
revenues between 2030 and 2050.
And so there again, just
underscoring that from a long
range policy perspective, um, we
look forward to having
discussions over the interim
about how we can really address
that long range forecast for the
state of New Mexico.
On page 10, just to underscore,
I think a number of things that
you all, um, uh, with your
experience of, of state road
fund revenues are probably
familiar with just some, some
challenges here. Um, you know,
uh, for the state road fund that
we have to underscore New Mexico
fuel taxes haven't been revised,
um, since 1996 gasoline tax,
2004 special fuel tax, where um
uh New Mexico's gasoline tax, 17
cents is the 5th lowest in the
nation on average, um, states
are, are.
charging about 32 cents per
gallon, um, New Mexico's
passenger vehicle registration
fees significantly lower than
the US average. That's, you
know, one of those 4 high
revenue sources. And then, of
course, the ongoing um
efficiency of vehicles is quite
frankly just going to cause that
decline in revenues over a
period of time. And so, um,
about um during the the fall of
2024, we assembled a task force,
uh the
UT led a task force of, you
know, national policy experts,
financial advisors, bond
advisors are construction
partners and and a few other,
um, you know, fields of
expertise to really study this.
Um, we did identify a couple of
things. One is that a lot of
states are in early phases of
identifying strategies for
moving away from fuel tax, and
we have a lot of research that
we can lean on to see how that
might work for New Mexico, but
two fundamentally is aren't a
lot of silver bullets out there.
that are working and so states
are looking at measures to
identify their tax revenues that
are not connected to road user
fees, identifying niche
industries that, you know, they
could use to create taxable
revenues that you know are
outside our road use use fees
and then some states are coming
up with additional surcharges
that are tied to services around
road usage, for example,
surcharges for third party
deliveries, right? So if you go
online, order something, there's
a surcharge.
that it would be delivered to
you, right, with a heavy truck.
And so we're excited that we
kind of have a jumpstart into
what our work over the interim
will will do on page 11.
Um, just to show you all the
side by side between the
executive budget recommendation
and the legislative finance, uh,
LFC recommendation. This is just
showing because the chair went
over House Bill 3, which is our
op bud. We didn't want to be
redundant here, so we're showing
you what the specials are one
time general fund appropriations
were looking like on the
executive side of $322
million.01 time appropriation,
uh, including 10 million for
beautification, 12 million to
support rural air service
enhancement, which is
A fund that supports municipal,
uh, and other local owned
airports, adding commercial air
service to their services, $150
million in construction, notably
to support two major projects
that are attached to 115 million
in federal grants, 150 in
maintenance. On the right hand
side, you'll see the LFC rec,
um, not far apart from the
executive wreck 188 million in
construction, 100 million to
support the transportation
project fund, which is a fund
that
locals may appeal to for local
infrastructure projects, 50
million for wildlife corridors
and 12 million for equipment, we
too were mindful of our
equipment needs. We identified
10 million for equipment in our
capital outlay requests in
addition to an additional 20
million in chargers, and we
continue to underscore the much
needed capital outlay for our
agency improvements, and I
always harp on on this, and that
is New Mexico DOT has the 2nd
largest footprint in any other.
other state agency and
government, second only to New
Mexico Corrections Department,
yet we do not receive uh capital
outlay for the maintenance and
upkeep of our buildings. And so
in order for you to do that, we
have to dip into the state road
fund, um, to make those
upgrades.
On page 12.
You'll continue to bear with me.
Uh, we wanted to share our
legislative priorities, things
that we've worked on, uh, with
some of you all and to be sure
over the last several months to
identify how, you know, we can
address, um, some safety
concerns, but also some, some
long term or mid long term uh
funding solutions. House Bill
145 being uh carried by um
representative Houckman V. Hill,
Lstrom, Cheer de la Cruz, um,
and um, I apologize but also
representative.
uh, forgive me for not adding
that, um, that's the state
transportation commission
bonding bill which would
authorize the state
transportation commission up to
1.5 billion in transportation
bond authority over the next 10
years.
And um uh that's, that stems
from a resolution the state
transportation commission passed
supporting that initiative.
On page 13, we have Senate Bill
241 being carried by Senator
Gonzalez is the highway
construction zone automated
Speed Act, which would allow the
Department of Transportation to
place to place automated speed
enforcement cameras in work
zones, construction zones to
address safety measures and
infrastructure safety measures,
um, on our roadways. And then
lastly, on slide 14, we have
Senate Bill 289, which we
recognize as the feed bill for
House Bill 145, fundamentally a
strategy.
That would allow the department
to receive new revenues to
offset debt service for um that
bonding authority. And so you'll
see here to point out which
would increase unestimated
increase to state road fund
revenue is about 124 million.
There's, uh, this bill also
increases recurring revenues to
the transportation project fund
to the tune of about 18 million,
and we do underscore, of course,
that it is a general fund impact
of about 140 million. So, um,
that bill, um, of course, um.
Goes above and beyond what we
would need for annual debt
service on, on our debt ceiling
limits. And so with that, Mr.
Chairman, thank you for
indulging me.
Mr. Chairman, if it's OK, I'll
have joey to my right, introduce
himself and then Diego.
Uh, good evening, Mr. Chairman,
members of the committee. Joseph
Simon with the Legislative
Finance Committee.
Here to answer any questions.
Thank you Mr. Chair, Diego
Jimenez, I'm an analyst with DFA
also here to answer questions.
Thank you. Excellent. Thank you
very much, uh, Chair de la Cruz
and Secretary Serna, thanks to
the analysts for being here.
We'll go to committee starting
with Representative Sanchez.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Uh, I
guess this is more an
observation than a question, I
think, uh, the secretary rings
up a big issue in terms of uh
the gas tax.
Revenue is going down. I know
currently uh with electric
vehicles, uh, his assumption is
based on uh more electric
vehicles being used in the
future.
We, we need to figure out how uh
we're gonna tax that type of
vehicle.
I know right now, uh, typically
people that are better off drive
electrical vehicles. Same with
the solar systems on homes and
uh that's kind of punitive on uh
people that aren't well off
either because with our net
metering policy right now.
Uh
The way our energy rate works is
uh
Part of the operational costs
are built into that when you use
electricity.
And um
People who have solar systems on
their homes, uh, with that, the
way net metering works.
The, the better off people are
getting subsidized by the lower
income people and now we're
seeing that as an electric
vehicle use goes up.
Who typically has a gas
vehicles, it's lower income
people. Our state is majority
low income people, so.
I think, uh, the secretary
brings, brings something to
light that we really have to
look into, uh, we got to change
that, that's bad policy. We're,
we're putting all the tax
burdens in those two areas on
our, our low-income people, Mr.
Chair.
Uh, thank you very much for
Sanchez. Uh, we'll go next to
Representative Da.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Um, thank
you, Chairman and Secretary Joey
and Diego. I, he mentioned, I
want to read the right way, he
just said, and I definitely
agree.
Um, but I also on page.
This page when you write down
the funds, I don't see the
number. But can you tell as the
gasoline tax, special fund tax,
each of these, can you tell us
what stays in the road fund and
what goes back to the general.
Yes, um, Mr. Chair
Representative, great question.
So, um, this actually shows the
distribution of all of those
funds and not all of them
provide revenue to the general
uh fund, and so using gasoline
tax up at the top, for example,
of this that highlighted area.
going left to right, 76.27%. All
the highlighted areas as you
move down the page will show you
exactly what goes to the state
road fund.
And so,
I can't read that. I don't know
if other people can. Can you
guys read it?
Oh, I need, I need glasses
Friday.
Mr. Chairman and Representative,
we can get you a larger copy of
this, OK, thank you.
I apologize, but um, yeah, we
can get you an expanded copy of
this and maybe even isolate just
state road fund revenues.
Well, I, I'm more curious, Mr.
Chair and secretary, to know
what's going to the, how much of
the dollars that are generated
by
uh maybe even like the weight
distance tax or any of those,
what percentage is going to the
general fund? That's what I'm
interested in.
So
20% roughly 30% it might just be
one, so Mr. Chair, Mr. Chair,
uh representative at Quickle and
kind of getting concurrence from
Joey here is that it only
appears that in one instance,
60% just under 60% or just over
59%, 163 million from motor
excise tax is going into the
general fund. OK.
And when we get our magnifying
glass, we may see a need to
correct that, but that's what it
appears to be now. OK, thank
you, Mr. Chair.
Uh, thank you very much, uh,
Representative down. We're gonna
go next to Representative
Herndon and represent Luhan and
keep on going. Thank you, Mr.
Chair and um.
And Mr. Chair and Mr. Presenter,
Mr. Secretary, I just want to
look at your legislative
priority too for just a moment.
Is this Senate Bill 241,
something that's before this
legislature now.
Mr. Chair Representative, yes,
all three of those bills have
been introduced, um, Senate Bill
241 is scheduled for Senate tax
tomorrow. Senate Bill 289 for
Senate tax on Thursday and House
Bill 145 on Thursday morning in
house transportation.
Thank you, uh, Mr. Secretary and
Mr. Chair, how much, how much
are you expecting to generate
from the fines through your
Senate Bill 241.
Um, Mr. Chair Representative,
not a lot based on our
conversations with other
municipalities who are running
the program, uh, namely Rio
Rancho, City of Albuquerque and
town of Bernalillo, we're
working on just construction
zones, and so we won't have
automated speed enforcement
cameras out outside of
construction zones, and so it's
our expectation that the program
will likely net zero, that is
supporting the contractor who
would provide the cameras,
calibrate them regularly.
certify, um, the citations
before they're moved off to DPS
and then DOT to issue out to
drivers.
And Mr. Chair, uh, Mr.
Secretary, thank you. And with
respect to these uh automated
traffic enforcement systems are
people gonna be notified that
these are up and they're
entering one of those zones. Is
that part of the process? Um,
Mr. Chair Representative,
absolutely, not just as part of
a campaign once the bill passes
to let New Mexicans know that
these are underway, but proper
notice the way we would for
double fine zones ahead of speed
zones ahead of construction
zones, excuse me.
Thank you Mr. Chairman of I
might add one thing that might
be a little helpful. Have you
noticed on the interstate, you
have these billboards that show
the zipper, uh,
If you, when you're merging,
it's called a zipper, and uh
that's just one level of that
kind of information and they'll
be the same if not more enhanced
for the cameras.
OK, thank you very much. Thank
you, Mr. Chair.
Thank you very much for Herndon.
Uh, we'll go, uh, next to
Representative Duncan, then
Representative Hernandez.
Thank you, Mr. Chair.
I, uh,
I may need to adjust my foot
pedal.
Um, Mr. Chair, I think I've got
a great idea for um for the
taxes. If we could bring back
the muscle car that the chairman
drove when he was in high
school, that would burn a lot of
gas.
Pollute a lot of air, um, just a
quick question on, on page 11,
the, the $12 million for
equipment, and then $10 million
for capital outlay.
Is that for your whole
department?
Uh, Mr. Chair Representative,
um, if we receive the 10 million
capital outlay in our bud, we've
also, we've also budgeted out an
additional 15 million. And so
the sum of 25 million would be
agency-wide for this for for the
fiscal year.
It's true that
That doesn't seem enough, and,
and I'm, I'm probably wrong
cause I know nothing about road
building, but uh.
And what you do, so, Mr. Chair
Representative, you're not
wrong. I would flag that, Mr.
Chair.
If at all possible. Thank you.
Thank you very much.
OK. Uh, next we have
Representative Hernandez and
then ranking member Chatfield.
Thank you, Mr. Chair, and uh and
Trevor De la Cruz, I, I
appreciate the understudy I'm
getting on Tuesdays and
Thursdays on, on transportation,
uh, Mister Chairman, um, uh, Mr.
Secretary, my question is, uh,
how many ports of entries does
New Mexico have and Mr.
Chairman, uh, Mr. Secretary,
does New Mexico receive revenue
from fees charged with those uh
commercial vehicles.
it's true.
So, um, Mr. Chairman
Representative, we have 12 ports
of entries and yes, in large
part and uh I can have our ASD
director correct me, but in
large part, the ports of entries
are a self-sustaining department
within the Department of
Transportation. This year we're
moving away from the use of
contractors to uh bringing
staff, uh, on board as employees
of the Department of
Transportation, um, that'll be
kind of a wash, but we wanna
bring their pay up like we have
in other divisions and so the
department might find itself
supporting some of its building
and capital upgrades from the
state road fund, but outside of
that, it, it largely supports
itself.
Thank, thank you Mr. Chairman
and and uh um a uh chapter
meeting that uh took place with
Shiprock on Thursday, uh, many
of the constituents they're
brought up, uh, the increase of
commercial vehicles, uh, through
our community and just the, the
speed that these commercial
vehicles are going through our
community and, and I, I, I do
recognize, uh, recognize the
Senate Bill 241, which your your
department is bringing a, a
really meaningful construction
job, uh.
22 Highway 64, uh, will, will
this uh recognizing that
there's, there's fines connected
to this, but I think, Mr.
Chairman, my, my community would
be more interested in those
cameras, uh, speed cameras,
would this be available to
Highway 64?
Um, Mr. Chair Representative, so
one of the things that will
occur immediately after the
legislation passes is, we'll get
to work on the project selection
process for the construction
zones, right? And so we may
determine or it's likely we'll
determine that we don't need
automated speed enforcement
cameras on all work zones right
as a cost efficiency measure. So
for example, if we're reducing
speeds from a 35 mile per hour
to a 25 mile per hour. We may
not see that it'd be.
Sufficient to do it then, but
when we increase the, the, the
maximum speed of 20 miles from
75 to 55, that may make more
sense. And so it may be the
case, however, well you're
identifying seems to be a more
immediate and longer term issue
which may need to be a
discussion between us, local law
enforcement, state police, about
better enforcement and then
communications, I think with the
truckers Association as well
about what we need to do on some
of these secondary roads to
ensure.
truck drivers are obeying the
posted speed limits.
That was my last question, um,
Um, the, your, your, uh,
revenue. I'm, I'm really
surprised to understand how your
revenues, how it's your, your
budgets put together, uh, are
other states in the country, uh,
establishing a, a trust fund to
help with uh the cost of, of,
of, of transportation in the
state and is that something
that, uh, you know, we could,
uh, look into like this term.
Thank you, thank you, Mr.
Chairman, uh, Representative
Hernandez, absolutely in and
it's, it would not be the first
time that we've offered that as
uh an avenue for funding. Uh, it
has failed in the past. We've
talked about it maybe doing it
again this year, but one thing
that will help tremendously if
we were able to do that, uh,
bonding authorization will go a
long way. Thank you, Mr.
Chairman.
Thank you, Char de la Cruz, and
actually, and then I wanna, I, I
was proud to join uh that bill
today and sign on in support of
that. So thank you for your
leadership there.
Great. Uh thank you very much,
Representative Hernandez. We'll
go next to ranking member
Chatfield and
representativeignana.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Mr. Chair,
each year,
I tell everyone.
I think when the party's over,
What we're gonna have left is
the things that we built.
Roads are one of those things
that we need to build.
Whatever the
The, the price of oil goes south
or, or the electric car becomes
the only what means of
transportation, whatever it is
that shuts it down. When the
party's over, we better have our
roads taken care of. We need to,
we need to fix them now. And I,
and I just was looking at the
budget and I'm thinking, I don't
know if that's enough, and then
I looked over at the uh bonding
1.12 billion, and I kind of get
a little hope. Is that enough?
Mr. Secretary.
Mr. Chairman, the, the number
is, uh, Mr. Chairman
Representative, the number is
not arbitrary over the interim,
we did identify for legislative
uh finance committee and for uh
tiers committee, a list of
projects totaling $1.7 billion
so when you look at that 1.5
billion combined with potential
special appropriations, it would
keep us busy, uh, Mr. Chair
Representative for a number of
years, understanding that we
have to manage our capacity, we
have to grow internal resources.
to get those projects to
production and ready to be let.
So Mr. Chair, this, Mr.
Secretary, if this bond takes
place.
Is that something that's gonna
keep engineers coming into, into
your agency knowing that they're
gonna have a job, that's gonna
have.
Construction companies, people
are worried about going out and
borrowing money for heavy
equipment. It costs a lot, I
know.
And uh so I wanna make sure we
have the, the funding there. You
can bring people to come and,
and participate in that, in that
job to uh
Invest in a construction company
or to come from, we have one
that you all have used out of
Colorado up in my area.
Wonderful company, do a
beautiful job. Uh, we want them
to come back to New Mexico.
This, this will do it. Is that,
is that the message I hear?
Mr. Chair Representative,
absolutely we're excited after
House Bill 145 comes over to how
we can get into the weeds about
what this will do for our
internal capacity, but what you
mentioned is exactly why
contractors are leaning into
House Bill 145, and the one word
is predictability. They can make
meaningful investments in pits
in equipment purchases and in in
workforce development, if they
see predictability in in roadway
funding. So Mr. Chair, Mr.
Secretary, when that bill comes
over to the house.
I'd like to put my name on it.
Mr. Chair Representative, it, it
started here and so uh duly
noted.
Thank you when it gets ready for
me to put my name on it.
It's closed, Mr. Chairman right
after your vote, representative,
so Mr. Chair, one last thing on
my little white car, I've got a
sticker.
Right in the center of the
windshield, and when I go to
Texas,
I wanna run fast, I get on one
of them toll roads.
I don't have to do anything,
they just send me the bill.
Yeah, uh,
it works really well. They're
not as much traffic.
Speed limits a lot higher.
Uh, ro good.
Because it's paid for by tolls.
And they're building them just
as fast as they can build them.
And I, I don't see why.
That are electric cars, our
gasoline cars and all the rest
of our cars can't have one of
those little sticker right in
the center of the windshield,
and then everybody pays their
Appropriate amount for how much
they drive. I don't think it's a
hard thing. It, it may take a
little bit of willpower, but I
don't think it's a hard idea to
come up with somebody else
already thought of it.
Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Thank you very much, ranking
member Chatfield. Uh, we'll go
next to oursarana.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Can we
go back to electric vehicles. So
what, what percentage of
electric vehicles are in the
state.
I, I feel like I'm on the price
is right, cause you ask a
question, it's like $2.02
dollars.
Yeah, yeah, Mr. Chair, our
representative, um, for for some
time now, it's been less than 3%
either hybrid or full plug in
electric,
so and you think there's gonna
be more with this administration
in Washington DC You don't think
they're going to get rid of
everything that's renewable and
saving the planet, you know.
Uh, Mr. Chair Representative, I
think, I think our governor has
really put in place some carbon
reduction goal.
and measures that are gonna work
toward, um, advancing that clean
fuel initiative or zero emission
initiative in the state of New
Mexico, and of course, all of
that is contingent in uh of much
of your support. And so we're
going to continue to build out
the state's network. There's no
question now, um, I think to the
points made about recouping, you
know, fuel tax loss and, you
know, it's transferable across a
number of modes, we have to be
mindful, right, that if all of
us today were to also say we're
just gonna cycle to work, right?
Those who can't afford to ride a
bike to work would carry the
burden of road infrastructure,
right? And so I think in, in
the, in the discussion about,
you know, reducing carbon
emissions from vehicles on our
roadways is a policy question
that we do need to ask and that
we need to start working on, and
again, leaning on what other
states are doing to ensure that
all road users, right, are
paying for their proportionate
use of the road, the weight of
their vehicle, the wear and tear
that they're placing on that
vehicle. I believe
fundamentally, generally
speaking, is where we need to.
ago as a state and that will in
fact swoop in the use of
electric vehicles.
All right, I'll ask him, but I
don't want to. But thank you.
Thanks.
Thank you, Representative Saana.
Next, we'll go to represent
Brown, then
Thank you Mr. Chairman. Thank
you, Mr. Chairman, and Mr.
Secretary.
When we were in transportation
committee, um.
Hearing uh a little bit about
how the 145 we're going to see
it again tomorrow, I guess.
One of the things that we were
wanting was an amendment telling
us what we're buying for that
large debt we'd be incurring.
And I don't believe that
amendment was adopted, uh, and I
don't know that it's coming up
tomorrow. So, Mr. Chair, maybe
the chairman could tell us or.
What we know about that. Thank
you, Mr. Chairman.
Remember Brown, we are not gonna
hear it tomorrow because there
were some additional amendments
and we didn't have enough time
to notice, so we'll, we'll be
hearing it on Thursday, uh, but
I think it'll be a complete
package that will be presented
at that time, and I'm confident
there will either adopt it or
not, but it should be uh
complete. Did you wanna ask
secretary?
No, I want to thank the chairman
and the other sponsors, we sent
over some language, they worked
on some language and as he
mentioned, it's being drafted
and so you should have adequate
time to catch that before
Thursday.
OK. Thank you very much. I
already did my homework on the
bill, so I'll do a little more
towards Thursday. Um, I, I did,
uh, remember Mr. Chairman that
um Secretary Serna gave us an
outstanding.
tutorial on bonding and how we
were saying 1.5 billion, but we
don't borrow that large amount
upfront. We, we kind of take it
in little packages and we've got
25 years.
To basically use that funding
and it's up to 1.5 billion.
If you wouldn't mind, Mr.
Secretary, Mr. Chairman, for the
benefit of this committee, just
give us the cliff notes on that.
It was very, very informative.
Mr. Chairman and Representative,
I'll try without my cliff notes,
um, but, um.
So there's 2 numbers and I don't
want to be confusing in our
slide here, but in statue, um,
at any single time the state
transportation commission can
only have total outstanding debt
of $1.124 billion right, so at
any given time, that's the
ceiling of debt they can have
all at once.
We're asking for 1.5 billion,
however, in bonding authority
because that would serve as a
line of credit, meaning that
over time, the state
transportation commission would
authorize the sale of bonds, the
issuing of bonds, and insure all
the while that it didn't exceed
that total debt ceiling of $1.1
billion. And as the
representative mentioned,
there's not going to be a single
time, I think, in the
department's foreseeable future
that it would borrow the 1.1
billion all at once.
new debt. It's important to know
that we do have some existing
debt because the last time we
were authorized bonding
authority was in 2003, um, a
bill that grew into the name the
grip, right? And so the last of
that debt was incurred in 2021
and so beginning in FY 26, we
will have about half a billion
in debt.
And so if even we wanted to
borrow the 1.5 billion. We
couldn't for two reasons. One,
because there's a debt ceiling,
and 2 because we already have
$500 million in debt, which
means that based on that debt
ceiling, the most we could
possibly borrow all at once,
would only be 600 million. But
we won't do that. We've done
some estimates that show
probably, um, a year after
receiving authority, we'd borrow
something like 200 million, get
some projects done. And then
over
the next 3 years after that,
about another 700 million and
then probably by 2033-ish we'd
exhaust uh that total authority.
And so it isn't one big chunk at
once, it's managed based on what
the team is queuing up for
construction-ready projects, um,
over the the next several years.
And so again, we'll, we'll pull
that out again when the bill
comes to house appropriations at
second stop in its path.
Mr. Chairman, I, if I might, I,
I like to describe it as a home
equity line of credit or a HELOC
as they call it, as you pay down
the debt, then you could extend
that debt out. It's, it's almost
identical.
Yeah, thank you very much. Um,
and I, I bring this up for at
least one reason, maybe 2.
We, we had, I believe, at the
start of the session, a
proposed, I think it was 188
million out of section 5, I
think it was for maintenance.
And because of this bonding bill
and the possibility that it will
pass, I believe that was a race,
that 188.
I'm concerned about that because
bonding takes time.
Uh, we're not gonna have a large
chunk up front as you've
explained, uh, Mr. Chairman, I
think that
We need that maintenance money,
because that's an immediate need
that I believe we have and that
money could be accessed quickly,
bonding again takes time. So I
was disappointed to see that
that had been removed from the
proposed budget.
Um, as far as bonding goes, we
may or may not pass it. I don't
know, uh, but, and I did sign on
to the bill, uh, because we
really need the road work to be
done.
So I just bring that up if we
could bring back that 188
million. I know it sounds like a
lot, but it's for an absolutely
important, vital need that we
have.
Um
The um transportation trust
fund, Mr. Chairman, as
Representative Hernandez just
mentioned that. I, I do have a
bill coming.
It proposes much of what um is
proposed here in Senate Bill 241
and moving more of the MBETX
proceeds into
The road fund and kind of wean
the general fund off of some of
that revenue. So I have a couple
other ideas in there, it will
be.
Ready for prime time probably
tomorrow and I'll get that into
the, the hopper, but
I think this committee, and I
would hope, uh, the whole
legislature, Mr. Chairman, would
really start thinking about
putting money into this trust
fund, um, it would be used under
my bill to be matching funds for
federal grants, no other use,
and we could sure leverage it
that way too, so, um, I guess
I'll just say, Mr. Chairman,
it's coming. Stay tuned and, um,
but I want to thank all of you
for the work you do on the, the
state transportation budget.
It's
It's so very important and I
know how much work it is. Thank
you.
Thank you very much
Representative Brown. Uh, next,
we'll go to Representative
Garrett, then representative
Silva.
Thanks, Mr. Chair. Thank you.
Um, all of you. 2 questions.
So I just learned 15 minutes ago
that the Bridge of America
sinking and will close in 2027,
as that been on your radar yet,
planning for that to come to New
Mexico.
Uh, Mr. Chair Representative,
great question. Um, the, the
governor is, is really tasked to
a handful of secretaries and
agencies to really work on
really good border strategy,
which I think she's publicly
discussed as being a big
priority for expansion of the
Santa Teresa support, um, which
would be a prime option for that
truck traffic that would
typically go to Bridge of the
Americas, which I understand is
gonna receive some millions of
dollars of investments, but
ultimately won't reopen to truck
traffic.
And so fundamentally, um, on, on
our end, one of the projects
that you see in one of the
slides is the completion of the
border connector highway, which
would essentially serve as an
avenue for moving truck traffic
coming into the Santa Teresa
port of entry east onto I 10.
To move um goods and goods from
the Santa Teresaor outside of
that free trade zone that's
established there, combined with
rail and the development of that
roadway, we believe it makes
really good sense for New Mexico
to play a major role in the
transfer of goods and services
from the west to the east,
everywhere in between.
Thank you and, and, um, Mr.
Chair and secretary and chair.
Um, it brings into play, we,
we've passed um the trade ports
bill at least in one committee,
and there's a commitment of
about 100 million that still
being worked on, and then the
transfer, the DOT is often not
been strongly supportive of um
the P3 bills saying they're not
needed, but I feel like in light
of the trade port bill.
And all the emerging stuff at
the border, the Bridge of
Americas that we really have to
get behind um House Bill 276,
which representative Brown and
myself are both signers on and
share de Cruz's, um, and I don't
know, Mr. Chair, if there's been
any development in getting
transportation funding for the
P3 bill. Can you give me any
update on that? Sherman.
Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Representative Garrett, so as
you know, we, we passed it in
committee, um, Mr. Chairman,
that discussion around the
revenue that might need might be
needed, as in solidified enough,
but we, we will have to have
that conversation fairly
quickly. That's, that's about
all I can add at this point.
OK. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Thank you. uh, Mr. Secretary,
and just to clarify, Mr. Chair
Representative is when we answer
the call that comes primarily
from you all that we need to
move projects to construction
quicker, more quick than we ever
have before to minimize the
impact that the cost of
inflation is going to have on
them. We recognize P3 as being
one of those tools, CMGC, a
legislative effort that you all
passed design, build the tool
we're using.
now in our largest single
project in P3 and so the idea of
these alternative methods to
design, build our, we embrace
those at the agency.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Thank you,
Mr. Secretary and chair.
Thank you very much
Representative Garrett, uh,
Representative Silva then
represent Pettigre.
Thank you, chair, and thank you
Secretary Serna and um chair the
la Cruz appreciate
you all coming here, um, I
mentioned this at last week's
early morning workshop, um,
around my concern that DOT
doesn't have any current
operating agreements with
customs and Border Patrol at the
checkpoints. Um, I'm not arguing
the validity of checkpoints, um,
I'm simply saying the state does
not have any current.
agreements with them and so when
it comes to easements right of
ways, if there's a liability
incident that happens at these
checkpoints, the state might be
held accountable. Um, and so,
um, I, I just want to know what
might be the process for getting
operating agreements with CBP. I
know that DOT does have um
agreements with like US Fish and
Wildlife for right of ways and
easements, um, and my district
is impacted by 2, checkpoints.
on state highways on US 70 and
on 54. And so just wondering um
what.
I as a representative can do to
support getting some operating
agreements in place so that we
aren't uh exposed to that
liability and uh any, any other
thoughts you might have. Thank
you, chair.
Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Representative, and it, it was a
really good point that probably
was just otherwise gonna fly
right underneath the radar. We,
and I shared at the time that we
were eager to start discussions
with them about, um, strategies
or partnerships around
communicating incidences.
that might affect our employees
or the employees of our
construction companies who would
be on work zones near and around
checkpoints and so that stems
from an incident that occurred
with CBP, um, uh, CBP involved
Chase of a vehicle that
ultimately crashed into a DOT
truck carrying 3 NMDOT workers.
And so that from that spawned a
discussion about a partnership
with them, and the local and
F law enforcement agencies for
incident management to better
inform our crews of what an
incident like that was
approaching a work zone. And so
I think there's a number of
discussions going back to Santa
Teresa Por build out to
communications on incident
management to formalizing our,
our, our, our agreements for
state asset road use that um.
There's enough there to bring
those parties together.
Excellent, thank you. I
appreciate it. Thank you, chair.
Thank you very much
Representative Silva. Uh, next
is represent Pettigrew.
Thank you, Chairman and thank
you secretary. It's good to see
the, the whole group again.
Um
Chairman, Mr. Secretary, I think
I'm throw start with the
softball.
If you don't mind.
On the budget.
But fact sheet, page one
underneath your performance.
You're right to a yellow with
respect to projects completed on
schedule.
I know the answer for this, but
I'd love for you to, to describe
the, the committee.
What happened with respect to
that.
I'm sorry, uh, so Mr. Chair, um,
anytime you say you're gonna
throw me a softball and ask a
difficult question, you just set
me up to look really bad. And
so, um, the question here on
project design and construction
or
For the FY 24 key measure, is
that what it is? Chairman and
secretary, yes, on, on the
project design and construction
for FY 24, we were in yellow,
um,
For not hitting your targets on
projects completed on schedule.
Chairman, uh, secretary.
Some of that had had to do with
the availability of funds on the
timeline that you were given
some of that had to do with some
other problems. I just thought
it would be a good time to chat.
Prove what some of those issues
are so that chairman and
secretary as we look at the next
set of books that we get in a
year.
Um, we understand what the
constraints are on the, on the
department. Sure. Mr. Chair
Representative, it's, it's, it's
a long list of things. There's
no question about it, but just
to underscore a few, right?
And so the, the pro the process
for getting these projects
completed on schedule vary from
getting them fiscally
constrained on time, um, to
letting projects and getting
bids on all these projects, for
example, we can identify a
couple of projects for which we
had to let more than 2 times to
get bids, I believe that was the
case with the New Mexico 64
project and then splitting that
project up into different phases
so that it can appeal to a
contractor to get those things
done. And
So, um, and, and then just to be
quite honest, a lot of his
internal bandwidth, um, and, and
making sure that we can manage
projects appropriately, um, hold
contractors accountable to what
they propose as a project
construction timeline and costs,
and, um, and then, of course,
it's ensuring that, um, you
know, all of the right away
acquisition can take place on
time, etc. etc. And so, uh,
there's no question that we take
the measure seriously, um,
despite the the excuses.
Again, getting projects done is
a cost saving measure, and, and
we need to do that and so what
we're looking at and we'll
discuss this more with the House
Bill 145 bonding is if we
receive the revenue for the debt
service on House Bill 145 is to
invest the revenue we're using
now for existing debt service to
build capacity to the tune of
$40 million at the agency to do
these things more efficiently.
Thank you for your answer. Um,
chairman and secretary.
And we'll get to the bonding
thing here in a minute. Um.
On page 3 of this presentation
or
The budget quick fact sheets.
Sec, do I understand this.
Line 14 correct that there's
only gonna be $28 million in
local government road funds.
Um, Mr. Chairman, that's
correct. And so going back to
some of the chairman's high
points is about 92 million in
local project support combined
between transportation project
fund in the local government
road fund.
Chairman, Secretary.
Chairman
That 90+ million dollars will be
available for applications from
all local governments.
Yeah, um, Mr. Chairman
Representative, just real
quickly, the local government
road fund is only one of the
possible sources for local
governments to get their road
projects funded. The other one
is right above it on line 13,
that's the transportation
project fund. And, um, the, the,
you know, the recurring revenue
into that program in DOT's
operating budgets, uh,
Um, about 50, a little more than
50 million, in addition, because
of some reversions to that fund
from projects that haven't taken
up the whole award. There's
about 10 $11 million in fund
balance that, um, is included in
House Bill 3.
Thank you, Chairman and thank
you, Joey for that.
Going on down the line, line 16
and 17, I get somewhere right
around $100 million for uh road
maintenance contracts and then
supplies and materials. Am I
reading that correctly?
Mr. Chairman Representative,
yes.
So, chairman and um
I don't know who's gonna answer
this one.
I look at page 11, and I see a
different set of numbers in
there.
I, I'm just making sure we're
looking at basically $100
million put across 6 different
departments.
So, Mr. Chair, uh, you're, uh,
representative, the comparison
between the maintenance budget
you see there on page 11, um,
what we're showing you in um
these spreadsheets right over
here is not inclusive of any
one-time general fund or special
appropriations, and so if you
were to take um number um 16
road maintenance contracts or
above that, yeah, road
maintenance supplies and
materials. If we were to receive
additional.
Special appropriations, for
example, in the executive
director, $150 million and it
would add to that sum, which is
part of our op bud.
Mr. Chairman and secretary is,
as I read it.
That is in the exact, and it's
not in the LLC wreck.
Would that be correct?
A Mister Chair, representative
for maintenance specifically,
uh, that, that's correct.
So, well, my colleagues were
asking questions. I went back
through all the presentations
this summer from all 6
districts.
Um
Without looking at all of the
projects.
You guys are, um,
Somewhere around 75 million
spent.
On maintenance projects alone.
So I got 10.9 and district 5,
and I'm assuming that number
because district 4,
Wasn't on the
On the legislative website,
District 6 spent almost 25
million D3 just over 102, uh,
over, just over 10 and do 1,
again, just over 10, so you
start adding that together and
just come up with an estimate,
you're 75.
And, and
Chairman, I would contend that
that
If we want to add road
maintenance contracts, which
would be
The
Dry bean.
Chipsail that's not done by the
department, uh, crack repairs,
um,
Any other just facility
maintenance.
Upkeep
We're nowhere near where we need
to be for what you guys are
spending on an annual basis
right now.
Would that be correct,
secretary? Um, Mr. Chair
Representative, if I remember
correctly from last year, we
have this
chair and I, I just used the
wrong table.
We're way off.
I was using the equipment table.
So,
no, we're over $100 million with
what we spent, chairman and
secretary on the, on the road
maintenance projects.
You guys aren't close to where
you truly need to be, are you,
uh, Mr. Chair Representative,
compared to last year, um,
again, I'm remembering from the
specials appropriations, I
believe it was the sum of about
190 million in total maintenance
that was about 70 million um for
some legislative identified
projects and then 120 million
for statewide maintenance on top
of that.
Thank you.
and, and presenters as that
number of concerns me and then
when we get to, now we'll go to
equipment. We're looking at 10
million in equipment and just
The asks.
The discussions that came from
all 6 of our district engineers
totals over 75 million.
Um, chairman that concerns me as
well.
We're continuing to get that in
Chairman, don't get me wrong,
I'm sure that there's some areas
in here that pay for some of the
half ton vehicles and stuff like
that. There's some ways that
they can rotate that.
But I don't think it gets us
anywhere.
Near close to where we need to
be. So if there's something that
we could look at, uh, maybe in a
special with respect to both of
those, it does concern me.
The chairman, you know, 2 or 3
years ago when the, when uh the
4th floor.
Why the maintenance budget in
half.
We're still trying to catch up.
In each of our districts.
And with some of the events that
have happened across the
districts.
Just to remind them whenever
there's a an event that you call
it flood, fire, whatever it is.
Our districts have to use their
maintenance funs to do that.
When that happens, then they
don't get all the way through
all their maintenance projects.
So
We move continually talked about
The secretary and I have had
conversations and as I have with
other people about maybe trying
to come up with a way to
Um
Allocate
fund
That our commissioners, our, our
road commissioners have access
to that they can pull from
during a when an event happens.
It doesn't come out of the
maintenance fund and doesn't
impact the district's trying to
get their continued work doing.
When we, when we design a road
for 20 year life, the
expectation is 4 different times
on that road.
We do something to maintain it.
Keep that life moving forward.
When we're not able to do that.
We actually
Reduce the lifetime of that
project, uh, uh, and that
capability on that road.
And increase the, the life cycle
costs on it.
So it's, it, it is a concern for
me.
Um
Chairman and secretary, I will
tell you that the condition on
your bridges that every year
that report gets a little bit
better.
And I appreciate the
department's efforts on that.
And uh it's not an easy when you
only have 3 options.
You know, um, but 60% that are
in fair condition now is far cry
from where we were at 3 years
ago.
And I appreciate the effort on
that.
Um
If
experiment and secret back to
your presentation on page 11.
You have a $50 million in there
on your wildlife corridor, and
I'm looking at
One of your most recent
presentations.
Which project is, is, uh,
That earmarked for is that 550
or is that somewhere else?
Uh,
Mr. Chairman Representative,
we've identified the wildlife
corridor project, which is
number one in our study, north
of Cuba and 550 as being our
principal project. And so the
$50 million based on our
estimations reported out during
the interim would, would fund
that project entirely.
Thank you very much for that
answer.
I, I do have just like with your
and secretary with your
predecessor, the, the long
conversations I had, uh, with
the department about bonding
several years back.
They still have a concern with
that when we have so much money
that we could have put into a
fund and then this completely
different and not done something
to our debt load.
With respect to
Um, your bonding capacity now.
Chairman and secretary, and I I
know so many people are looking,
looking at this as a positive.
As we get closer and closer to.
2030, not knowing the
projections, not knowing what's
gonna happen from DC not
knowing, um, whether or not our
state electric suppliers can
even keep up with the
electrification of what we need
to do.
Just the grid side of all of
this.
Putting herself at risk.
With respect to bonding.
When we when we could just as
easily.
The $1.5 billion into a fund and
not impact.
Our reserves because we're
calculating our reserves in a
whole new way right now anyway.
We calculate new money
differently, but our reserves
aren't calculated the same way
we calculate new money.
I think there's some options
here that we wouldn't have to
use bonding capacity for and we
could save that, especially
considering where bond rates are
at as well, right now. Um
That, that concerns me that we
continue to go down that.
chairman and, and secretary, I
haven't, I don't really looked
at uh what's in the proposal for
the P3s. I've objected to those
each year.
Uh, just because.
I've built enough P3 projects in
my lifetime, to know which ones
work and which ones don't, and
the, the past P3 solutions that
we've had as legislation.
lock you in on some things, as
the DOT that um don't give you
the latitude that you need to
build the, a good project and
have control over that project.
So that continues to concern me
as well. I look forward to
seeing the legislation and
seeing how some of this stuff
moves forward. I do hope that we
start having conversations
chairman about a different way
to fund this and bonds.
Thank you.
Thank you very much for
representing Pettigroup. We're
gonna go next to Little.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Um, and
thank you for the very extensive
and involved presentation that
was for someone who's new to
this, uh,
This uh area uh in
transportation, it it is very
enlightening, uh, Mr. Chair, I'd
like to ask a very basic
question.
Uh, about 30 years ago, I
remember having a brother-in-law
who oversaw federal roads and
the cost at the time was about a
million a mile.
Can you, is it possible for you,
I'm trying to put this all in
perspective. And so I'm
wondering what if you might be
able to tell me what
The range perhaps is of the
average cost of and I'm as this
conversation is happening, Mr.
Chair, I'm seeing how it's, it
is separate between uh
constructing a road versus
maintaining a road, and then the
bridge is also bridges are also
in there, so, uh, that's a
rather long extended question,
but if you, I could have the, if
you could share that with me
great time, great question, Mr.
Secretary.
Sure, uh, Mr. Chair
Representative, uh, thanks for
asking that. I was actually part
of my talking points and I was
talking about bonding and making
a comparison, as it turns out,
the last bonding bill took place
in 2003, and it was at that time
that the Federal Highway
Administration started really
capturing and indexing the cost
of roadway construction. And so
because they started that
process in 2003, the indexed the
cost of construction 1.0, what
they estimated to be $1 million
a month.
for construction.
And so, I can tell you back then
that index was 1.0 today or in
2024, that index is 3.19. And so
you can multiply based on that.
1 million by 3.19 gives you
what, um, that same methodology
would cost you so over $3
million a mile, uh, for
construction and so when you
make that comparison of that
2.2003 bonding bill was also 1.5
billion kind of equates to 1/3
of that, right, today. So, um,
and if you would like, um, Mr.
Chair Representative to for us
to pull some figures on
maintenance. We could try and do
that as well, but that's the
number for construction on a
using a national method of,
yeah, and so for maintenance I'm
being told about 288,000, a lane
mile for just roadway
maintenance. So that just to
give you some perspective.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Thank you
very much.
Great. Thank you very much from
some little, uh, Mr. Chair,
thank you very much first, uh, I
think, as you noted, uh, there
is more transparency and uh the
care with which you're taking on
the bonding, uh, bill, I think
is very much to be commended,
uh, Mr. Secretary, Mr. Simon,
what, I do have one quick
question, uh, which I'll ask
members to turn to one page 117.
In, uh, our volume threes.
Spiral Brown.
We turn to page 117, Mr.
Secretary, and you have it there
in front of you, um.
These numbers are always a
snapshot in time.
But remember sort of what we're
seeing here from 2019 to 2024,
1.8 million in appropriation of
that amount, uh, Mr. Secretary,
836,000 is shown as expended.
467,000, 468 is shown as
encumbered.
Uh, counting.
The um
And it and it grant and then uh
remaining uh 555 million.
Uh, this also has the reversion
dates here, uh, Mr. Secretary, I
think committee this goes to
maybe a few points that were
raised, including sort of um
Just the work flow and work
capacity.
Yeah, Mr. Secretary, it seems
like from this, although there
have been a few years where, you
know, and it seems for what uh
in the 2021 special, much
smaller amounts. Almost all of
that has been expended in
different categories.
In a number of these areas going
back even to 2021.
Um
This shows that 34 million.
34.2 million is remaining not
expended, not encumbered, uh,
from the state roads, so maybe
one of the ways for us to see
this is that this speaks to like
that construction capacity. Is
that a fair thing to say, Mr.
Secretary.
Um, it, it does, Mr. Chair,
understanding that not all of
the appropriations were for
construction projects, some of
them for things like
electrification, wildlife
corridors, rural air service,
maintenance to airports, uh,
etc. and some of them, um,
actually flow throughs to local
governments, so, um, I think Mr.
Chair, but what, what we do
agree with is to be sure when
these projects are identified,
some of them are construction
ready and we're ready to let the
project.
and get shovels in the ground.
Some of them are identified um
as part of the legislative
process and are not necessarily
ready and so what we work on
doing is getting those projects
ready for construction so that
we can enact the will of the
legislature, not only make our
roads better, but in some cases,
some of the appropriations are
attached to specific roads that
we have to prepare for
construction. Got it. Thank you,
Mr. Secretary. So the vast
majority of these are 4 road.
for, for state roads and for big
infrastructure, it's true. I, I
don't know off the top of my
head. Mr. Simon, do we know, uh,
sort of, um, I guess non
Uh
State Road transportation, we
have central air service, local
roads.
Regional airports, which fits
into that.
Electric vehicle charging.
Of, uh, of the 1.8.
Do you have, do we have a sense
of sort of um how to break that
down. I, so Mr. Chair, I don't,
I'd have to do some quick
mathematics, but um I think
that, you're correct, the bulk
of it is for, is for
construction construction and
maintenance on state road on
state roads. And so let me ask,
maybe going back to 2021, 170
million encumbered uh remaining
34 million.
Uh, reversion date the 6:30,
2025, so this year I
Will we see some of these in our
reauthorizations. Uh, Mr. Chair,
and, and, yeah, yeah, that's
correct. The, the, the all of
the items that are set to expire
6:30 2025, except for the 2019
appropriation, the Department
requested reauthorization for.
Got it. OK. So, uh, safe to say
there's um
There there is a great deal of
general fun remaining that that
we have to work together to
ensure it's allocated and is
expended, and on top of that,
Mr. Secretary, you're bringing
us, uh, or we're being with
Chairman de la Cruz and with the
members, um,
Were being brought a bonding
package that can be sized, and
I, it, it think it, it makes a
ton of sense. You can size and
Mr. Chair, as you described it,
always, you know, sort of size
it as we go. um members.
Even as we sort of sort through
some of the challenge like the
numbers, if we, it is super
important, look at page 117, 1
of, I think our collective fears
is in this time of great surplus
money that we set aside for
implementation in a year or two
that we look back 5 years after
we've we've, we've dedicated
that money in the state budget,
and it remains unspent largely
or in full. That is, that is
By every definition and through
no one's fault. It, it's
something that we're just
dealing with larger amounts of
money than we've ever dealt with
as a state. That's one of the
things that we have to work to
avoid. And so, Mr. Secretary,
um, the bonding approach and
reauthorizing
How much of this is, are we
requesting being reauthorized?
Do we have that off the top?
Yeah, so, uh, Mr. Chair, it's at
least 2, is it it's well over
100 million, yeah, um, line 8.
Line 10.
Um,
Line 1718.
Um
Let's see, lane 1718 23 and 24.
OK. And if I can just add, Mr.
Chairman again and, you know, I,
we agree wholeheartedly that uh
that we've got to be very
accountable to the resources
that you provide to us, but just
pointing out of that 555
million, 220 million was
appropriated in 20,243,320.
That's totally fair point
now, Mr. Secretary, thank you
for that. Totally fair point,
uh, a very large amount and this
is.
all 4 major road projects was
appropriated, so the bulk of
that, yeah, I think it's still
really goes to show us maybe.
You know, we're, we're, we're
learning more, maybe, uh, and we
don't wanna, you know, get down
to 0 at the end of every year,
that means probably we could
have done more, but um we're
learning more. OK, thank you
all, great questions, great
conversation, Mr. Secretary,
thanks to you and your team, Mr.
Chair, again, I wanna say a very
big thank you to you, um, the
rest of this decade remain
really remarkable opportunities
for the state, and thank you for
that. OK, we'll go to
representative.
You
Thank you, Mr. Chair. I move
that we adopt House Bill 3 as
amended and direct staff to
include the bill in the
committee's substitute for House
bills, 2 and 3.
Yeah it's been moved by uh
Representative Garrett, seconded
by, uh, ranking member
Chatfield, although there are
other seconds as well. Uh, is
there any opposition to that
motion?
Seeing none that's been adopted.
Thank you all very much. Thank
you members if there's any
dinner in the back, please, uh,
DOT staff, please feel free to
grab stuff from the HFC office.
Thank you. OK, we're now down to
our final piece.
Uh, members.
Which is, uh, director Soli will
come up.
Mr. Chairman, being handed out
is an HAFC scenario for the
Rios.
Um, some of what you just heard.
These were handed out this week
Saturday at one of the work
groups as well.
The
changes from the LFC.
Uh, are highlighted for you.
There's only a handful and
they're technical in nature.
There is
One real that you, you've had a
hearing on these two, Mr.
Chairman. There's one riat that
you hadn't seen, that's on page
6, line 26, the do it at an
appropriation that was stranded,
and that one is for
cybersecurity, so that would
make that money available to go
out the door with that Mr. Mr.
Chairman, I'd be happy to answer
any questions.
OK. Uh thank you very much,
Director Sale, um, you've
directed us to page 6.
Is that right? Yes, line 26.
That's a reauthorization for
cybersecurity appropriations
that didn't come through the LFC
or the executive and we verified
that that money is stranded, it
hasn't been spent, and this
would be another tranche of
money to go out for
cybersecurity initiatives that
do it.
Great. OK.
Uh, are there any questions from
committee, so we're tracking
everything is the same, um.
From the LFC scenario.
Page 6 is an addition that was
not in the LSC scenario. Correct
that came from staff finding
that.
And this is more funding for
cybersecurity correct. Great.
OK. Any questions on that?
OK, can we have a motion then
and directorly, it's late, so
can you, uh, motion to adopt the
HAFC scenario for the
reauthorization appropriations.
OK.
Wants to make that move.
Mr. Chair, I move that we adopt
the HAFC scenario for the
reauthorization of special
appropriations, great memory.
OK, it's been moved by uh
Representative Garrett saying,
uh, and saying by Representative
Silva. Is there any opposition
to that motion?
Please show represent Pettigrew
in opposition.
OK.
We've adopted that.
You are done with structions for
today. Thank you, members. We'll
see everybody at 9:30 tomorrow
morning, uh, for a catch-up
cleanup.
Um
Yeah.
Uh,
well, I'm also in-house where
we, we have to, yeah, this, uh,
and members just because, and I
appreciate the question. The,
the biggest reason we meet early
is because um
For LFC to put the bill
together, they go through and
write the entire bill. And so
for us to sort of stick to our
uh um timeline, we need to do it
in the morning. Uh, myself and
many others. I know folks were
in committees were doing it at
9:30 so it doesn't interrupt
sort of the start in the
beginning of the committees. I
apologize. I'll certainly
apologize to other, uh,
committee chairs.
I, I can think back to my first
year on the committee when I was
presenting a bill in house tax,
and I came very late to that
vote and so it will work if, if
there are things, particularly
if you're presenting bills or
what have you, if there are
votes. We don't want you to miss
votes in other committees, just
communicate with us, but uh this
is just because they're gonna
put together a several 100 page
budget in a couple of days and
