Shares off today so my pleasure
the will to be Representative
Garrett.
And
For the.
The time to our affirmation
from.
Your comments and questions.
Anymore I don't want to cut
anybody off by doing you do
presentations this week but
thank you but also we could not
only for the goal tonight.
Mr chairman that was a special
the differences were zero is
that it's a different G. zero
just keep it down to five
minutes or so that we because
there's no losses are going into
detail.
Some of.
You know reduce the committee
for.
The lack of time will.
The double date so the first
presenter for will come up new
uses
Agencies three forty three
retiree health care of.
So you Mr chairman
HSD three forty through the
retiree health care authority is
in volume two on page ninety two
of your sheet and I'm just very
quickly going to direct your
attention to actually rather
than look at the different she
actually the agency provided a
really helpful overview on page
three of the agency.
And rather than go through the
details is in the interest of
time.
The LFC recommendation both the
LFC the executive recommendation
fully fund the agency's request
for health care benefits the
difference in this agency is in
the growth of the program
support program you can see the
LFC recommendation is is
slightly lower than the
executive recommendation for the
transfer program support the
executive actually let's talk
about that.
Chair of Mr chair members of the
committee these are
recommendations are very very
close it's almost four hundred
million dollar budget but most
of it is to pay health care
claims slight difference for in
ministration do exactly with
three new FTE while the LFC
included one U. F. T. that is
basically all the difference
here so with that I'll turn it
over to the agency.
Mr chairman members of the
committee thank you for saving
up to present a subject one
quick moment just to recognize
my staff that's sitting right
behind me I have my deputy
director Keith sweat and my
chief financial officer sherry
on.
with that you also want to think
of the analyst for the work that
they did on this in the
recommendations are greatly
appreciate everything they did
and the regulations for today I
will briefly just HSD three four
three as far as who are retired
after thirty my name is a keeper
and executive director and as
far as our agency were
established in nineteen ninety
started providing benefits to
members in January of ninety one
for over about fifteen thousand
with no free material funding
of over two much detail it's
like to as a kid so overview but
really what I want to point out
here is just kind of the growth
that we've actually seen with
our agency as that's how to
relate to part of the requested
looking at the program support
since the the time is agency
receive as I stated before we've
grown from that fifteen thousand
and over to over time we've
actually came to the point were
over sixty seven thousand
members of even looking back
just ten years looking back
about fiscal year twenty
fourteen we were a little bit
about fifty five thousand
members and once again like I
said during that time we
continue to grow we get to
provide different services to
our members as relates to
medical dental vision life we go
to different procurement
activities wondering right now
is life insurance which adds it
back to our budget as far as our
contractual and then as far as
these extra briefly point out
was our solvency we've seen
improvements as we move to a
deficit spending up to twenty
thirty two and we are past the
project itself into thirty years
back in two thousand seven we
were actually projected to
twenty fourteen.
originally discussed the study I
will say we went twenty five
percent of funded status that is
so it's going to thirty three
percent so I just kind of want
to recognize that growth there
is well moving to slide three.
That Mr Simon actually refer to.
The area that have actually
focusing in this is the state
with the program support.
During this time for program
support we have seen growth in
our membership during those ten
years unfortunately during this
time we've actually seen one
position sense twenty fourteen
to where we are today so we've
continued to grow as far as an
agency and responsibilities have
also increased of what is
required for us so that's kind
of today we're just kind of
looking at the recommendations
of one of the key aspects is
that of anti status and and and
hopes to have the DFA
recommendation for the twenty
nine FTEs to really help us
support us in our endeavors we
do know that sports programs
support this is about one
percent of our budget we look at
as far as far as a whole but I
do believe it is an important
role that it plays into this
agency in the services that we
provide to our members but also
as far as providing leadership
the opportunity to looking for
the in depth into our contracts
are a request for proposals and
make sure that we can manage
those more effectively to help
hopefully drive additional
savings this agency at all.
For
four just a brief that and we
just kind of started out just to
reflect exactly what I stated
which is that growth of the
fifty five thousand members to
refer to sixty seven you can see
what's actually to move up with
that bar graph you will see some
transition as far as colors and
that we see more members of
moved into a Medicare plan
versus our pre chair at the
density growth there and then
our voluntary benefits as well
as a topping three
during this time is that this
state without growth there was
about twenty percent growth over
this time frame in regards to
membership and about four
percent growth with our theme.
On slide by this to more
specific as far as those three
positions that we were
requesting as is looking
specifically at an I. T. network
administrator to administrative
operations manager as well as a
business operations specialist
this is really to help us with
the additional responsibilities
that we've seen as a lot more
federal laws and regulations
that have come forth US Census
agency has been in place a lot
of those being that formal Care
Act we've also seen the
consolidated appropriations act
as well as inflation reduction
act a lot of these different
federal regulations actually
requires us to do additional
reporting there's a lot more
coming out the transparency it's
asking for a lot more as far as
regards to our staff that we got
a before to make sure that we
are being compliant as we do our
pre Medicare plans and we do
work Medicare plans so we have
to follow a lot of CMS center
for Medicaid and Medicare
services.
With this initial support is a
good state before this will help
us in our endeavors of making
sure that we're doing utilizing
our time affected eight all of
the request for proposals for
reviewing contracts performance
guarantees allowing this
research we partner with local
delivery system to track program
ways that we can change care
really helping us for the
oversight of our investments
which not grow to one point one
billion dollars and also looking
at the well as an education that
we can help our members.
Of that one point one to be
directed and reflected on slide
number six as you can see about
ten years ago we were at two
hundred fifty six million we now
actually climbed up above the
one point one billion mark our
largest you know highest point
was actually March of twenty
twenty two when we actually have
one point one six five with that
as you can see to the far right
though the market has been
volatile unfortunately with that
we have not seen the growth in
our investments are in the past
now I will say we're going to
it's also with that was within
the contractual services a
program support I know ours and
it faces a little higher than
Elsie's part of that increases
really also to look at our
investments in bringing on
somebody for a full time basis
and currently we do have a high
annual review as it relates to
our assets and we do a
reallocation but now that we've
at this point the board as well
staff will be appropriate to
actually have one on a regular
contracts that we would have
immediate quarterly reporting
and we're doing our best so
that's another aspect that we
would be looking in that
regards.
finally moving on to page seven
will be clear he was mentioned
as far as the solvency as I
mentioned that we are going to
be something different about
twenty thirty two as far as we
start seeing deficit spending
when I refer to deficit spending
that's actually what our
expenses start to exceed our
revenue so that's something that
we want to push off as it
relates to investments and that
we don't want to start tapping
into that money will be start
tapping into what we're gonna
start losing our returns and
it's going to have a negative
effect to our program so that's
one of the concerns that we want
to make sure that we continue to
manage and really try and push
off as long as possible before
we actually start utilizing.
This is a completely part of
this today but I would be remiss
just oxygen as I did state part
of the concern that we have for
funding is coming forth as far
Senate bill one ninety three as
well as a duplicate bill for
house bill one fifty in rate is
looking to at our payroll
contributions ordinance could
not enhanced both particularly
pronounced members you would see
a change in payroll
contributions from one percent
to one point one seven percent
for some is about self and the
employer would move from two
percent to two point three three
percent it does also show the
impact of the bill making about
forty thousand for you would see
that as far as an annual basis
would be sixty eight dollars and
two sixty two by weekly for the
employee and employer would be
one thirty two per year with
about five oh we provide weekly
once again as far as that impact
as far as the revenue generated
out this agency and our and go
towards our revenue would be
about twenty seven point two
million of recurring revenue but
we know that we could do to help
us to further extend our
solvency it would also help us
toward our goal of reaching a
fifty percent of funded status
and help us to prevent and
hopefully stave off of
individualized any of our
investments until further down
the road when it may be required
in addition one of the
consideration that vehicle for
that I know it's not part of the
recommendations of the budget
was just a one time
appropriation of twenty six
million
that would you know for your
consideration of the time as a
program comes with that I I will
wrap it up I hope that was brief
and to the point of this
committee is a no you have many
more after it but I do stand for
any questions they do ask for
recommendation of the Department
finance ministrations budget.
Thank you for that
Representative Allison.
Thank you Mr thanks to a very
calm if you ever decide to leave
this of.
I think you would make a good
option is.
Thank you for the presentation
thanks for being correct that
information in your packet is
fascinating could you talk to me
a little bit more about free of
Medicare.
A focus and what's being done to
sort of fix that disparity in
subsidy between the younger and
the older beneficiaries sure so
I I know Mr chair of
Representative Dixon this is an
open question is been brought
before it is something that we
continue to review there really
is some big distinctions between
our pre Medicare population of
Medicare population what aspect
is for Medicare population they
do have to enroll in Medicare
part a and B. us when they're
rolling in Medicare part a and
B. they're actually picking up
eighty percent of that cost so
what are chair side we are
actually picking up twenty
percent so with that there is a
little difference in the in the
funding status because the parts
of our our that is the ratio of
the benefit we're trying to
apply to all during that time
there chair we've also looked at
our pre Medicare side we are
actually self insured one
hundred percent those are also
the cost that we're passing on
to our members and while we are
getting contributions from their
payroll we're still actually
charging and premiums and and I
will say when you look at the
premiums and we compare we look
at studies as far as you know we
look at the the health insurance
exchange were comparing us to
you know other agencies that are
as far as act you know our
premiums are to be higher
retirees you know we're trying
to public at some of those costs
that they have a fixed income
and real initiatives that
benefit as it relates to the
chair to try to keep equitable
up right now it is actually
being subsidizes sixty four
percent as what we have for the
retiree when they're pre
Medicare it's probably you know
lower than many of our act if
you look at certain entities
actually happy eighty percent
subsidy even as well as I know
the city when I used to work
there they're ready percent
across the board we actually
don't tear it based on any of
the incomes of all we have to
find a flat subsidy as regards
to all of our members providing
the same benefit regardless of
what they were you know
contribute during their payroll
that one percent they were
contribute to this agency to
really just like I said we try
to fund some act really between
that also make sure that we're
meeting our.
mission in both providing you
a comprehensive budget also
trying to make them affordable
you notice every time we do ship
this is putting the burden on
our members we have actually
decreased as part of our
strategic goals in the past
we've actually lower those
subsidies that's where we're at
today sixty four we lower the
spouse to thirty six and we
actually did away with the
dependence of the rate is not
see what we did not find any
subsidy to those dependence.
Health thank you Mr chair.
Any other questions.
Of.
One question.
Slide ten.
An additional four moves to help
farmers.
My question is.
All of the.
Four Mr chair I apologize I
don't have a slight tended my
prison Tatian.
I would also like enough but I
also like I.
The pharmacy.
All right.
really struggling with
medication for diabetes.
How's that going to affect your
budget
The medicine is expensive.
Mr chair as relates to insulin
there's actually been a lot of
changes are actually coming
forward we do know that there's
some caps that have been
presented through the inflation
reduction act that we're
actually gonna see coming up
where they're actually cap
insulin on the Medicare side we
are actually seeing some of
those caps in relation to
vaccines so this is additional
cost that that we know may be
passed on to us it is a little
bit harder still to determine
exactly what made the federal
government's gonna be kicking in
towards that we know that's
gonna take place in twenty
twenty four but that is going to
provide some relief to those
members and knowing that they're
gonna have some of those caps I
will also send a pre Medicare
side as well as in a chair we do
have a pharmacy benefits but we
do actually with our benefit
have different minimums and
maximums as it relates to their
co pays that they would fall
into so we provide additional
protection through those as far
as not being a co insurance
percentage or anything like that
we do of those men maximum kind
of help provides a troll with
that.
Thank you for that the I will
prescription request committee
for the question.
Mr Chairman I move that we adopt
the LFC of budget recommendation
the first second or first of all
leisure of your offer second
from Representative Allison
the legislative if there
the committee should for all of
C. will go ahead legislators.
If there is an issue that we
need to address.
Committee.
Thank you thank you.
Are you there any opposition.
All the
people.
Will we see two fifty two
educational retirement board.
so Mister chairman our next
agency is the educational
retirement board not just.
Read the direct your attention
to page one of the LFC packet in
the column on the far right you
see that there are no
differences between the the LFC
and executive recommendation in
terms of budget there is
language included in the LFC
recommendation which is with the
lower there are.
So with that I will unless Simon
has any comments Mr chair no
comments turn it over to
director level.
What is your good afternoon
Mister chairman and members of
the committee my name is that
the second director of the
education department for I'd
like to start out thanking both
of the Simons Mr Miller here for
their support over the years
because I've had the good
fortune privilege marking them
with that for a number of years
I also like to take the
opportunity to introduce a
couple of our key staff members
my deputy director of the St
Lawrence this bill are long time
previously deputy director then
acting director and our
assistant director and chief
financial officer Mr
extravagance interview director
communications receivers.
So with that instead of going
over the presentation because I
know there's ten slides and you
guys can obviously read this
information for yourself or just
hit a couple of key highlights
of the first president the first
page The presentation to listing
the nine member board of
directors to answer to our what
we consider to be a non
executive executive agency
called we have representation
from the governor's office and
from the two appointees we also
have a very senators represent
different key stakeholder groups
to participate in the education
retirement system of the second
page includes a couple of.
Items with regard to our couple
of key agency highlights and
I'll just know if you one of
which is that we put out more
than one point three million
dollars able to the retirees of
fifty three thousand plus
retirees receive benefit from
this organization we derive
about eight hundred fifty
million dollars in employment
our contributions that go to a
state that benefits of the to
the quick math we have a billion
dollars comes from our
investments I'm happy to report
to you the last year are stellar
and investment team was able to
generate about one percent
positive return on investment
Fund previous years were the hit
almost twenty nine percent
return
right now the organization is
about sixty three and a half
percent funded as reported to us
as the end of June of twenty
twenty two we measure that on an
annual basis as a result of the
legislation that was passed last
year in Senate bill thirty six
in previous Senate bill thirty
two thirty six and forty two
there's been an increase in
employer contributions to the
program which has us on a path
to be fully funded within the
next twenty nine years and I
think that outside of that I
would just wrap up my senior we
have two pieces of legislation
are moving through the system
right now the first of which is
Senate bill twenty seconds house
bill one eighty nine year old
duplicates introduced by Senator
Kernan and the other by
Representative brown they do
three key things and I'll start
with the easy one first one of
which is aligns the minimum age
distribution requirements from
seventy to have to do what the
federal law requires which is
currently seventy three will
eventually go to seventy eight
seventy five so that it aligns
that section of the bill it also
adds a southeast college to the
list of eligible groups they are
they can participate in the
alternative retirement plan
which is basically the defined
contribution.
Lastly it provided an exception
to the procurement code
associated with our pension
administration system earlier in
the US Senate Education
Committee today there's been
some identification of some
conflict with that requirement
so it is likely that if if the
we have the good fortune
presenting this information to
you before this Committee or
before it was over from the
Senate will likely see that
amended out of the bill up with
that Mr chairman and members the
committee and with the class
separate questions.
Can you question the members.
What.
Yes Mr chairman and Mr Philip I
just want to thank your
Stephanie Stiller job during the
COVID I retired this summer
after teaching comment and
everything was done remotely
fabulous taxes thank you for
this thank you.
Mr Chairman.
The current page twenty two was.
This is the best performance.
Your update Mr chair.
Mr Jackson Mister Jackson.
There.
Every period of their homes
apartments is outstanding and I
think we should be aware of that
and the other the only at the
state.
Would you should know that.
That was the purpose of capital
consists.
No just care RigCount.
This.
And the folks from his dad and
his heritage.
Thank.
I thank you Mr ivory the new new
question committee.
The inequitable have questions
about Mr chairman I move that we
adopt the LFC LFC recommended
budget.
chairman of seconded by
Representative Allison the
objections do not.
Thank you Mr chairman members of
the state.
To to support the mission of the
college.
There.
Has.
Whether you that.
Mr chair members of the
committee this is for HSD three
six one the department of
information technology you guys
are following along and you're
going to this is on page one
sixty eight on page one sixteen
and also of a couple of of
sections and volume one that you
all might want to have your
attention drawn to copy just
seventy four in volume one has
the some synopsis on on the
policy issues regarding
information technology and then
in regards to of the agency I
projects you can also find the
report cards in volume one on
page one sixty one and those
page numbers at the top of your
sheet as well.
will go head to be briefed Mr
chair will want to start with
the HSD overall but mainly the
only difference between the LFC
the executive recommendation
it's four million dollars in
general fund revenue the LFC is
higher by four million dollars
because the LFC of fully
recommends the agency requests
for cyber security so the LFC
recommendation provides five
million dollars over the FY
twenty three budget for cyber
security where the executive
recommendation of only provides
one million dollars over FY
twenty three I do want to just
note that both recommendations
support the agency's request for
person and I'll have a few is B.
briefly on broadband but one
other difference Mr chair in
regards to the cyber security
funding LFC recommended language
that makes four point seven
million of that five million
dollars contingent on the HSD
developing rates to support
those cyber security services in
FY twenty five and since the
executive provides a lower
amount of the did not include
that language hello go head and
head over to just never managed
to speak on the office of
broadband which is going to be
on page eighty eight going quick
here on page eight of your
packet Mr chair
Senator chair members of the
committee moving on to pick up
fees that eight nine office of
broadband access and expansion.
For the revenue for both
recommendations support the
agency requests for general fund
revenues in the office of
broadband access expansion
providing one point three
million to fund additional
staff.
In the base both recommendations
support agency requests for
expenditures in all categories
recommendation provides five
hundred thousand dollar increase
over fiscal year twenty three
for additional FTE bring program
FTEs total.
Contractual services another
cross amended flat fiscal twenty
three there was so languages
Jessica mentioned and
performance and also come to
consensus on all fronts.
to briefly now back to the cyber
security increase that was
recommended at five million for
an additional four million by
LFC the executive did recommend
that four million dollar
differences a special
nonrecurring requests for the
agency and with that I would
like to pass this off to
secretary member of NVA briefly
I apologize if I may speak
briefly to the agency special
appropriations I just think this
would said the agency up for
their presentation on page nine
of your LFC packet so that
someone with the orange sheet on
page nine you can see a couple
of differences between of the
agency special appropriations
subcommittee of Mr chair I just
want to point out that for the
agency's recommendations for
broadband again this is
nonrecurring appropriations
which is for the committees
information the executive online
to provide full funding a
hundred forty six point one
million dollars for broadband of
this includes things like
federal matching funds workforce
development where is the
legislative recommendation
provides twenty five thousand in
I'm sorry twenty five million in
general fund revenues but then
in line three you can also see
that the legislative
recommendation also supports
three appropriating twenty five
million from the connect New
Mexico fund this is a fund that
has a balance of about just
under a hundred million dollars
from twenty twenty one that
funding is supposed to be used
for grants however the agency
has been undergoing rulemaking
and so it's been delayed and
being spent just from the
existing appropriations so we
propose and the LESC
recommendation are you for
reading some of the funding to
open it up for federal match and
then just briefly in terms of
cyber security of the LFC is no
provides five million in the
operating budget but we also
provides three million dollars
for higher education cyber
security two and a half million
for public education cyber
security and ten million dollars
to do it
As nonrecurring cybersecurity
three million of that Mr chair
is supposed to address incident
response at the regulation of
licensing department they had a
cyber security incident of late
last year and so the HSD rather
than funding at oral do we
provided funding to the
Department of I. T. on to help
coordinate that response where
the executive of funds RLD's
incident response last four I'm
so that's just one other
difference Mr chair in terms of
nonrecurring funding I will go
ahead and now hands over to the
agency we have secretary then to
us is Kelley Slagle for the
office of broadband and Rogers
and then down who is the chief
information security officer.
Thank you Mr chair and
This.
Since then.
Mr chair I'd like to introduce
first only option to work to
Schlegel and R. C. so slide show
some Sen often are sort of with
three of our teens who had some
for HSD talk very very was are a
legal counsel or general counsel
and chilled thank please with us
is for us
sure sure he'll do is our acting
CFO and unable to be with us
today is refresh this to
related the bulk of this
presentation for some very much
appreciated.
In the interest of time are are
will go through quickly and.
I was going to highlight the
differences contested on that
quite well so we'll just on page
three or you know some of our
strategic goals and on page four
are the priorities that I've the
very public to
committees of when I present and
to the entire do it staff of
broadband is represented here
cybersecurity is represented
here and I am personally saw
working on several efforts that
have to do with making do it's
more customer centric
organization on page five you
can see a.
I chart of the different P.
codes that we have and how much
money is in there as you can see
the bulk of it is enterprise
services most of the services
that we provide including public
safety radio telecommunications
for the executive branch of
hosting and cloud services for
other agencies we charge back
for those so the the bulk of our
revenue that you'll see on the
actually won't cedars seed in
your
factions click below for revenue
does come from and price
Services and we charge by the
hour.
As just mentioned on page six
the major difference is four
million dollars and even that
four million dollars the
differences one is recurring
with a contingency that we steps
rate structure and the other is
one time so that's the
difference you'll you'll see
there.
What can I say quickly about
page seven I think I just said.
Of.
To say that you know that's
where you'll see the four
million dollars because that.
The service areas for last year
setting standards to
secure Russian wanted to speak
to Georgene
thank you chair and members of
the committee so we requested
right now I'll keep it simple
right now we have bills to pay
that can get close to ten point
six million dollars that someone
will expense that is one of the
reasons we are asking for about
ten million dollars to continue
to pay for the service that that
be able to.
Thank
and then there's also this
notion out there is a lot of
federal money coming into cyber
security efforts let me be very
clear that answers it off.
to be applied.
For the funding and the state of
New Mexico gets about one point
seven point eight million
dollars at the most and for
years what a forty year period
so and then listen to this
legislative establishment gets
to keep only twenty percent of
that I program so far that said
that we mining everything else
needs to go to the because of
his and I that are straight
meeting the locals the counties
and municipalities the homeland
Act the state does not get it so
the very notion of the you know
some of this cyber money is
coming from the feds.
Is a nonstarter Division but
that is no money coming to do it
our office eighty seven part how
we apply yes have you done all
of due diligence yes are we
working with homeland security
that says yes and we have the
like to provide a means of the
services so we have done
everything and everything
possible so that motion should
be off the table there is no
federal money coming for us for
four years yes are you all
thirty million dollars in range
to two point seven million
dollars every year for the next
four years and all of what we
need to do is unbelievable it's
worse than Harding cats because
we don't have statutory
authority over local
governments.
What I'm in the book because I
touched it
That said I need to pay ten
percent I'm to get that money as
part of the state match.
And I need to get them in
writing that they would comply
with me do you think that's
going to happen impossible
that's going to give anything in
writing saying that a couple of.
So that's my consideration so
thank you thank you know what
the.
Kelly should speak to page line.
Thank you Mr talent also.
Thanks to okay so we have thank
operating budget.
Point five people
six hundred thousand dollars
recently to get all of the work
we need to get done to apply for
federal funds intended ramming
funds that we can grow.
So we've asked for the five
point five more to get to eleven
both LFC and exec of three
without a long we have a lot of
deadlines coming up this year
for the federal funding through
the NCAA and we have a lot of
grant making video we have a lot
of tribal and community
engagement up to do a lot of
that's also required at the
federal level so we're asking
for five hundred thousand.
Which covers an additional I I.
Would I would put my office at
eleven.
Thank you.
Are you aware of that these two
are very close.
The job is to increase our
credit exposure by bringing
broadband out to the state his
job was to make sure that this
managed properly and so were
they surprised been locked and
secure.
All stupid show ten eleven
Jessica.
List goes there are differences
in the special appropriations
appropriation the
hundred forty six million that
is for match funds for that
I'm like cybersecurity.
They are the one money on the
table could be as much as seven
hundred thousand dollars to
bring much needed I'm sorry
seven hundred million dollars to
all.
What chief communities that have
been living without broadband
and frankly aren't in the twenty
first century yeah.
Of the questions.
Thank you presentation a
question from committee.
Mr certifications on four
million building in the budget
versus being a special
appropriation.
Mr chair up I can kind of speak
to that so are you just of us
about the rationale of for the
different approaches yes just
briefly yeah Mr chair of
Representative so the
legislative finance committee
during the interim had a working
group that equipment to
establish basically to determine
what the need was for recurring
cyber security funding and so
that's why the legislative
recommendation does provide more
funding in the recurring budget
the reason why this stuff
established a contingency is
simply because you know the HSD
is an enterprise agency they do
have overhead costs that need to
be covered if so we would we
would recommend that the agency
develop right so that they can
provide the services to state
agencies and be able to recoup
some of that cost in regards to
the executive I can have Cecilia
speak to the rationale thank you
Mr chair and vice chair in
regards to the executive
recommending it as a
nonrecurring request is a
provide sufficient time for the
agency to get that money before
the service fiscal year to get a
head start and and not be so
fresh to meet that deadline of
July first to get those rates
there are certain times of year
with the right committee does
convene to get those numbers and
with that it allows the
flexibility that funding is a
little bit less than four
million and they want to
continue with every valuation
assessment of the working on
this year next year they can
request reauthorization tech
back into that four million
dollars without having to maybe
four million dollars in
referring as this but with that
I hope that answers your
question thank you.
In New Mexico Representative.
Of thank you for your addressing
this chart respond to that as
well so that
I I do understand that there is
a need for creating that right
structure Fund I don't think we
are there yet so it is going to
take some time I'm Michael funds
would be this technology is
changing because of the bad guys
in the digital world is not the
same as what it was yesterday is
today I did changes every day so
yeah right structure in
definitive structure to go after
that is not the most conducive
way that is one of the reasons
from the get go I've been asking
for regarding general fund
revenue and now that we know
there's no federal funds coming
in.
This would be more conducive
because we have certified
agencies including boards and
commissions and we have twenty
four thousand employees.
And in some shape or form that
connecting to the network and
those networks connect to other
agencies including allergies and
walked off stage yeah the
legislature and be sent to a lot
of information including how the
administrative office of so that
is going to be all over the
place so you do this would be a
good.
How does the function that can
be better addressed through
general fund.
I can look at you know just
reading these in a race
replacement fund type of funding
so that the constant getting
funding it stopped.
This.
The.
Okay.
Thank you.
The Representative Dixon I'm I'm
thank you Mr chair I know we're
going to go more into specials
and supplementals later on but I
was hoping that we could talk a
little bit more about them and I
apologize if some of this isn't
covered and I'm advocating for
we have but.
Good first talk about
If you just bring me up to speed
on where you are with spending
the funds that were allocated
last fiscal year you know in the
last year that would be great.
Mr Chairman representative on it
in a specific area.
Well.
Sure so one of the things that
Right what's on the ground so
that is what we are getting from
that so what that doesn't mean
we can stop the assessment of
the Norwegian in those open and
distortion.
So we need to continue to do
that while this is happening so
that is what that money's going
so to bring some consistency
using the same level of metrics
are not the hundred and eighty
nine school district is what we
are trying to because if I
engage one person to do this job
one school and a different
person doing it and that is in
school I get to the for missiles
and it's hard for me to come
back on press focus on that we
need to focus the energy.
Mr chair to find further clarity
on your question so and I
apologize this was not included
in your packet but we'll see has
looked at spending of the cyber
street appropriations for
example ATD received one point
seven billion dollars last year
it from at the time that I
created this page was in
December on none of that has
been expended and then in terms
of the PED appropriation they
receive one point five million
for vulnerability management in
FY twenty two of Representative.
Hundred fifty thousand if that
was expended and so I just want
to speak to the you know we we
saw a request from a higher
education for eight million
dollars to establish this
operation center that's
something that the department
has been working on a very very
hard over the past couple of
years with their phone funding
and so what we did is instead of
funding the full eight million
dollars at the GDC we instead
funded up three million dollars
at the department of I. T. for
use to coordinate with the
higher education department
particularly for the reason that
they haven't spend their
existing appropriations and we
want to make sure that those
efforts are being coordinated up
to security standards that the
department was.
Thank you Mr chair I would like
to hear since we're talking
probability management I would
like to point out that over the
past year we've been able to
bring every single executive
branch of agency within the
state of New Mexico on to a
common.
Our ability management system I
can now look at.
The cyber security posture of
the entire state.
Control down to it and say the
state agencies to work here that
that agency needs to take care
of this for we weren't able to
do that for and now we're you
know through this standard
edition we have a common
platform instead of one agency
we're do it this way we'll do
that we will do the other way.
I could add them together it
would be you know.
Oranges and bananas one hundred
measure apples and so why.
Providing this fund to a
central.
Lysed cyber security office I
think benefits the state as a
whole.
Thank you Mr chairman I really
appreciate the elaboration and I
love hearing sort of that the
common vulnerability management
system and bring things together
because you know sometimes it
does seem like we run things
differently here and there and
you know maybe our respective so
thank you thank you Mr chair the
newer version Committee thank
god the smaller portion is to
concern.
Retrieval about up to quite a
few times you know there's some
money too much money involved in
in what we're doing but yet.
Rural communities are being from
the back burner.
Look at that to see how we can
better we talked about yesterday
briefly do you want me to
committee aware that no there's
issues out there.
Will be missed out on broadband
wires and everyone.
That comment and work with you
on this one thing thank you
Secretary the commotion Mr
Chairman I move that we adopt
the executive budget
recommendations.
The.
Any opposition.
Of will public first published
second question Representative
Allison we have one opposition
of canola.
Mr.
Okay going.
so real quick once again this
doesn't go to the merits of the
lack of the merits of your total
today and the budgets that
offers and this goes for those
who may be in here today I
against your I guess budget is
being presented has more to do
with the fact that.
In the last four years our
budget has grown from about
split over six billion dollars
to a little over nine billion
dollars year over year the
current spending and if we
especially with that the
governor's.
Budget overall budget we will be
pushing up against eleven
million dollar budget so this is
more of a concern I general
concern overall that it's
unsustainable I think it's a lot
harder on all the agencies if
we're put in a position one we
have to start cutting in a
sweeping after you've gotten
used to donor so once again this
has nothing to do with the
merits or lack there of.
Postal or the pledge to the
presented just that I see a huge
problem coming and I'm I'm
really I don't I have I've been
here long enough.
When we were sweeping unspent
monies from schools and.
It's awful and so I I just am
concerned I know we have money
right now I would really like to
see a spend one time dollars
rather than recurring dollars we
have this kind of money thank
you Mr thank you for the.
Just on that point we really
need to watch what we're doing
with the money fuel state has a
lot of money in it right now but
continue on the factor for you.
You know it's years and twelve
sixteen hours of the day her
player a lot of people and you
know it's concerning so we just
want to caution us all.
Mr chair representative thank
you I I certainly understand
your position it's a big debate
we do have a large need and we
are spending all our money I
think that we have to revert
fifty seven dollars.
Not not fifty seven you know
fifty seven dollars.
Wells there's.
We're not meeting the needs and
There's a lot more we can do
everything we can do it
effectively with taxpayer
dollars and we appreciate.
So if I may add to
Peters from and chair and
members of the committee
I'm not going to do here offer
weight solutions on how what
there are savings would be but
here are a few things to
consider.
agencies that has a tendency to
go to the club.
Increases then operating.
I do budget so you can take a
look at that
cost of cyber has gone up
significantly.
What used to be hundred dollars
to ensure this device is now six
hundred dollars HM.
Nobody wants to underwrite a
cyber security insurance.
That is one of the reasons we
have trying to bring some
consistency process right and
that's that all this effort is
going once we do that then you
can lock the doors and windows
that we can check them on a
regular basis we can minimize
that cost as.
The usual heavy lift is done.
But it's going to take a few
years before I get there until
the end the news should
consistency compliance and I'm
making sure the regularly out of
them to make sure that you know
they are following the right
side right.
Then this because if I go on
military out depending on what
other future threats are we
dealing the cost of privacy is
gonna it's four point six
million dollars but incident so
if we can invest and minimize
our exposure to an incident our.
Begin with emergency incident
which can cost you a problem.
So the options are not looking
available to us no matter which
way we look at but consistency
standardization will give you
the cost of being that you are
looking for Representative and I
was with tax and revenue we have
to report it to grow up to six
digits after the decimal to see
if we can scrape some dollars.
I know twenty six thank you.
A few more questions about.
You'll control for the
recommendation of all executive
owner foremost subcommittee
because much of a difference
from one to the other four
million dollar difference
moral appoint a subcommittee we
could focus to see what's
happening with the you know the
little differences one thing
before Miller.
More a point of renewed here.
With
this you can create a thank.
For but for the New York for
Committee.
Thank you for visiting thank you
thank you sure thank you.
What.
To
The HSD three six six public
employee retirement age.
Together of the staff.
So I can get it.
So good afternoon again Mr
chairman and just some of the in
your analyst for the public
employees retirement association
and again with me at the table
Mr Simon Miller from the
department of finance and
administration and Mr Richter
here who is the director of the
public employees retirement
association so just very briefly
Mister chairman I will run over
the differences between the LESC
in the second of budget
recommendations there are are
several that are that are worth
mentioning here so the HSD is
primarily funded by.
Investment earnings on the funds
that they hold in trust
there is a very small
transfer from the general fund
that recognizes the agency's
role as sticks social security
administrator there's a there's
a difference between the LFC and
executive recommendation on that
the LFC recommendation holds the
general fund transfer flat with
the FY
The three operating budget
noting that
the bulk of this general fund
transfers for personal services
employee benefits and if you all
include as you typically do a
compensation packages section
general appropriation act it
will be an increase to that
transfer because of that section
eight appropriation so the LFC
recommendation holds that flat.
On this a budget.
moving down a little more to the
the personal services employee
benefits category there's just a
very small difference between
LFC and exec in total but we get
there a little bit differently
the executive recommendation
includes one additional FTE that
the LFC recommendation does not
but the LFC recommendation make
that adjustment to the agency's
base budget in a in a larger
amount in the personal services
employee benefits category that
the executive so there's about
thirty five thousand dollar
difference in four person at the
agency the big difference
overall Mr chairman you'll see
is in the contracts aligned with
theirs one point seven million
dollar difference the LFC
recommendation is lower and the
reason the LFC recommendation
hold that flag is largely due to
the agency the HSD contracts are
largely for investment
management fees and
so those very quite a bit based
on market conditions and and Mr
chairman talk a little bit about
why those very I would note that
this committee has typically
included budget adjustment
language in the GA to allow the
agency to bring in additional
investment management budget is
not just management fees if
there's a need for that so for
those reasons the LFC
Representative budget
recommendations not to an
increase in the contractual
services line and with that I
will turn over Mr Miller for if
you have any comments.
Mr chair members of the
committee Joe we covered most of
the differences here that the
differences just in contracts
for investment management fees
this is probably gross
oversimplification but basically
the better their investments to
the more they pay an investment
fees
so if yeah if it's a bad here
that it's probably spend less
than the budgeted amount and
then if it's a good year
they usually have that budget
adjustment language that Joey
was talking about where they can
increase their budget for
investment management fees
because a good performance so
with that I will turn it over to
director Trujillo thank you.
Thank you for the thank you Mr
chairman members great with P.
R. eight Google staff members
with me at Michael of shuffle
four chief investment officer as
well as Anna Williams our deputy
director I want to thank Joe we
and sign in for the
recommendations we're very happy
with both of so also briefly try
to save you some time just
quickly looking at where we
stood at the end of FY twenty
two of the fund was at sixteen
point six billion dollars we
have forty just under forty
seven thousand active members
paying into para and we're
supporting forty four thousand
one hundred and fifteen retired
fees I just want to point out
those those numbers are getting
closer right now it's about
twenty eight hundred of person
different so I don't expect this
fiscal year but probably next
fiscal year retirees will exceed
our active membership and we
expect that to happen probably
through the end of this decade
about twenty thirty those lines
crossing and it's not unique to
where it's it's something that's
happened the prosecution of a
graphically are boomers are are
a L. P. C. those are working so
it's just something nothing to
worry about we've taken those
numbers into our kids long term
projections but it's something
we will reminded committee on
something that we we watch very
The end employer contributions
so again similarly here be about
half of that amount comes from
the investment fund funded ratio
right now since the seventy
percent in our administration
period how long it's going to
take us to pay off our unfunded
liability set at fifty nine
years.
We'll talk too much about the
budget deal just a ring of one
one issue or one request and
that's a expansion request.
Western expansion in our
contribution accounting units
that's the group is currently
for people that work with those
three hundred thirty five
employers to make sure what
they're reporting to us as far
as wages are correct and of
people members are getting the
services that they're entitled
to we've done quite a bit of
work in that area will having a
lot of elevations to stop bad
data come from coming into our
system if it's successful one of
the issues is it adds complexity
we've got to work with the
employers more one.
but also we've run into an issue
where we've had a there's been a
number of lawsuits out there
with regards to pay equity
issues between employees and
their employer there is not
normally involved in those
investigations but when there is
a Madam para has to go back to
work with the lawyer and the
employees to manually adjust
their accounts to to take into
account those wages persistent
wasn't built to do that it's
been a it's been a very it's a
manual process you will probably
recall the yes the lawsuit
between the state and just me
earlier this decade I was about
nine thousand accounts that we
have to manually adjust the City
of Albuquerque I believe just
settle the pay equity dispute
that's four hundred of members
that we try to manually adjust
and we've had some issues with
the AG's office was a bad issues
let's say we're not part of that
we've got as many work and an
additional FTE will help with
that.
Briefly just to touch on where
raft for Senate bill seventy two
many of you will remember this
is a pension reform bill done in
twenty twenty we are in the
third year of that
implementation of reef we
replace our cost of living
adjustment formula of positive
for three years and sent our
retirees a two percent lump sum
payment to July we sent out the
final game into this July and
we're moving into a profit
shekel of.
What the special I was last
there to check removing it or
profits your goal of this coming
July but it also increase the
employee and employer
contributions of that the state
as well as municipalities rate
we are in the third year of the
state increase and the first
year of the bonus pool increase
I'm gonna spell it for the two
year deferral period to prepare
their budgets for this increase.
That quickly of our thirteenth
check but we did receive a fifty
five million dollars
appropriation from the state to
fund those thirteen subjects we
actually came out about forty
thousand dollars and on that so
so we get it right on the head
the final of thirteenth
checkpoint to.
Just under twenty nine thousand
members at a cost of twenty
million dollars we also small
car about four.
Retirees are seventy five or
older with disability retirees
that are less than twenty five
thousand or any retiree that
earns twenty five thousand
dollars or less and work at
twenty five year career they get
if they got a car up to get a
two and a half percent full of
of commonality for the rest of
their lives.
The other additional members of
this ask your increasing
contributions was about thirty
two million dollars for current
that's going to continue the
next of three fiscal years so
very happy and hopeful to get
those fully in place.
And then just a matter of Mr
chair on our investment
performance is well it's kind of
the the economic impact of our
our dollars go toward retirees
within the state of New Mexico
of the beyond that Mr Chairman
home happy to answer questions.
Thank you for the vision which.
What I just wanted to
Commend you for you know sort of
steering the investments you
know
you guys did well this year and
so I just want.
The second and gentleman
speciation.
Representative well thank you Mr
chairman.
Just a real quick I know that
state investment council has
certain parameters investing
how how is your investing
handled and is that is that
farmed out Representative house
how how is the best sure.
Mr Chairman Representative
Montoya if I don't answer
questions come up in that a
little bit more we've got a
fourteen member of investment
staff
all of our investments are
outsourced our internals of
group does the diligence on
money managers on investment
companies on asset allocation
what we're going to we are us.
Part of the prudent investor
activity was passed in two
thousand eight that kind of
dictates what our investment
authority is but we we do not do
any investments in house it is
although source.
Thank you Mr chairman.
Director
The because of that even though
we have a.
And deficit.
just fifty nine years into to
catch up.
we change that Anderston that if
if the number of folks would
retire.
That sounds somewhat change that
figures that is positive or
negative how does that work Mr
Chairman representative Montoya
of the fifty nine years is
actually proving when we have a
Senate bill seventy two and
twenty twenty we have a funding
period there was evidence of
some of the reforms that we are
going to take years to to fully
implement you know we brought
two hundred six years the year
it was passed seventy two years
the year before fifty nine years
this year so we are making up
we're making progress it is a
twenty five year outlook right
now with a return last year
we're still kind of a little bit
outside that twenty five year
period but hopeful with the
reforms we may as long as they
are fully implemented even even
with the.
Change we're going to be paying
more people that are paid again
we're we should be able to
weather that storm that's
something we look at daily will
bring back to the station to
communicate of a we are on the
right track thank you Mr
chairman.
Introducing a bill that.
Will ask for us to pull one time
dollars that we do have
currently to bolster the fund.
I also just so you know my
background is
Nineteen years as a union member
with coal mine.
Five years as a union steward
and also negotiator and.
Hi there when we transition from
a.
Defined benefit plans to
defined.
Defined contribution plan so I
I've been through that those
tough decisions and so the bill
that I have and I I believe I'm
not sure if you guys have got
back whether or not in our men
from.
For the airport but I am asking
a similar thing that I ask my
own you members which is to.
Maybe have a higher contribution
so that we can fully fund but
once again I do believe the
state needs to do its part in.
In a long time.
Flexible orders
we need to pay our bills and I
think this is a this this budget
this year is a perfect
opportunity to
be voting against your budget
today.
But I am hoping that we can work
on that the solvency of the fund
thank you Mr.
You
Leisure.
Mr chair I move that we adopt
the LFC foundation.
Thank you well first property
second brothers also any
opposition.
Representative opposition.
with that being said the you
have the policy recommendations
and you know I there is a big
difference on one to another
like six hundred thousand I
think.
No we can all federal remember
on your own.
Miss Mister chairman I believe
there is a one point six million
dollar difference right.
Of.
You know this enough that it's
still if you love to work on
these projects for these funds I
mean the phone so.
Just keep that in mind and
you'll see what I have to thank
the presenters.
Thank you for us.
Of the year to sign.
Thanks for both sides and that's
the problem in a.
Yeah.
Yes I was.
I
want to this report in.
The mission.
This this this.
The.
All of their investment.
In that.
Disparity being no.
Okay so there was like eight or.
And just like those the.
There are you're being retired
I see invests money on behalf of
many agents I said as far as in
the case of.
This is just for okay.
Thank you well the treasury.
The treasurer liquidity our
checking account.
The others are all term savings.
I.
Whether the.
Thank you Mr chair members of
the committee again just because
it's been LFC analyst enjoying
with the equipment is the
executive analyst New Jersey
Pharisees active director of the
state ethics commission this is
a pretty brief but your volume
two documents are on page one
forty four one forty five but
you know really quick run down
the executive is over the LFC by
thirty nine point five thousand
this is primarily because the
executive recommends an
expansion for financial
specialist FTE what's the LFC
recommendation does not include
as an F. T. expansion however
the LFC recommendation does
provide an additional twenty
five thousand dollars above the
request in the contractual
services category and this is so
that the agency can up have
additional contract financing
for services so rather than
providing an additional FTE as
you'll see the executive
provides nine FTE on the LFC
does not approve the additional
antibody test provides
additional contractual support
and so I will go ahead and
quickly handed over to Diego for
any additional comments on the
expansion and performance
measures thank you.
Mr chair members of the
subcommittee from the executive
perspective the difference is
fairly close but the potential
impact of that difference is
rather and answered
threaten the the commission's
independent autonomy within
their own staff if you look at a
list of similarly sized budgets.
Almost all of those agencies
have eight FTE the ethics
commission currently does but
also almost all of those.
agencies point there I courts
the DA's office of African
American affairs they all have
much larger agencies that that
can assist them and are legally
directed to us which is
different from the ethics
commission because they are
independent
thank you.
Affairs.
Mr chair members
could be here today first I'll
just remind you what we do the
ethics commission.
Has interpreted that you could
Tory investigatory and
enforcement powers for our
state disclosure laws our
state's government conduct act
our state's procurement code our
state's anti donation clause and
recently we also handle
complaints against notaries
public under the revised the
form of on a tour lacks it's a
wide array of statutes is an
interesting set of duties.
It's a new agency still this is
its fourth year
in the twenty nineteen to
appropriations act the initial
preparation was five hundred
thousand dollars so we've been
growing from that point of up to
this point every year I come in
with that with a very much
request we are small agency this
this is a request for a budget
less than a million and a half
dollars is surrounding area
compared to some of the other
other appropriation should
consider.
we have seven employees five of
them are turns to non internet
stuff we've gotten to the point
where I realized that we have to
have non attorney staff
additional monetary staff in
order to actually run a state
agency we have one person who
came over with me from DFA that
does all of the state to work
she's our CFO channels offer HR
transactions that employee had
to take some time in in the fall
she had she.
Some issues extended leave of
absence and that that was that
was quite scary DFA inspo they
really came and helped and
supported the ethics commission
the constitution says we're
independent we're supposed to be
independent and unless we have
more classified service person
we can be independent we need
depth in kind of just these
ordinary operations of running a
government agency
these are both good good
recommendations both the
executive and the LESC in the
past years have been supportive
of the commission's growth in a
measured way as we kind of make
our way into the ecosystem of
the the state of New Mexico New
Mexico government both of these
recommendations enable enable me
I think to do what I need to
which is higher the financial
coordinator to support to the
CFO and build some destiny SD
Division
I'd like to get nine FTP on
organizational chart as opposed
to eight that that just helps us
build the agency a little bit
quicker but I can I can move it
around I can hire I can hired
investigators contracts and put
the the to the two hundred
support
SB positions.
So they're both good
recommendations that both
supportive of the commission's
growth in government
the executive I think might use
their little bit faster
interventions expanding or well
but again the LFC the at the
because of the contracts
increase LESC budget gets a
little bit more options but I
think I can I can get to the
same place for this this next
fiscal year if each fiscal year
to come back and ask for just a
little bit more so you so you
can see from nothing.
Mr chair.
The committee.
Mr chair of thank you Mr Ferris
I think that's a great job and
to have really happy to have
this new agency thank you.
Thank you Mr chair.
Mr Ferris.
Yeah I'm sure you probably know
I've I was not in favor of
establishing facilities.
concern was.
That.
Even ethics commission could be
manipulated into.
So what.
If we're unethical it's.
not stating that that could
happen from then I can see from.
As to using a a.
Blunt instrument and especially
proud to elections and so
a lot of those restrictions are
there are restrictions and I
worked on to try and put in
place so that candidates could
be.
picked on just write prior to
election.
Nothing keeps not nothing would
keep the individual making
complaints from having being
able to go out and.
Publicly stated just.
So so that's X. commission with
the.
Once you hear something from the
commission.
I mean Madam it's official
there's complaint.
And and unfortunately.
The wait complaints without
taxes you're guilty almost the
public signed into proven
innocent.
it's just concept so
I don't disagree that there
needs to be an agency there
needs to be some some group that
is monitoring.
The people who are who are
entrusted public trust that does
need to happen.
I just I do.
encourage the agency to to stay
within the.
The specific Roma and and not
allow for us to to try to.
For.
What
a call
comes.
that being said I I do have a
concern.
Just because of in Allentown
mentioning names of mentioning
but.
I am aware of one thing that is
concerning to me and that is
that we required by the
secretary of state's office
through our our individual
reporting of our income tax
that's coming up now first of
February second February.
that we have to do a financial
disclosure report.
But on there it says.
Anything less than five thousand
dollars you don't have to
disclose you may have.
I am aware of someone who was
for.
Five thousand dollars was an
issue with the commission.
had had a question that wasn't
disclosed I think it was because
of what the person is doing on I
related to a certain business.
I'm just concerned that.
That if there's something in
statute.
That is required by an agency
that we have to report to that
if not saying that it should be.
But if there is another
requirement that the ethics
committee just by.
We need to be aware that rather
than one before you.
because that could be
weaponized.
just because it's something that
the average person I only reason
I know that just because I was
leadership in the house
Republican caucus so things like
this come up very become aware
because it's necessary no one
these are up.
So
I'm really happy you can respond
if you want to but I'm just
saying.
And you and I had a little bit
of interaction that and I and I
just want to make sure that.
Understand my concern is.
That amounts came out accusing
agency accusing those on the
outside of the agency.
Who might see a political
advantage.
But just off on property for
your budget today stated earlier
when I'm not working for budgets
but I do have a concern that
that your agency.
Get big enough for bigger and
bigger.
That that the CBN in looking.
To justify itself and having I
mean I think you should come
with however many more cases
come to.
And and and maybe that's where I
should go to questions from
where you are now.
From from one point agency okay.
What have you see just a numbers
of an increase of a workload.
Have you seen because that that
might help me a little more.
Sure so Mr chair representative
toria
Unless the question first and
then financial disclosure piece
and in some of the larger
questions of weaponization and
partiality.
So as to the growth in the work.
We have seen an incremental
increase in the number of cases
filed an administrative
complaint filed with the
commission we're up to over
fifty in fiscal year now looking
back at the past fiscal year.
In the beginning maybe were at
twenty the first year here's the
difference the the difference
as.
New Mexicans folks in this
building folks that are related
to the political process folks
that are adjacent to the
political fights.
Within this building they've
they've come to understand our
jurisdiction better in the
beginning we were just missing a
lot of cases for lack of
jurisdiction because
complainants they weren't sure
that you know which how how we
work in relation to other folks
to understand we don't have any
jurisdiction in the adjudicatory
investigatory part over locals
and we would get complaints
against mayors place against
the village trustees paper
complaints.
Over time folks the interactive
features to track the state
ethics commission of coming work
on the set of our jurisdiction
so higher percentage of our
cases now are really within the
jurisdiction of the ethics
commission that means they
require under the act an
investigation by attorney staff
and
That that's a lot of work.
With respect to our authority to
file civil enforcement actions
separate from our to investigate
an administrative complaints but
to go off and file a civil
action in state court.
That's increasing we we were in
litigation this this past year
with respect to the four Texas
sister in the in in the county
assessors office on revolving
door claims
We're on the cusp of filing a
significant
lawsuit lawsuits as you well
know are very labor intensive
state they take a lot of our
attorney time
the attorneys are kind of at.
They come to work every day and
have plenty to do plenty to do
and as just a is the person the
I'm not asking for your kind of
attorneys at this.
I'm just asking at this point
four additional support staff.
With respect to the financial
disclosure statement the
financial disclosure act does
require a disclosure of sources
of income north of five thousand
dollars in terms of general
category descriptions however it
also requires disclosure of an
employee.
And so it's it's not enough just
to disclose sources of income
north of five thousand dollars
budget category descriptions.
All of us myself as a as a
recorder porting individual U.
S. member of the body after
discussion player.
Last with respect to
weaponization often times I will
see complaints.
Reported in the paper before I
see on our docket because I look
to the paper before I let our
our our doctor's office every
morning I don't know what to do
about that under the act's
complainants and respondents
they have the full liberty to go
to the media after they file an
ethics complaint and they do and
they do it sometimes even before
the complaint is filed on our
docket
Yes the right that's that's
that's part of I guess one of
the a piece the collateral
damage doesn't mean that the
respondent has violated the law
absolutely not absolutely not
doesn't mean that we're going to
conclude probable costs
absolutely not does it even mean
it's within our jurisdiction no
again no.
I did the best I can to try to
publish what we can't publish
but again you have to remember
when the state ethics commission
act was set up there's a lot of
confidentiality obligations on
us on the commission on it staff
on its contractors if the case
never makes it all the way to a
conclusion that there's probable
cause hearing will be set we
can't say anything about we can
even say that we got and so.
I don't have the tools to
respond to the media to say that
complaint is
You know that complaint is is
frivolous second place not
within our jurisdiction if you
look in the state ethics
commission agendas you'll see
dismissals for lack of
jurisdiction but you only see
the case number because we're
not allowed to say who filed the
complaint to the complaint was
against.
Those confidentiality
obligations I think we're
motivated by your concern about
weaponization but part of the
effect of it is that it ties it
ties our hands to respond in a
way that is substantive to your
concern that no that.
That that that complaint was
frivolous that complaint was
outside the jurisdiction.
That the ethics commission never
remotely concluded that that
responded had violated our
state's disclosure or government
conduct at us.
The less with respect to the
commission's impartiality.
We have a professional staff we
have attorneys who work for
judges we've attorney to address
fears offices for local
governments for our significant
law firms in the state they are
professionals they are not down
there doing the work to to
benefit one side or the other
we're not we're not on anybody's
side we're on the on the side of
the law in the state of the
Sicko is most extractions that's
the first thing to know about
the state ethics commission.
Thank you Mr chairman thanks for
the response I appreciate just.
Do you mentioned something about
that someone has to report an
employer.
How.
Large or how small.
Of a and what particular waste
someone considered an employer
so I can have contracts.
With someone what I'm doing work
for them.
In my mind that does not make
them poorer.
In the mind of the ethics
commission is that employee.
So Mr chair and representative
monthly I can't respond to the
point precisely because I can't
recite to you from memory this
the secretary of state's
rulemaking on the definition of
employer under the financial
disclosure Act the secretary of
state's office.
Has rulemaking authority.
They promulgated a rule on but
some players and players.
That rural just what we got.
So just ask you to look at the
imac.
Thank you Mr chairman because of
that to me I think that the.
Could be potentially.
Because of concern if that.
Doesn't mention because a.
Sometimes.
To quote former president
sometimes it.
Some of the meeting of this is.
And so sometimes depends on
whose definition we use.
So that's that's concerned
that one thing I've had a couple
of concerns but.
Anybody who's ever watched a
football game has a like to
cover the referee calls.
Anybody who's had something
before the Supreme Court and
maybe just thought.
Okay well how come right this
was considered in this instance
it wasn't considered in that
instance so anyhow I just try
to.
As much as possible trying to
advise people as to how to.
Do their business in a way so
not to mention all of the ethics
commission because once again I
think it's necessary
Part of government I think we've
all seen enough this happened
and that are in the papers.
That show that
Senator Campos ourselves so I
don't disagree with that I just
once again I just want to
continue to urge
Just the of our state.
Care.
When dealing with folks.
Because once again if a public
official if they have to go
before you.
We don't get we don't get.
A government employee or a
government lawyer to help us we
have to hire a lawyer.
If it's if it's a more friends.
If it gets to a.
A civil.
Point as well.
We end up
Having to pay out of pocket the
time away from work.
We're already doing.
I don't want to because
everybody wants to be here every
year but.
I've I've calculated price
costing about thirty five
thousand dollars a year to
serve.
so.
I think maybe that's sometimes
why.
Just when we were doing this
within our own caucuses or not
with this with our own chambers
maybe things were sliding by and
that because everybody
understood okay we're all doing
this cost so to some degree like
I said I'm grateful that you
guys are there.
Always concerned I've always
hated my name.
Come up for that.
And I've got to tell you I have
one instance on the house floor
or.
There was a person taking
pictures of people during well
we were in the middle of the
floor session.
And.
I would just the started our
state we suspend the rule that
people could be awarded we
suspend role that that I some
media can be here taking
pictures no we didn't so I said
well there's a guy over there
taking pictures of my members.
And audio us turned out to be
one of the members
Sons who is African American.
And so the question came up was
that something against him or is
no it was I was concerned.
That somebody is taking pictures
and I don't know why we had
suspend rule.
So.
But I know briefly had to go
through a a little saying there
the funny thing is about.
Two weeks later.
R. a Republican member is also
African American.
nephew was there on the floor
and the sergeant at arms came up
to me after and said there's
another person taking pictures
and they're not Mexico are you
telling me that the speaker
suspend.
It was just the rules and and
and they you know and by the way
the rules could be suspended.
I mean that's really all we send
rules submitted pictures so and
after that it was like from.
Yeah I mean after after once.
The second time that will work
okay.
This could look like a pattern
and and really the sergeant arms
came up to me because I brought
up question first.
And really what it was more than
anything as we're coming up on
election season why is there a
picture for somebody bending
down the mobile money.
Below a.
Representative whose debate.
I have nothing to do want me to
be concerned of.
Percentage.
So.
I think sometimes.
That doesn't mean for the person
who made the complaint was one
hundred percent.
Heartfelt.
And why.
So
Anyhow I just I just want to
say.
that I appreciate you guys too.
But when I think I just urge
caution.
And the more that you see the
more that we see caution and
restraint and.
Thought for some of your
department I think you.
This brought up perfectly the
right to.
What is the service to the state
of New Mexico I appreciate thank
you Mr chairman.
Committee chairman.
Mr.
Mr chairman I move that we adopt
the executive recommendation
for.
Six of the opposition.
One opposition.
With that being said we'll go
over.
The presentation before we
adjourn.
I'd like to thank all the
members and also.
The participate you all the.
