Representative Garrett.
Representative Garrett.
Representative Hernandez.
Representative Herndon
Representative Herrera.
Representative Little.
Representative Luhan.
Representative Pettigrew.
Yeah
Representative Sanchez.
Mm
Representative Sadi Signana.
Representative Sainana.
Representative Silva.
Representative Vincent.
Representative Vincent.
Vice Chair Dixon.
Chairs small.
We have a quorum. Excellent.
Thank you very much, uh, uh,
Miss Jackie, we appreciate that.
OK, members, uh, wanna welcome
chair uh Thompson, ranking
member Jones, thank you both for
being here today. Uh, for all
members, folks who are tuning in
online, our schedule, which is
on our uh website, we're gonna
first have um
The proposed legislation with
fiscal impact uh from our
health, health chair and ranking
members. This is an opportunity
for the chair and the ranking
member to share uh brief
perspectives on legislation with
potential budgetary impacts and
also other uh sort of budgetary
components from their committee
of expertise as we of course go
through our different
Uh, health agencies to date.
We're not gonna have any
questions to them. This again is
just again an opportunity for
our chair and ranking member to
share their perspectives, put
together by director writing,
uh, Vice Chair Dixon and others
so that we can have greater
continuity with our uh working
committees. Uh, after that,
we're gonna go to sort of an
overview with um Mr. Shee, our
principal analyst, um, this,
we're not gonna do any questions
on the overview.
Um,
or at least work to avoid those
questions, uh, in order to,
Madam Secretary, to get to the
agencies and really allow the
members to spend a lot of time
there. Um, so trying to use our
time wisely with that, uh, Madam
Char Thompson, uh, ranking
member Jones would turn over to
you, whoever wants to go first
can start us off. We're
targeting about 3 minutes each,
but uh very much again,
appreciate you being here and uh
we'll turn it over to you.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. I was told
2.5, so I'm celebrating. Um, so
Mr. Chair, uh, Madam Vice Chair
and members of the committee,
um, you all know how complicated
healthcare is in, in New Mexico
about we our budget including
the federal match for Medicaid
is about $12 billion. So 3
minutes is not gonna get us
anywhere, and I would love to
throw up the opportunity for
maybe us to have a joint meeting
during the interim, um, because,
I mean, I've been on the
committee for, this is my
11th year and I still am about
this deep in it. So, uh, let me
check my, um, OK, so Mr. Chair,
we, we, we are requesting um
money for a cost driver study,
we all know that healthcare
costs are through the roof. We
don't, we don't know why we have
some
Indicators, um, but what, what
we've been finding is that we
can't get the data from
providers for the big hospital
bill we did for with Senator
Munoz last year.
OFC had to IPRA, the healthcare
authority, to get the data. And
then when we did the bill, the
hospital association came back
and said, you have the wrong
data. It's like, well, so we
really need to figure out a way
to get data, so we are
requesting money for cost driver
study and health expenditure
study because we can't really do
anything until we know what's
going on. Um, when I started in
the legislature in 2013, the
Health committee was state
government Indian Affairs and
Health. So
11 years ago.
No attention was paid to health,
and, and so now we have a strong
robust committee and we are
thankful for the LFC folks that,
that participate with us, um.
So this committee has been
neglected for many, many years
and as big as it, and I know
that many people say healthcare.
I don't know anything. I, you
know, la la la, so we can't do
that anymore. Um, it's
incredibly complicated. We need
to invest in every level. We
have a workforce shortage in
every possible healthcare
position. I'm a physical
therapist. We are 600 and some
physical therapists short. The
only program in the state
graduates 30 a year.
So, um, the math just doesn't
add up. And we have a lack of
data. We've gotten a lot of
trust, and I think trust but
verify and people say, well,
it's proprietary. And so I'm
saying state money is also
proprietary. If you can't give
us the data, then we can't give
you the money. Um, corporate
practice of corporate medicine
is driving um practitioners out
because they can't practice
their their skills, they are
basically given a list of this
is what you do for
this, and there's no, there's no
use of their training and we, we
are looking at that, of course,
behavioral health is a major
issue, has been since 2013, and
we're not anywhere back where we
were then, and then it was, you
know, held together with duct
tape and love.
Um, and then I'm just gonna
throw in a plug for autism.
Autism, it's autism Day and
that's, that's why I'm here. We
have underfunded autism. It's
now one in 36 children in New
Mexico. So there are thousands
of children, not to mention
adults, and then the final thing
I will say, Mr. Chair and Madam
Vice Chair is the county and
tribal health councils. They
have been starved for a long
time, and most states have their
public health county-based. We
have our state-based.
So we really depend on them to
be our eyes and ears and our
workers in the counties and
they've been woefully
underfunded, and so I'd really
like to um really like to push
that forward and, and finally,
Mr. Chair, we don't know what's
going to happen on the federal
level. I mean, there was that
freak out where Medicaid was,
was frozen for a little while
and, and this state cannot
afford to cover all of the
people, I mean, not to mention
the Tricare and the
And all the other federal
government programs that we rely
on, so we really need to pay
close attention to what's
happening nationally, and I, I'm
looking for all the healthcare
champions I can find. So please
join me and if you have
questions, come see me. Thank
you, Mr. Chair. Thank you very
much, Madam Chair. Uh, madam
ranking member.
Thank you, Mr. Chair and members
of the committee, um, much of
what, um, our chair, health
chair just said I can just
totally agree with that. I, I
would really appreciate a
meeting, a joint meeting like
you mentioned, that would be
very valuable for us and uh so
Mr. Chair, um, I do appreciate
the policies that I, my
colleagues, um, I appreciate
sharing with you the policies
that I and my colleagues would
like to see advanced in health
and human Services Committee
this session, and I have
um, some remarks, um,
Uh, some notes actually to keep
myself on track. So, um,
We have agreed there's a
critical need for an increase in
healthcare workforce and to
ensure healthcare access for all
New Mexicans. But while we may
not always agree on how we
achieve that, I believe it's
imperative that we consider all
the ideas from everyone if we're
to truly serve the people of the
state's health care needs. So
with that, I'm looking forward
to a robust conversation on our
state's medical malpractice
laws, the recent change adopted
by this legislature and what we
need to do to reform those
malpractice laws to provide
the protections for patients,
but also to keep um
Providers from leaving the
state.
My caucuses several bills that
will be introducing, dealing
with the higher caps, um, the
punitive damages, and how trial
attorneys view the definition of
occurrence in our current
statutes. So I'm looking forward
to discussing new ways to
encourage relocation and
retentions of our healthcare
workforce, nurses, um, I think
we're almost 9000 nurses short
just strictly RNs, not even uh
specialty RNs, advanced practice
providers, physicians, and all
other healthcare providers, we'd
like to.
to see the changes in our text,
structure that would incentivize
rural um practice providers even
greater than we have thus far.
So we've spoken to you and
Health about new ways to
encourage doctors who go through
residency program to stay and
work in New Mexico and how more
comprehensive approach to
tuition reimbursement, maybe one
way to increase provider
coverage.
We'd like to see um more
independent practice for
physicians assistants, um, which
would increase care in rural
parts of the state. I also like
to see our committee have a
thoughtful discussion on
pharmacy operations, health care
reimbursement rates and access
to medications for seniors, low
income residents and rural
residents. Last year we passed a
bill that provided much needs
assistance um for several
struggling rural hospitals, and
I'm hoping we can consider with
you all uh whether that was
successful.
And uh if that support package
did what we thought it would and
how we can further keep those
facilities open.
So those are just a few of the
things I'm looking at and I, I
know we can work together on a
lot of that, and I'm hoping to
make some progress. Thank you so
much, Mr. Chair. Excellent.
Thank you very much, Madam
ranking member. OK, Madam Chair,
Madam ranking member, we
appreciate you very much coming
here. Please feel free, uh, as
time allows to stay for the rest
of our hearing. Members, thank
you for this. I think it's
always good where we can hear uh
perspectives from our committees
of expertise.
Uh, Mr. Shea is coming up.
I chose the wrong time to put a
mint in my mouth, which I
apologize for, but
Um,
Uh, Mr. Chee, uh, is gonna take
us through, um, so this what
we're looking at this as, again,
we're gonna discourage questions
on this part encourage all the
questions as we go through our
agencies, but this is a budget
and accountability update. Some
of the big things that the LFC
has been tracking as we go
through the summer. This is
maybe the way to see it as, as a
way to catch up on that,
particularly for new members on
the committee. With that, we'll
go to Mr. Chen Yi.
Uh, Mr. Chairman, I apologize.
How do I get this to show up on
the screen here.
There we go.
All right, Mr. Chairman, members
of the committee, my name is,
again, my name is Eric. I'm an
LFC analyst.
Uh, and we conducted this
behavioral health and substance
use, uh, treatment gap analysis.
Uh, back in, over through the
summer and then we uh first
presented it in November. We've
done a little bit of updating
the data, um, since we presented
it to the LFC.
Uh, so just
Starting right off at the top,
um, and I'm not gonna go through
every single one of these slides
and I want to remind you that
you got, you also have a hard
copy of this, um, I think in the
piles in front of you probably
at the bottom there.
Um
I'm gonna go through what our
findings were.
Um, the state, federal
government and local communities
invested significantly in the
last few years, putting funding.
Um, among the top of states uh
for behavioral health.
The number of providers and
provider organizations have also
increased in that time period.
However, there's a significant
uh diffusion of roles and
responsibilities.
There's 17 state agencies, many
local governments and local
provider agencies receiving
funding.
But there's little planning to
strategically use the resources,
uh, we have more effectively.
Where there is planning, it's
spotty.
Um
And continued high rates of
behavioral health disorders,
increase the urgency to address
um
these issues.
So I'm just gonna go over some
of the outcomes here. So what
are the needs? New Mexico ranks
poorly on key behavioral health
metrics, the number of
behavioral health providers is
growing. We focus on providing
more high quality evidence-based
services is needed and improved
data and analysis will show uh
where to focus our efforts, um,
and I just wanted to point out,
if you look at the table on the
right hand side there, um,
You can see the middle column
there behavioral health 2023 and
then Behavioral Health 2024,
that's the state rankings.
Um
We are ranking decreased from 36
to 44th.
Uh, in overall mental health,
mental illness prevalence.
Went from 36, 32 to 49th, adult
substance use disorder, 42nd to
46th in youth major depressive
episodes.
And 47 to 511 in uh youth with
the with the substance use
disorder.
Uh, the entity and state
government responsible for
coordinating efforts and
improving outcomes is the
behavioral health purchasing
collaborative.
Uh, they have not met, met for
over a year, and there's no
director in the absence of the
behavioral health purchasing
collaboratives taking the lead
and producing a gaps analysis,
this report is a needs and gaps,
work in progress, and we expect
to continue, continuously be
updating it um as we go along.
One thing I will say though, at
this point is just this morning,
um, I actually received from the
department, uh, and I haven't
gotten a chance to go through
it, uh.
Behavioral health needs and gaps
analysis, um, and so we'll see,
uh, next few days, how that is.
Hopefully it's, hopefully it's
even better than mine. Um, but
we'll go forward from there.
Uh, I'm actually gonna skip this
slide. I, I think we're kind of
wanting to get through this
pretty quick, right, Mr.
Chairman? Yeah, because we got a
long day ahead of us.
Um
All right.
Slide 7, approximately 42% of
New Mexico population is covered
by Medicaid. This is just a
slide to kind of illustrate, you
know, um, the green line there
at the bottom is general funds,
that big blue ocean, uh, there
in the, uh, towards the top.
That's your federal revenue.
Um
We bring in a lot of federal
revenue through our Medicaid
program, and it's just to
illustrate also that um that
blue line at the very, very top
there, we're at the end where it
says 900, 323, 900, 323. That's
our population that's in uh
Medicaid.
42%, it's our biggest lever to
really make change within uh
Within behavioral health.
Um, Medicaid is the largest
payer for behavioral health
services in the state and
nationally. You can see on this
chart that each year we've been
increasing investments in
behavioral health, however,
there's a significant amount of
funding coming from the federal
government, uh, which will get,
get into more that is um not
tracked at the state level.
Uh, moving on, this just
illustrates how where the
funding is, um, about 75% of the
funding is in uh Medicaid, um,
that's not showing up on here
correctly.
Uh, well, anyway, the rest of
the, it should show up correctly
on your uh handouts there.
Um
The rest of the funding is in
all the other agencies including
The DDC, the Behavioral Health
Services Division, the
Department of Health, Children,
Youth and Families, and other
agencies.
Um, I'm gonna skip this one.
Just wanted to get into the
federal funding, skip this one.
Um
More than half of the federal
grant dollars over the past 10
years went directly to
behavioral health provider
entities.
Uh, since many federal grant
grants go straight to local
governments and entities, the
state may want to look at
setting up a process to track
these grants and ensure state
funding and granting is not
duplicative. You look at that
68% number there, that means
that 68% of the funds go
directly to local governments or
Um, provider agencies, which
means that about 32% of the
funds only about 32% of the
funds go to state agencies, um,
kind of bypassing a lot of uh
the state structure, and nobody
really looks over this to see
kind of where that money is
going, are we duplicating
services, that sort of thing.
Um
Moving on.
Actually gonna skip a few slides
here.
I just wanted to get into some
of the workforce.
Uh, certified nurse
practitioners, um, are kind of
leading the, the pack as far as
behavioral health providers.
Um, within our, uh, managed care
organizations, you know, so
from, uh, the 2nd quarter of
calendar year 22, we went from
175.
Of providers to calendar uh to
quarter one.
2024, the 231 providers just in
the Blue Cross, uh, Blue Shield
Network.
Um, and similar numbers with
Presbyterian. You can see those
numbers increasing there. So we
are doing a better job, but with
all the increase in funding that
we've done over the past few
years, this increase, this
influx in um providers out
there, uh, it kind of makes me
wonder why are we still seeing?
Uh, not seeing the outcomes that
we want to see, and that's kind
of, that's kind of the crux of
this, and that's kind of where
this comes, this comes from.
Um, and with that, Mr. Chairman,
I'm gonna go to the appendix,
just one.
One slide here, and I wanted to
show just as an example, this is
um I believe Rio Riba in Santa
Fe Counties.
Um, and it just gives you an
idea of kind of the landscape of
what the local collaborative
Area One the Behavioral Health
collaborative in area one, and
it looks like with what it
covers, um, kind of the change
in, uh, the workforce over the
last few years, um, and then
some of the money that they've
received, and you can look each
member, um,
You can look and see, you know,
Bern Leo County on the next one.
We've got Donia Anna County,
which actually does a pretty
good job of planning down there,
um, more of San Miguel,
Guadalupe, you can, each one of
you can, uh, go through this on
your own, your own time and
kinda look and see uh what
Some of the behavioral health
needs and gaps are in your area.
With that, Mr. Chairman, I'll,
uh,
That's
Great. Thank you very much, Mr.
Cheer. Thank you, members, uh,
great to see everybody looking
through. Uh, we're gonna go
straight into our hearings
because we do have our agencies
here but appreciate that uh
condensed look in the deeper
dive that's available, uh, in
the handouts. Uh, last thing,
please feel free to reach out to
Mr. Shee, other LSC staff, also,
of course, our DFA uh the
healthcare authority and
Department of Health staff, uh,
as questions arise sort of
outside of the committee.
Um, but with that, we're gonna
go, let's go straight into uh
agency code 6:30. Madam
Secretary, thank you for being
here.
Um
This Dinsmore, thank you.
Madam Secretary, when we get to
you, please feel free to sort of
recognize your team in the way
that you want to.
And um.
We will dive in.
All right, Mr. Chair, uh,
members of the committee, just
wanted to um kind of, kind of
repeat sitting next to me as
Secretary Kerry Armijo and
sitting next to her is uh Mary
Beth Dinsmore, the executive
analyst.
And we're gonna be going over
agency 6:30, that's the
healthcare authority, and that's
behind tab 6 in your books
there.
Um, I'm not gonna go over each
and every different sheet, um,
like maybe some of the prior
ones have.
Just because this is a 10
program agency, it's a big
agency, lots and lots of money,
but most of the money is in
Medicaid, the Medicaid programs.
I think it's better to just go
over the, the high level, um, to
give you guys an idea of where
the money is, where the general
fund funding is, and that sort
of thing.
Um, so jumping right in, LFC
recommended a total of about
$2.8 million I'm sorry, billion
dollar increase um in funding
for the healthcare authority and
the executive recommended a
total increase of about 3.2
billion.
Um, when it comes to just the
general fund portion of this LFC
recommended about a 4% increase
in the executive recommended
about a 10.7% increase.
Um, I just wanted to mention
also, you'll see as we go
through this high level here,
um, the agency requested and in
a lot of cases, the executive
Recommended uh salary
adjustments or um you know, uh,
funding to fill vacancies,
different things like that, um,
personnel, LFC and a lot of
these cases did not recommend
that funding, first of all, um,
the first reason why LFC didn't
recommend that funding was uh
because of um the 4% comp
package that we have in the back
of House Bill 2 that we
recommended. And then there's
also um a new
uh,
salary structure that that um
Spo is gonna implement in the
next few months.
And uh there's $17 million that
goes along with that, and that's
to boost anybody who's not um in
those new.
Who's below in that new salary
structure.
All right, um, and then I also
want to mention, you know, the,
the
HCA, uh, LFC, and the executive,
we've all worked pretty hard
together on this, um, most
recently we got a, on January,
you know, middle of January, we
got a new uh budget projection
that showed there's, there was
quite a bit of a decrease in
funding for uh decrease in
spending, um,
Between the time of the uh
budget request.
And now,
And so there's quite a bit of
room in here, you'll see as we
kind of go through this high
level that um the agencies
actually not needing quite as
much, uh, funding, especially in
Medicaid, um, as they had
originally uh intended.
Now, uh, moving into the actual
high level. I wanted to, it
looks like this, it's purple,
has all your your lines on it,
uh, I'm sorry, pink, um, my, I
just wanted to kind of talk you
guys through, uh,
How to go through this. If you
look at line one, that gives us
the the uh name of the program,
so that's the medical assistance
program, and that's the program
that has Medicaid in it.
Um, line 2 gives you your prior
year, uh, operating budget.
Um, and then, if you look down
at the line, the subsequent
lines going down. So for
example, line 4, we had um in
the January Medicaid budget
projection line, we add $15
million to that, um.
Original operating budget, then
we add each of those lines going
on until we get to the bottom,
which is uh line 26 or line 25,
which gives you the total
general fund amount recommended
for that agency for um
Uh, for FY 26.
All right, so, jumping in now,
finally.
Um, online for and line 5,
both LFC and the executive
recommended um continuing
half-year rate adjustments um
from FY 25 for primary care,
maternal and child health, rape
maintenance and phase 3
providers.
Um
LC, if you look at line 5
included 5 million from their
early childhood education and
care fund for those rates. And
so if you add that up to the on
top of the 8 million, that's
13.8 million executive
recommended 13 million in total
for those rates.
Um
Line 6,
The executive recommended about
5.3 million for the program for
all-inclusive care rates, while
the, while the LFC recommended a
million, the executives would
about double the rates, LLCs
would increase it by about 26%.
Uh, same thing with assisted
living facilities down there on
line 7.
Uh, online 9 enrollment growth.
Um, the executive recommended uh
22.2 million for enrollment
growth, but like I said, we got
that new um projection and it
actually shows the enrollment is
down significantly, uh, ever
since the end of the um public
health emergency, it's gone from
about
1 million and then, uh, or
sorry, yeah, around 1 million
enrollees, and now we're down to
about 840,000 enrollees.
Um, as, as of January.
Uh, line 10, healthcare
inflation and rebasing, um, the
executive and the LFC are pretty
close on that.
Um, line 13 FMAP reduction and,
and fee for service, uh, they
turned out to be a a lower, a
smaller amount required uh for
the FMAP decrease, um, than was
originally understood, so the
executive had the 11 million LFC
ended up with 1 million on that.
Um, on county supported
Medicaid, uh, there's about a $2
million difference, um, in
How in the decrease from that
revenue source that we assumed.
Um, LFC recommended 11 more, 11
million more in the use of
safety net Capool funds.
Um, and then on line 16, uh, LFC
recommended 30 million from the
healthcare Affordability Fund.
Um
Moving on,
Line 20, uh,
The executive recommended about
15 million for the Medicaid
management information system
replacement project. That's,
that's the big IT project.
Uh, that the state's been
working on for uh quite a long
time, probably the biggest IT
project ever in the state, um,
And now some of those modules
are coming online, and so now we
have to pay for the actual
operating expenses and that's
what that is right there. And
I'll actually stop right there
for that first program and let
um Ms. Marie, Mary Beth
Dinsmore, um, add any comments
that she wants, uh.
On that one.
Thank you very much, Mr. Chair,
members of the committee, hello
again, um, I actually don't have
too much to add with Medicaid
where not super far apart, which
is lovely, um, and it, I think
it does speak to the work that
we've all done um during the
interim and trying to come
together on some of these
issues. So, uh, I won't take up
any time with that. Um, so we
can move on to DDSD yeah.
All right, Mr. Chairman, members
of the committee, uh, line 29,
uh, that's our updated Medicaid
projection for utilization, uh,
the executive recommended 16
million LFC recommended 20
million on that line.
Um, one that you guys might all
be pretty interested in uh line
31, the provider rate
adjustments, um, the executive
recommended 28 million there in
the LFC recommended 23.
Million for those uh
adjustments.
Um, also to maintain the uh
You know, a few years ago, we
eliminated the wait list for
developmental disability waiver
services.
Mostly eliminated it, this kind
of continues that, that payment
down to make sure that um
We don't grow that wait list
again, so that's the 6 million
in the in the um
Executive column 4 million in
the LFC column, and that's the
LFC's recommendation is for
about 2 to fill about 200.
Uh, uh.
Um
vacancies within the DD program.
Um
And with that, I don't have
anything else to add on that,
uh, very best if you want on the
D.
Thanks again, Mr. Chair,
committee members, there's just
a couple of things that I wanted
to call your attention to, um,
in the DD waiver program.
So Eric mentioned the difference
in the um
I guess it's line, sorry, 32,
um, where, uh, LFC has 4 million
in the executive has 6 million.
So I just wanted to explain a
little bit about that. So the 6
million in the executive is
intended to help with continuous
allocations or uh determining um
eligibility for the waiver
program, as it is currently the
way the department is funded is
they only can do those
allocations once a year. So you
see a weight
List kind of build up a little
bit. Um, until the next time
that they can actually do the
allocations. This funding would
allow for them to do this a few
times during the year, which
keeps the wait list down, um, so
I just wanted to make sure that
was clear, the amount to the
executive. The other thing I
want to put on your radar might
seem a little tedious, but, um,
but if you just wanna bring it
up. So, um, I believe Eric
mentioned there is a $5 million
fund balance.
carry forward in here. Um, it is
line 38 on your high level.
So, um, the issue with this 5
million. Now, the first issue is
that it's very likely there will
not be $5 million left at the
end of FY 25, uh, the agency is
expecting to spend most, if not
all of it. So there wouldn't be
this revenue available in FY 26
to support the program. Um, if
there is a little bit less, left
that we could put in. Um, what
we would need to do
and I believe the agency has
submitted some language
surrounding this is, uh, to
extend the expenditure period of
time for this fund balance. This
fund balance, uh, expenditures
was actually done through a
special appropriation, and it
expires at the end of FY 25. So
the money would revert before we
could get it into FY 26. So
there's a couple of issues
there, um, one.
Just being that there may not
actually be any funding left,
but number 2, we would need to
try to ensure that there is some
language, uh, extending that
appropriation for another year,
so whatever's in there could be
spent. So that may be one way
that um that we can look at
working on this and, and try to
see if we can get any of this 5
million into the budget.
Thank you.
All right, Mr. Chairman, uh,
moving on to the Medicaid
Behavioral Health Program. I've
only got uh one line that I
wanted to talk about on there,
and that's the uh line 43,
behavioral health provider rate
adjustments over the last two
years we've done about um 7.5
million in general fund, um, uh,
for
For each of those years and this
year we're doing about 5.6
million in the LFC
recommendation.
And then the executives got
about 2.9 million for that, um,
with that, I'll pass it over to
Ms. Dinsmore if she has anything
else to talk about. All right.
OK, so just wrapping up, so
that's the 3 Medicaid programs,
um, within the healthcare
authority that comprised
Medicaid, um, so just wrapping
that up.
You'll see that um,
The executive recommended about
1.99 billion.
LFC recommended about 1.8
billion.
Um, and that's an 11% for the
executive and about 4.2% um for
the LFC.
Um, and then I just wanted to
mention to you on this before I
go on is that this HCA January
Medicaid budget projection, um,
Uh, column here.
Uh, I actually received more
information just last night, um,
and did it get, get to kind of
include it in here, but it's
actually the ACA projection is
actually uh decreased more than
we had originally thought, so
there's even more room in there
than is showing up on here, and
that's gonna be some more work
that we're going to be doing,
uh, over the next uh few weeks
or so.
Moving on to page 2.
Uh, income support,
Um, fill vacancies. This is uh
kind of a, uh, I know this is
kind of a rub area with the
department, uh, and LFC LFC
recommended 1 million online 67,
uh, while the department
recommended or the executive,
sorry, recommended about 5.8
million to fill the vacancies
and unfunded vacancies, um, they
also included funding for staff
training, um, staff safety and
security contracts.
Um, and then the other items
that you can see there, um,
that's all I wanted to go over
on that one, if you have any
further.
Thanks, Eric, Mr. Just really
quickly, you'll hear from the
secretary shortly, but before um
we get to that. I really just
want to emphasize the importance
of this program for the agency
and for um just helping to
ensure that they have enough
staff to do this work. It's a
lot of work, and they don't have
enough staff. So, uh, the
executive recommendation does
put a lot of funding into this
program, um, so it's uh, it's
the hope that
That would assist in um staffing
up this division and allowing
them to do the work efficiently,
um, and with as few errors as
possible, uh, but again, you'll
hear from the secretary shortly,
um, and she'll have lots more
information for you. Thank you.
If you want on that too, the,
the PS Calc is on page 29 if you
want to go, go back to that. I'm
not gonna go over it, but um I
think a lot of you can read it
and um maybe there questions or
whatever, we can go over it,
but.
Um, moving on to program
support.
Uh
Both recommendations included
funding for software license and
support LFC included 830,000
while the executive included
415,000.
Um, on line 80 contracts and
office space, we're pretty close
on that, um, and then the, the
executive included salary
adjustments if you have anything
else to add, OK, we'll move on
to the child support enforcement
that's starts on line 84.
Um
Line 86 replaced federal revenue
with uh general fund revenue,
uh, both, both recommendations
included that funding and then
there's again that salary
adjustment amount.
Um
Division of, do you have
anything else, sir? Um, and then
moving on to the division of
health improvement program.
Um, line 94 for salary
adjustments again.
Um, anything else that you
wanted to add on that? Um,
thanks, Mr. Chair. The only
thing that I'll add real quickly
is that the executive has a
$600,000
recommendation to uh support
provider fee replacement in this
program. So that was not
requested originally with the
agency that was an executive ad,
which is why you won't see it on
the LFC side, but I wanted to
call it to your attention. All
right, and then the healthcare
affordability fund. I'm gonna
actually go over that uh on the
next page, um, a little bit just
to talk through that.
that's not a general funded
program, um, and it has a
different revenue source to the
healthcare affordability fund.
And then, um, moving on to line
109, the state health benefits
program, again, not, not a
general fund.
Uh, program, this is a program
that's had a structural deficit
in it. We can go into more
detail on that, but there were
no differences between the LFC
and the executive rec.
And the base on the state health
benefits program, but there was
a difference um between
recommendations for a
supplemental appropriation where
LLC recommended 124 uh executive
recommended 84 85 8 85 million
um
And then I think the, it's
turned out ever since we've made
this, um, I believe we got a new
projection in January.
Um, that the
Shortfalls around
what, what was it 8
Around 85, so.
Yep.
Thanks, uh, Mr. Chair, just
really quickly, um, so the, uh,
the difference in the original
special when you see those two
amounts, the LFC supporting that
full amount that came in
originally from the agency with
the executive a little bit
lower. That difference had to do
with the local public bodies
being included in that amount.
So, um, where we are now is
after they have now received
some actuarly sound projections,
which is what they've been
working on with their actuary,
um, and, uh.
The projections um are now uh
showing about $85 million need
which covers both state
employees and local public
bodies. So those
That line should be taken care
of, uh, which is, which is nice
to say.
Thanks.
All right, Mr. Chair, I'm gonna
move on to the healthcare
affordability fund that's on
page 3 there.
Now, this one works a little bit
different than the high level.
It's more like a balance sheet,
you see at the top, the revenue
coming in.
Um, on both of these, there was
an assumed 212.
A million, um, revenue coming
in, uh, bringing the fund
balance at the beginning of the
year to 403 million.
Um, and then, so on the spending
side, the recurring spending
side, um, the executive
recommended 3.1 million.
While the the LFC recommended 2
million for fund administration,
so that $2 million that's more
than a doubling the
administration of the healthcare
affordability. Uh, the next line
down.
Small business premium
reduction, um.
The, uh
Executive recommended 76.2
million, while the LFC
recommended um 50 million. We
haven't seen the increases, um,
that the agency was projecting,
and so we recommended uh less of
an increase there.
On the health insurance
marketplace.
Um
Affordability out of pocket
assistance.
Um, the
Executive recommended about 72
million, while LC recommended
about 50 million, that LFC
recommendation is um doubling
what was spent in FY 25, the
executive recommended
recommendation would nearly
triple it.
Um, and then for the coverage
plans for the uninsured, uh, LFC
included 50, or I'm sorry, the
executive included 58.4 million
and the LFC included 46 million
again doubling um the spend
amount from the prior year. uh,
and then I just wanted to point
out, um, on the non-recurring
side, uh, and you'll see this in
the high level, um, on the prior
two pages, that $30 million that
we're using to, uh, fund
Medicaid out of there, and it's
a non-recurring.
Um, I, I don't know if you have
anything else that you want to
add to that. I, I thought you
had this, but OK.
Um,
and with that, I think we'll uh
pass it over to the secretary
for further comment.
And.
Uh, good afternoon, Mr. Terror
and members of the committee.
Before I start, I just wanted to
mention um there were a couple
of typos on some prior slides,
so, uh, slides 5 and 25 have
been replaced in your packets,
so hopefully you have those
slides. I just wanted to call
that attention to that they may
not be stapled in, so yeah, they
should be in there, um, slides 5
and 25.
There you go. They're up at the
top of your.
Ross from there.
All right, so good afternoon.
Uh, I'm carry on me, I know, I
don't know if we've got the deck
coming live here.
While we do that, I'll get
started, um, I'm Carrie Armijo.
I'm the cabinet secretary of the
Healthcare Authority, an agency
that's directly serves more than
50% of New Mexicans, and which
functions as the state's largest
payer of health care and safety
net services. Um, I would like
to thank you for the opportunity
to be here this afternoon to
present the agency's fiscal year
26 budget request, uh, we really
value your leadership, uh, and
your service to the state of New
Mexico. I'd like to thank uh the
hardworking and brilliant.
People, uh, in this team from
the healthcare authorities'
leadership team. They are
amazing, uh, very dedicated
public servants and in
particular, I would just today
like to recognize Deputy
Secretary Alex Cascio Smith and
Alisa Reed for putting together
today's materials. Uh, they have
been working really around the
clock and I just really
appreciate them. I'd like to
thank Eric, uh, and the LFC, uh,
for their partnership with our
agency and of course Mary Beth
also for working so hard on our
budget. It is a big budget, very
complicated, takes a lot of, uh,
takes a village as.
they say, uh, to make it all
come together. So thank you for
that.
I'd also like to say thank you
to the um health care authority
employees. We have about 2400
employees who come to work every
day to serve New Mexico, and I
really appreciate them very
much. And so I'd like to thank
them today as well.
Um, today, I'm gonna really
focus on 3 priority areas that
are tied to the executive budget
request, um, which are to
adequately fund the agency to
ensure that it can meet its
state and federal obligations to
ensure access to healthcare and
to protect our vulnerable
populations. Uh, you can see in
the map on the right, the
percentage of individuals who
receive at least one healthcare
authority benefit by county, uh,
which demonstrates the huge
impact of the agency's budget in
every part of New Mexico.
Um, the healthcare authority's
mission, uh, just to remind you
and we're always anchored to our
mission, vision and goals. Our
mission is to ensure that New
Mexicans will attain their
highest level of health by
providing whole person
cost-effective, accessible, and
high-quality healthcare and
safety net services and our
vision is that every New Mexican
will have access to affordable
healthcare coverage through a
coordinated and seamless
healthcare system.
Um, a lot of the difference
between the LFC and executive
recommendations is related to
agency staffing, uh, today, so
I'm gonna really focus on that,
um, and I wanna remind you, uh,
that lowering vacancy rates at
the healthcare authority has
been a major priority, um, over
the past couple of years we've
really focused on that. Our
current uh budgeted vacancy rate
for fiscal year 25 is currently
below 1% or or actually less
than 0.5%, um, and the three
divisions that I'm most
concerned about.
are the income support division,
which is currently operating
with a negative vacancy rate of
-14.2%, um, the developmental
disability supports division,
which is funded at a 0.6 vacancy
rate and our Medicaid
administration, which is funded
at a 5.3% vacancy rate today.
Um, the median healthcare
authority employees salary is
58,000 $555 and 20% of the
healthcare authority employees
receive at least one of our
benefits or have children.
Who receive our benefits, um,
including Medicaid and SNAP.
Which as you know, are tied to
poverty levels.
The Healthcare authority's
recommendation strengthens our
delivery of essential services
to New Mexicans and completes
key investments, many of which
have been made in partnership
between the executive and
legislative bodies, um, the
executive recommendation total
is $15.5 billion 85.7% of that
comes from federal funding, um.
The budget also just a reminder
now includes an additional $264
million that used to be in the
Department of Health and now is
with the healthcare authority
since the transition of the
agency in July. We also now have
an extra um one a little bit
more than a billion dollars
that's built in in federal
funding to support the
healthcare delivery and access
Act uh for our rural hospitals.
So that is all federal dollars,
but it does reflect in that top
line. Our general fund.
request is $2.2 billion
And that difference is really
driven by 3 major components,
Medicaid program, uh, which that
number has come down as Mr. Shee
described, um, the developmental
disabilities waiver program and
then the income support
administration,
um.
I will just say that we really
were very mindful of the
obligation of this body in terms
of appropriations and the
increasing share that Medicaid
occupies every year of general
fund. We know that as you are
making decisions, you're having
to juggle these priorities. We
tried to keep our expansion
request small, uh, because so
much has been done to improve
our programs over the past few
years. So we have um FY 26
expansions in the budget
totaling 21 million.
General fund, um, that's about a
0.8% general fund increase over
FY 25.
Um, so not, not a huge amount,
uh, compared to prior years in
terms of expansion and just a
reminder that the agency's
reversion rate is 0.23%.
OK. So I'm gonna start with the
income support division.
IND is the front door for
Medicaid, Snap, other income
assistance program, emergency
food, summer food for children,
supplemental food programs for
seniors and individuals with
disabilities.
And um 90% of behavioral health
services are accessed through
the Medicaid program. ISD is the
point where people get access to
these programs and so I'm very
passionate about supporting them
and making sure that they are
adequately funded to do the work
that they are obligated to do
every day.
Um, ISD is also subject to
rigorous and complex federal
requirements, um, at this time,
uh, and I do think that we are
about to work on some
differences, um, having
conversations about where the
Medicaid budget is, but at this
time I will say that I do have
concerns that if the executive
recommendation is not adopted
for income support, the
healthcare authority will not be
able to meet its federal
requirements for ensuring access
to services and benefits for New
Mexicans. Right now, the income
support division is narrowly
meeting our time.
Liss standards, um, we have to
provide under federal law, uh,
access to um expedited food
benefits, uh, this is for
individuals who really have no
food in the house uh within 7
days we have 30 days to provide
benefits for folks, um, sort of
under that snap income limit and
then 45 days to provide access
to Medicaid. Uh, we are, we've
worked very hard. I have to
acknowledge, um, Nikki
Kozlowski, our income support
director for really cleaning up
house, making sure that we are
meeting those timeliness
standards.
Um, and really for the first
time we are, we are timely. Uh,
it's been several years since
the agency was timely and so we
really want to make sure that we
sustain that progress.
I will say, um, it's my read of
the LFC budget that they are
adding about a million dollars
in general fund to ISD
personnel, but they are shifting
LSC budget shifts existing
friends from the snap
supplemental food program for
older individuals and individual
people with disabilities to the
personnel category and
contracts, um, that would reduce
that snap supplemental food
program by about $6.9 million.
Um, this would mean reducing the
number of seniors and people
with.
disabilities to receive the food
supplement program in FY 26 from
50,000 New Mexicans to 25,000
New Mexicans or reducing the
benefit from $120 a month down
to $60 a month, and I'd like to
remind you all that the
legislator legislature made that
investment last year, um, to
increase that food benefit from
$25 a month, uh, to make sure
that our seniors and individuals
with disabilities aren't going
hungry.
Um
I'd also like to remind you all
that uh because of all of the
federal requirements for the
income support division. If ISD
is not able to meet our federal
timeliness and accuracy
standards, we will be subject to
federal withholds and compliance
findings, uh, probably about 90
million worth of penalties. So,
um, I think as of right now, um,
today the income support
division has 590 FTE the LFC
recommendation funds only 432 of
them um in FY 26.
At the same time, our workload
is increasing, and I will say
that um it's really important to
know that Medicaid and Snap are
actually reducing poverty in New
Mexico. These programs are
working, um, and people are
really dependent on them for
income, um.
The FY 226 executive
recommendation includes 5.8
million general fund to keep.
158 existing case workers that
we have today, so not additional
FTE just trying to hold on to
the staff we have, um, the FY 26
LFC recommendation would enable
ISD to only retain 27 of those
158 staff.
Um, as of September, each
caseworker is responsible for
over 1300 cases, that's a 22%
increase in caseloads since
2019, um, and FY 26 caseloads
are expected to increase to over
1500 per caseworker. That's a
13% increase. Um, and I would
just like to point out that in
2019 we had 858 FTE, um, and we
are down to 701 today. We're
trying to hold on to this case.
workers, the LFC recommendation
reduces that further.
Um, I would also just like to
take a minute to remind um the
LSC that we are evaluated. There
are 2 performance measures
related to access to snap and
timeliness of benefit
determinations on the LFC report
card.
Our most recent LFC report card,
um, for the first quarter of FY
26 acknowledges that increased
workloads have led to diminished
performance in the income
support division, that is from
the LFC's report card. Um,
improvements have been made, and
we really like to hang on to
those improvements and make sure
that we can sustain and support
our team.
Um, there is also an 8% salary
retention incentive uh that uh
has been funded through the
exact uh the legislature through
specials uh since I believe 2020
it's been the past five years.
That was part of a settlement
with the federal government for
the SNAP program, um, and that
was really made in recognition
by our federal government, the
case workers are not paid
enough, um, so just a reminder
that right now our caseworkers
are being paid $23.90.
uh, with that 8% salary
differential if that salary
differential is not funded,
which it currently is not in the
LFC recommendation, we will
reduce our salaries to $22.13 an
hour. Um, right now, that would
reduce us our our ISD workers to
about uh the income level of a
fast food worker uh here in New
Mexico, uh, so we really have
concerns about whether that's
enough money uh for our
caseworker workforce.
OK. So I'm not gonna spend a lot
of time on Medicaid. There's a
lot of good news here, uh, which
is that, um, enrollment is
really the key driver of cost
savings, uh, but you know,
having come through the
unwinding when we first uh came
out of the Medicaid unwinding,
which required us to um sort of
unwind the public health
emergency, um, and redetermine
eligibility for all 1 million
people receiving Medicaid, um,
we have re-enrollment has
reduced by about 1060.
140,000 I think, um, and so that
has driven a lot of budget, um.
savings, I guess, uh, so I think
the LSC recommendation and the
general fund need for Medicare
are very close and I appreciate
um our continued work together
to kind of get to that place
because when there's a big
difference with Medicaid seems
to take all of the energy, so
I'm really grateful, uh, for the
work that's gone into that. Um,
the main difference, uh, really
is expansions, um, the LFC
recommendation, uh, doesn't go
as far as we'd like to go for
assisted living providers. They
haven't received an increase,
uh, since 2000.
19, um, that recommendation
would result in a less than 1%
rate increase for them, um, and
just a reminder that 30 assisted
living facilities have closed
since 2023, um, decreasing our
bed capacity here in New Mexico.
Um, we are also requesting
additional funding for the pace
program, which is another um
program that serves our seniors,
um, again, those rates have not
increased since 2019, um, and
then I just like to say thank
you, uh, you all have.
Really, really supported the
agency in terms of Medicaid, uh,
through the non-recurring budget
and the grow recommendations to
support some of the really
innovative initiatives that the
state is launching, um, those
are big investments in New
Mexico. I'm really excited to
see how those get um support uh
our population keep them
healthy, um, so thank you for
those investments.
We do have a a small ask, uh, in
terms of Medicaid staffing um
administration, uh, New Mexico
is currently one of the most
administratively lean Medicaid
programs per capita of Medicaid
enrollment, um, we are asking
for about 700,000 in general
fund to fund about to fill our
vacancy rates by about 16 FTE.
Or reduce our vacancy rates by
about 16 FTE, um, and, you know,
underfunding Medicaid means that
we can't do all we need to do to
oversee this massive program
that is costing billions of
dollars. You can see in the
table on the right that the
Medicaid program has grown 53.2%
since FY19 and we've only added
6 FTE to the Medicaid team, um,
we have heard and we've heard
testimony from plaintiffs in
litigation against the state,
um, that they.
feel our agency is understaffed
to oversee the MCOs, uh, today,
so we would like to really
invest in that oversight
capacity. Moving on to slide 13,
I'd like to thank you all, uh,
for the Medicaid provider rate
increases that were supported in
FY 25 budget, um, those were
implemented on January 1st for a
lot of hard work. Uh, we did,
uh, increase Medicaid
reimbursement on 64,500 billing
codes, uh, and so all of that
has gone into place, uh, I think
in previous years when we've
done.
increases. There's been a lot of
retroactive reprocessing, not
happening this year, got
everything done, um, and those
maternal child health primary
care services and behavioral
health services are now set at
150% of Medicare, um, all other
codes by and large, uh, sort of
increased to 100% of Medicare,
70% of all Medicaid claims
include at least one primary
care code. So that is a raise
for all of our healthcare
providers across New Mexico.
On slide 14, you can just see
some examples of those increases
in terms of behavioral health
and the percentage uh that was
applied, um, so I'll move on
from there, but just wanted you
to have that.
OK, so behavioral health, um, I
wanted to just spend a little
couple of minutes talking about
behavioral health outcomes
because there have been a lot of
discussion, um, about that
during the session, but in front
of you, you have two documents.
You have a behavioral health
capacity and gaps analysis that
says that the agency has been uh
working on for the better part
of about a year, um, and so you
have the first edition of that
that actually just came out, um,
and so I'm going to talk a
little bit about how we
refining that and what, what
information it contains. You
also have a behavioral health
action plan that was recently
finalized by all of the New
Mexico agencies that um have
behavioral health, um, I know
there's been feedback about the
collaborative. I'm not meeting,
but there has been a lot of work
taking place in terms of
planning um and making sure that
we actually have a behavioral
health strategic plan and so you
have that in front of you as
well.
Um, in terms of the budget, uh,
I would, I would just describe
myself as very grateful to you
all. I think um BHSD has really
seen the largest percent
increase in its budget since
2019, um, we've worked really
hard to make sure that we're not
reverting money, I think that
was something that was an issue,
but it has sort of been cleaned
up, um, the BH the LFC
recommendation largely keeps
BHSD funding uh staff funding
flat, um, we had requested about
for FTE, um,
not a big difference there, I
think the only two things I
really want to call out here or
or that the LFC recommendation
includes, um, does, has it no no
funding for the 988 suicide and
crisis hot lifeline. I think
that's because there's a
different plan for funding that,
so I'm not sure um if that's
something we just need to
continue to discuss, um, and
then I think, um, certified
community behavioral health
clinics, of which the state
launched 5 in January earlier
this month, um.
We're not seeing that in the
budget, but it is there's an
indication from the LFC that um
that funding, that 3.3 million
is included as part of a $43
million non-recurring grant for
acute care facilities, probably
just need some, you know,
statutory clarification there
because uh CCBHCs are not acute
care facilities and so we would
just need to clarify um that
that could be spent accordingly.
So I'm just I have a few slides
about behavioral health, uh,
because I think it's so
important and so much discussion
going on about this, um, in
terms of utilization, behavioral
health visits have continued to
rise and as well as have persons
served, uh, we had 4.3 million
behavioral health visits, um,
and calendar year 24 and almost
300,000 New Mexicans served uh
positive year over year trends
continuing um in terms of
behavioral health access.
On slide 19, um, there are a lot
of um areas in which we are
seeing improved outcomes in
behavioral health, uh, New
Mexico's suicide death rate
decreased by 9% in 2023, um, and
there was actually a very
substantial decrease in the
number of new Native American
New Mexic individuals in New
Mexico who died by suicide by
43%, um, in the past year, um.
21% decrease in drug overdose
deaths between August 2023 and
August 2024, and then we are
seeing some positive trends,
some of the numbers are small,
but the trends are going in the
right direction in terms of
youth, um, so we're seeing a
positive trends in terms of uh
sadness and hopelessness,
suicide, vaping, opioid misuse,
cannabis use among our youth,
um, in terms of the gap analysis
that you have in front of you,
um, what, what we are producing,
uh, as the agency as a gap
analysis for.
Adult services, uh, so this does
not include children, um.
You have on the map, a map of
the on the left that shows how
far individuals are traveling
and this is one example. It's
medication assisted treatment,
which helps people, um, say, uh,
in a recovery for from opioid
misuse, for example, uh, and so
you can see how far today
individuals are traveling to get
those services, and so that's in
the map on the left. You can see
the total number of individuals
receiving um MAT services is
43,000.
Uh, and that's from the last
most recent available data and
then on the right, which is what
I think we really need as a
state. That's the projected
number of individuals by county
who need medication assisted
treatment who are not getting
services today. We have a
projected number of 9130
individuals who need MAT
services and so as the state
looks to build its
infrastructure for behavioral
health. This will be a very
valuable tool uh for.
us to make sure that we're
putting those investments in the
right places, um, we will have
region or county specific uh map
data in terms of projected need
for these key services, uh,
fully, uh, for all of the needs
that are in that um gap analysis
by the end of June.
OK, and then um I just want to
mention on slide 21 the the
Medicaid provider network. We
have seen a lot of growth in the
provider network. This is
probably largely due to rate
increases, um, but really
positive uh trend here, uh, more
than 2700 providers have joined
the Medicaid network since July,
um, and I just want to call your
attention that includes 532
behavioral health workers, 228
licensed counselors, 96 social
workers and 70.
LPCCs or professional
counselors.
And lastly, related to
behavioral health, um, just
wanna make the point that our
growth on slide 22, um, shows
that rural county growth is
actually the highest trend rate.
Uh, so we've seen 124% growth in
our provider network in our
rural part of our state, Moa and
Dubaca counties have the
greatest rate of growth, uh, by
646,600 and 400% respectively.
And then one more point I'd like
to make before going back to the
budget, um, is related to the
rural healthcare delivery fund,
um, the executive request does
include another $500 million for
I'm sorry, 50 million.
It's easy to add a 0 at my
agency, um, sorry, $50 million
for uh the rural healthcare
delivery fund right now the
agency is supporting almost $71
million for 51 behavioral.
Health projects across New
Mexico. That includes at least a
behavioral project in every
rural county across the state,
um, and I want to point out, um,
the real progress that has been
made. I know the system is far
from perfect and we have a lot
of work to do, uh, but New
Mexico currently ranks 7th in
the country for providing
treatment to individuals with
mental illness.
OK, I'm gonna go to back to the
budget and talk a little bit
about the developmental
disability supports division. I
think this was largely
addressed, uh, so I'm not sure
I'm going to spend a lot of time
here, but, um, 11 thing that's a
priority for me, um, the DDSD is
one of the divisions that is
newer to the healthcare
authority, right? It was part of
the Department of Health before,
um, there has been a lot of
work, lots of legislative
investments to clear the
waitlist and so that super
allocation process was a huge
investment for New Mexico and
really life changing.
for many families, um.
We didn't have a true 0 on the
waitlist because of what Miss
Dinsmore was talking about, um,
there was an accumulation over
the year of families that had to
wait for services, um, because
of the way the allocation
process is done. So that is
really the one adjustment that I
want to say we're really hoping
to get so that we can do a
continuous allocation to the
waiver and families don't have
to wait for up to a full year to
access services through the DD
waiver, um, and then I think
there's just that technical
change around.
um permitting the agency to
attribute any needed carryover
or balance uh TDDSD and FY 26,
um, that's a carryover language
that was in the Department of
Health budget.
Um, a note, uh, this is another
area where I think we are um
currently underfunded in terms
of vacancies or we have another
negative vacancy rate for DDSD,
um, and our executive rec
includes um a reduction of that
vacancy rate by 10 FTE, um, this
was recommended in a external
study, um, of DDSD that I
believe was actually a part of a
legislative effort to sort of
evaluate DDSC structure.
and so um that is part of those
external recommendations to make
sure that we meet DDSD's
obligations to keep individuals
safe and ensure that they're, we
are doing the work we need to do
to identify risk and make sure
that we um negate the rates of
uh identify and sort of
eliminate the risk of abuse,
neglect and exploitation, um,
those DDSD staff have added to
wellness visits or visiting
everyone in person twice a year.
Um, I've been on a couple of
those visits.
Uh, and I think they're really
important. Uh, we need to make
sure that we're putting eyes on,
um, this vulnerable population
for New Mexico.
Um, I'm not gonna go, I think
it's too much depth on the
health care affordability fund.
There are some differences
there. I think what I would like
to call out is that, um, and I'm
on slide 28, by the way, um,
that you know there, there could
be.
You know, differences in
enrollment that sort of result
in cuts to the funding through
this program right now at the
federal level, the subsidies
that are providing assistance or
financial assistance to make
coverage more affordability or
probably more affordable, are
probably at risk, um, and so the
healthcare affordability fund
kind of takes on a new role, um,
if we had to sort of decrease uh
enrollment we might have to do
that, um, we also want to point
out that individuals might have
substantial premium increases up
to.
800 % for an individual up to
500% uh for a family, um, and
that could affect New Mexicans
choosing to forego health
insurance, uh, because it's
simply cost prohibitive. These
are working people who uh make
too much to qualify for
Medicaid, um, and so this is
really kind of illustrative of
the cliff effect that's been
discussed so often, um, over the
past few years in terms of uh
maybe incentivizing people to
not take a better job because
they might medicaid might be
preferable financial option for
them.
I'm almost done I promise, um,
in terms of uh state health
benefits, I think, um.
There, there's a lot of work
going on right now to to shore
this up, um, we did request an
8.5% premium increase for fiscal
year 25, um,
Sorry, FY 26, um, we are
probably still going to be short
with that 8.5% increase. Um, I
think this is the result of
having a statute that is about
20 years old and the way that
the income tiers have been set
for employees. We are proposing
some modernization of that
statute, uh, to make sure that
we can shore up that deficit and
get things back on track, uh, so
we have a proposal, um, which
is, um, I'll talk about it.
just a minute, uh, for fiscal
year 25 on slide 31, um, this
was the topic that was discussed
earlier. We had an original
shortfall production of 121
million. That's now 85 million
because the actions that were
taken by the agency to sort of
shore some things up, uh, that
didn't seem right and so uh
we're now at about 85.3 million
in that uh FY 25 shortfall
projection, uh, but looking at
about 87 million uh potential
shortfall in FY 26 if we don't
do something.
mitigate that now, um, so on
slide 32. There's some options
that the agency has been
proposing, um, we are really
kind of suggesting option 3 sort
of option 1 is if we just sort
of follow what the executive and
the LSC recommendations are the
costs ultimately are higher
under that projection, um,
option one, option two is
including that 8.5% premium
increase, um, and
implementing some
reference-based pricing, which
is a cost containment initiative
that we are proposing and then
option 3 really kind of resets
the premiums to an actuarially
sound rate, which means that the
premiums collected to the fund
are sufficient to cover the full
liabilities in the fund, um, and
that actually has a lower
overall cost projection for the
state of New Mexico because um
what it does is it ensures that
the local public bodies are
adequately set and paying their
share of the.
premiums.
OK. And um we were asked to add
our C2, uh, presentations or
some a couple of C2 slides to
the deck today, so I'm not going
to spend too much time on this.
I think there's another C2
hearing going on this weekend,
um, but I wanted to just mention
in terms of the, um, miser
project, which is our Medicaid
management information systems
project. Uh, we have launched
5.5 out of 9 modules that are
fully live and in production.
Uh, we will be launching the 6th
module.
That's our financial services
claims payment in July. So most
of those modules are kind of
going into the live zone, uh,
which is really good news, um,
and that half is uh quality
assurance because we are still
integrating that with all the
other modules, so, um, that's
why it's kind of uh in that
halfway state. And then lastly,
um,
The LSC recommendation doesn't
include any funding for the
child support modernization, uh,
for our system, uh, I just want
to point out this is what the
system looks like. It was
designed in the 1990s. Uh,
there's a picture of it on your
slide. Many of our workers don't
actually know how to operate it,
uh, because it is so old, um,
and we do project that New
Mexico is losing close to $11.5
million a year in system
inefficiencies, um, and that we
could save money over the 1st 3.
with an updated system, so um.
With that, I'd like to say thank
you and um remind you that we're
really striving to adequately
fund the agency to make sure we
can meet our state and federal
obligations, ensuring access to
healthcare and protecting our
vulnerable populations. On the
right, there's a note, we get a
lot of uh thank you letters
related to the, the rural
healthcare fund. I'd like to
share that with you. Um, this is
a joint effort that was done in
collaboration with the
legislature, uh, but this is a
thank you note from a provider
who's receiving those funds,
calling it a lifeline for
individuals and a cornerstone.
for building stronger rural
communities. Thank you very much
for your investment.
Excellent. Thank you, Madam
Secretary. Thanks to your entire
team. I think we've seen a great
deal of progress and work with
you in various leadership
positions and now uh in this
spot, I think it's a very
productive relationship. Also
members, I think a shout out to
our former ranking member, uh,
Representative Armstrong, who
was a key partner on uh what the
uh we're gonna go straight to
questions. We're gonna start
with Representative Sanchez.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. I had a
question uh regarding the income
support division.
Uh, it looks like there's a big
gap between the two
recommendations and uh from what
I understand, there's a.
A delay in processing uh Snap
applications. I wanted to ask uh
LFC uh why such a big gap? It
sounded like the secretary
mentioned that ah.
The executive was proposing a
budget just to keep existing
employees and uh under the LFC's
recommendation.
It would have to let go of
employees. Is that, did I hear
that right?
Thank you, Mr. T.
Mr. Chairman Representative
Sanchez, yes, so the
LFC, if you look on page 29.
In your packets the PSL.
Um, LFC funded an extra $1
million for Philly's positions,
um, income support.
Uh, would be able to fill it
about 2.6 um additional
positions. I will.
Grant it to the agency, they
have filled a lot of positions
since this data was collected
back in August.
Um
And so
There probably is a negative
funded uh vacancy on there.
Uh, I, I, I do think the other
thing is too is um a lot of what
the agency asked for or for uh
salary adjustments, salary
increases, I didn't include that
because of the 4% uh
compensation package, and
there's also a new uh salary
plan, um, coming out, that's
gonna be.
Um, started in
July.
Uh, that'll adjust a lot of
these, we've actually found that
a lot of the income support
workers are within.
Um, market range.
Um, and so we didn't see a
reason to do those uh salary
adjustments.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Uh, I had
one more question, uh,
regarding, uh,
I nursing facil facility uh
Medicaid rate your basing.
When's the last time we did
that?
Uh, Mr. Chair Representative, I
believe it's been 17 years, uh,
since a rebasing occurred or a
full rebasing occurred, and the
reason I know that is because my
son is 17 years old and I saw
the year uh that we lasted
rebasing. I was like, OK, that,
uh, so it has been a long time.
However, there have been Market
basket increases, uh, delivered
to nursing facilities, and there
is a provider tax that is used
to generate additional revenue
and so they have received
increases year over year, in
fact.
Pretty substantial ones, um, the
rebasing, um, you know, it sort
of included in the FY20, the
agency's FY 25 budget, you're
not funded, um, and so I think
that's an issue we're still
talking about in terms of how we
worked that out. I think there's
um some mutual agreement that
they are due for a rebasing, uh,
and that, um, that is something
we need to address.
Madam Secretary, so are you
saying that uh in this budget
there's not a, you guys did not
rebates and ask for money to do
that, um, Mr. Chair.
Representative Sanchez at this
time, the executive budget
doesn't include the rebasing and
the reason for that is because
when we were uh developing the
budget back in September, the
numbers were very tight based on
the available revenue, um, that
was coming into the state and
the projection at the time, um,
and so we were not able to
increase
The nursing, it's about an $18
million I believe. We just
didn't have the room in the
budget, um, for what the agency
could do, I think things have
changed since then and so, uh,
you know, there's we're really
open to discussion, but I think
We had to prioritize rate
increases in the expansion
budget for providers that had
received no increases since 2019
and the nursing facilities have
received increases and so, um,
that was really why that was
prioritized in that way.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Um, Madam
Secretary, so you're saying the
you guys estimate the cost to be
18 million to rebates.
Uh, Mr. Chair Representative, I
want to make sure, uh, Mr.
Taylor, can I consult with my
staff on that number
can get an answer from her
after. I don't want to hold up
to the question.
Uh, Mr. Chair representative,
it's about 18 million.
Great. Thank you very much,
Representative Sanchez. Uh,
next, we're gonna go to
Representative Hernandez.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Um, and
Uh, no, Madam Secretaryers,
uh, I wanna thank, uh,
Representative um Sanchez for
bringing that up. That was
actually gonna be my question as
well. Um, Mr. Chair, the nursing
homes in
Um, northwestern New Mexico.
There's a large population of,
of Navajo elders in there.
And I even went to go visit one
of them. My, um,
The one in Bloomfield, they were
here and they expressed the
exact same uh frustration.
And, and the, the amount of time
and, and it's, it's, it's just a
fix that, that I, Mr. Chairman,
um,
Madam Secretary,
is, is this a, a, a fix that we
can
Make some movement to, to move
forward with. Thank you, Mr.
Mr. Chair, Representative
Hernandez, um, I'm sure we can
discuss, uh, ways to get some
progress. I do wanna say that we
did do a rate increase for
nursing facilities and actually
nursing facilities are one of
the only providers that have a
guaranteed rate increase every
year, so it's just, it's the
rebasing and sort of that it's a
cost-based methodology and so I
think the reason that it hadn't
been re-based since 2007 was
because of funding and so if we
can address that together, um,
really open.
Do that and happy to discuss
that further. That's true.
Thank you very much, Hernandez.
Next, we're gonna go to
represent VAA then represent
Silva.
Oh, thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Thank you for the presentation.
Uh, I'm just gonna echo the
sentiment of my colleagues, uh,
representative Sanchez and
Hernandez. um, I think it fits
in what, what we're talking
about for our nursing facilities
with protecting our vulnerable
populations.
And I think as we look at what
those services they provide.
And the level of care that some
individuals need.
My hope, uh, Mr. Chairman, is
that, um,
That we're able to properly fund
this so that the nursing
facilities don't have to make
the difficult decision.
Of reducing staff.
Or closing their doors, hence
providing even more distance for
these families and to be
displaced from their families,
and so.
I do appreciate my colleagues
bringing this to light, and I, I
do support the fact of us taking
a look at this and funding this
program.
Thank you very much, uh, Baca,
Representative Silva, then
represented them.
Thank you, Chair. Thank you,
Madam Secretary. Um, I
appreciate the information and
reports, um, the Children's
Health Insurance program went
into effect in 1997. I didn't
have health insurance until
then, um, growing up.
And so health insurance is
really important, um, issue for
me. And if we can't keep our
kids and families, um, fed and
healthy and safe, um, then I
don't know what we're doing as a
state, um, and I really think
that we're at the cusp of a,
like a tipping point of getting
New Mexicans as healthy as
possible.
So I want to recommend to the
committee and my colleagues that
we try to fully fund HCA, um, as
much as we can. Um, so I, I
would recommend a full um
executive of
Take on the budget that the
executive recommends, especially
the income support division. Um,
I got numerous emails about it.
I don't know if folks are in the
room that sent emails out. You
can raise your hands if you did,
Um, but often it's, yeah, thank
you. Often it's the first
Person that a family talks to,
um, that represents the state in
some cases, but also when
they're looking for support for
food or health, so thank you so
much, Mr. Chair. Thank you.
Thank you very much, we're gonna
go to represent Dow and Duncan.
Thank you, Mr. Chair, and thank
you, Secretary, for the
presentation and all the staff
for their hard work, um, OK, let
me get my on page.
8. When you talk about the snap
and the EBT, um, you were
talking about that as income.
Can you explain that to me or,
or, or just in general the, the
income support is, is that
considered income?
Um,
Mr. Chair, a representative Doo,
I guess it, it kind of it does.
I mean it's income for food, um,
and so it's specific for food.
You can't spend it on anything.
We have other income assistance
programs that are, you know,
there's cash assistance we
provide um home energy heating
assistance and cooling
assistance. So there's different
forms of financial assistance,
child support as a form of
financial assistance or income
assistance, but the SNAP program
is, um, specifically for food.
Thank you, Mr.
and thank you secretary for
that. Do folks have to claim
that as a fringe benefit on
their taxes. Uh, Mr. Chair
represented it out. I'm really,
I'm not sure I can get back to
you and find out. I just hear a
lot of reference to where
providing people with income
that I've heard is like
assistants in the past. I know
that like even uh with family
style meals at a childcare
center, if we provide a free
meal to the employees so that
they sit down and eat
inclusively with the family with
the children in the room, we're
supposed to count it as a fringe
benefit or if we provide
The housing subsidy, a subsidy
even but for calling something
as income and counting it
towards increasing their total
reducing our call level or
whatever. I'm just wondering if
we've thought that through. Um.
When you, on page 9, thank you,
Mr. Chair and secretary on page
9, when you talk about losing to
your competitors, who are the
people that you, who do you use,
lose your staff to.
Um, Mr. Chair,
I representatives, yes,
Representative Do. Sorry, um, I,
we lose them, we're, you lose
them to other agencies, uh, and
so these are really hardworking
people, um, during the unwinding
for of Medicaid, for example,
mandatory overtime across the
agency Saturday's evenings, um,
people sacrifice their time with
their families uh to really show
up and do this work, um, it
would be really easy for them to
get a job doing something way
way easier.
Not as complex. It takes about a
year to train them adequately.
These are people who are charged
with issuing billions of dollars
in benefits, um, and so yeah,
they, I mean they could go work
at Starbucks, probably make more
money, any retail, and so we do,
we compete with uh all of those
entities.
There are parts of the state
that these are really good jobs.
I mean, in rural New Mexico, you
know, having state employment is
really stable. There are good
benefits and so we've really
been thinking about that, like
pushing, you know, kind of
looking at our workforce and
other parts of the state to make
sure that we can adequately
hire, um, where, you know,
that's not true in Santa Fe,
it's really hard to live on $22
an hour, um, not really, um,
universally true all across New
Mexico, but um, yeah, there's a
lot of competition for workforce
out there right now.
Thank you. Thank you, Mr. Chair,
and thank you secretary for
that. On page 1130 assisted
living facilities closed, were
those closures more often in
rural areas or metro areas.
owned and operated versus
corporate.
Mr. Chair, uh, uh,
Representative Doo, I'm not sure
if we know if we have a map. I'm
gonna look behind me just to see
if we have the answer or we need
to get it to you.
Um
Uh, Mr. Chair, Representative
Doo, it sounds like a
combination of the two. We can
provide you with some
information about where those
closures were located. Thank
you, Mr. Chair and thank you
Secretary. I'm really concerned
about the silver tsunami, our
population is aging, at least in
my district.
And to hear that we're losing
facilities and capacity is, um,
you know, our bed capacity is
pretty concerning. I'm
wondering, I know you presented
to us early on in a very high
level, but I forgot what is the
amount of money that's needed to
rebase the nursing facility.
Could you talk a little bit
about that? Uh, Mr. Chair,
Representative Doo, it's about
18 million in general fund.
18 million. And what percentage
would that represent of your
budget?
Oh, Mr. Chair Representative
Doo, it's a small percentage in
a $15.2 billion dollar budget.
I'm gonna look at the math
people next to me to see if they
know that it's not, it's not
very much, yeah.
Madam, Mr. Chair and secretary,
I, I think it's 1%, I think less
than a
not even one, not even 1% for
our so families can stay close
to their loved ones as they, um,
Need assistance at the end of
life.
Um, OK, and then, um,
What other ways, how, how are
you looking at?
How what what ways you're
looking at to achieve this
funding? Is there plans or how
are you looking at making this
work? I, I'm hearing from
facilities and I'm sure it's
worse in the metro areas as
you've pointed out, maybe it
works a little better in the
rural areas, but not in Santa
Fe, that they're losing between
$40.80 dollars a day on the care
they're currently providing.
Mr. Chair, um, Representative
Doo, I think, um, you know, just
we're happy to talk about that
and see if we can kind of reach
some kind of way to get there
through the budget. I mean, I
think, um, unfortunate the
numbers have changed
substantially since September
when the agency submitted its
request and so the general fund
has shifted a lot in terms of
the need. And so I do think
there's probably more room than
there was when the agency
submitted its budget back in
September, uh, to really have a
productive conversation about
getting those dollars built in.
Thank you.
And my last question, Mr. Chair
and secretary, you said
6,400,500 Medicaid building
codes received a rate increase.
How many codes are there? I'm, I
mean, I'm my mind's blown. I
can't, um, Mr. Chair represented
out, I don't know how many there
are. You're asking some really
good questions today. I, I, I
don't know. There's, there's a
procedural codebook with
thousands of codes and um I
don't know the exact number, but
70% of all
all codes received some kind of
if that's 70% of codes, then you
have over 70,000, easily over
75,000 codes, potentially
100,000 codes. Is there any
efficiency or costs that would
be saved by merging or
consolidating, who has to
determine the code? Is it the
nurse, the doctor who does this?
Uh, Mr. Chair Representative
Doo, those are those are medical
codes. We cannot change them.
They're determined by the
American Medical Association,
and that's really how providers
account for the work that
they're doing and it's tied to
audit, so not really possible.
It's sort of
like when the doctors, when you
provide the, you know, you go in
for a physical, that's a code,
and if they take blood, that's a
code and so they have to code
those things differently so that
um we know what services were
provided and what we're paying
for. OK. Thank you. Thank you,
Mr. Chair.
OK. Thank you very much,
Representative Doub. uh, great
questions. Next, we're gonna go
to Representative Duncan, then
Representative Luhan.
Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Madam Secretary, I'm gonna beat
the dead horse some more
um, 17 years, we ought to be
ashamed of ourselves.
Uh, Mr. Mr. Chair
Representative, I really need to
be clear that the nursing
facilities have received a lot
of money. There is a provider
tax that pulls down about $90
million for nursing facilities
every year, um, they, they, they
have received a large shares of
increases. I think it's really
just the rebasing that we're
talking about and I don't want
to create a perception that we
haven't raised nursing facility
rates in 17 years cause that
just simply isn't the case.
Thank you, Madam Chair, for
that, but the problem is, is
we've had 30 facilities closed.
They didn't.
closed because they weren't
getting paid.
They closed for probably a
number of reasons. One is
probably finding help, too, was
not getting paid enough, um, I,
I received umpteen calls from
providers that say that we're
barely getting by with what
we're getting and so my point
is, we as a state government
should be doing better than
this.
We asked them to do better and
then we don't hold ourselves
accountable.
Mr. Chair Representative, uh, I
don't disagree with you. I just
want to clarify that was
assisted living facilities um
that had closed and were the
agency is requesting more
funding for assisted living
facilities than what is in the
LFC recommendation.
Um, so I think that's one area I
just wanted to clarify, um, and
assisted living facilities and
nursing facilities are
different, so there's um the
assisted living facilities have
not received a rate increase
since 2019, um, the nursing
facilities receive a rate
increase every year, um, and so
that was really the distinction.
I just want to make that, uh,
because it's not 30 nursing
facilities that had closed.
So yeah.
Thank you, um, Mr. Chair and,
and Madam Secretary. So if I go
to line 7, we're talking about
assisted living facility rates.
The executive and the LFC
there's a huge difference there.
Can, can we explain that?
Uh
Yeah,
Mr. Cha representative the.
Difference there is that the
rates, um,
requested by the executive with
about double the rates for
assisted living facilities. LXC
recommended about a 26%.
Um, increase on those rates.
and so the LFC um and I guess
I'm gonna get in the weeds for a
minute here.
So the LFC understands precisely
what it takes to keep an
individual in that home and the
cost of that.
Uh, no, Mr. Chair, it's, it's a,
you know, this is a budget we
have to have priorities, um.
We included a 26% increase,
which I think is pretty
substantial.
Thank you, Mr. Chair and thank
you for that. So, are we still
playing catch up?
We might have got a 26%, but are
we still playing catch up?
Uh, Mr. Chair, uh, maybe, I
mean, maybe it's something that
we look at again next year.
Um, but I think at 26% increase
is pretty substantial.
Mr. and I couldn't agree more
with you if we're not playing
catch up. So if, if we're not
going to provide the funding
that's necessary that we don't
close 30 more facilities this
year, who takes the blame for
sending these folks to another
state to get the care.
Uh, Mr. Chair, um,
You know, this is, this is a
budget we're doing this.
It's
Thank you, Mr. Chair, I
understand that. I'm, I'm just
frustrated because that group is
now now going to be the next
group of people that are going
to be homeless.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. I'm just
so frustrated. No, thank you,
Representative Duncan, and it's
our, of course, it's our
province to make the policy, our
analysts give us that
information. Thank you, great
questions. We're gonna go uh
quickly to ranking member
Chatfield, then representative
Bohan.
Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Good afternoon, ma'am 6 here,
um.
What can we do to, so that we
can take care of our old folks.
You know, I mean, we, we beat
this around how much did we
raise Medicare? They stopped me
in the hallway, so, we're losing
$40.
Per person
Uh, Medicare rates are too low.
Uh
as you said, the, the, this is a
big machine, it's pretty
complicated machine, you work
with it all the time? Tell me,
other than just uh
What the agency with money. What
can we do to fix the problem.
They take care of our elderly.
Uh, Mr. Chairs representative,
um, Chatfield, I think that's a
really, it's a big question, um.
I think that, you know, raising
the rates is one strategy, um,
there are substantial payments
that are going out to nursing
facilities for quality of care,
um, and they are incentivized to
improve nursing facility
quality, uh, they get bonuses
for that, um, so really kind of
trying to focus on the quality
of care that our facilities are
providing, and that's another
avenue, but it is nursing
facilities are an expensive
model, um, the state is also
very focused, and I think we're
actually one of the
the best seats on this in terms
of what we call rebalancing,
which is serving more people in
the community, um, then in a
facility and so really making
sure that we have a robust
system of care, uh, for in-home
services and caregivers, um, and
so I think there's a lot of
discussion going on about that
too, and what's adequate
funding, um, you know, at the
end of the day, these are really
expensive services and problems,
um, and so I think that's really
the tension that um Mr. Shea is
talking about, uh, but it does,
you know, I think.
Um, it probably should be a
focus, uh, in terms of like what
the reimbursement rates are, uh,
you know, for some of those
caregiver supports because that
is, that is the alternative is
sort of making sure that we can
keep people safe in their homes
and um not put them in
institutional care, um, which is
really not what most people
want, so, um, I think there's
there's system of care issues,
but New Mexico is one of the
strongest, uh, sort of, uh, home
and community based networks of
care in the country in terms of
uh keeping
people out of institutions and
that's really important factor,
uh, as well for healthy aging.
Mr. Chair,
Madam Secretary, what is the
monthly cost to have average
monthly costs. You have someone
in a long term care facility.
Um,
uh, Representative, I, I'm not
sure the average cost.
We can provide that to you, get
you that cost unless somebody
has that.
And we will have that in just
one minute, one minute.
I was told that, uh, that, uh,
Facilities are losing about $40
per person. I guess that's $40
per day per person.
Uh, Mr. Chair, would you mind if
deputy secretary Secretary
Castillo.
Um, chair vice chair, members of
the committee, Representative
Chatfield, Alex Castillo, Smith,
deputy secretary. Um, so we have
34, 3,496 licensed assisted
living facility beds in New
Mexico. One of the things I want
to point out is that it's
actually cheaper than annual
cost of care per member for
caring for folks in assisted
living facility. That average
cost is $30,189 compared to the
average cost.
of care for individual nursing
facility, which is $90,00043.
Part of that is that
I'm sorry, can you say that one
more time, the total amount
30,000 for how much time?
30,000.
Um 189 per Um
Chair of Representative
Chatfield, the average annual
cost of caring for a member in a
nursing facility is $90,043
compared to an assisted living
facility and an average annual
cost of 30,189.
Part of that.
There's many factors to that,
but a significant one is that
the, the level of care required
for an individual at a nursing
home is much more significant.
Their activities of daily living
are a little more compromised,
if you will, I need more
assistance, whereas those living
in an assisted living facility,
typically have more levels of
independence.
So, Mr. Chair, Madam Secretary,
let's just go with the $30,189
annual assisted living cost.
What does Medicaid pay?
Um, Mr. Chair, uh,
Representative Chatfield, I'm in
terms of are you're asking what
the total cost, uh, that
Medicaid covers in the assisted
living facility. Mr. Chair, um,
we will have to get that
information for you because we
cannot cover the full cost of of
the assisted living. We are
federally precluded from
covering room and board, uh, and
so individuals we usually have
to cover for part of the cost we
can't cover the entire cost and
so we can get you some follow
up.
information about what that
actual um coverages we did ask,
um, most recently in our uh
federal waiver to the federal
government. We asked for
approval to cover room and board
and assisted living facilities
and that request was denied, uh,
and so Medicaid will not cover
for that room and board cost. So
that 30,000 reflects the total
cost, um, and we would be paying
a portion of that.
Thank you, Mr.
Thank you very much for your
member Chatfield. Next, we're
gonna go to Representative
Lujan.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Thank you
Secretary of Staff and uh LFC,
um.
I have to change my my notes
here, um.
So, I think we have we're we're
hearing uh
Uh, consensus on some of the,
the, the concerns, especially
with the um the loss of, uh,
possible loss of caseworkers
that we we went through. What,
what is the plan to prevent um
Delays and staff is a question
we already heard, um.
So
I guess what is, what would,
what is the worst that could
happen? What is the worst
scenario, Mister Chair, what is,
what, what do we need to, where
do we fill that gap, Mr. Chair.
Mr. Chair, Representative Lu Han
said the way that the current
LFC budget funds the agency.
Sort of shorts that supplemental
food benefit, so we, we would
need sort of cut that. I think
that was part of the discussion,
but we are also looking at
losing 131 FTE uh because it
supports 27 FTE out of 158.
Those are filled positions, so
we would probably have to go
into a hiring freeze. I, I don't
know. I mean, we're, we can't.
There's no other funding source
for uh income support. It's not
like and it's, as you know, uh,
we can't run up a shortfall or
deficiency, um, that on top of
the issue of not funding that 8%
salary differential means that
we will probably lose a lot of
staff. So we will probably
quickly get to the uh vacancy
rate, uh, but I think what it
does is it means that ISD will
not be able to function
correctly. Um, we are very under
a lot of scrutiny, um, really,
really proud.
of the work that we've done to
clean that up, uh, it's really
tremendous. A lot of work has
gone into that. I would hate to
lose that progress. We are also
under a, uh, almost 40 year
consent decree related to access
to services through the income
support division, um, which is
also a big factor, um, you know,
it's sort of anything that would
kind of upset that progress or
kind of keep the agency unable
to be adequately staffed.
Thank you, Mr. Chair, and I
think we, I would just mention
that, you know, during the
pandemic, um, and afterwards for
quite a while, the, the agency
wasn't meeting its performance
targets on timeliness of
Um, and all those things. It is
meeting its um
Performance targets at this
point now.
Um, the other thing I would say
is like,
We were behind for quite a long
time. I know the secretary is
talking about that we might, we
could lose money, but we were
behind for a pretty long time
and we never lost that money,
and so I just wanted to kind of
point out that, you know, there
there is kind of a, a give and
take on this.
Mr. Chair, I'm sorry, uh, Mr.
Chair, our representative, I do
want need to correct. We were
under a corrective action plan
with the federal government
related to the uh performance
metrics for many years um and
and actually the snap settlement
agreement is the result of um
some failure to perform, uh, by
the agency and so I just, I want
it correct. I think there have
been penalties. There have been
corrective action plans, um, and
most recently because the agency
was able to clean up that from
unwinding, um, we
under a federal review and we
were able to exit that review
with glowing uh remarks from our
federal regulator about how
quickly we had been able to exit
that. So I do think those
penalties are very much on the
table, um, if we cannot achieve
our performance.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Thank you
for that, for those answers and,
and, um.
And clarification also. I think
that, um.
We need to look a little bit
more and see how we can uh come
together on that. The, the other
thing is the question that came
up, Mr. Chair is the 988
funding. Is there an
alternative, uh?
plan in the budget for that, Mr.
Chair.
Uh, Mr. Chair and, uh,
Representative Lujan.
Um
When we were developing the
budget, the department had um
said that they were going to
introduce a bill that the
executive was going to introduce
a bill, increase the
telecommunication surcharge, um,
to pay with for this um 988, as
it was originally envisioned by
the federal government when they
um put out these grants, um, was
that we were gonna, um, with the
states, we're gonna increase
that telecommunication surcharge
to pay for the 988.
Thank you, Mr.
uh, thank you, Mr. Chair, um,
secretary, has that been a uh
action from the executive.
Uh, go ahead, Mr. Chair, I think
Miss Dinsmore can answer that
question, um, thanks, Mr. Chair
Reresentative Luhan, um, if I
understand what you're asking,
it's uh where in the executive
is this funding. So with the
executive has is a
non-recurring, a special
appropriation, um, so you don't
see it on these slides, but it
is in there and basically what
it is, is a $9 million general
fund.
Um, appropriation contingent on
any legislation, uh, proposing a
fee replacement, failing. So
that's, that's you, Mr. Chair, I
understand. Thank you, um, next,
I'm trying to be quickly quick
so uh
uh I just want to say thank you.
I, I love, I'm, I'm reading over
again the the statistics and
information we have regarding
behavioral health and, and
those, uh, those changes and
declines, uh, I wanna say, um,
That's a good thing, and I think
that that will help us uh come
to a measure for other.
Uh, legislation that we're
looking at, um, but to to better
improve those numbers as well as
we were really, um, um, moving
in, you know, down in those um
those in the other direction for
quite a while, um, Mr. Chair.
Some of the questions I have
regarding um the high level.
Um, budget she, uh, on, um.
Page one
2 points, uh, line 45 and 60,
we're looking at the opioid
revenue replacement, and maybe I
just missed this. Uh, can we,
can I have some clarification
on.
Um, we're not
We don't have it funded in the
LFC line, but what is there a
reason because of the uh
replacement, um.
Method that we're gonna use, Mr.
Chair, uh, Mr. Chair
Representative, I'll try to be
really quick for you. Um, so,
uh, there is no opioid revenue
replacement, um,
In the LFC budget because they
kept it flat to 25. So the
executive took it down just a
little bit, which is why you'll
see just a small amount of
general fund in there, but
there's not a very big
difference in that revenue
source.
Thank you. I appreciate that,
um.
Moving on, I'm gonna go to um
the child support um portion of
the budget.
And I'm looking at updating the
child support system to the 21st
century, Mr. Chair, um,
I've had um interactions with
constituents here and I've
actually gone.
In person to talk to, um, the
departments and I, I just want
to say I, I have the highest
respect for all of our state
employees and for the work that
they do, but quite frankly, the
systems are not they they're,
they're not talking to each
other. The the work is doubling
up because you think that online
is collecting the information
and then you go into a person
interview and they don't have
any record of the individual uh
from the online um registration
even.
And so then they're creating a
new case file, and this is
duplication and a waste of time
and money and effort. So, Mr.
Chair, I just say, um, this is a
this is a big problem and
individuals that are going to
use and need um child support
and need other uh information
and and they feel like they're
they're going through the
process online and then come to
find out. It's taking 3 to even
6 months or longer for them to
even get.
Get their file in place, so this
is not, this is not OK and then.
Um, we really need to look at
that. Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Thank you very much,
Representative Lohan. Uh, next,
we're gonna go to Representative
Herrera.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Thank you
Secretary and presenters so.
appreciate all this information,
although it is a
A heavy lift, um,
Uh, ditto on the nursing home
problems uh and we Rita, you
know, they closed one down 4
years ago, the county did a bond
to raise the money, and yet we
find ourselves now, you know,
hoping that the governor will
chip in, you know, 11 million
from the capital outlay just to
keep up with the expanded cost
of building what we have, and
that's after collecting money
over a five-year period, so you
know.
The more we do, the more it
costs, it seems so um ah.
Uh, people in trauma now have to
drive to Santa Fe.
If they're lucky enough to get
into a nursing home and, and so
we all get that problem, so
I'll, I'll go on. I'm curious
about
page 32. The five-year cost to
the state and the 3 policy
options. Would you go over that
page for me again.
Yes, uh, Mr. Chair,
Representative Herrera, so
sorry, I did go over it quickly
from an interest of time, but.
Um, I guess I'll start by saying
that.
The health care authority is now
charged with managing state
employee health benefits. This
was something that was
transitioned to the agency
starting July 1st, um.
What? I would say it has been,
um, the that health benefit
program has been running a
deficit year over year. The
legislature has been picking up
the cost for uh through specials
and supplementals to make sure
that there's not a deficiency.
Um, so it has a structural
deficit, um, one of the things
that I have been charged with is
cleaning that up, uh, making
sure that we kind of have some
options on the table so that uh
year over year, I don't keep
coming back to the
Legislature asking for $90
million to cover a gap. There
are really some factors that are
kind of driving that deficit.
The first one is that the
premiums have not been set at a
level that will cover the
liabilities. This is just like
plain math. You got to collect
enough.
Uh, to cover your liabilities in
the fund, uh, and so that has
not been true. They're currently
running over 120% of what the
liabilities are, so that's
problem number one. Problem #2
is that um the way that the
statute currently is set, sets a
very finite amount in terms of
what, how much employees will
pay based on salary levels, and
I think it's 500 or 60,000 in
the statute, um, now when that
was set, that was 20 years ago.
Um, now,
Everyone's making way more money
over here and they're they're
that statute has not been
changed in 20 years, and so
there's a problem in terms of
the state used to pay about 80%
of employee health benefits. Now
it's paying like 60% and so
we've shifted the costs and I
think the legislature has been
very mindful about not wanting
to shift those full premium
costs on to employees, but the
underlying foundational problem
still remains and so.
These options here are really
around trying to address that
deficit.
In a structural and cohesive
way. So option 3.
What that does is it requires us
to do a few things. First, we
would have to set an actuary
sound premium level, which means
in order to do that premiums
would have to go up right now by
20 to 30%. OK, so we don't want
to pass the full cost of that on
to our employees. So we're also
proposing resetting those tiers
uh to make sure that the state
is picking up sort of what the
market would usually dictate as
the employer.
For these employees and the
employers are paying the
remainder, uh, but that we reset
that to a fair level. That's
really more closer to what the
market would dictate and then
thirdly, um, this option would
require the state to do some
cost containment. Um, we have
not done cost containment in
that benefit fund.
I don't think, uh, historically,
uh, and so we have a proposal
that would kind of dictate what
we pay to hospital providers,
for example, uh, some of our
hospitals were paying 700% of
Medicare, um, I think that, uh,
other states have exercised this
method and said we're going to
have a price cap. We're not
going to pay above 200% of
Medicare, for example. And so
that is what option 3 is and why
it represents a lower overall
projected cost to the state is
because
it resets.
All of those things, um, and
make sure that the local public
bodies are paying their fair
shares. The state of New Mexico
has been picking up that cost or
uh charging the local public
body is kind of creating some
litigation, I think, um, and so
it would really kind of reset
that and sort of lower the cost
burden for the state of New
Mexico and have the local public
bodies paying the correct share.
So it's really complicated. I'm
happy to meet with you. I hope
that helps to answer the
question, uh, but this option
really 3 really just kind of.
to get things back on track.
Uh,
Thank you, Chair. I appreciate
the answer and I, I do have to
talk to you more.
Thank you represented an
insurance costs are one of our
most challenging things. Thank
you for digging in and thank
you, Madam Secretary, for going
to more, uh, we're gonna go next
to Representative Herndon.
Thank you, Mr. Chair and thank
you Madam, uh, secretary. I just
want to uh first uh direct your
attention to page 19 of your
presentation and on page 19 of
your presentation, you talk
about um.
There. You talk about the
reduction in youth mental health
and they show um
Issues and you show that it's
showing improvement. Two years
ago, this body allocated about
$1.7 million to mental health
rooms and schools around the
state. Is there a correlation
between what you're seeing and
the reduction in mental health
issues in youth and those mental
health rooms. Uh, Mr. Chair,
Representative Hernon, that's a
great question. Um, I have no
doubt that that probably
contributes. I'm sure that that
was uh probably through the
Department of Health. Um,
public education, um, the all
resources, um, there's been a
huge investment through the
legislature around school-based
mental health, um, and I think,
yes, I think that those, I can't
tell you that there's a direct
correlation, but certainly that
addition of resources at schools
where kids are uh really makes a
lot of sense and I'm sure there
is some correlation um in the
data.
Thank you. I'm asking for the
data on that and hopefully I can
see that and maybe somewhere you
all where you are keeping this
data on the reduction that
you'll also be able to share
that. And then Madam Secretary,
Mr, Mr. Chair, I am also taking
you to page 28 of your
presentation, if I may.
And then that presentation, you
talk about there being the
possibility of a cap on
enrollment and um looks like um
healthcare marketplace plans,
and then that it, it might be
capped at a rate
in a number, so I'm asking you,
Mr. Chair and Madam Secretary,
like what will happen to the
rest of the people.
To try to sign on after you have
reached your rate. I mean, our
Affordable Care Act is supposed
to care for everyone. Please
help us understand that.
Mr. Chair, uh, Representative
Herndon, the Healthcare
Affordability fund is sort of
helping people afford coverage
sort of adding additional uh
coverage protection or
affordability protections for
New Mexicans. There have been
some pretty big subsidies
provided through the federal
government that are expiring
right now, uh, under the current
federal uh structure and so, um,
what this would result in and so
there's a difference between the
executive and the legislative in
terms of what gets funded here,
um, and so we're
there are some potential
scenarios in which we wouldn't
be able to provide that
assistance to everyone, um, and
I think uh what that means is
sort of there on the slide. It,
it could result in some
substantial premium increases
for families, uh, and what that
would mean is probably that they
might forego coverage. It costs
about $2500 to $30,000 to buy
coverage for the year as a
family if you don't have
employer sponsored in coverage,
um, and that just, that's
premium only.
That doesn't include any of the
deductibles or cost sharing, um,
so it's a very expensive
product, um.
Probably as close to people's
mortgage, uh, and so, you know,
I think it's, it could be really
unaffordable for some people.
So, uh, Mr. Chair, um,
Madam Secretary, I just want to
take you to uh
To page, um, I think it's 18 of
your slides where you talk about
healthy eating. I'm, I'm
thinking that this was the
slide. Well, in any event, you
made a presentation about uh
during the summertime, what you
do is you help make sure that
children have food and so my
question to you, Mr. Chair and
Madam Secretary, has to do with
um my conversation with, with
students around the state,
talking about the free lunch
programs that we've had in the
unhealthiness of those foods. So
my question to you
you is, do you work with uh
healthy farms, uh, any of those
places to make sure that the
summer supplements are healthy.
Uh, Mr. Chair, uh,
Representative Herndon, so the,
the supplements that were
provided during the summer are
really it's for groceries. It's
not um meals and so I think the
meals are provided under the by
the public education department
sort of in that, and I know that
there's a lot of work going on,
um, you know, including an
executive priority around making
sure that kids get healthy meals
and trying to require that
across the state, so, um, that
summer food program was really
designed to provide families who
don't.
have access to meals at school
during the summer because
school's on break with enough
money to buy some groceries over
the summer, so it's really a
grocery benefit. So Mr. Chair,
Madam Secretary, I'll go back.
Are they healthy?
Uh, Mr. Chair, a Representative
Herndon, I think those follow
the the typical rules of the
snap program, uh, which does
not, uh, unfortunately, and I, I
wish it did. I actually, uh,
it's one of the concerns they do
have about the snap program as I
do wish it sort of subsidized
healthier food, uh, it is a
more, um, at the federal level
sort of allows for a broader
benefit in terms of choices of
food. Thank you Mr. Chair and,
and Madam Secretary, just two
other quick questions.
One I want to refer you, I, I
wanna go back to page 11 of your
presentation for just a moment
and specifically pointing to the
program for all inclusive care
of the elderly. So I just want
to understand, Mr. Chair and
Madam Secretary, does this have
to do with respect to people who
are helping to take care of our
aging population, similar to the
way the aging and long-term
services department as the
Medicare program for helping
those with Alzheimer's.
Um, uh, Mr. Chair Representative
Herndon, the PA program is for
seniors right now it's sort of
limited in terms of region, and
we are looking to expand that
over the long term, but I think
you might be referring to the.
Personal care services program,
uh, which is really where most
of the funding goes for
caregiver supports that are
providing care in the home, uh,
to our seniors or individuals
who need long term care
services, and so I think um
those two things are not the
same, um.
All right, thank you for that
clarification, Mr. Chair, Madam
Secretary, and then my last
question, I just want to go back
to the different sheet for just
a moment, if I may, and specific
to line 43 on that different sea
where we're talking about
behavioral health provider rate
adjustments, and maybe this may
be a, a, a question for Mr.
Sunni. I know that one of the,
one of the pieces of legislation
that is before us right now is
making sure.
Uh, that, um, people who are
seeking behavioral health
services, don't pay a
co-payment. But my question is
very different than that. In
terms of this provider
reimbursement, like what is the
payment difference like is we
had been looking at $150 payment
increase per person uh to a
provider when they are going to
a behavioral healthcare. What is
this provider rate increase. Uh,
Mr. Chair, Representative
Herndon, I'm glad you asked this
question. This is, uh, one of
the, this is.
related to, so we, as you know,
did, um, rate increases, uh,
that were scaled to Medicare or
across behavioral health and
primary care and maternal child
health and all the other 600,000
codes, um, we, um, we also.
Did not. We were there are some
codes that are not covered by
Medicare and so they didn't
receive as much of a rate
increase and so we would like to
kind of fix that, and that was
that budget request to sort of
go in and make sure that we have
funding to increase those rates
that don't have a Medicare
equivalent that we could kind of
raise the rest of the behavioral
health codes cause not
everything has some of them are
just Medicaid only uh codes and
they're not covered in the
Medicare program.
And just for clarification, Mr.
Chair and Mr. Madam Secretary.
The executive was looking to
increase all the codes, but in
our LFC budget we were not
increasing all of the codes.
Uh, Mr. Chair and
Representative, yeah, if you
look at the, the LFC
recommendation was actually 5.8
million, and the executive
recommendation was 2.9 million,
so we funded the agency's
request for um increasing those
codes based on that. You, Mr.
Chair, thank you very much.
Thank you very much for Herndon.
Next we're gonna go to represent
Little.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Thank you
for the presentation this
afternoon. I think I have 33,
issues to, uh, I'd like to
address uh the first is, um,
regarding uh the presentation,
uh, the segment on page 7 about
our about the um stuffing.
Shortage, uh, the shortages that
could occur.
Um, I think that the
conversation that has been going
on now is incredibly timely and
that uh with the workload
increasing, I cannot, uh, it's
difficult, let me say, it's
difficult for me, Mr. Chair, to
see how we can continue to serve
the citizens of the state with
the loss of staffing.
So, uh, Mr. Chair, I would like
to flag.
This area, uh, and, um, request
a discussion on additional
discussion to meet this request
and avoid the uh loss of staff.
Uh, uh, another part to that as
well is uh if the with the study
having been taking compensation
piece taken on, um,
As I understand it, Mr. Chair,
the these uh pay levels also
include bands, and that as
individuals are working their
way through this uh through um a
department such as ISD.
That they are, and correct me if
I'm wrong, but uh that they uh
upon their anniversary dates or
merit will be able to reach the
next level.
And
Um
That is key in retaining good
employees. And so, uh again, Mr.
Chair, I'd like to make sure
that we uh do flag this item,
uh, when we get to this topic.
Um, thank you. And then
secondly, um,
I don't need an answer now, but
I would like to get some
information in reference to page
19, the uh suicide, drug
overdose and uh mental health,
youth mental health showing
improvement. I'm
Incredibly
Happy to see uh pleasantly happy
to see and surprisingly to see
the
Suicide death rates decreasing,
so offline, my question is, um,
what you didn't get the
opportunity to discuss what
this, what might be this trend
might be attributed to. So
please, I'd like to know what
that is because if we're doing
something right.
All of us want to know, and we'd
like to continue it and and be
able to support those services
as well. Uh, finally, um,
Representative Luhan touched on
page 35, the updating the child
support system, and my question
is this.
How much, Mr. Chair, if it has
been, um, examined already or
priced, uh, what is the
anticipated cost of a new
system.
Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Um, Mr. Chair, um,
Representative Little, um, the
request of the executive was
15.4 million.
Um
There has been, there have been
some stops and starts on this,
um, replacement project we had
to do because it's a mainframe
based system we had to do with
what's called a refactorings we
did complete that several years
ago.
The federal government is also
sort of uh, you know, they've
been, they've asked for us
feasibility studies. There's
been a lot of work that's kind
of gone into supporting that
child support system
replacement, um, and trying to
make the case for that, um, I
did try to make it a goal that
we would at least start work
before I leave, uh, and so
hoping to at least get some
progress on that, uh, but that
cost for 26 would be that 15.4
and, if I may. The um is this uh
Is this a
Stand alone if you will, uh,
because of the content of the
information in the system. And
I'm wondering if there's an
opportunity for um do it to
assist with this or whether, and
you may have touched on this
earlier. Forgive me if I did
not, do not recall, uh, whether
they're providing assistance in
this, and is this something that
might be able to be coordinated
and alleviate some of the.
cost
Uh, through their, through their
uh with their assistance. Thank
you, Mr. Chair Representative
Little, great question. We, we
do work closely with do it, um,
they're pretty involved in our
big IT projects and so happy to
um kind of raise that with them,
um, the child support system,
one of the things that does make
it somewhat unique is that it
contains federal tax
information, uh, and so there
are some very, very, uh, serious
protections, probably even more
thanIPPA in terms of um how we
protect that data.
Um, and so it is, it is
something that we could look at.
Uh, there are some off the shelf
products that other states are
using, uh, that we were kind of
hoping to be able to leverage
here at to start designing our
own system and um, you know,
hopefully.
If I may help them, if I may
help on, uh, in volume one, Mr.
Chair and Representative Little.
On page 166, you can see the
report card for this project.
Um
At the end of FY 24, it had all
red ratings and uh I just wanted
to mention that um at that time
they had spent about 46.3% of
the appropriations that they had
received.
Um, and now the project is
expected to close out in 2029,
which is 16 years after the
beginning of the project, and so
this is a project that's had a
lot of issues, um, and like the
secretary said starts and stops.
I just wanted to point out the,
that, that piece of it for you.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. The end of
my questions. Great. Thank you
very much, Representative
Little. Uh, next, we're gonna go
to represent Pettigroup.
Thank you, Chairman, and, and
thank you all for suffering
through all the questions. Um,
Chairman
My first question is probably a
very basic one.
on line 14 of the, of the
differences she, uh, we have
county supported Medicaid.
Herman, can we get an
explanation on what that is.
Uh, County supported Medicaid is
a um.
It's a fund that's been created
in statute, uh, we get, um,
funding from each county, uh,
based on the GRT rate, um, I can
get you more information on it
if, if you want, but that's,
that's
That's it. Um, we had uh
unbalanced carry forward, uh,
that we used up last year, um,
that on balance wasn't available
this year.
So we had to um
Increase the use.
Thank you, Chairman and thank
you Eric for that. I had two
potential answers and at least
One of the two options was on my
list, so that's good.
I appreciate that. Um, Chairman,
I have a question for you. Um,
As we look at the, the budget.
Are we
Considering
HCA January.
Medicaid budget.
Or reconsidering the executive
recommendation versus the LFC,
which one are we comparing?
Yeah, uh, thank you, great
question, Pettigrew, that our
budget sheets are built off of
previous projections, uh, but
it's a great question in our
work that we're doing here in
HAFC we will be getting the most
up to-date projections in using
that for the work of this
committee, the public health
working group, so this shows us
over time, but we'll be using
them.
most up to-date numbers.
Thank you, Chairman. So,
Another way to say that, the
January but uh prediction or the
numbers versus LSC would be
probably
Yeah, because the executive
recommendation was mid mid
December, and now we're
Yeah, we'll be using up to
updated numbers and those need
to be sort of a consensus that
are uh
The diff our, our analysts, uh,
the executive and HCA worked
together on, but this, this is a
good way, shows the evolution
over time and here is the,
they're discussing and
appreciate you bringing it up,
shows how we're uh coming closer
and actually saving a little bit
of capacity that the committee
can think about dedicating in
other places, thanks to the drop
in projected uh expenditures.
Thank you, Chairman and
Chairman, my next question may
be to the secretary, uh, or, um,
didn't really matter. I feel
like I heard a comment that
there's $50 million for the
rural healthcare delivery fund,
but I can't find that in the
different sheets anywhere. Then
me it's not there, just means
I'm blind. Mr. Chair
Representative Pettigrew, that's
in non-recurring. So it's not
going to show up on this high
level. This is just the
recurring.
Um, but if you were to look at
the, you know, the side by side,
um, or the executive
recommendations, it would be in
a special recommendation.
Thank you, Chairman. So Section
5.
Thank you very much for that.
um, Mr. Chairman, and, uh,
Representative, you can also see
the um side by side of the, the
differences and non-recurring in
the back of the packet. Thank
you. You have.
Thank you very much.
Uh, chairman, uh,
My next question.
would be with respect to the
administrative costs.
I had a note here somewhere. OK.
Um, um,
3rd page of the uh
The detail on reoccurring, we
have fund administration.
And
Those numbers look to be close
to double the differences there,
but
Chairman
This may help me understand it.
In the sectarian inside your
presentation on page 11, I wrote
a note that you said this is the
most administratively.
This
This has the most administrative
costs out there.
And so is, is
Can you clarify that for me when
we look at what's on
reoccurring, um,
Expenditure side versus
What I think I heard when you
were talking on page 11.
With respect to Medicaid being
the most
I guess strenuous with respect
to the cost of from an
administrative standpoint.
Uh, Mr. Cha, representative, um,
what you're looking at is the
administration of the healthcare
Affordability Fund that is um
different staff than the medical
assistance program, so two
different things there, um, we
were referring to sort of the
Medicaid program staff being
very,
um, and I think, um, this, yeah,
we've got someone here who could
answer questions about the admin
on the fund, uh, but two
different things. I just wanted
to make that clarification.
So, thank you for that and and
Chairman, so
There was this sheet first.
Um, our administrative cost uh
for the healthcare authority
fund, um,
905.
000 last
year 24, the executives asking
for 3.2 and LSC is looking at 2
million. So if we just go from
the fund administration from a
year ago to this budget, we're
saying it's
Twice as, as costly to, to
administer now?
Uh, is your chair representative
Pettigrew, um, I'm gonna try to
answer, but I do have somebody,
uh, behind me, uh, Mr. Bao, who
runs the fund, um, really,
that's just staffing and it
started out with a couple of
people, uh, and so I think it's
by doubling it's sort of um
we're asking for a few extra
FTE, uh, in the admin, um, with
your permission, Mr. Cherry can
have a better answer for you
from the person behind me uh to
give a clearer answer if that's
OK with you.
Thanks
Uh, Mr. Chair and Representative
Pettigrew, um, as these programs
have grown and become more
complex to administer. Um, we
feel that we do need some
additional staffing, um, the, as
you, uh, as was noted in the
presentation, um, each of these
programs, uh, in both the LFC
and executive request are
growing fairly substantially, so
we just want to make sure that
we've got appropriate staffing
to take on the additional
program complex.
The Chairman and presenter um
We think $1.1 million is enough
to cover all the new employees
that it takes to, to do this
because we're throwing more work
on your back.
Is that a reverse way of saying
that.
Uh, Mr. Chair and
Representative, uh, uh, yes, I
think there's, there's
additional work coming our way
and especially with some of the
changes at the federal level
where um we do think it's
appropriate to, to bring on some
more staff to, to manage the
programs, yeah.
Thank you, Chairman, and, uh, so
back to
Sheet 11, page 11 on the
presentation. I feel like that
on the Medicaid Medicaid side,
that's the same issue. It's,
it's just extremely hard to
manage and administrate.
Uh, Mr. Chair representative
Pettigrew, um, I, I really can't
overstate how complicated
Medicaid is and how complicated
the management and oversight of
that is, um, we have is that's
where the billions of dollars
are. That's the biggest share of
the budget, um, we have a lot of
federal rules and regulations.
We have to manage network
adequacy is that provider rates
according to the manager, the
pastor of the provider rates,
uh, we've got quality metrics.
There's just.
Thousands of regulations for
that staff, um, and it is really
complicated, uh, and we are
probably pretty inadequately
staffed to adequately oversee um
our managed care partners that
really administer these programs
for us, uh, on behalf of the
state, and those are huge
contracts that require a quite a
bit of oversight and so, um, you
know, the Medicaid program, I
really, you know,
They, they really could use uh a
reduced vacancy rate so that
they can do the work that
they've been charged to do and
um as I showed on that slide,
53% growth in that program, um,
with 6 FTE added in a few years,
just that's it. So yeah.
Thank you, Madam Secretary, did
you want to add something to
that? Uh, yeah, just real quick,
if you look at page 29 on the
PSA in your packet, um.
There's about 27, uh 28.
Uh, funded vacancies in that
program. And that's why LFC
didn't.
Go higher. Mr. Mr. Chair, uh,
representative, so that is true.
There was a pretty high vacancy
rate. We didn't have, uh,
Medicaid director uh until
almost a year ago, um, our
Medicaid director Dana Flannery
has worked on getting those
vacancies filled. We have a 5.3%
uh vacancy rate funded vacancy
rate as of right now. So not
much room to hire, um, at the
current moment.
Thank you, Chairman and thank
you for that. So,
Diving a little bit deeper on
that. So when we look at that.
Just make it simple for out of
the dollar, 25 cents from us, 75
cents from the feds with respect
to Medicaid. Is there anything
with respect to the federal
piece of this.
That provides funding for
administrating uh a
They, uh
Hard system to deal with.
Uh, Mr. Chair represented a
Pettigrew. Yeah, I mean we get a
lot of federal funding, so the
general match rate for Medicaid
is about 50%. They'll pay half
of the salary, so that's why for
relatively low general fund
investment of 700,000, uh, we
can add 16 FTE uh with that and
so, um, there are different
rates of administrative, uh,
contributions from the federal
government, depending on what
the staff do, uh, so I teach
some of the IT folks get a 90%
match rate. Some of our
eligibility staff get
75%, uh, so it really does vary,
but the base minimum is 50%. And
so the federal government will
pick up 50% of the cost. Thank
you, Chairman and thank you
secretary. So what you're
telling me is the IT guy, the
feds pay us more for the IT guy
than the person that actually
helps.
A constituent or resident in the
state.
Have access to Medicaid. Mr.
Chair, represented a Pettigrew
not of all of the IT guys, but
uh we do for some of the system
development that we do, uh, we
get a 90% or enhanced match rate
for like the miser project
staff, um, they do get enhanced
funding for those similarly
staff are working on our
eligibility system. We get 90 or
75% just depending on what
they're doing. Uh, so yeah, I
mean, it's true to say that um
there's some enhanced funding,
uh, that it goes above that.
0 % match rate for depending on
the functions of certain stuff.
Interesting. Thank you very
much. Um,
Two more questions, I think,
chair.
Um
A 32, and I really didn't have a
question on this until somebody
else asks a question. Um, I
understand the options.
Chairman, one of the things,
secretary that you said as
transferring some of those costs
to the local public body.
To find local public body with
respect to that, if you would
please.
Uh, Mr. Chair, representative,
um, local public bodies means
sort of any, uh, county or
municipality that wants to buy
into the health benefit plan.
OK.
Or, uh, we also, uh, Mr. Chair,
representative, it could include
university employees as well.
Got you.
So, chairman and and secretary,
we're talking somewhere around
an 8.5% increase in premiums
right now, right?
Mr. Chair Representative
Pettigrew, uh, that is what the
budget currently uh has in it
for F. Will you clarify that for
me. There's a difference between
what the actual premium
increases, but the state's
willing to to take that and
chairman, maybe just clarifies
something even more. So we have
state employees, but then we
also have people on state.
Uh, insurance plans.
Are they the same thing or are
they different premiums?
Uh, Mr. Chair Representative
Pettigrew, so every entity that
purchases in purchases in the
plan has the same premiums. They
might not split it in the same
way as the state of New Mexico
with their employees, but
everyone would have the same
premium. So let's just say it's
$800 a month for a household for
um that that is the same, that
would be the same premium no
matter who is bought into the
plan, but they might have a
different split, uh, and so, um,
what I think I was trying to say
is that the 8.5% uh premium
increase that's built into the
budget still leaves us with a
projected 90.
million dollars shortfall in FY
26.
Well, I'm sorry, Chairman, what
was the shortfall again? Uh,
about 87 million, Mr. Chair, uh,
Representative Pettigrew.
Thank you, Chairman, and, and
thank you for suffering through
that and
seem to remember that number
and, and I going back to the
original part of the
presentation on
Line 25, when we're $97 million
apart, which isn't that far, but
we have an $87 million shortfall
in just one area. Seems like we
are kind of far apart. So, not
that I'm in sport one way or the
other yet. I'm not talking that
way. I, it just didn't, it
statements like that don't
coincide with
statements like we have an $87
million shortfall.
Thank you.
Thank you very much for
Pettigrew, uh, great questions.
We're gonna go to Vice Chair
Dixon.
Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Thank you all so much and thank
you for your patience as we, um,
talk about this. I think there
are a lot of great issues that
have been brought up, um, and so
I
won't repeat anything, at least
try not to repeat anything that
has already been said.
Um, I do want to piggyback off
of um something that's just
brought up, um, Mr. Chair and
secretary on page 33, I think
this is what um Representative
Pettigrew was looking for in the
different sheet on page 33, it
does have the executive request
for a special appropriation for
50 million, uh, for, uh, to
defray operating losses for
rural regional hospitals.
That one.
OK. Thank you, Mr. Chair. Thank
you, Eric. And, and what my
question is, is this would be
the 2nd year, um, that we would,
you know, that we've had a
request for this cause we did
something 3rd, 3, OK. Um, what
is our long term plan?
Uh, Mr. Chair, uh,
Representative Dickson, so I
think the long term plan is to
try and invest as much as we can
in providers. I don't know if um
you would not, would not
appropriation was originally
requested by the executive, I
think it was 2 fiscal years ago.
The request was for 200 million,
um, and so I think the executive
is still trying to get to 200
million over multiple years, so
we, I think we had 80 million in
the first year, uh, we've issued
those funds, uh, we had 46.
million and 25, uh, we've issued
those funds, um, and now we're
sort of trying to, I, I think
sort of ultimately trying to get
to that 200 million mark, um,
you may also recall there was
legislation creating the fund,
uh, the fund that legislation
passed, but the fund hasn't been
funded, uh, and so I think we
are trying to get some, uh,
still continue to do the work
that was sort of endorsed and
and passed by the legislature,
um, and get some funding for
that, um, really over
years trying to get to that 200
million.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Eric, did
you wanna, no, that's good.
Well, I, I guess I can, uh, jump
in, Mr. Chairman and Madam Vice
Chair.
Um
The reason why we haven't, why
we didn't fund it on our side,
the LC didn't find it on its
side is uh.
We haven't seen a strategic plan
out of it. We haven't seen much
performance data out of it. We
haven't seen.
Uh, much of that, um,
information that would kind of
give us an idea of how effective
these dollars actually are.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Thank you,
Eric. Um, I appreciate that. Um,
I also wanted to highlight that
uh I know several members have
asked about the um 8%.
OK, uh, but, um, Mr. Chair,
Eric, am I correct that the LFC
recommendation in the LFC
recommendation. There isn't
across the board 4%.
Hey raises, uh, Madam Chair, uh,
I mean, Mr. Chairman and Madam
Vice Chair. Yeah, that's
correct. There's a 4% uh
compensation package.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Thank you,
Eric, and we are also finishing
up a pay study with Spo or, you
know, I keep hearing about
different pay studies.
Uh, Mr. Chair, Madam Vice Chair,
that's correct.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Thank you,
uh, uh, Ms. Dinsmore. Thank you
so much, Mr. Chair and Madam
Vice Chair, I just wanted to to
piggyback on the 4%. The
executive does have a
compensation package as well,
um, which works out to
approximately 3% per employee,
so there is that across the
board, um, in that, in the
executive as well, but there's
also these targeted amounts that
we're prioritized.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Thank you
for that. Um, I think one of the
things that concerns me just as
a, as a appropriator is, you
know, that we keep increasing
sort of on an ad hoc basis, OK,
and then there's poaching and
competition everywhere and so,
you know, I'm not sure that
we're really solving the
problem. Um, Mr. Chair, um,
secretary, this is sort of a
random question, but do assisted
living facilities pay GRT on
room and board.
Chair, uh, represented to
Dickson. I don't know the answer
to that question, but I can get
it for you, Mr. Chair,
Secretary, thank you. I would be
interested because it, I think
you were saying that um,
Medicaid or Medicare does not
cover um the room and board at
assisted living facilities. So I
was just curious. So I'd love a
follow up.
Uh, Mr. Chair, uh, Vice Cha
Dickson, I will absolutely
provide that to you. I did wanna
just um say one thing about the
rural healthcare fund because I,
I do disagree that there's no
plan, um, we've been very
cautious about how we've issued
those funds, making sure that
we're really looking at access
gaps in every rural part of the
state, um, we have a lot of data
and we've created a dashboard
actually, um, in terms of like
how many visits are being
provided through that fund, um,
and we are making sure that
there's no duplication of
Funding, so I just wanted to say
that I, I, well, I don't, I
don't totally agree that there
hasn't been data and I feel like
we've been very transparent
about every dollar that's gone
out from the fund and and really
what it's supporting, uh, which
is really an infusion of access
uh through New Mexico and is
resulting in real patient visits
today.
Thank you, uh, Mr. Chair. Thank
you, Secretary, for the
elaboration on that. I, I
appreciate it and I'll take a
look at the dashboard. Um,
Mr. Chair, um, and I think
probably for any of you, um, one
of the concerns that I have with
a lot of the funding, the line
items and even into the
specials, is that there does not
seem to be a focus on getting
ahead of opioid addiction. So,
looking at the upstream issue,
and I, I've spoken to um to Eric
about this, but I really would
appreciate it if we could.
In some of our pilot programs
and things that we're looking at
really try to have people not
get addicted to opioids in the
first place. And I think that
there's stuff that we can do
with healthcare providers on
that, so I just wanted to flag
that. Um,
Mr. Chair, um, and I think this
is for Eric, probably.
Also in the specials, there are
2 lines for food. Uh, there's
one which is $30 million and I
think it's gross, so it would be
$10 million per year, uh, for
food banks.
So it so it's that breakouts.
That's true. Thank you, Mr.
Chair, um, and thank you, Eric,
and then there's also a line for
15 approximately $15 million for
um healthy foods for pregnant
women. And I think that that we
LFC recommends that separately,
and I think the executive has
that as part of a larger
component, is that, yes,
sorry Mr. Chair, Madam Vice
Chair, yes, that is, that is
correct, Mr. Chair.
Uh, vice chair Dixon, um, just
wanna clarify that that food is
medicine for pregnant women,
that's matchable, uh, through
the Medicaid program and so, um,
that's really our vision is to
try to leverage that match, uh,
for that support, uh, by
accessing federal Medicaid
dollars.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Thank you
Secretary for um mentioning that
because I, I do appreciate, uh,
making sure we're leveraging our
funding. Um, I just wanted to, I
think, make sure that we're not
duplicating, um, you know, and
everything is, we're covering
different bases, uh, with that
funding.
Um, Mr. Chair, um, and
secretary, this is um
My last area of questions and I
have, it goes to, I'm gonna
follow up on some of the
questions asked earlier about
the nursing home, uh, base
rebates. Um, if
The funding if the $19 million
were provided. Do we have a
sense of what percentage of an
increase that would be.
Uh, Mr. Chair Representative
Dixon, I'm not sure if we know
that today, um, I'm looking to
the team to see if we can pull
that hang on just one second.
Uh, Mr. Chair, uh,
Representative Dixon, we can
follow up with you. We'll send
you an email on that later.
We'll be able to do that
calculation quickly. Um, thank
you, Mr. Chair. Thank you,
Secretary. Um, that's perfect,
and I think there are a couple
of subquestions that can go
along with that, um, that we can
follow up offline. Um, and so
the final thing with
That item, the nursing home, uh,
rebates is a question of whether
or not that can actually be done
over several years, you know, is
it, um, something that has to be
done in one year, or is there
the possibility that it is a
planned, uh, rebates over the
course of say 2 or 3 years. Uh,
Mr. Chair, Vice Chair Dixon,
that is a a question I was
talking to Mr. Shee about that
earlier today, um,
We might be able to do that.
Typically when we do the
rebasing, we aren't providing
the market basket increase and
so we do the market basket, the
way that we kind of envisioned
doing this is doing the rebasing
and not the market basket
increase, which would then allow
us to fund part of that through
the healthcare quality surcharge
funding, um, and so if we did it
over 2 years, that might change
how we do it, so I am really
open to thinking through
methodologies for trying to get
there. Um, I appreciate the
creative thinking about maybe.
trying to do a glide path, um,
and so we're, we're open to that
discussion and we could probably
figure something out. Thank you,
Mr. Chair. Thank you Secretary
and our wonderful analysts
really appreciate all the hard
work.
Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Outstanding. Thank you very
much, Madam Vice Chair, uh,
Madam Secretary, just a few
quick things. Um, first on the
income support division, I know,
uh, members have mentioned it
and really focused there.
One of the core challenges
though, Madam Secretary, I think
the sort of the bar maybe to
work to clear is that these were
federally funded positions
brought in to fill sort of
almost an emergency need, um.
And
Now with fewer folks.
Enrolled
In, you know, now after sort of
that, um, I'm gonna forget the
terminology, but following the
end of the, the pandemic, the
health emergency, uh, the, the,
the requirement.
I get we're not serving that
emergency need. So what are we
serving, Mr. Chair, I'm really
glad you asked this question
because I think there's a
misunderstanding about that, um,
if you go to slide 8, you can
see um the total staff that ISD
had in green. Yes, that's the
green line, um, as of February
of 2019 and then in September of
2024. The contract staff are in
yellow, um, we brought those
staff on board.
just to deal with the Medicaid
unwinding. They could only
really do Medicaid cases.
They're not, and we have off
rolled those off. They are not
part of this workforce that
we're talking about that if we
were trying to fill, we would be
asking for several 100 more, um,
because we, we onboarded
hundreds of staff just to get
through the unwinding and help
with Medicaid cases. I may think
there were, yes, more than there
were like several 100 probably
600, so I just want to be
clear that that 158, those are
existing caseworkers, um, that
additional staff augmentation
strategy was just for the
unwinding, uh, and really
doesn't even, you know, those
have all been rolled off. And so
with the agency isn't proposing
to retain those resources at
this point we're really just
trying to get to our base level
of staffing, which you can see
in 2019, um, was higher than,
uh, and so we're really, I just
wanna be clear that we're not
asking for that staff
augmentation. Ma'am Secretary,
thank.
Thank you for that. Uh, and as
we go forward, I sort of
understanding the prioritization
within different areas,
including, as you mentioned, uh,
sort of our Medicaid, the
program support there and the
overwhelming need, particularly
or I guess potentially with
different challenges for um
And your help in sort of working
us as we go through that, I
think it's helpful. Uh,
secondly, appreciate very much
sort of the guy, the, the
clarity, good questions, and I
think good ideas from the vice
chair and Madam Secretary, your
openness around uh nursing
facilities.
Um, around behavioral health,
point of pride for us that
within the legislature that we
met the agency request in
through the process, the
executive overall, we doubled
the funding when it came to
Medicare behavioral healthcare
providers and the, the rate, uh,
the rate increases.
Many of those rates are not tied
to Medicare, as you explain,
Madam Secretary, correct?
Uh, Mr. Chair, uh, that is
correct. There are some, uh, I
don't know if it's the vast
majority. I think most are tied
to Medicare or the most commonly
used ones are, but there are
some gaps, yes. Got it. OK, and
so within Medicare specifically,
there's sort of a very
established value-based payment
system, a great deal of that
exists to sort of try to provide
the highest quality service at
the, the most effective cost. Is
that right?
Mr. Chair, uh, there are
value-based arrangements all
over the place, uh, including in
Medicaid, not just in Medicare,
but we have many value-based
arrangements today in our
Medicaid contracts. Got it. Uh,
I'm very interested as we really
lean in and invest very heavily
in behavioral healthcare rate
increases, provider support,
expansion.
Should we be looking at um
Really doing a lot of our own
work around that value-based
payment for behavioral
healthcare specifically, trying
to get the best bang for the
buck and studying that within
our state, uh, Mr. Chair, I
think it's always good to take a
look at value-based
arrangements. I, I think they're
really, really important,
particularly in healthcare,
partially because of cost
containment, but also because
they enforce and reinforce
quality, um, and they really try
to incentivize that. There are a
lot of different types of.
value-based arrangements, some
in which just get sort of
rewarded for performance and
some in which they're taking on
greater risk for the further
along a provider kind of falls
on that spectrum.
They, they need to be very
mature provider, uh, just
started to take on risk and you
usually want to move them along
a continuum and so it is kind of
complicated, uh, providers, uh,
you know, what you're trying to
do is really kind of get them to
sort of share in those outcomes
and have some steak and making
sure that those are improved and
so you don't usually want to
just keep things at a basic
value base, you want to kind of
move along a continuum, and it
does require some providers
sophistication, but I don't
dispute uh the value of of those
arrangements.
Thank you, ma'am, Secretary,
love that answer and sort of
shows that it's going to be a
continue as we are able to
invest funding which is broadly
supported there, um, we have a
lot of work to do together, um.
Briefly on the rural hos uh the
rural healthcare delivery fund,
obviously right now there's a
big difference in specials. Can
you provide us offline, um, a
bit of a sort of an indicator of
rural healthcare access.
Um, I know it's a, it's an
important thing for members and
for the state, and if you could
sort of share that.
Um,
Uh, really quick, Madam
Secretary, uh, it's and Mr.
Cheer, it seems like we have
continued capacity within the
healthcare affordability fund to
really do a good job making sure
that coverage, whether it's
supporting our small business
owners, the uh individuals
seeking the coverage on the
exchange, others, it seems like
there's pretty strong capacity
and we've got a very strong
revenue source coming into that
fund. So,
That may be an area, would you,
um, Madam Secretary, that's one
of the larger differences
outside of some of these uh
staffing issues. Is that a big
focus for HCA to be able to
provide uh the highest level of
care for New Mexicans,
and I think we're you're right,
it is a strong revenue, uh,
stream and it's exciting. Uh,
we've been really thinking about
what other ways we could be
leveraging that fund to make
coverage more affordability for
more affordable for everyone.
Uh, great. I look forward for us
sort of looking, looking at that
as we go forward. Uh, a couple
of things, um, unfortunately,
the FY 24 audit and this again,
of course, is from staff, uh,
indicates a $4 million budget
reversion, um,
And, and the FY 24 reversion was
actually larger.
33.6 million. I know there's a,
there's
It
Maybe we would have, maybe we
can ask for an uh an next.
Explanation offline, um,
particularly related to uh any
of the audit findings because I
think that's an area as we have
invested, obviously, we need to
work very closely to get
control.
Um
OK. I members, great questions.
Thank you for taking time. Uh,
we're gonna ask for the LSC. We
have a public health working
group.
From insurance through income
support in other areas, members'
questions I think have covered a
great deal of really good
ground, nursing home rates and
others.
The really fortunate thing here
appears to be that with the
revision down of overall
Medicaid spending, there's
capacity that the committee can
really look to prioritize um in
in different ways, which is
fortunate for us for this year,
cause it's not always like that.
Um, so we'll ask for the, uh,
LFC, uh, in, in with the full
expectation of making
significant changes.
Mr. Chair, I would move the
committee adopt the LFC
recommendation at this time.
OK, it's been moved by Vice
Chair Dixon, seconded by
Representative Garrett. There
are any opposition to that
motion?
Will show represent Pettigrew in
opposition and
We'll go forward again members,
great questions, Madam
Secretary, thanks to your and
your team.
OK. Uh, next, we're gonna invite
up um uh secretary designate de
Blasi.
Yeah, yeah. Anyone who's here
for HCA.
You have to provide everybody
dinner if you don't take the
conversation.
Oh, no.
Very good.
We've got a motion a second it's
unanimously adopted.
Uh, Madam Secretary, thank, uh,
secretary Designate. It's great
to see you and Kelly, great to
see you and we'll, um,
We'll dive right in once we get
there on the screen.
Thank you, Mr. Chair, members of
the Committee. Kelly Cle
legislative Finance Committee.
We're on agency code 665, the
Department of Health.
And with me as a secretary
designate and my um counterpart
Sky with that, I'm gonna make,
we're, these are wrecks are
pretty close that you're gonna
hear. I know you keep hearing
that, but they are.
So, um, with that, I'm gonna go
over the high level pretty
quickly for DOH.
And that should be your page one
that I don't know what color it
is for you, it's pink for me. So
off white for you.
And so at the bottom line, at
the very bottom line, 59, you
can see that the two wrecks are
within point 3% of a difference.
So 5.2% for the executive rec
and 4.9% for the LFC wreck.
That's pretty darn close.
But we'll go over some of the
key differences. So, um, in the
public health program.
You'll notice that the executive
recommendation added a million
dollars for food services, while
the LFC recommendation had 3
different line items. One was
for uh rent utilities and
travel. One was for STD clinical
services, and one was for mobile
staffing units that I think we
might be having a
age, so maybe I'll pause for the
committee.
Uh, it's it should be by agency
code 665 and in your volume 2,
if you look at the top right, it
has all of your agency codes on
the top of the page, and it will
say 665 for Department of
Health.
In your volume twos.
Not that I'm going to
filibuster, but I'm gonna talk
about not numbers while you guys
are.
Going through this. So it's kind
of like a just an overview of
the LFC approach for the budget.
Um, DOH has a very large
footprint compared to a lot of
agencies, and if you remember,
it's because they own several
and operates several state
facilities or state hospitals
around the state.
And in their request, there was
a lot of operating cost
increases for rent and utilities
and just kind of keeping the
doors open and so the LFC rec
recognized a lot of that, and
that's going to be a key
difference you're gonna see
across the two recommendations
is I'll recommending just kind
of the keep the doors open costs
across that.
It looks like we've settled, so.
I can stop my filibuster. OK.
Shortest filibuster of all time.
OK, so, again, so given that
context about, you know, keeping
the doors open across the
facility, you'll see, we talked
about those 3 differences in the
public health program.
Uh, the epidemiology and
response program, to see the LFC
was a little bit higher as well,
um, while the executive, they
did a lot of um appropriate
placement, um, wage kind of.
Uh, recommendations while the
LFC did a lot of keeping the
doors open, so, you know, it's
just a little bit of a different
strategy.
Um, laboratory services, LFC was
higher again by 465,000 and that
was again just for utilities,
rent and the staff.
Uh, facilities management is
always kind of gonna be the the
Pacman of this budget, the big
cost driver because that's where
all of those state hospitals,
state facilities are, so you can
see um LFC has about $3.5
million just to kind of support
those facilities operations
while the executive, um,
specifically put 5.2 million for
two of specific of those
hospitals, the LFC is, um,
broader and says across the
facility.
put it where you need it.
And then the executive has an
expansion for the San Miguel
County substance Use Program,
which was not included in the
LFC recommendation.
Just for some context on why
that was not included in the LFC
recommendation that program was
put into a capital outlay, it
was built at the time that that
money was requested the
legislature, the conversations
were then operator was going to
come into that facility and
build private health insurance
and bill Medicaid, and now
they've asked that the state
operate it and so um there was
some.
Conversations about those two
operating.
Um, structures.
So program support LC again had
some support for operating
costs, totaling down to that
total difference of only
$527,000 given that this isn't
over $200 million agency that's
a pretty small difference. Um,
and with that, we'll go through
the different sheets quickly.
So if you can turn to your page
2.
And uh we have some questions
about the page numbers in volume
2, and that's you can see that
at the top of this page.
So, um, overall, the
recommendations are pretty close
as I talked about LFC um was
nearly 5.2, and most of that
difference is in the facilities
management program for the state
facilities.
Um, the recommendation for
contractual services aligns with
actual expenditures while the
executive recommendation
recommended an increase from the
opioid settlement fund it for
2.3 million. Now I will say that
transfer from the opioid
settlement fund is a policy
decision. That's money for Kira
services. Some of you might have
read in the news that funding
was being transferred from HCA
in an MOU.
To DOH for them to operate some
Kira FTE, um, LFC, they're
they're probably gonna have to
do a bar about that, um.
That's a policy decision that I
think this committee needs to
have a discussion on, um, given
that there's probably gonna be
some care for bills happening in
the session.
Um, in the base, you know, the,
the difference is really
performance management. We've
come to consensus on all of our
performance measures and the
main difference in expansion is
that uh behavioral or that
substance use disorder facility
in um send me a County with uh
I'm gonna turn it over to my
counterpart to go over, um, oh,
actually I'm gonna.
Yeah, my counterpart's gonna go
over um administration, which is
the next program.
Good afternoon, Mr. Chair,
members of the committee, um, my
name is Sky Stone. Happy, um,
yeah, I'll just start with, uh,
administrative services
division, um, both of our
recommendations, uh, were in
line with the agency request for
federal revenues, um, but the
executive recommendation was
lower than the LFC's by $400,000
in general fund.
Uh, the executive general fund
flat.
Um, from
525 uh operating.
OK. Great. So we'll move on to
public health, which is your
next P code page 5 and.
page 5 in your packet.
Um, so again, the major
differences here are LFC really
focused on uh funding for
staffing those mobile health
units. I will say in the
previous few legislatures we've
given money for mobile health
units to both purchase the
vehicles and set up that
program, and we think that is uh
probably pretty important
programs, especially for rural
healthcare or um some possible
substance use disorder in um
really spot hotspot community
areas and
we've continued that as like an
important funding aspect of
public health in New Mexico and
the executive recommendation is,
um, has more for food services.
Um, that's really the the main
policy differences in that, so
I'll.
turn it over to my counterpart
for EPA and response.
Mr. Chair, members of the
committee for epidemiology and
response.
Um, the executive recommendation
is about 1.1 million lower than
the LFC's uh in general fund.
Um
Uh, again, both recommendations
met the agency requests in
non-general fund uh funding
sources.
Yeah, the executive
recommendation included $200,000
in general fund for.
I will know on this program that
the LFC recommendation, um, did
have some recurring revenue for
what we call the APCD. Some of
you might have heard about that,
this in terms of the all pairs
claims database.
So that's a database with.
All pairs for like Medicaid,
private health insurance, um,
for the state to really kind of
get our arms better around what
the true cost of healthcare is
in the state across the
different insurance pools, um,
so, uh, Elsie included some
operating costs in there. I, I
will note that there's been some
discussion that Elsie has been
unable to um receive data from
that to be able to do any
evaluations, um, and it's
something that this body might
consider, um,
Possible legislation to allow
access so we can do better
research for you.
Um, I, I believe, Sky, you're
also doing laboratory services.
Mr. Chair, members of the
committee, um, again for
laboratory services division,
uh, the executive recommendation
kept the general fund flat from
the operating budget in FY 25.
Um, the LFC.
Recommendation was about
$460,000 higher, uh.
All right. Thank you. Facilities
management program, that's page
8 in your packet. Um, so this is
where a big chunk of the entire
department's revenue is so
important program. The executive
recommendation was 7.6 million
while the LFC was 4.6 million in
general fund revenues, so a
slight difference there. Both
recommendations significantly
increased revenues for personnel
and operational costs.
The executive recommendation
included personnel and
contractual services for
staffing above the LFC.
Um, I would note that most of
the differences in the actual
budget is that expansion that
you see at the bottom of that or
middle of the page, I would say,
and that's a $7 million
difference or that is from
general fund revenue and 3 of
that is from other revenue, uh,
billing, um, and other pro
another um revenue sources. So
that's really the main
difference in the two is LFC
really funded, keeping the doors
open, keeping current staff,
operating.
levels, executed some of that,
but also did a big expansion for
that additional facility, and
that's really the main
difference in the wreck.
And with that, I will give it
back to Sky to close with the
medical cannabis program.
Thank you, Kelly. Uh, Mr. Chair,
members of the committee, uh,
the executive recommendation,
the LFC recommendation for
medical cannabis are the same.
Uh, Gina De Blasio for.
Thank you, Kelly. Thank you,
Sky, Mr. Chair, members of the
committee, Gina De Blasi,
secretary designate for the
Department of Health. I'd like
to recognize the Department of
Health leadership team that's
sitting behind me to my, um,
right, um, where I rely upon
them greatly since I'm 10 weeks
into this, uh, to this agency.
Um, so with that, um, thank you,
Kelly for and Skype for your
recommendations. We're gonna
keep this pretty high level
because the uh budgets were were
pretty darn close with just some
some few differences on where
the funding was going, so if we
go to page 2, here it's just
really an overview of the
Department of Health roughly
over 3500 employees, uh, for
division 6 centers, uh, the 7
facilities.
um, Kelly spoke about earlier
and we've got 56 public health
offices across the state, um, we
have them in 33 counties and we
also collaborate with 24 Native
American tribes of nations.
Slide 3 is just a general uh
fund roll up of the LFC versus
the executive recommendation. I
think that um the analysts of
both Kelly and Sky went through
that, so I'm not gonna revisit
um that for you.
Was there for your reference?
Page 4,
provides a roll up of the
Department of Health general
fund, non-general fund, um,
budget, and you can see that,
you know, roughly public health
represents roughly 46% of the
budget, and that also includes
the non-general fund with
facilities, uh, being, uh, the
next, um, uh, highest at 35.1%.
It just gives you the split for
your reference.
A couple things I wanna
highlight, uh, there's been a
lot of conversation I know over
the interim, um, the previous,
um, last year's legislative
session, um, the 30 day and um
and now with with the budget
differences which just
facilities, um, we operate the 7
facilities and what we're asking
for is a supplemental for the um
New Mexico state veterans home.
Um, I don't know if you all have
had an opportunity to visit the
new 6 small homes that were
built that we built in tier.
They're beautiful, uh, the
veterans love those facilities,
but we're experiencing there and
why we need a supplemental
request as we have a lot of high
agency costs, um, in order to
staff that facility. Uh, we've
increased the census at the
state veterans home, so kudos to
to the team, um, from last year,
uh, running at roughly 57 uh
veterans residing at the
veteran's home to 109 today.
So that's 100, uh, that's a 90%
increase, so, uh, we're really,
we're really happy about that
and we've got a little bit more
room to grow and and we're on
the move to make that happen.
Um
Also want to talk a little bit
about the census, um, is it
relates to uh the facilities,
um, because there's been a lot
of talk about how the um
Department of Health is not
really filling their facilities.
Uh, we've got 3, facilities that
actually do quite well, as it
relates from a census
perspective, um, NMBHI for their
forensics and their adult site,
but we've got some room to grow
there.
we're, um, you know, we're
roughly running 72 and 64%
there. Meadows is only about 50%
full, and that's the long term
care facility in Las Vegas and
we're working towards increasing
census there. That's it. It's
definitely a focus of mine, as
I'm now coming in uh to the
apartment and working on
increasing uh facility census,
um, across all of our uh state
facilities. The uh Los Lunas
community, uh, program we run,
um, census there about.
97.2%, um, those are across, I
want to say 23 homes where we
service the uh developmentally
disabled uh population and then
um as I stated earlier, the New
Mexico State veterans home, um,
you know, I've got numbers for
um our uh Fort Baird Medical
Center as well. Uh, we've got
some room to grow there. We're
looking at how we can
partnership with our TRC
facility with veterans and
filling the veterans over at
Fort Bad Medical Center in
Silver.
City, so we've got an
opportunity there, but just know
that this is definitely a focus
for us, we've got uh some
challenges at um our Roswell
facility, and it's really
related.
In my opinion, uh, for the
medical rehab unit to uh
coverage of a physiatrist.
We've, it's been, um,
intermittent, so we might build
up census and then we don't have
the necessary coverage for
admissions and as people
discharge, we need, we need a
full time physiatrist that's
employed at that facility. We've
got some under contract. So, um,
we're working to get that
resolved as well.
Um, additionally, we're asking
for a special to offset the
shortfalls at NMBHI and the Los
Lunas Community care program, of
$5.4 million the New Mexico
Behavioral Health Institute is
stated we offer the forensics
unit, that's, that's completely
supported by by uh state
dollars. We're, we're not able
to bill for that adult psych
well there's some Medicaid, but
it's not fully covered by
Medicaid, um, so that is also
partially supported by just
state dollars.
as well.
Um, and then we're also looking
for another special just for
overall facility operations and
maintenance across all of the
Department of Health facilities
of a million dollars. This
allows us to perform the
maintenance and the needs that
happen across all the facilities
that we operate.
On page 7, Kelly spoke about the
San Miguel.
Uh, facility program, and one of
the things is, you know, as
we're talking about the
behavioral health package, uh,
that's coming through the
Senate. There's a big push to
have regionalized planning, and
one of the things that I can say
about this facility is that the
great thing about it is that it
really took the local community,
whether it's it's the county,
it's law enforcement, it's the
hospital and the community as a
whole, we really wanted to do
something, um, for, for, uh,
northern New Mexico.
So $6.2 million total, uh, went
to this um to renovate, uh, this
facility, and they're asking the
state to see if we could operate
the facilities, there was a $4
million ask in the budget, uh,
to do that and what this would
do and the reason for that ask
is that we, we have the
professional services that were
that we could support that
facility as well, we'd be, it's,
it's almost across the street
we'd be pulling on each other's
staffing too.
So we thought it would be some
some great synergies to do that.
I did find out this $2.5 million
that they have not yet spent can
go to operate for this next
year, so that 4 million could
potentially come down to about
0.5 million, uh, for the next
year. The goal is to ramp this
up, um, and get it sustainable
through through billings.
The operation and have it cover
itself.
Page 8, is a seniors farmers'
market. We asked for a million
dollars to continue to sustain
this. Um, it's a, it's a really
wonderful program, uh, the
program supports 554 local
farmers across the state and
23,000 low income seniors with
healthy produce, uh, so we're
that that was a difference in
the in the um
Executive mass versus the LFC
budget.
Another difference is $3 million
for the county and tribal health
councils, uh, the health
councils do partner with
Department of Health and they
provide support across 33
counties and 8 tribal health
councils, um, we provide, uh,
the epidemiological data and
technical assistance, uh, to
inform their community for their
planning efforts, the health
councils will um complete the
community health assessment and
then what we do is they work
with us on convening.
and providing, um, education and
supports across the communities
in the state of New Mexico.
26 specials, um, we had $800,000
request for a special, um, in
administration, I think half of
that 400,000 was included for,
uh, LFC, and this is really to
uh replace decreased federal
revenue that we no longer have
access to. It's, it's lost due
to the end of COVID funding and
the indirect revenue that we had
from DDSD and DHI that moved
from Department of Health over
to the
Healthcare Authority.
spoke about facilities
management. I'm not gonna touch
on that again and the and the
county and uh tribal health
councils, um, we're also asking
for a million dollars to support
uh the purchase of vaccinations,
um, through our public health
offices, so we're asking for a
million dollars special.
And then the state lab, uh, we
have a short uh fall in
personnel services and employee
benefits of $110,000.
Small, small amount.
We've got a couple C2 requests,
uh, one is uh $2.1 million to
modernize the website platform
when I uh first day Department
of Health, I started looking at
the website and noticed that it
was.
Extremely out of date.
Um, so there's a lot of work to
do to modernize the Department
of Health West right, so that's
we're asking for 2.1 million and
then $250,000 to update the lab
information management system,
um, that we need there right now
there's a lot of uh manual
processes, um, that the lab is
doing, it takes away time from
testing so uh we're asking for
250.
Uh
reauthorizations of bar
language. Just wanna put that
out there. We're asking for some
bar language, um, one
particularly is is is well
there, these are all very
important, but we have a grant
and thank you to um
Representative Dixon and
Representative Hernan, I believe
it was from the 2022, uh session
for the um
Uh
Sexual violence intervention
program was $9 million. The
department has, has, um,
expended 1.5 of that 9 over, it
was for 3 years, it ends in
2025. We would like to be
reauthorized for that. Uh, we're
gonna, I'm working with the
team, the program team, we're
gonna relook at the application
process. We're gonna provide
some technical assistance, we're
gonna make sure we get that
funding now.
Um, we're asking for a, um, oh,
we're working on a um adult uh
accreditation, um, accreditation
for an adult uh resource uh
residential treatment center,
excuse me, and that's uh $2.1
million
and we expect that we will have
joint commission come in, um,
this spring, then we'll look for
uh some certification to happen
this fall, that's 2.1 million.
Uh, we want reauthorized and
then the uh bar language
authority through the Department
of Health for uh fiscal year 25
and um looking at it for 26 as
well. And with that, um, I stand
for questions.
Thank you very much, Secretary
designate. Thank you to your
team for being here. Uh, first,
we're gonna go to represent
Luhan and then to ranking member
Jackford.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Um,
I guess I wanna, I wanna talk
about the um the the behavior
health package it's making its
way through the regionalization
plan of that. How are you
integrating or if at all, are um
Health councils with the
regionalization.
Mr.
Mr. Chair Representative Dilhan,
I think it is um with the
behavioral health reform package
and the look towards
regionalization, the Health
councils will be a um.
A partner with the Department of
Health in helping convene, um,
you know, the, the, um.
The regional planning, perhaps,
um, in helping us with um other
uh education efforts that we
want to do within within their
communities. So that's how I, I
see them playing a role. Thank
you, Mr. Chair. So yeah.
They're in our state statute,
we, we're looking at, um, we
have light at, uh, budgets for
um.
It applied to them, um, we
looked at our specials of the $3
million last uh this week, and
um so I just wanted to know how
that, how that comes into play
and using if we were to give
additional funding for them,
how, how they would be integral
to that if that bill passes too,
but how they already are, but
they'll even have more um.
Um, opportunity to participate
in how we regionalize this plan.
Thank you for that answer. Um,
Um, sorry, Mr. Chair, I had to
step out for just a minute and
then I came back and have my, my
notes right here, um.
You talked about our, our
school-based health centers. How
are they doing, Mister Chair?
How, what is the report back and
how they are um.
How they are, um, meeting the
needs of our schools, Mr. Chair.
Mr. Chair represented Duhan, as
you know, we did an expansion of
school-based health centers. I
And from our youth resiliency
program. I think the
school-based health centers play
a vital role as it relates to
the prevention efforts and
education, uh, we've expanded
expert the uh, you know, the
screening brief intervention,
referral to treatment, uh,
program throughout the
school-based health winners and
we've pushed that out to primary
care across the state, and I
think that goes a long way to
help support a lot of those
prevention efforts. Thank you so
much for that answer, and yes, I
do remember and that.
Giving the funding for the
expansion and this is the effect
of that, Mr. Chair. Thank you.
um, thank you for that answer as
well. Um, on my list, I wanted
to talk about the senior, the
senior farmers' market.
And are, are, is this related to
the um.
The RX, the food for um medicine
program, Mr. Chair.
Mr. Chair Representative Lu Han,
I don't know if it's part of the
uh food is medicine program, but
I do know that this is part of
the um that you all supported
the governor's initiative for um
healthy food across the state
and you know there's a definite
need for the seniors and how
we're supporting 23,000
low-income seniors, particularly
as it relates to uh the produce
that they need uh to maintain
their health, so we see this is
is extremely important. Thank
you, Mr. Chair. I, you know,
after
this year and we're going to
hear from aging, um, and so I'm
just I'm, I'm glad that we're,
we're, we're looking at this
population and how we're we're
looking to keep them healthy,
Mr. Chair, I think that this is
a great program along with our
other food programs that we have
in those initiatives, um, let me
see really quickly the mobile
units that you, uh, you talked
about for um, for, um,
For all the different uses for
the healthcare. What I didn't
hear are those mobile units uh
to be uh, can they be used for
the the harm reduction program
we have in place, Mr. Chair.
Mr. Chair Representative Lu Han,
absolutely, and we're so
appreciative of LFC, uh, putting
the staffing in the budget for
those mobile units because
they're vitally needed. I really
appreciate that. Thank you. I
think those when we're seeing
some of these results and some
of these improvements is because
we have focused these dollars,
um.
Across what you know, some of
the questions that I have, Mr.
Chair, and you know, I just like
to to just highlight those
things in the budget and how,
you know, improving.
The healthcare and the
behavioral healthcare that we
have, we have done so far is
important, I think one of the
concerns I think I heard though,
Mr. Chair.
Um, as we're talking about.
The opioid transfer of funds.
Can you, can you elaborate on
that, Mr. Chair?
I think it was that Kelly, you
brought that up that that might
be part of this, the discussion.
The transfer of funds in which
the opioid settlement. Oh yeah,
so, um, so the healthcare
authority was initially given um
opioid settlement revenues to do
the um.
Your coordinator's not the right
word.
This is navigators, thank you,
um, at HCA, um, HCA has signed
an MOU with UH and I believe
they plan on transferring that
FT and funding to DH for DOH do
those FTE, um, that is different
than what the legislature had
recommended in the budget last
year, um, and it's possibly not
in alignment with some of the
proposed uh
Legislation to kind of do some
reformation on that issue. And
so if uh you do do that
transfer, you're gonna have to
figure out this this puzzle
pieces are still going to fit
together and if you do want
those FTE and that money
transferred to DOH as a policy.
It was not recommended that way
by the legislature last year and
it's not recommended by the
legislative staff this year.
Thank you, Mr. Are we still in
the guidelines of of what those
those monies are supposed to be
used for, Mr. Chair.
Uh, Mr. Chair, uh, it is an
allowable use of opioid funds
that that's.
Thank you. That's what I'm
asking. Yeah, thank you, given
that, um, you know.
Our car evaluation recently.
Most of the um children who come
in through Kara. It's not
opioid. It's um usually
marijuana or um alcohol, but as
a substance and a possible use
that's an allowable use of the
settlement. I appreciate that
answer, um, I think we need to
have a, uh, I guess a little bit
more of a discussion there
because um.
With even though that it's
within the, the, the boundaries
of what the the languages for
the use, um, we need to, I need
to understand, did you say that
there might have, we might have
to look at bar authority, Mr.
Chair.
Um, Mr. Chair members of the
committee, uh, the LFC staff
believes that a bar should be
submitted for that revenue to be
moved from HCA to DOH, we have
not received that bar yet, um,
so that would be a further
conversation.
Thank you. Yes, please.
Yes, Mr. Chair Representative
Lujan, absolutely, I'm, I'm sure
that um that is coming forward.
I just want to talk a little bit
about Kara over at Department of
Health, the um
The thought behind that is
because we want to address it
from a public health
perspective. And if you think
about the healthcare authority
and if you have got the managed
care organizations that are
involved, not all exposed babies
are on Medicaid. So, um, we
wanna make sure that we're
addressing this from a public
health perspective. There's lots
of conversations going on
between the Department of
Health, CYFD Healthcare
Authority and early childhood.
About the uh transfer of Kara uh
to Department of Health as well
as ensuring that we have
identified all the touch points
and what we're going to do
within in case of intensive case
management, uh, followed through
post um exposure delivery and
continuing to follow the family.
So there's lots of conversations
about that on the development
and make money to make sure that
we're fleshing out, um, the CARA
program. Mr. Chair,
is this part of the what we saw
with the the executive order
with all the the agencies
working together to understand
this issue and and.
And figure out the solutions, as
we were told, Mr. Chair.
Mr. Chair Representative Lu Han,
I think this is a piece of that.
It's a piece of that. All right,
Mr. Chair, thank you.
Thank you very much for the fun,
ranking member Chatfield.
Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Uh
I just start out by saying I'm a
great
And of your health councils and
And also the
Fresh produce for seniors,
that's a, that's a main
important thing, you know.
care of
I think we need to make it
mandatory.
Sorry, but
That's, that's how I feel about
it.
Uh, but I did want to ask you
about, I'm looking in this book
right here.
26,237,600 no.
37,000 and $80 reversion.
Um
And tell me about that.
Mr. Chair Representative
Chatfield, I've got some
information about the reversions
that um.
I'm happy to share with you, and
if it doesn't answer your
questions, we are happy to get
that information to you. Um, so
we had some reversions from our
public health division, um, a
lot of that was uh related to
the grant, um, we have.
See here, I've got.
5.7 million in reversions
because the Department of Health
actually did a better job of
billing Medicaid.
Um, so that money is gonna go
back to the state, um, we also
had some uh reversions related
to wick and that's related to
the rebates that we get for the
formula, um, and that's uh
roughly $2.5 million and I think
that was just a timing issue,
uh, to be honest, um, but that's
where that reversion came from,
and I'm happy to um provide a
lot more in-depth detail, but
there's also some reversions
related to DDS.
D and DHI that are no longer at
the Department of Health that
have gone over to healthcare
authority.
OK.
I'm not trying to come down on
you, just 26 million is a lot of
money. It's just, and uh, oh,
you know, help us understand
that whenever we're trying to
hammer through the numbers and,
and pick a number that's
appropriate for, for next year,
that's, that's all we need to
know. Um, looking at, uh, this
other little book here, uh,
policy and performance analysis,
uh, the epidemiology response,
got a lot of red dots on it, and
you talk to me a little bit
about that.
Mr. Chair Representative
Chatfield, um, you know, I've
looked at the at the performance
across the department. I said,
I'm 10 weeks into it, so I've
got a lot of questions for for
the um for the department, um,
but just know that you know
we're gonna have a high focus
and and move that forward. I
think as it relates to the
epigroup, um, we hadn't filled a
lot of positions, um, there and
that that's part of the
reversion that we're also
seeing, but recently they've
really ramped up the hiring, uh,
within our epidemiology team.
So our job is to help you do a
good job, so help us understand
what we need to do. Thank you,
Mr. Chair.
Thank you, ranking member
Chatfield. Next, we're gonna go
to Representative Do please.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Thank you
Secretary. Thank you, Kelly. I
thank you guys all for your
work, this is from the last, but
I'm hoping you have the answer.
What is um I just assumed
everywhere in New Mexico is
medically underserved area. What
is a medically underserved area?
Most of New Mexico you would
would is identified as
medically, medically underserved
and that is, um, I think it's a
federal designation, um, but
I'm, I'm happy to get you the
details on that. OK. I was just
curious. Um,
So
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Thank you,
Secretary. I want to ask some
questions about the Veteran's
home. It is beautiful. I have
toured it.
The folks who are living it in
it are thrilled. It looks like a
Taj Mahal. If you have, if you
have, it is probably the most
beautiful hospital maybe in the
United States. I mean, I haven't
been to all of them, but it's
awesome.
It looks like you're at La Fonda
or or any, it's really
beautiful. Um, and I see here
that when it's approved, uh, you
haven't been approved yet, but
when it is recognized, we'll get
a 75% reimbursement on the
facility on the construction
costs. Uh, what do you do with
the 75% reimbursement?
Mr. Chair, Representative Doo, I
guess I'm trying to understand
your question about the 75%
reimbursement,
but when it's recognized as a
state veterans facility.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. 0, 60, OK,
I'm reading out of volume.
3
Uh volume 2 on page 318, and it
says that you're eligible for a
65% federal funding
reimbursement for the project.
Um, Mr. Chair Representative
Doo, that is a veterans grant to
offset the cost of the build of
the facility. So where did,
where does the reimbursement go?
General fund, general services
division.
Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Mister chair members of the
committee, so, um, this, the,
the buildings were actually
built with general fund with the
promise that from the executive
branch that the Feds were going
to reimburse us for that build
cost, uh, we have not seen any
movement on that and it, it's
probably.
Less than likely, at least in
the next few years that we're
actually going to get reimbursed
that from the feds. We know that
we've at least for now been
pushed back again for even
consideration. So it would be
the, the payback would go to the
general fund for front costing
the bill of that project. Thank
you, Mr. Chair. Thank you for
that, Kelly and secretary, and
I'm, I'm really thrilled to see
that we're admitting and that
we're getting up to our quota.
I'm also have questions about
the percentage of, I know that
there's a trigger when it's
federally reimbursed or when
it's state reimbursed, how many
of the veterans there are
getting federal reimbursement
versus people from the public
who are paying out of pocket to
be there. What's the population
of pay? Describe that.
Mr. Chair Representative Doo, if
you wouldn't mind, I might have
to check this over with um with
my team to see if we have an
answer. If not, we can, we're
happy to get back to you. Thank
you. Thank you, Mr. Chair and
thank you for that secretary,
um, the federal inspection,
annual inspection, audit. I
don't, I don't want to get the
term wrong. Are we in
compliance? What's holding us
back from this.
After the build
I hope we get reimbursed.
But if we're managing this
correctly, shouldn't the federal
government be paying the lump
sum of the cost at the veteran's
home.
Mr. Chair Representative Doo, so
that we've gone through, um, the
annual surveys.
We are working with the veterans
to have the uh state veterans
home designation. They have come
out twice.
The last visit, there were some
um areas identified, uh, moving
towards plan of correction
related to call lights in the
main living areas where the
veterans would sit.
Um, so we're trying to to to to
figure that out. We wouldn't
want a 3-4 cord running across
the the living room because
it's, it's potentially a trip
hazard, um, so there's, there's
other ways that we can um
accommodate that request as a
matter of fact, we had the
executive have a conversation uh
with the veterans administration
about really thinking about
modernizing, um, you know,
their, their survey process.
and review, particularly as it
relates to small homes, but
we're working towards uh that
level of compliance. So what
that would mean is that we would
notify um for another uh
certification, uh, visit, and I
don't know that that yet has
been um scheduled.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Thank you
for that, secretary. Um, I know
that we talk, we talked a little
bit of behavioral health and you
brought up Rudo so long time ago
toured that facility and it was
about the same time that they
closed down turquoise Lodge in
Silver City and had converted it
to Fort Baird, um,
But now we're I'm seeing this
regional. So I'm trying to catch
up and maybe Kelly will have to
help. We're doing regional
behavioral health. Well, in the
rural communities, you have,
there's not a scale of offer uh
scale of operations to
specialize. You need to do
multiple things. So we've got
this rule, critical access
hospitals.
That's also a really rule
designated clinic.
And then trying to provide the
behavioral health services.
And now they're not
Tagged on the regional.
As a regional site. So they're
not getting to a hole, you're
subsidizing them, um, then a
school-based health clinic comes
in, and now the clinic at the
hospital that used to provide
the vaccinations, you provide
the physicals, used to provide
the health dental, vision
screenings, is no longer doing
that because now the behavioral
health clinic is doing that. Are
we, are we thinking about
duplications? I mean, Kelly, I'm
looking at you back in the days
of early childhood. Are we
trying to prevent duplication or
are we trying to fully fund
these.
Especially the rural access, the
critical access like Chatfield
and I have, we're trying to be
mindful of sustaining them and
not duplicating services.
I mean, Mr. Trimmers get this
um.
Great question. Um, and the
answer is I think we need to do
more work on that, uh, you know,
the, the public health councils
when they originated, it was
prior to the Affordable Care
Act, and they had a different
mission and vision, they were
providing a lot of the um
uninsured and rural and um.
Populations that there was just
no services. When the age uh the
ACA came in. You know, most of
people became covered and they
started going into more
traditional healthcare settings
and the
The public health offices kind
of.
It
It's really kind of really
figuring out what they're still
their places in in this and
they've done a good job of kind
of switching recently to um
doing more substance uh
substance use disorder
treatments. Um, they still do
vaccinations and um some like
early um
prenatal work, but.
Do I think we could do some more
collaboration with DOH and those
facilities to make sure we're
not.
Duplicating that, of course, we
can always do better.
Thank you, Mr. Cha, thank you. I
mean, like when I'm hearing the
numbers that I'm hearing about
behavioral health, and when I'm
hearing the numbers that we're
going to invest in building
healthcare capacity. I think
right now is a good time to look
at what you and I went through
together in the early childhood
world when we tried to
supplement and not supplant and
think about that because I think
we'll be coming back and having
to give more money to these
critical access rural hospitals
if we're not intentional about
it, and we're not really
graduating more.
We've got a big nurse vacancy.
We've got a big social work
vacancy. We're not graduating
more people, we're supplanting
them. So when I hear Kara say we
want, I don't know if the term
cure navigators or whatever, I'm
like, wow, we've got
underutilized home visitors
doing exactly the same thing. So
I'm, I'm just the coordination
of care or prevention of
duplication, I don't, I don't
know how we get there, but I
don't want to take up a bunch of
time. I also know that a rule, I
don't, it might be statewide,
traveling nurses make more
nurse, more money than people
who are living in their
hometown, people from TRC drive
to cruises, people from cruises
drive to TRC. Socorro
to less, less strives as a
quarrel. They make more money
that way. We've
Either we need to pay with their
words or figure out how to stop
this loophole, but I mean, it's,
it's not uncommon for people to
choose to travel rather than to
stay in their communities.
Are you looking at that?
Mr. Chair Representative Dell,
um,
We know that that's an issue, so
yes.
All right. Thank you, Mr.
Turtis. My last question.
And again, thank you for the
hard work, um, why do we need a
million dollars for
vaccinations. Is that not
billable? Like, is that, is this
not are are vaccinations not
covered, Mr. Chair
Representative they are. There
are some individuals who aren't
insured that need vaccinations.
That we're covering out of our,
we've got uninsured individuals
in the state.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. I, I, uh,
who are they?
I mean
Who's not able to be insured in
our state plans. There are many
individuals who still cannot
afford to buy insurance on the
marketplace.
Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Thank you, Representative down.
We're gonna go next to represent
Pettigrew, then
representedernandez.
Thank you, Chairman and thank
you for your time. Um, chairman,
first, I think I'd like to build
off of some of the questions
that represented doubt.
Brought up with and
Others with respect to the
veteran's home.
My understanding, if, if I got
the answer correctly, Chairman.
Was that
We haven't been able to get it
officially approved.
We're a veterans home for to get
the federal 65% back.
Did I understand that correctly?
Mr. Chair Representative
Pettigrew, we have not been able
to to, we have not moved up the
list of the federal grants from
the veterans facility to receive
that replacement funding for the
build of 65 million.
Thank you, Chairman, and thank
you for that answer.
My understanding was that we've
gone through a couple of
inspections. We've had some,
some
Somebody come out and review the
facility and request
Different changes to a new
facility.
That
Is there a reason, chairman, why
those people weren't part of the
review of the plans and
specifications to begin with.
And if they were, why aren't we
giving them the opportunity to
come back and say, oh, we need
to change this, Chairman.
Mr. Chair Representative
Pettigrew, um, I can't speak to
whether or not that the
veterans.
Surveyors that that provide the
uh state veterans home
designation were part of the
planning of the build, um, I
can't tell you though that this
is the survey process, there are
federal rules and regulations
such that from a safety
perspective of what is required
in a facility like this, um, you
know, there's lots of ways to to
um have call lights, for
example, in a.
facility, is it, is it call
lights or is it just
notification that somebody might
need assistance. It could be a
bell, um, that they have. So
those are the things that we're
working through, but again, you
know, we're, we're ready to, um,
you know, work through that and
ensure that our new facilities
have that new designation from
the um the veterans.
Chairman, I appreciate that, and
I appreciate.
The
I'm just gonna say it's a dance
that you're having to go through
right now.
But
Surely, when we came up with the
idea.
To build a new veteran's home.
Somebody
Reviewed the federal rules, and
what's the requirements were
gonna be in somebody in the
evaluation process, made sure
that we met all those.
Parts and pieces.
So that by now,
Um, we shouldn't be happy,
we should not have this problem,
which
We should have looked at this to
begin with.
And so if we didn't,
What are the corrective actions
to ensure that as we continue,
Doing building out that this
isn't gonna be a continued
problem.
Am I making any sense at all?
Mr. Chair Representative
Pettigrew, I agree.
Um, yes, and, you know, it's
definitely learning opportunity.
I think it is also dependent on
the um I can tell you the first
time they came out, they didn't
identify the issue.
It was the 2nd time they came
out, they identified a different
issue.
So as you said, you know, the
dance that we're having to go
through, it is somewhat of that,
but we want to make sure that
we're able to get these
facilities designated as the
state veterans facility, so
we'll do what we need to do to
do that. Going forward, I agree
with you, it's a learning
opportunity for us to be, um,
much more diligent in this
process. We've got the call
lights or the call cords in
there in the each of their
individual rooms, um, but then
they wanted him next to a
sitting place where they
they might be watching
television in their rooms, so we
had to do something there. And
then now it's, it's related to a
notification um in the main
living area and how we're going
to do that, um, it's related to
a hood, um, and, and we've got a
um.
A stove that's on wheels so we
can pull out and make sure that
we've got clean, good infection
control. Um, is it our ability
to get it back in the exact same
spot so that the ventilation is
appropriate, so it means just
just marking the, the floor, so
it's to that degree, and I'm
giving you that detail so you
understand the, the um, you
know, how detailed that these
these reviews are.
German and
Secretary designee, I appreciate
the the detailed response.
I would challenge
Your team to go back and verify
whether or not.
The inspecting agency was part
of the original.
sets of, of, and, and review the
plans and specifications, the
uh, before the facility was
turned over, if they were there,
and if they were, I'd start
pushing back.
And so I'm not saying that some
of those things aren't needed,
chairman, but at the end of the
day,
Relatively confident the
engineers and architects and the
people that we have in this
state are pretty aren't capable
in making sure that we're
following all the guidelines,
so, and if not, then having the
root cause and and uh coming
back so that as things continue
to grow, we make sure that we
don't build from that. We'll
just be my suggestion. Chairman,
uh,
On um
On the presentation.
Under facilities, we talk about
uh the executive act for $2.2
million.
Um
In the in the LLC doesn't have
that. Chairman, I'm just
curious, do we have that
somewhere else in special cause
I went through the specials and
I didn't find it.
Mr. Cherry to me that was not
recommended by the LFC. This has
been uh for several years,
you'll see has struggled with
personnel spending at Department
of Health and getting accurate
projections on where personnel
is going to end at the end of
the fiscal year, and I think
we're still struggling with
that, and so at this time, uh,
we did not include that.
In our recommendation given.
Some detail that was needed.
Chairman and Kelly, thank you
for that. And, and I believe I
heard in your initial
presentation that you requested
a bunch of information, but you
weren't, you didn't receive it.
On a, on a, on a multiple level
of things. I don't want Mr.
Chair,
DOH does answer our question
that I don't wanna give that
impression. Um, I specifically
was talking about the all pairs
claims database, which is an IT
system that the legislature
authorized and paid for, um,
that both the interim LFC and
the interim Health and Human
Services Committee has requested
the LFC to do some research
regarding that data, but we have
not been able to receive it
given.
some um statutory beliefs that
the agency believes that they
can't release that to us, and so
I was suggesting that we might
want to think about, um,
allowing LFC access that
database that we can do that
better, um, health insurance
research for you.
Thank you very much for
clarifying that for me. And uh,
sorry if I implied anything.
Anything different than that,
and my question probably came
across extremely wrong and I
apologize for that.
The chairman, I'd like to figure
out how we figured that too.
To countries in that, so when we
cast LFC to be able to do
something, they actually have
the capability to get it done.
Chairman, one last question on
the senior farmers' market.
Not for right now.
But I would love to have detail
on this program.
$1 million.
Helps to support 550 local
farmers.
And 23,000 seniors.
I'd love to have the detail, and
if there's grants out there what
those are, how this whole
process works. Thank you,
Chairman, for your time. Thank
you presenters for your time.
Thank you very much, uh,
Representative Pettigrew. Next,
we're gonna go to representative
Hernandez.
Like it was terrible and uh.
Um, Madam Secretary, uh,
Last time that we, we were
talking, I asked you about the,
um, well, first off, my, my, Mr.
Chair, um, there's it on page
11.
Uh, on the output.
Uh, it talks about the
percentage of the Mexican adult
uh cigarette smokers who
accessed New Mexico Department
of Health.
Seeation services, um, Mr.
Chair, in, in my community of
Shiprock and also other gas
stations in northwestern New
Mexico. We're seeing a rise of
uh synthetic tobacco.
Madam, uh, um, Mr. Chair, uh,
uh.
Um
Uh, um, Madam Secretary, is, is
this is synthetic tobacco.
Common in New Mexico at retail
stores. Is, is this something
that um of concern from the,
from the Department of Health.
Uh, Mr. Chesson Hernandez, um,
it is definitely a concern. Is
it common? I would say likely
yes. You asked me if it was
legal that uh when we met, uh,
roughly a week and a half ago, I
believe it is, and um, I don't
have an answer for you on that
yet, just. If Mr. Chair, if, if
I have a, if your department can
follow up with me on that
because I, I, I'm, we're limited
on how many bills we can submit,
and that's something that I want
to address at this legislative
session.
Uh, I have a, I have a few
follow up questions on uh what
the, um, body here has been
bringing up when it comes to the
uh uh.
Community health councils, Mr.
Chair, um,
Madam Secretary, uh, can, can we
go back and, can you tell me how
many, um,
There was a number you gave
about, I think it was 9 tribal.
Health, Health councils can um
can, and, and I understand that
there's, uh, and, and I'm
bringing this up because I, I've
spoken, uh, I'm, I'm, I'm aware
that like the Zuni Pueblo, Zia
Pebble, and even the hacky
Pebble, they are also wanting
to.
initiate some similar like the
Tohajli, what's in Tohali, um,
and, and, and I'm also wanna
acknowledge, uh, the wonderful
work of Janice Johnson, who's a
tribal liaison there. I know she
has, has a lot of work under
her, but, uh, there's a huge
demand, uh, with our tribes,
pebbles and nations, um, the,
the problem, Mr. Chair is, is,
is the, the funding request to
get some of these started in
these tribal communities, uh,
I, um, Mr. Chair, um, Madam
Secretary, are you aware that
there's legislation right now to
help expand access for these
health councils. Is that
something that you're
department's willing to support.
Mr. Chair Representative
Hernandez, yes, I'm aware of the
legislation, I think it's $43
million. There's an estimate of
a million dollars per health
council, um, I think that one of
the challenges that we have seen
in working with some of the
councils is that some are much
further along than others in
their ability to convene, um,
and.
Uh, they're a little more
organized, so the concern I
think that we would have is the
ability for them to get that
funding out, um, you know,
roughly a million dollars for
council. We, we did put a
request in as a special for 3
million to ensure that we're
continuing to support the
councils that we have, and it's,
it's 33 county councils and 8
tribal councils.
Mr. Chair, I just want to bring
awareness that, you know, these,
these health councils are
critical in our underserved, uh,
communities, and, uh, not just
the prevention and intervention,
but also they do so much more in
our communities with coming more
than just the assessment
planning, you know, I, I, I've
seen a lot of wonderful, you
know, work that they're they're
doing, um, in fact, in in San
Juan County, Mr. Chair, uh,
there's actually a, uh, a health
fair that goes on every year.
That helps bring awareness, so,
uh, I, I just really wanna
encourage, uh, you know, that
this continued conversation and
um, and you know, I, I just,
again, uh, the hearing from from
Other communities because it's
not just, it's not just the
tribal communities. It benefits
it statewide, uh, these health
councils, uh, I think there's,
there's a lot of
Benefits uh on the return of
investment that uh we put into
it and, uh, I, again, uh, Mr.
Chair, um,
Madam Secretary, you mentioned
56 uh 56 centers that you have,
uh, of those centers, how many?
Uh, public health nurses do you
have at each one.
Mr. Chair, Mrs, we can get you
that information. I don't have
that off the top of my head.
We've got, yeah, 56 public
health offices across the state,
and I do see those as access
points, uh, for health care
services and um there's
opportunity to do more out of
those, out of those offices for
sure. Thank you Mr. Chair, and
I, I apologize. I, uh, just,
just trying to find out to make
sure that they're staffed with
with uh these public health
nurses, uh, Mr. Chair, I, uh,
some const
students of mine, uh, actually
at a, uh, at a
Um, at a school uh meeting, one
of the biggest concerns that got
brought up to me was access to
dental care, especially on the
Navajo Nation where, you know,
our, it, it, it's just not
there, and what I understand is
that these mobile units can,
can, Mr. Chair, can these mobile
units be retrofit to allow for
uh dental care services.
Mr. Chair Representative
Hernandez, there are some mobile
dentistry programs, um, you
know, but the, the mobile units
themselves when you think about
the X-rays and I mean, it's,
it's, it would be, it would be
costly, but, you know, it, it's
definitely doable.
Mr. Chair, what's going on in
our dental services on, on the
Navajo Nation is they're not
failing, they're actually
pulling teeth. So I, I just
wanna to raise that concern of,
of uh community members in my
district. Thank you for, Mr.
Chair, that concludes my
Questions. Thank you very much
Representative Hernandez. Uh,
thank you, Madam Secretary
designate. We're gonna ask for
the LSC. I know there's a small
difference. There are some
pieces to continue in
conversation, but great to see
that there's overall very, very
small difference.
a vice chair.
Thank you, Mr. Chair, I would
move the committee adopt the LFC
recommendation.
OK. It's been moved by Vice
Chair Dixon, seconded by
representative Garrett.
Uh, and Representative Luhan
hand.
Uh, any opposition to that
motion.
I don't see any opposition to
that motion. Thank you, Madam
Secretary.
And appreciate very
The sort of short time you've
had and uh the partnership is
great, we're gonna invite uh our
aging and long-term services up
members, there's a number of
different uh dinners tonight for
different uh committees and
others, we know we want to be uh
quick here, um.
Also explains why we don't have
dinner for the committee 2
nights in a row
3rd time, uh, you know, 2
strikes maybe following the
strike. We'll try to wrap, we'll
try to go quickly through Madam
Secretary designate, it's great
to see you here today as well.
Thank you.
We'll dive in, uh, Kelly, you
can start us off even as we're
sort of repositioning around the
room.
Great. Thank you, Mr. Chair,
members committee, I, I will be
quick but this is again another
small difference, um, this is
agency code 624 in your packet,
so it should be right in front
of uh DOH.
Um, so pretty small overall
differences just like 0.3
difference again, um, between
the LLC and the executive
recommendations in the high
level, you can see um the main
differences for um consumer and
elder rights, uh, the LFC put um
some funding into FTE. The
executive put more um adult
protective services I would say
that the main difference if I
did summarize for this recurring
budget, then there's really just
one main difference.
And of course, there's small
stuff, but it's the creation of
a new P code that was
recommended by the executive and
not recommended by the LFC, and
you can see that lines 19
through 24. And so, um, there is
some additional funding for
that, but a big chunk of that is
a transfer online 9 from the
adult protective services into
this new new pe code online 21,
so when you look at that 6.5,
don't think of.
that is additional general fund,
just think of that as general
fund we've put in from one place
to another, and I mean, outside
of that, that's really the major
difference between the two
recommendations and given that
I'm sure we're all starving, um,
I'll let Laurie just do the
first P code or?
You want to just make comments
on the overall.
I'm
Mr. Chair, members of the
committee in the interest of
time, um.
Unless the committee would
prefer, I think we're just gonna
summarize the differences like
Kelly did, and for the
executive, um, the only thing
that I would comment is that
P 595 that new program, the
reorg is already in existence in
legislate um in statute, and the
executive is just supporting the
agency's request for better
transparency and that
segregation of those long term
care services back into its own
program code as opposed to being
housed within uh adult
protective services and the
aging network, um, with that, I
will hand it over to
um,
the
Cabinet Secretary designate for
her presentation.
Thank you so much, Mr. Chair,
members of the committee,
pleasure to see you today, Emily
Coltenbach. I'm the cabinet
secretary designate, aging and
long-term services. I've been
with the department now 3
months, uh, amazing 3 months.
I've enjoyed every minute of it
and I really wanna thank the the
staff, the leadership staff, all
the staff who have been great
teachers and guides for me. I
watch every day how they work,
um, and how compassionate they
are to.
our older adults and adults
living with disabilities, so
they're all here today and I
just wanna take a moment to to
thank them. I also want to thank
and recognize our community
partners and uh advocates and
tribal tribal pueblos and
nations, providers who joined us
also from across the state, um,
I am going again in the interest
of time, I'm gonna go quickly
through these slides, um, but I
do do wanna just remind folks
what our agency does, um, at the
heart of what
we do is really, um, making sure
that our older adults and adults
living with disabilities can
live independently and with
dignity in their own communities
for as long as possible, and we
do that by helping people
navigate this very complex long
term care system we prevent and
investigate adult abuse, um, and
exploitation and neglect, uh,
protecting nursing facility
rights being those eyes and ears
in our nursing facilities across
the states, uh.
Family caregiving it's really
important supporting those
caregiver, uh, senior hunger,
combating senior hunger and
isolation and encouraging
healthy and productive aging.
That and so much more, but um I
just wanted to to remind folks
we're all over the state. We,
um, might seem like a small
agency at, um, just over 200
employees, but our breadth and
depth of work, um, is seen and
felt in so many of our
communities. Um, I just want to
quickly take us, um, to slide 4.
I'm not gonna walk through it,
but it's again, you, I don't
think it'll be surprised to see
these numbers are.
older population is growing in
New Mexico and has been. Um, I
was with the department 20 years
ago. We started to recognize
the, the increase in the growth
of um our population in New
Mexico and those projections are
bearing true now, so we, uh, by
2030 are going to be 10th um in
the nation for the population
over 65. So we have to be
prepared and that's 5 years
away, um, and that in and we're
going to increase by over 200.
1000, uh, New Mexicans over 65
by 2040. So that's a 28% uh
growth. The next slide.
I can't leave here tonight
without.
Recognizing this is slide 5, the
The unsung heroes of our long
term care system, um, those are
our family and friend
caregivers. They're really the
backbone of our long term care,
um, system. I know that many of
us in this room are caregivers
and the incredible strain
caregivers, uh, experience
financially, uh, physically,
mentally, um, we need to be
wrapping our arms around these
caregivers, and that is a huge
priority as I step into this
role, and, um, I believe.
leave our budget, um, or request
really reflects the need to
support our caregiver. So just
to touch briefly on a few other
priorities, um, as I, uh, as we
move into FY 26, uh, we really
need to strengthen, um, the
point of entry for the
department. That's our aging and
disability resource center.
That's where people call and um
sometimes a phone call is not
enough. We really need to do
those warm handoffs. We have to
be providing air coordination
and
So our budget reflects that
protecting facility resident
rights, the eyes and ears of
our, our residents. We need to
be those advocates just like we
don't let a loved one be in the
hospital without an advocate.
Um, we need to have those
advocates for our loved ones in
nursing homes and assisted
living facilities, rebooting the
aging Network after COVID, very
important. We need to get our
older adults back engaged in our
aging network services and we
also recognize we lost staff
during COVID and.
So we need to make sure um to
raise um the wages for aging
Network staff across our senior
centers. We need to make sure
that that system is whole. We
already heard about the long
term care division that's really
taking all of those caregiver
support veteran self-directed
care programs, our care
transitions and and housing it
in the peak code, um, the new P
code, it's a division that
already exists in statute, but
we can't provide that long term
care support and services.
with those programs, um, all
over the department, we need to
have a home for them and that's
what that ask is. And then I
just want to mention behavioral
health issues and housing
issues.
Significant for our older
adults. We're seeing it over and
over again with within our adult
protective services system, um,
and so those are two areas that
I look forward to working with
my colleagues across state
government to, to support.
So, slide 6 just shows again
what you heard, um, as the
executive, so I'm not gonna go
through that. Um, slide 7.
just shows, um, the comparison,
the base budget comparison
between the executive and the
LFC budget. So again, that's
just for reference.
I'm gonna run through this so
quickly, slide 8 is that
strategic alignment of our long
term, uh, cares.
Oh, thank you.
Long term care division, um, and
as Kelly mentioned, it's about
moving those programs into one a
new division. It's not new
money, um, it's realigning um
those programs and the budget.
the Kiki Savera dignity, senior
dignity Fund, critically
important. I heard today
conversation about food
insecurity and the governor's
food initiative. We participate
that in that as well. It's
called the NM grow and and I'm
grown and our senior centers
actually, it's what we call farm
to senior center, and those
senior centers work with farmers
and others around the state to
make sure we have New Mexico
grown food in our senior.
that is funded by the Kiki Save
Fund. That's just an example of
one of the programs that gets
funded.
As I mentioned, we have this
growing need, growing
population. We have to be
nimble. We have to be flexible.
We have to make sure we have
those funds available to address
the needs. The other thing is
transportation and um this be my
last example on Kiki, but um,
the nonmetro AAA is doing an
incredible program where they're
matching volunteers with
individuals who need need
transportation after hours to
the grocery store to medical
visits. That's not paid for
through our aging network
budget.
But it can be paid for through
the Kiki Sara Fund. Those are
examples of really important
programs that serve primarily
our rural and underserved areas
across the state. So, uh, that
is really important. The other
thing is around technology, we
have a request of 500,000 to um
revamp our IT systems.
I was at the department from
2006 to 2011. We haven't done a
full revamp of our IT systems
since 2007 when I was there
last. I had a BlackBerry. I
didn't even have an iPhone. I
can only imagine how technology
has changed and evolved in that
time, and it we aren't keeping
up with the need for our older
adults, um, and, and then, um,
marketing and communication. If
our older adults and adults with
disabilities can't access, um,
information or know about our
programs, um, then we're failing
and so there is a request of
$1.5 million to um improve our
outreach, marketing and
communication to the populations
we serve. So I will end there. I
wanna thank you all, um, for
being the champions you are for
our older adults. Um, it has
been such a pleasure to be back
at the department to work with
our community partners and all
of you really make
sure, um, our adults can live
with dignity and independence
and joy in the communities they
they most love. And as I also
heard today, supporting people
in that home and community is so
critical and so I see that as a
uh a central focal point of our
department. So thank you so much
for your time today. Great.
Thank you very much, uh, Madam
Secretary designate. We're gonna
go to ranking member Chatfield.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Uh, Mr.
Chair, you saw, I went back and
talk, spoke with the secretary
and I've talked with her a time
or two, and the, the budget, the
LFC budget seems to be pretty
close, but uh some of the, some
of the P codes, maybe we need to
move a little some of that money
from one ico to the other, so I
would ask if we could flag this
for further review and just work
with her a little bit to get
that money put where, where she
can use it.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Thank you,
ranking memberm Chatfield, uh,
representative Pettigrew.
Thank you, Chairman and thank
you, Secretary designee for
being here.
Uh, chairman, I only have one
thing. I would like for
us to schedule a time together
with.
Within the next week or two.
Uh
I continue to fund our senior
centers in my district and
outside of my district in some
cases, um,
And I, I have some concerns with
respect to how we're controlling
and how our senior centers get
paid for milks.
So, I'd love to have that
conversation offline. Thank you.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Thank you,
Representative. We'll make sure
to to meet. Thank you very much
Representative Herndon.
Thank you, Mr. Chair and Mr.
Chair and, and Madam Secretary,
uh, I just, and members of the
committee, I just want to flag
for you that may and outstanding
work that Madam Secretary is
doing with respect to
Alzheimer's and dementia in the
state of New Mexico as we look
at this program and uh she has a
new program called New Mexico
Care and uh to help individuals
who are taking care of others
with Alzheimer's or some other
uh illnesses they, as they age,
how you can be paid for that.
And but one other thing that I
wanna flag for the committee,
Mr. Chair and Madam Secretary,
is that the governor has
actually tasked her with a
million dollars to try to make
uh um
I try to make sure that we have
a program that brings in the
community to address Alzheimer's
within the state of New Mexico.
So we don't want to leave that
out, Madam Secretary, Mr. Chair.
Thank you very much. Thank you
very much, uh, Representative
Herndon, Representative Garrett.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Um,
Cabinets, madam's cabinet
secretary designate, um,
something has come up, I mean,
as you know, there's so much
overlap between departments and
something that's been brought to
my attention as working on
long-term care facilities and
nursing homes, and Medicaid. So
I just wanna flag that for you
to, to look at.
Thank you. Thank you, um, Mr.
Chair and Representative, we
have a health huddle, um, every
week or so and so some of those
issues come up and thank you for
that cause I, I think it's
really important that we work
together. I also want to mention
that we do have a plan to do a
long term care assessment and
study to look at quality and
quantity across the state, and
so I hope we'll have that to you
for, uh, before the next
legislative session. Thank you.
Thank you.
Thank you Sam Garrett. OK, uh,
ranking member Chatfield.
Mr. Chair, I moved the executive
recommendation. OK, it's been
moved by Representative
Chatfield, saying by
Representative Sanchez or
ranking member of that field,
noting it's the lower general
fund, um, is there any
opposition to that motion?
I don't see any.
Oh,
you say it it it is and it's the
desired recommendation from the.
From the department,
uh, OK, uh, I, I apologize. I
didn't, uh, any opposition to
that motion.
I don't see any, um, thank you
very much, Madam Secretary
designate. Thank you. Uh,
members, thank you. We're gonna
go very quickly to public
comment, um.
5
Uh, folks in here, we're gonna
try to limit it to 45 seconds.
That's right,
We've got multiple timers on the
committee
but and I appreciate the
committee. This is an important
feature that we've added.
OK, so, uh, if everybody could
clear out, um, or sort of uh be
extra quiet.
Is that? We've got a number of
folks in line for public
comment, which I appreciate.
We're gonna limit it to 30
seconds and just go through
everybody. Please go ahead and
start, Mr. Chairman, members of
the committee, my name is
Vicente Vargas. I'm with the New
Mexico Health Care Association,
New Mexico Center for Assisted
Living. We'd like to thank you
for considering the request to
rebase nursing facility Medicaid
rates. Thank you very much for
the time today and for all the
questions.
Um, Mr. Chairman and members of
the committee, my name is Scott
Williams. I'm the administrator
at Paloma Springs Healthcare and
should the consequences New
Mexico.
Um, we're a 94 bed facility. We
have 108 employees, um, I also
would like to urge the support
of the uh Medicaid rebasing.
Thank you for your time.
Um, Mr. Chair and members of the
committee, um, my name is John
Anderson, and I am the
administrator at Aztec
Healthcare. Um, Aztec Healthcare
is an 86 bed uh nursing
facility, and we employ 130
people. Um, we will soon be
opening a 26 bed dementia unit.
Um,
Having this uh Medicaid rebasing
would certainly help us get
adequate staffing, especially
for this dementia unit, which
many of them will require a 1 to
1, um, either CNA or helper to
be with them at all times. Thank
you very much.
OK.
Great. I'm Patrick Cash. I'm the
administrator with uh Secora
Health and Rehab. Uh, we're the
only facility, well, one other
facility between us and
Albuquerque, um.
Where, uh, 51 bath facility
we're licensed for 65, you know,
we need the additional funding
to expand and improve the
quality of life for our
residents, um, we're probably
one of the bigger employers in
Socorro, uh, a town that is
above the state average in
unemployment, uh, there's just
so much we need with that
rebasing. um, thank you.
My name is Doyle Harris. I'm
from Clovis, New Mexico. I'm an
administrator for 104 be skilled
nursing facility retirement
ranch, um, our current gap,
we're the ones that's $40 from
cost to what we actually get and
despite the inflationary amounts
we've been getting every year.
Um, we're still really short and
that adds up to about $900,000 a
year. And we really need that
funding, uh, we currently from
May to November, we've had a
$367,000 loss, and we're going
to keep having that.
until we get that rebates and so
I really appreciate your
support.
Good afternoon, Chair smaller
members of the committee. Thank
you for staying and listening to
our comments. Um, my name is
Adrian Nhaus. I'm a registered
nurse. I'm a union
representative, and uh we wanted
to discuss the disparities that
are ongoing with health
professionals throughout the
state that can lead to better
retention and recruitment.
There's some real systemic
problems that I had a two-minute
speech prepared for, but I'll
make it 30 seconds.
And, um, and we just know that
um we're working together with
other unions that would
recognize the issues are
systemic and that they're
multifaceted, but including uh
improved compensation
structures, strong collective
bargaining and hospital staffing
legislation like House Bill 138.
They're all investments in the
workforce retention and
recruitment that will improve
healthcare throughout the state.
Thank you very much for your
time. Thank you.
Good evening, you guys. My name
is Samuel. I'm a national
organizer for the National Union
of Hospital and Healthcare
Employees, and I, um,
representing District 1199 New
Mexico. Uh, thank you, uh, Cham
smaller members of the
committee. Uh thank you for the
opportunity to speak. We are
here to discuss the disparities
that have led that ongoing
problems that UNMH Tanel
Regional and health and
healthcare facilities across New
Mexico. These challenges are not
new, but they have worsened due
to chronic understaffing, a wage
stagnation and an equitable
labor practices that impact
patient care.
And worker retention. I am here
today on behalf of 1199 to
highlight the urgent need for
solutions that prioritize safe
staffing, for wages and
workplace protections for
healthcare professionals across
the state. 1199 in collaboration
with the United we're good.
Yeah, 30 seconds, thank you.
Appreciate it. Thank you very
much.
Hi, I'm Kathy Pinnell. I'm the
administrator at Odelia
Healthcare in Albuquerque, 119
bed facility with about 200
employees. I'm here also to uh
advocate for the Medicaid
rebates reimbursement. It would
mean so much for the quality of
care for our residents. Thank
you.
Hi, I'm Rick Samuelson. Um, I'm
a regional director for OPCO. I
oversee 9 buildings in northern
New Mexico. My administrators
and the staff in those buildings
have the biggest hearts, they
want to take care of their
residents in the most, the, the
best ways they possibly can.
They've learned how to do more
with less over the last few
years. I'm asking you to
consider the rebasing, um, and
help fund some of their their
dreams in terms of ways to take
care of their residents in more
effective ways. Thank you. Thank
you.
Setting a timer. Hello, my name
is Jason Gonzalez and I am a
small farmer in San Miguel
County, and I'm here advocating
for the Department of Health,
senior Farmers Market nutrition
program. Um, this program
affects me greatly as a farmer
financially, but a whole lot
more than that. I mean, farmers
and ranchers, we, we find a way,
but these seniors, they, they
benefit greatly from, for being
able to supplement their diet
with New Mexico grown fruits and
vegetables, fruits, vegetables
and honey is all it covers. And
it's New Mexico.
and they're speaking, there's
been a lot of speaking about
Alzheimer's and you know, that
more and more is being known as
type 3 diabetes, which is
largely diet and lifestyle
driven, not, not 100%. I'm, I'm
not judging anyone, but, um,
This is a very important
program. I see these seniors at
the farmers' market. I see them
buying healthy foods, visiting,
getting out of the house,
and anyhow, just please find it
in your hearts to, to fund that
$1 million. Thank you very much.
Boy, that's hard to follow, Mr.
Chairman and committee members.
My name is Pam Roy and I'm here
representing the farm to table
the New Mexican food and
agriculture Policy Council and
Rocky Mountain Farmers Union in
full um support of all of the
food initiatives, we see these
as a
Collective. These are about as
our farmer gentleman said,
helping our from our senior
centers, we have 177 out of 240
senior centers purchasing New
Mexico grown now so that funding
is gonna be really important for
them.
Um, and 67 out of 89 of our
school district school districts
also purchasing fresh fruits and
vegetables as well as meats
across the state. Lastly, senior
farmers market nutrition program
really near and dear to my
heart. Um, I sat here in front
of your predecessor's 31 years
ago requesting the first funding
to New Mexico.
$42,300 and now we're asking for
a million because it will serve
our communities. Thank you so
much. Thank you.
Mr. Chair, members of the
committee, I'm Jill Dixon, I'm
the executive director of the
Food Depot, which is the food
bank for northern New Mexico,
but I'm representing all 5 food
banks in the state and the
hunger relief Network. Together
we feed over 100,000 New
Mexicans at 570 locations. We're
here supporting the expansion of
the budget for ISD to make sure
that those snap.
Applications can be processed.
We know what it looks like on
the other side and we can't go
back. Representative Dixon
pointed out that there's a lot
of funding coming from different
sources and we need all of it to
succeed in feeding all New
Mexicans.
Thank you very much.
I
My name is Frederick Garcia. I'm
president of local authority
when he asked me, I am an IED
worker. This
Moa
where everybody gets from 2 to
$3 more, we get 2 or $3 less.
A study when you help us bring
this back up.
So we consider
The cut help ID.
Provide these workers because we
provide services to our New
Mexicans.
They, we help process that
footsteps. The Medicaid, they're
kind of, the waivers, the de
waivers you heard about, we
processed that. We do a lot of
this stuff.
To reconsider with less help,
less workers, that means
everybody suffers.
Not just.
Thank you, Mr. G.
Hi, my name is Michelle. I'm an
ISD worker too, please support
our bill because without the
workers, we are already
understaffed and overworked.
Thank you very much.
Mr. Chairman, members of the
committee, Carter Bundy asks me,
we represent, um, the ISD
workers, the case workers, you
do so much good work to try to
alleviate poverty and help
people raise themselves up. We
think that the people who
provide those services for our
lowest and most vulnerable,
lowest income, most vulnerable
people. They are the glue that
holds it together. Thank you for
your help. Thank you very much.
Mr. Chair, members of the
committee, I'm one of the
attorneys that represents the
class of applicants for food and
medical assistance in that
decades long.
medication.
And I want to stress that the
ISD budget is so important to
getting people food and
healthcare, but also to
complying with federal court
orders, and we heard a proposal
today that would take money from
the senior SNAP supplement to
make up the difference between
the LFC and executive budget on
this, and that would be a really
disappointing and harmful, um,
solution to this problem. We
need all of these things to be
funded for New Mexicans. Thank
you. Thank you.
Mr. Chair, members of the
committee. I'm Erica Sanchez
with New Mexico Center on
Poverty and the New Mexico
together for healthcare
campaign. We ask that you fully
fund the healthcare
Affordability Fund. The fund has
had a significant impact on
healthcare affordability for our
state, lowering costs for tens
of thousands of people and
thousands of small businesses
each month. We want to continue
to see these programs fully
funded. Thank you. Thank you.
Hello, my name is Nigel
Williams. I'm the regional
director of operations for Opco.
We oversee um the southern New
Mexico region for nursing
facilities.
I'm here to ask for your support
in the rebates and funds. Those
funds mean a lot just, not for
the providers but the residents.
Our residents deserve better
than the older adult population
deserve better. So we just ask
that you support this, please.
Thank you very much.
Mr. Chair, members of the
committee, I'm the last one.
Yeah, uh, my name is Johannes
Lenzer. I'm with the National
Center for Frontier Communities,
we are headquartered in Grant
County, New Mexico. We operate
the Frontier FUA program which
serves farmers, ranchers,
institutions and residents in 13
New Mexico counties. We're also
here to lend our support for the
senior farmers market nutrition
program as well as and I'm grown
generally for all institutions.
Thank you. Thank you very much.
OK, we're gonna go very quickly
online 30 seconds each, starting
with Katherine Anderson.
Hello, can you all hear me? Yep.
Wonderful. Hello, my name is
Katie Anderson. I'm a vice
president with Roadner Food
Bank. Um, I just want to um
Highly encourage, uh, that ISD
is fully funded, uh, Snap
matters so much to the people
that we serve through the Food
Bank Network. Uh, the amount of
food that the food banks would
have to cover without um
appropriate attention to Snap,
uh, would be, uh, would be
insurmountable, so we just want
to put forward the importance
of, of funding ISD fully. Thank
you.
Thank you very much, uh, Cecilia
Fred.
OK. Um, we'll, uh, let's go to
the Alliance for Health
Councils.
Thank you. This is Valeria with
the New Mexico Alliance of
Health councils, um, petitioning
for investment in county tribal
health councils. They are the
boots on the ground for
improving health and well-being
in New Mexico in concert with
the Department of Health,
providing a prevention and
intervention efforts
collaborating with key partners
to coordinate access to
essential services. Thank you so
much for your support. Thank
you.
Uh, moving, uh, now to N.
Uh, thank you, Mr. Chair, Madam
Vice Chair, members of the
committee. My name is Nat Dean.
I'm a disability advocate and a
senior with disabilities and um
I, I appreciate all of the
information today. New Mexico is
an available program to help
seniors who are not eligible for
Medicaid, but may be eligible
for Medicare, not all seniors
are eligible for Medicaid. Let's
embrace more programs that
create access to individuals who
may only qualify for.
Medicare. Thank you very much,
Mr. Chair, members of the
committee, OK, and one more time
to for Cecilia, Fred.
OK. I don't know that it's gonna
work, but we've had very robust
public comment that'll conclude
our meeting for tonight. Thank
you, members for great work.
