Representative Lotta.
Your.
Representative Lundstrom.
Representative Sarinana.
Here.
Representative vice chair Dixon.
Sorry here.
Madam chair Trujillo well.
You've got a quorum.
Chairwoman.
Thank you madam chair and the
Representative Garcia is fun G.
I think from.
The madam chair I should step
aside with I'm here.
Representative Armstrong.
District where you're.
Representative Townsend.
Your.
Representative Dixon.
Representative.
Here.
Baster Stansbury.
All.
Reporter.
Okay
For you have to do that again.
I'm hearing an echo on my and
also.
Local well let's go ahead and
see what we can do to move the
path that.
That's.
Yes this is the.
Our house if you are not.
Going
to.
Your life is off.
Because we have a lot of.
One so
This is the everyone off.
Okay the first one is to remove
Commission Mr Martinez minor.
I definitely have that.
Good morning madam chair no
problem good morning members of
the committee I'm Jacqueline
Martinez the LFC analyst for the
renewable energy transmission
authority that.
Andrew Miner is also joining us
he is the executive budget
analyst and we have Fernando
Martinez the director of Rita
Rita doesn't have different
sheets so I won't have to share
my screen for them they
requested a special
appropriation every year for
funding this year right
requests.
Three hundred and fifty thousand
and the LESC recommendation
includes one hundred thousand
well the executive
recommendation includes two
hundred thousand I'll turn it
over to ensure if he has any
additional comments.
Thank you Jack on your morning
madam chair members of the
committee could be here this
morning and I have no further
comments on your.
Bob.
For.
We can turn it over to Fernando
for his presentation.
Good morning madam chair and
representative my name is.
Robert bush I am the chairman of
the board of the renewable
energy transmission authority
I'm just going to get us
started.
I want to introduce
both our executive director we
just
mentioned Mr Fernando Martinez
and our general counsel ms Lynn
most dollar.
So
I've been the chair of Rita for
now over ten years
Fernando is a little bit new to
read but has now been with us
over a year and he will be
discussing our request this
morning.
Both missed Mosteller and myself
will be available for questions
at the end of his presentation
if there are any Mr Martinez.
Okay I think you chairman bush
madam chair and committee
members if it's okay I'll start
sharing my screen right now.
Okay and alleged one that does
the telephone.
I'm sorry to hear that Madam one
large laws that health Martin
thank you you know that is that
is a for a grew up in early on
to and north to Taos so.
That's that's where I wish I was
a this weekend but hopefully
hopefully next weekend.
Well good morning madam chair
committee members.
Thank you for giving us some of
your time out of your very busy
schedules today we recognize
that.
You're volunteering countless
hours in making many sacrifices
to do your jobs for the benefit
of New Mexico and and all the
citizens so we very much
appreciate this opportunity to
discuss the New Mexico renewable
energy transmission authority or
as we call it read a for short.
There are numerous updates that
can be found in the report we
provided the committee by email
and what you can now see on the
screen in the interest of time
we'll need to talk about the
highlights and not go page by
page through this entire report
I want to leave apple time for
questions and speak much less
than ten minutes
as you just heard we did submit
a special appropriation request
for FY twenty two this is a.
Course a nonrecurring requests
it's meant to cover read a
general operations until the
Western Spirit transmission line
which is a unique public private
partnership between read on
pattern energy is in commercial
operation at the end of this
year at this time Redis we'll
begin re receiving these
payments and will no longer
require state funding support.
last year read was still in the
development phase.
Of the Western Spirit project
this year the project is much
further along and we have a
completed multi billion dollar
financing as of December thirty
first twenty twenty and the
transmission line.
And associated with farms are
under full construction.
When turbines and the
transmission line with
associated facilities are
actively being constructed.
So far forty wind turbines are
have gone up.
I know some of you may be
wondering how I know that read
it will not be here again at
this time next year asking for
more state funding.
And it is because Rita has
signed and fully executed
agreements with pattern energy
that will guarantee developers
lease payments for me to general
operations the.
Will ensure reader will no
longer need state funding
support once these facilities
are in commercial operation at
the end of this year.
Regis gonna start receiving
these payments and early twenty
twenty two.
But until then read it will have
a cash flow problem after July
first twenty twenty one this is
why we need your help.
The visible success of this
Western Spirit project has other
world class developers
interested in partnering with
Rita.
Because these partnerships are
complicated they take a long
time to go to negotiate and come
to an agreement but we will get
a completed.
Reader is currently negotiating
expansion of existing
partnerships and the development
of new agreements with New World
class developers.
We're very close to partnership
agreement on a couple of major
projects right now.
I do want to point out that you
know read it does get private
developer contributions but will
they do support specific project
needs they provide limited
general operation support for
Rita.
our private developers are not
gonna find reader would general
operations funding that would
benefit their direct competitors
and this is one of the reasons
that Rita
until we start receiving our
lease payments from pattern
energy energy twenty twenty two.
We need state funding support
our development partners should
not be required to pay reader to
work with their direct
competitors now the issue today
is that the executive
recommendation and the LESC
recommendation on readers FY
twenty two request for for part.
LFC recommendation is not enough
to keep reader operating after
July first twenty twenty one.
There's never been a more
critical time to fund Rita.
At least until we start
receiving these these payments
in January of twenty twenty two.
so if we could get an adequate
amount of operating funds after
July.
Twenty twenty one until some
time in early twenty two will be
in good shape one thing I cannot
emphasize enough is that
transmission projects must
follow a very tight schedule and
any delays could cause them to
fail.
Any stoppage in read
appropriations me jeopardize
multi billion dollar renewable
energy transmission projects and
thousands of jobs.
That's reader is requesting that
the AGFC match the executive
Representative recommendation in
order to keep return operation
after July first twenty twenty
one and I and I houses for the
following reasons on this
committee is very well aware
that the oil and gas industry
Montoya answered installations
and national labs Regan billions
of dollars and tens of thousands
of jobs into New Mexico each
year but now what I can happily
report is that we can now
include renewable energy and
transmission development as
adding billions more of
investment.
Thousands more jobs to New
Mexico every year.
And because building
transmission capacity is the
most important factor to
developing more renewable energy
Rita is critical to making this
happen to help with New Mexico's
economic recovery during this
pandemic and after it ends and
readers also critical to meeting
the clean energy goals of the
New Mexico energy transition act
and also for the all important
initiative of helping with
upgrading and modernizing New
Mexico's grid.
as this committee knows reader
was established back in two
thousand seven to plan finance
develop and acquire high voltage
transmission lines and energy
storage projects to promote
economic development we have to
have at least thirty percent of
our power come from renewable
resources every project we're
working on right now is one
hundred percent.
Originating from renewable
sources.
So why.
Our building renewable energy
transmission projects budget
beneficial to New Mexico besides
the multi billions of dollars of
investment and the thousands of
jobs added every year really the
benefits are countless energy
infrastructures never given a
second thought so long as light
switches refrigerated air heated
heating sources in the deep
freezer in a garage or working.
What happens when there's a
power outage at last several
hours it's very costly to
industrial commercial and small
businesses and affects even the
average citizen.
On.
Having reliable power on at all
times is critical to the way the
world works right now.
In California over the past
couple of years we've seen loss
of life and property due to an
aging transmission grid that
failed.
Electric grid can and does fail
with respect consequences so
having safe reliable resilient
low cost energy is crucial to
the competitive ness of New
Mexico and for expanding
businesses as well as attracting
new businesses that demand
reliable low cost renewable
energies companies like Intel
would never of invested in New
Mexico without reliable power
and neither will companies like
Facebook or Google or anything
else do it without having low
cost renewable energy as I
mentioned little better your
media has achieved our most
significant milestone in its
history with the recent
completed multi billion dollar
financing of the Western Spirit
project.
To get into a little bit more
detail this of my also provides
the capital necessary to
construct the approximately one
hundred and fifty mile three
hundred forty five thousand will
read own transmission line and
the associated pattern energy
wind farms that total more than
one thousand fifty megawatts of
renewable energy.
To put this in perspective in on
scale one hundred megawatts will
power one hundred twenty
thousand homes so this is a
tremendous.
Competition so when in
commercial operation this
renewable power's going to flow
through the western trance
Western Spirit transmission line
and not to customers in the
west.
Is going to make our powerful
wind resources in this state
accessible to the lecture
CityGrid in New Mexico and the
broader broader western markets
it is a first of its kind
partnership at least as far as
we know.
That's between pattern energy
which is a global renewable
developer and Rita at the end of
this year when it goes into
commercial operation the public
service company of New Mexico
will acquire and operate this
transition transmission line
upon its commission this is
going to be the largest upgrade
to the PNM grade since the mid
nineteen eighties so this is a
really big deal these
transmission projects take a
long time to plan and finance
but after over ten years readers
accomplishing what it was tasked
to do the two thousand seven
legislation.
And with the completion of this
financing the full start of
construction the Western Spirit
line in the wind farms we've
really made a major the toward a
clean energy future it really
holds multi billions in economic
development for many years to
come.
On but I really also want to
emphasize that readers efforts
to build transmission capacity
are critical to developing an
upgraded flexible and modern
grid we're going to need this
for the regional efforts we
really need to start working on
that a bit more so this grid
modernization is going to ensure
more clean energy for in state.
Not a state uses and it's going
to lower the cost of our.
Read is very committed to
working with the the developers
the utilities the state and
local officials military
installations tribes in the
public to achieve a brighter for
future with renewable energy.
in closing I want to brief you
on the results of the reader
renewable energy transmission
and storage study that was
completed last year this was a
very major study that involved
partnering with ICF resources
which is a major global
renewable energy in transmission
consulting service with just
tons of experience we also put
together an advisory group of
energy experts in New Mexico to
help guide this process and
hundreds of hours were spent
developing are these results.
Just give you a very brief
summary of this
Here's here's the bottom line
New Mexico could New Mexico can
having eleven thousand five
hundred megawatts of renewable
energy operating by twenty
thirty two and again one hundred
megawatts of power one hundred
twenty thousand homes to put
that in perspective so this
represents adding six thousand
megawatts to what is already
existing or in the pipeline here
in New Mexico but it's dependent
on whether or not we can build
electric transmission capacity
at unprecedented unprecedented
pace also transmission
infrastructure is the limiting
factor here this is why readers
so important what does this mean
for New Mexico up to three
thousand seven hundred jobs per
year during the construction
phase and up to eight hundred
jobs for your beyond twenty
thirty two.
So building this renewable
energy generation and
transmission at their this right
indicated in the study will
result in the eleven billion
dollars in capital investment
that's probably at a minimum
it's probably on the low end I
can tell you there are with the
companies were working with the
now there's billions more of
investment waiting to happen
it's happening now there's more
to come so in short great
economics in the clean energy
policies are driving the demand
for renewable energy wind and
solar now cheaper than your
guests in new coal even without
federal tax incentives.
So wind and solar a large part
of the new energy markets based
solely on low costs and with
that I want to close and just.
Again ask this committee to
seriously consider matching the
executive recommendation now as
of a really good time to be
funding reader with multi
hundred million dollar projects
moving towards completion with
that like to stand for
questions.
Thank you can you all hear me
now.
No.
Yes good I'm will you remove
your your share screen.
Yes.
Thank you so much and on a side
note why is everybody named
Fernando.
I don't know that's a it can
think is because it was my
amputation let me see on.
The.
K..
I'd like to do while we're
removing that.
What thank you all I appreciate
it what we I'd like to do now is
Go to the audience is.
Yes go to the audience and see
if there are any participants
that are wanting to speak.
I don't see anyone.
Question thirty Saturday so I'll
go to my vice chair
Meredith do have a question.
I'm I did have a question madam
chair is that okay yes okay
great thank you for Nando I
thank you madam chair I was
wondering if you could talk
about
the roll that Rita plays in our
transmission lines and working
with our military institutions
are basically here thank you
thank you.
Hi yes madam chairman and vice
chairman Dick sent thank you for
that question it's a very
important question because you
know as I mentioned in my
presentation the military
installation they bring in tens
of thousands of jobs and
billions of dollars and in New
Mexico every year and it's very
important to be to to not
adversely affect.
You're those money that jobs or
national security so one of the
things that we've been working
on very hard to strengthening
those relationships with the
military installations on do not
adversely impact on so we have
been giving regular updates to
the military installations
for instance we also belong to
the insisting ability committee
where we work there we do
presentations to the military
Billy bass Planning Commission
you know Montana governor how we
might all this was there we've
we've been with economic
airforce base Holloman Air Force
base and so we're very much a
cognizant of the fact that we
need to work with them to make
sure we're not interfering with
their their missions in any way
and we try to bring them in we
will bring them in early on in.
These future projects to to make
sure we don't have any issues
there it's important to work
with all the stakeholders and
there there's certainly a big
stakeholder.
Thank you very much I don't have
any further questions thank.
Okay and Representative Dixon
the special appropriation
recommendation by LFC is to to
do DFA and it's found on page
one ninety line one line forty
one.
Is there anyone else has a
question for this debate over
yes Representative Chatfield.
Thank you madam chair.
Thank you Sir for your
presentation I was just curious
most types of energy that we
export out of our state or or
produce a they get there's a tax
it when it goes out you know
goes off when we produce a
resource that goes out of state
is there are some income to the
local folks in the state from
the electricity that runs down
the.
I applaud so to speak.
That madam chair and
Representative Chatfield you
know I can say that you know
there are some some.
Tax benefits you know for
instance on the Western Spirit
project are you know the
property taxes over the next
thirty years will be eighty
eight million for another
project we're working on with
Cynthia will be much higher
amount than that so there are
property taxes gross receipts
taxes compensating taxes of
various things going to local
communities including payment in
lieu of taxes on these payments
that go to landowners I really
think that I have read a lot of
reports on this that right now
for rural America renewable
energy projects or I just as
lucrative this soy in any other
corn and any other crop that
that that's out there right now
so this is really important to
economic development in rural
parts of New Mexico I mean it's
just huge so so those are just
some of the benefits and
including the billions of
dollars of investments when
you're getting sort of those
indirect effects like people are
restaurants and renting hotels
and things like that of course
also added into their you know
with the Western Spirit project
we're looking at a you know
completed multi billion
financing that's really going to
have a net economic benefit of
over two billion dollars to New
Mexico so so it's pretty big
it's large scale stuff that
we're talking about but it's a
really more about the capital
investments in the
Thousands of jobs that are going
to be created here.
Thank you madam chair thanks
thank you Sir a.
It is that we support the of the
all these all the renewable
energy it's a big deal where I
live in and we're still we're
you strongly supported I just
wanted if there was a attacks on
the Energy that runs down the
line and thank you for your
answer.
Thank you Representative
Chatfield
I'm looking to the participants
list I don't see it oh wait now
Harry Anderson and
Representative I am lying.
Harry Garcia following followed
by a Phelps Anderson.
Representative Senator thank you
madam chair I I just have one
question you madam a jobs
created many jobs this project
creating right now.
Okay Madam chair representative
Garcia specifically the Western
Spirit project is going to be
creating a thousand
Construction jobs when you look
at it in total of what we're
working on with other renewable
energy developers I think we can
expect in these three thousand
seven hundred construction jobs
per year.
Madam chair thank the next ten
years.
Of the.
But after the construction phase
of this project how many jobs
are created after that the
reason I'm asking that I have a
with formed in my district.
The government is probably
seventy or eighty would no
longer.
And it creates jobs.
Two people working my concern is
not what we're creating right
now you said a thousand job
maybe two thousand jobs and you
mention of full trigger aedile
will delve so for by understand
that my concern is our
investment not going to have no
return that this construction
jobs are done that's the.
How do you explain that or how
many jobs will be created
afterwards okay
Madam chair representative
Garcia
again I'll point back to the
renewable energy transmission
and energy storage say that we
completed last year and when
we're looking beyond the next
ten twelve years we're looking
at least eight hundred permanent
jobs you know and and very high
paying jobs beyond that so
you know again I don't think
this is going to stop anytime
soon I think the you know as I
mentioned the clean energy
policies along with the low cost
Howard there's just hundreds of
gigawatts of potential to be
selling out there so I don't see
for CD's construction jobs going
away anytime soon I think this
is going to be a great
opportunity for New Mexico and I
think we'll always have those
construction jobs for the
foreseeable future and we will
have significant
permanent jobs as well and not
to you know through their
operations and maintenance of of
these facilities.
Thank you madam chair you
mentioned earlier it will create
a thousand construction jobs.
The construction jobs coming and
you should right now for you had
a thousand construction jobs
many to become permanent.
Madam chair and representative
Garcia I really don't have that
exact number for the Western
Spirit project available at this
time but that's certainly
something I I I can look into
and get back to you on that just
to see what the number of
permanent jobs that would come
from the Western Spirit project
in particular
I can just talk like in general
terms based on our study that
you know beyond twenty thirty
two we should have about eight
hundred permanent jobs for.
Chair and and.
That concerns me because the you
know a thousand this today and
then our investment into this we
need to see how our business
will come back around to our
state good like I said it in the
wind farm up enough to pull
County regional jobs those are a
big investment in their and
these are these are issues that
we all have to look at
realistically I'm not worried
about.
All those.
When I will be coming up in the
future that we know they're
gonna come I'm worried about
these thousand jobs we're
talking about right now.
When are we gonna get funded our
state going to get their
investors backed were state of
the money reporting now for
these projects that's my concern
and another of them the one more
question and I don't know if you
can answer this one what makes
is a all.
With the pollution and I say
throw the state.
Okay.
Madam chair representative
Garcia you know just with
regards to just on your your
your first comment there your
first concern there with was
just what are some of the
benefits besides these jobs and
and the billions of dollars in
investment but you know again I
got a point out to.
The reliability cost savings we
get the efficient use of
generation resources we're going
to have a fishing great
appropriations in short any time
a state can our.
Have a situation you know like
you can drink the drinking water
you got great schools but if you
also have low cost renewable
energy it's reliable.
It's resilience that makes New
Mexico far more competitive than
everyone else around is it makes
us more competitive in
California because we see what
their electric grid can do when
their power goes out so those
are some of the other tangible
benefits you can get besides
these jobs and and this capital
investment is really an upgraded
flexible modern grid that's
going to deliver reliable low
cost energy so that so that's
one other thing to really
consider about the competitive
new competitive ness of New
Mexico and having that with
regards to the Western Spirit
project these are G. E. wind
turbines there's going to be
three hundred seventy seven of
them by the time it's a.
completed but as you know you
know.
The parts for just about
anything whether they do wind
turbines or anything else you
know come from different parts
that can be managed manufactured
in the United States that can be
put together in the United
States but but in general you
know things come from different
places as well so I I mean I
really couldn't answer you
exactly at this time
but that's another question I
can get back to you on exactly
we're all the turbines in the
components are are are
manufactured in maybe.
Thank you madam chair with
regard to I I have a question is
but budget time will touch base
later on thank you madam chair.
Thank you for Nando and
Representative Garcia I'm not
calling on you if you try to
trick me and say only have one
question when you start and the
need to follow fifteen follow
ups it's not all about you you
know.
Dispensing with the.
Six percent.
The next person in line is
Representative Anderson followed
by Representative Brown.
And chairman of I just wanted to
follow up on that the
presentation if I could with
short answers please we were
talking about in the
presentation the contribution
that renewables are contributing
to New Mexico's.
All the and then to taxes taxes
paid to local and state
entities.
Madam chair I was very
interested in the size of the
project but I was unclear does
that I think eighty eight
million dollars over the life of
the project.
Is that both the transmission
and the generating powers all.
Secondly what is the what time
period do we measure when we say
the life of the project sure
please.
Madam chair representative
Anderson
the short answer to that is it
is eighty eight million and that
includes both the wind farms in
the transmission line and the
time frame we're talking about
there's over the course of the
next thirty years thank you okay
so it's it's eighty eight
million divided by thirty years.
Would give this to an annual
contribution for the entire
project then I heard the word up
in the loop and I thought you
know that means they're doing
some of this or all of this on
industrial revenue bonds.
Is that the intent of the the
the this agency.
Madam chair representative
undersea I understand read it
does have the ability to issue
bonds money I know you're also
reviewing industrial revenue
bonds for
Transmission line security have
on for for the.
Generation facilities again
these are just more tools in the
tool chest that can be used to
really promote these projects
and and bring about more
benefits to the state in New
Mexico so yeah those are a
couple of tools that could be
utilized for the wind farms and
for the transmission lines thank
you very much for that I
certainly look forward to the
renewable energy sector.
growing their revenues to the
state as that.
Transition coming in that new
need green energy act where we
ship from of Haidar carbon to
renewable and there's quite a
difference in the.
Our tax revenues generated from
those two forms of energy last I
just want to make this comment I
Representative Lee County no
others should Indian Chavis
Roosevelt.
The oil and gas workers make
high wages also as a matter of
fact I just saw reports saying
the oil and gas workers in
America make ten thousand
dollars per year more money than
America's renewable energy
workers so when we go down the
trail of we got to get all these
oil and gas people over to work
in the renewable energy there is
great push back on constituents
and and citizens in southeast
New Mexico or saying I don't
want to take a job us bank
salary cut so be careful because
this week there was some
national comp at about G. you'd
be better off if you just quit
working in oil and gas to go
over working renewable and the
answer from those workers is I
don't want to work for that much
less money madam chairman thank
you and thank you for your
presentation.
Thank you thank you and now
Representative Brown.
Thank you very much Madam chair
good morning everybody.
I'm I'm not sure of the question
or two for our I was just a
question or two.
Of for Mr Martinez so I
understand I just wanted some
clarity here I believe I heard
you say Sir that the some of the
state.
Fund that the amount of state
money that's gone into Rita is
eighty eight million dollars as
of today.
Madam chair of Representative
brown no we're we're talking
eighty eight million dollars is
in reference to the project
budget to the local communities
at the Western Spirit project
when built is going to have over
the next thirty years in terms
of revenue to the to the state
so and and budget so that that's
what we're referring to actually
the investment of state funding
to Rita's really not a whole lot
as you can see from our special
appropriation request.
Madam chair and and Mr Martinez
so just point blank how much
state money has been poured into
Rita.
From the time the the funding
started to flow.
Madam chair representative brown
we do have that information
available I don't have in front
of me exactly because read was
established back in two thousand
seven there was an initial
amount in there is funded for a
few years then we had a high
load some.
This is a project that we issued
bonds for and the from the
proceeds of that sale we're able
to fund reader for a couple more
years and didn't need state
funding that there is a a period
of time
where it wasn't funded between
twenty fifteen from state
funding at all until twenty
nineteen and and during that
period is not for the
perseverance of the chairman of
the board and the read four it
could probably just gonna wait
so there are several years
probably about
five six seven years were there
was no state funding supported
all
so I can get that information
staff information to you on the
state funding history if you'd
like Representative.
Madam chair and senator I would
appreciate that information and
I do remember hearings and yours
past about Rita and really there
were there were questions about
whether or not you would survive
you've really come a long way so
I I recognize them madam chair
and and Mr Martinez so we know
that the oil and gas sector
contributes about a third of the
state's annual budget.
We know that there's a severance
tax on oil and gas just so let's
just say and I think that's a
conservative number to say that
thirty three percent of our
state budget is dependent on oil
and gas Revenue.
madam chair Mr Martinez what
percent of the state budget will
come from wind
Wind energy.
Madam chair representative brown
I don't have that information
available at this time there are
some studies that are going to
be concluded
Very soon here that that could
get you that information you
know our renewable energy
transmission and energy storage
study
did indicate some.
tremendous benefits to the gross
domestic product of the state
are through twenty fifty and
from recalling that number.
Correctly well I better not say
I'll probably get it wrong graph
to get that back to you I don't
have that number off the top of
my head but it's actually a
substantial number I I don't
think that anyone appears ever
going to try and say that
Renewable energy to and
transmission development could
ever replace the revenues of oil
and gas that's not going to
happen but what it can do is
contributed material in a
significant way as part of
diversification of the state's
economy as well as making us
more competitive from the
standpoint of really having
reliable low cost energy.
but I'll get you that
information as well we do have
that that available thank you
madam chair I would really
appreciate that I think the
whole committee would benefit
from that information so what
we're asking for the rest of us
is for let's do let's do a
comparison I would say for
the next year or two or whatever
you think you're you can give us
that number and then let's do it
for some some years into the
future so we get a real good
clear eyed look at that if we if
we downsize oil and gas which I
think would be a mistake and we
we put our eggs in the basket of
renewables some people call the
money revivals quite frankly
what are we doing to our overall
state budget
and all of our state agencies
and programs depend on on this
revenue generation so let's make
sure we're we're not losing in
the translation.
Chair thank you very much that's
all I have this morning.
Thank you representative brown
and I don't have any other
questions from committee so
vice chair addicts and you have
a motion.
Hi yes madam chair I move the
LFC budget.
K..
I second that and just remember
Mr
I'm sorry for nondual.
That if there's any issue or
concern at that catch a cleanup
you know folks can the.
I'm.
Can do to reduce conciliate
issues of concern okay.
Thank you madam chair the
nextag.
Thank you for the next item on
the agenda is the public
regulation commission and again
a reminder to all to all the
participants we have a the I
more and
we'd like to have everyone who
wants to participate to
participate but try to keep your
comments and your questions
brief thank you go ahead ms
Martinez said and.
They.
Madam chair members of the
committee let me get my
differences after Jason you may
have to stop Schering screen
first second so I can see I
think.
Okay.
Thank you madam chair members of
the committee join me again is
Andrew Miner the executive
budget analyst I'll get started
with the I'm HSD roll up for the
public regulation commission the
LFC recommendation increase
general fund revenue by seven
hundred and fourteen thousand
this is mainly to replace fire
protection funds that got
transferred to the department of
homeland security which will
start this July for FY twenty
two.
The executive recommendation
increased general fund revenue
by five hundred and fifty two
thousand and this is for the
same purpose to replace fire
protection plans.
Both recommendations have the
same level of transfers
for the other transfers for the
same reason a lot of funding
will be going with.
The.
Fire protection fund state fire
marshal's office transferring.
Recommendations reduced
expenditure categories primarily
in public safety and program
support however in policy and
regulation program agencies the
large the agency's largest
program which has eighty seven
employees the LFC recommendation
increase general fund revenue by
two hundred and thirty three
thousand well the executive
recommendation decreased general
fund revenue by about thirty
thousand.
So we'll move on to the first
program that's policy
regulation.
The LFC recommendation increase
general fund revenue by two
hundred and thirty thousand.
This will replace fire
protection funds that are
getting transferred to homeland
security the executive
recommendation decreased general
fund revenue by about thirty
thousand below the FY twenty one
operating budget level and
shifted these funds to the
program support program which
and you're all covered in a
minute.
Those recommendations support of
the PRC is request to decrease
federal revenue and other
transfers.
The LFC recommendation maintain
personal services employee
benefits close to FY twenty one
budget levels of the slight
decrease up to twenty four
thousand.
Recommendation also increased
contractual services by a
hundred and eighty three
thousand an increase the other
category by twenty three
thousand this is to cover
increases due to the HSD moving
out of the pair of building.
The executive recommendation
increase the personal services
employee benefits by one hundred
and twenty eight thousand
because of vacancy rate.
The executive courage's right
classification and they also
increased contractual services
by about fifty thousand for
moving expenses I'll now turn it
over to Andrew for the public
safety program.
Jacquelyn right in madam chair
members the committee so during
next to P. six twelve the public
safety program so you'll notice
on your different sheets the
substantial reduction graduated
from the prior year here and
that's because this is where as
Jacqueline mentioned the state
fire marshal used to be so the
bill last year chapter nine
house bill three eighty six
transferred the fire marshal
Division from PRC to homeland
security maybe the fire marshal
at will position appointed by
the homeland security secretary
effective this July July first
and so that's where all the
budget went from this Pico the
remaining small budget that
you're seeing there as well so
that the pipeline safety program
so this P. code both
recommendations decrease other
transfers by again seventy seven
point six million to support
this transfer and both
recommendations decreased
personal services employee
benefits contractual services
and the other category by again
that matching total of seventy
seven point six million Hey so
then the last P. code P. six
thirteen program support.
The revenue here the LFC
recommendation increase general
fund revenue by four hundred and
eighty four thousand to replace
fire protection funds again
transfer to homeland security
the executive recommendation
increase general fund by five
hundred eighty four thousand two
back fill for some of that lost
revenue from the fire protection
fund.
Both recommendations decrease
other transfers by three hundred
forty thousand due to again the
the fire marshal office moving
and then the base both
recommendations increase
personal services employee
benefits the executive includes
one hundred thousand more to
fund personnel that were
previously covered with fire
protection fund and to allow
care C. to continue to hire
critical positions so that's all
I have and so we can turn it
over to the PRC.
Who is the Representative for
PRC.
And Fishman madam chair yep
thank you
I'll just do it a quick
introduction here of the chair
of the public regulation
commission
And.
Well we're you're gonna see some
fairly aggressive
recommendations about what we
feel we need
to perform the part of the
function correctly and to
protect the public and
What I will say is that right
now given all of the new
legislation that's passed in the
complexities of it.
That
Right now we're dependent on
interveners in the various
dockets that come before the PRC
to get the depth of analysis is
needed to educate all of these
issues correctly.
And if the people choose not to
intervene in the case.
We are short the resources to
thoroughly analyze and evaluate
what comes before us.
so we we really need to repair
that situation and with that
stark warning I will pass it on
to
are a great addition to the
commission at.
Joe my job I just this and to
our chief of staff case and
Montoya thank you.
Good morning madam chair members
of the committee I want to take
a moment just wish you all well
during the legislative session I
I want to make sure everybody's
safe and in good health to
everybody during this pandemic I
understand you got a lot of a
lot on your plate New Mexico
citizens are looking for to to
your recommendation so I'm not
gonna spend a whole lot of time
on some of the funding documents
here and our presentation you
see our mission you see our
vision I think everybody's
pretty familiar with the public
regulation commission I want to
start with page three which
really talks about FY twenty
revenue and I'm sure you can see
our comments here about it but
what I want to drive home from
this screen is is just bring
your body's attention to to the
revenues that the PRC generates
and and specifically those that
are highlighted in red those are
highlighted in red are the PRC
utility fee funds pipeline fee
funds in the motor
transportation receives funding
those are all these transferred
over to general fund or transfer
to deal monthly
that the take away from this
screen and that I want to drive
is is the FY twenty revenues
from the PRC chilli fi Fund is
about fourteen point six
million.
And.
The reason I bring that to your
attention is is in FY twenty
obviously we generated that much
money and the general fund it
received from are are probably
appropriated to the type of P.
Garcia was only about seven
point eight million.
And right now in FY twenty two
of the recommendations are
nearly nine point five nine
point three still well behind
what the utility feed fund is
actually generating said you
just want to keep that there on
the table because it will be
revisited here later on during a
presentation by commissioner my
asked us and so it's a very
important number.
Next is is just expenditure
summary you all can see what the
PRC actually operating
expenditures are around thirteen
point nine million is what we
spent obviously we have the
pandemic that not only PRC but
all state agencies were coping
with beginning in March and so
you know we had that hiring
freeze there for a lot of
vacancy savings were applied.
Madam chair and members of the
committee that let me take a
moment just pause our staff and
we.
You know our our employees are
the backbone of the PRC I makes
up in generates about eighty
five percent of the total
operating budget and this is
where we currently stands minus
a couple of offer letters that
were made yesterday I apologize
for not being current through
February sixth but
in all recognize that it appears
to anybody that this is a high
vacancy rate.
But with our current operating
budget and the FY twenty two
operating budget request our
higher plan allows us to get
down to about seven point five
percent in our in our vacancy
rate and and this is very
important minus the state fire
marshal's office is what I'm
presenting anticipating the
transition the PRC will be left
with a total of a hundred
nineteen authorized FTE.
So this is very important
because.
Commissioner my SS is going to
touch on the importance of.
Implementing the ETA and other
energy bills are actually being
presented before this
legislative session so here's
where it currently stands and
and I just want to touch base
real quick on the FY twenty two
operating budget request and how
we actually derived at the
twelve million dollars that was
submitted we actually took the
executive's budget preparation
recommendations into
consideration we actually added
these for a building that will
allow portion of the PRC to
return back to the office
beginning as early as April
because we have a board of
finance grant approval that'll
fund the lease agreement through
June thirtieth and then so they
are money that has been included
in our operating budget request
would allow us to negotiate a
long term lease for the PRC
beginning an effective July
first.
And in that we also reduced the
total general fund appropriation
request by five percent.
So the reason why this is
important madam chair committee
members is.
There's no secrets behind what
the PRC is asking right we
maintained in FY twenty one
actual operating budget we had
at the knees we are the
supplemental requests to replace
the fire protection fund and we
reduced it by five percent.
However that there is definitely
a need for an increase at the
you know I may not happen in FY
twenty two I understand that
commission my SS with such on
that a little bit more but the
baseline budget for the PRC is
falls well short of what we
actually need
just to touch on real briefly
and at and.
Due to the interest of time
here's some other initiatives
and directives that I just want
to touch on we are all coping
with the pandemic right
everybody every state agency is
in the PRC is doing our fair
share my opinion of trying to
reduce the expenditures and
spending and travel of except
for a lack of state revenues and
so we have transitioned to the
new hybrid work environment
we're teleworking we understand
and have accepted that of their
portion is going to be
teleworking after the pandemic
is resend it and.
That we're also working on
restructuring or divisions that
this is important to me as chief
of staff because it definitely
allows an opportunity for growth
and development you hear a lot
about retention and recruitment
of qualified staff members but a
lot of times I think org charts
are very flat and in there you
know instead of but they're more
horizontal and so what we've
been doing in our of P. Garcia
agency is restructuring those
divisions to allow us to recruit
individuals even from colleges
we've been partnering with the
New Mexico tech in this U. U. N.
M. and trying to recruit
individuals and and maintain
them so that's also consolidates
roles responsibilities which is
definitely needed we understand
that we're in a pandemic we
understand the lack of state
revenues we understand our
budget is probably gonna be
maintained flat for the next
fiscal year however we need to
know and understand except the
fact that there's a lot of
energy bills that are being
introduced to the legislature
there's a lot of ETA submittals
are being addressed and
implemented.
And we're also working on
building waiver out ivory's
reinstated there and recognition
and rewards programs we've
offered training your toward
setting improvements you know
more of a structured approach to
building people's career paths
in that pay increases are being
recognized you know for the
longest period of time I think
will many state agencies of
understood that Hey how do we
get people how do we retain
individuals and I kind of
mentioned this earlier and
that's recognizing performance
in my opinion.
we also need to change the
public appears he's public
image.
Without a doubt we need to
reestablish our working
professional relationships with
the executive with the
legislature and all other
oversight agencies DFA General
Services Division to name a few
we are working on improving our
agency website and also increase
our customer service manager and
members of the committee and and
so that's just a real brief
introduction I'm trying to save
time here because I definitely
want allow commission my asked
us who will take over at this
point.
Okay good morning madam chair
members of the committee
I'm glad to be here thank you
for your service to our great
state as one of the last
remaining elected PRC
commissioners I just want to say
that and I speak for the entire
commission and that we
understand we're in a transition
not just with energy but in a
transition from an elected
commission to an appointed
commission and we want to leave
the agency in the best position
possible for those appointees so
we have no intention of just
keeping the seat warm we want to
make positive change to that but
I'm here to tell you that the
the state of our energy
transition is not as strong as
it as it could be perhaps it's
strong from a legislative
standpoint but not from an
implementation standpoint.
so with that I want to just
briefly talk about legislative
evaluation of the PRC and it's a
publication it's.
Been circulating but
unfortunately a lot of the
recommendations in that
evaluation
Commission by Legislative
Council Service is a lot of
those recommendations have not
been implemented I wanted to
highlight one statement it in
that evaluation says the state's
five minutes with respect to our
chronic underfunding this death
spiral type condition in our
opinion has seriously jeopardize
the capability of the PRC to
protect the public interest the
evaluation goes on to point out
that New Mexico's only one of a
few states that is not allowed
to retain a portion of the fees
that it collects and
it also really points out the
glaring deficiency in terms of
technical expertise currently
the PRC just our utility drive
alone we have eighteen active
cases they take an average of
one year from application to a
commission final order to
adjudicate many of you have
known about the PNM Avenue good
merger this is a multi billion
dollar complex transaction and
so I'm just presenting a
snapshot of some of the
challenges we face as an agency
and no one thing that that this
evaluation points out recommends
is that look they recommend a
more detailed management audit
of the agency to to bear out a
lot of these preliminary
findings that they made and this
is a recommendation that that
we're going to make at the end
of our presentation next slide
the slide please I think you
know our chief of staff is and
highlighted some of the other
problems that have plagued the
agency hiring freezes out we've
seen major pieces of legislation
like the energy transition act
which called for nine FTEs
we were authorized to have I in
FY.
What twenty one budget but those
the budget for those positions
were were vetoed.
and I think you all know that
were operating without an office
and we need adequate funding to
provide in office and are
hearing examiners and in general
counsel need a safe working
environment so these are the
kinds of challenges
that we're facing madam chair
members of the committee
Next slide please.
And so you know what I wanted to
do is is present just a a
summary of the real budget needs
that the PRC has a chief of
staff is indicated that we were
severely limited in terms of the
constraints and submitting are
pending requests for you but
this outlines a detailed request
for example under the column
labeled FY twenty two request we
need the authorized but unfunded
FTEs and you can see the
description below all the FTEs
and if you look at the those
they're all you know technical
expertise technical specialist
subject matter experts attorneys
hearing examiners
we would like to have some
salary increases for our staff.
Their technical staff like no
other and we are seeing even the
private sector from some of the
entities that we regulate their
their poaching our staff and so
we really need higher salaries
for our staff and we need a
number.
Of enhancements to we we we
don't we not only need in house
technical staff we need
a budget for consultants to hire
outside expertise that may not
be a recurring need it may be
germane only to you know once in
a Blue Moon K. like the event
grid PNM merger so
this gives you a summary of our
total budget needs and we
realize we may not you know get
this but we feel compelled to
bring it to your attention our
next next slide just the bottom
part of that.
If you look at the total budget
needs it coincides very closely
to the total of our our PRC
utility fund revenue when we
submitted our FY twenty two
request we ask for president we
ask that we retain those fees
and I realize that that's a big
ask but that could be a game
changer for the agency to be
allowed to retain that and it
happens to coincide with our
budget needs.
Next slide please.
This is just a side by side
comparison of our pending
request and some of the
recommend the recommendations
made by the executive and the
legislative
and I just want to echo what are
chief of staff says we're we're
not looking inside anymore we're
looking outside you want to
build bridges to the executive
and legislative branches we want
to work with you turn the
general we want to collaborate
you know with the legislature's
and and be a source of technical
expertise in consultation when
considering trailblazing
legislation in the energy
industry next slide please.
So this is that I want to leave
you just with that quote that I
that I reiterated at the outside
of my presentation let's let's
avoid this death spiral
condition because I want to end
by saying that the state of our
energy transition really kind of
depends critically on the PRC
it's resources and its operation
madam chair members the
committee thank you and that
Jason and I will stand for
questions.
Thank you so much Mr Mestis and
right now it I'm stunned I don't
know I didn't mean to tell
people that they could ask
questions.
But the.
They're not asking them so you
can ask questions ladies and
gentlemen is there anyone in the
audience that has a question.
Okay committee anyone in the
committee that is the question.
Okay Harry you can do it.
Choose madam chair.
I know it's it's sometimes it's
all about you but not all the
time okay with the program thank
you madam chair Madam chair yes
if I may that I guess my my ask
if if we manage to come up in
your catch up and clean up
we would like at least the FTEs
that were authorized but vetoed
that part of the budget which
amounts to about five hundred
sixty six thousand and then
about seventy five thousand from
management audit so we can bear
out a lot of these issues to
provide additional information
to the legislature moving
forward so that's kind of our
ultimate ask if if that is
possible thank you thank you
Representative Lotta followed by
Representative Anderson.
Thank you madam chair and thank
you for the presentation a you
know I I I'm gonna refer back to
our I think it was slide number
nine with that's a crosswalk for
that in FY twenty two request
and
I'm looking at at the the
positions and so you're aware we
we we're changing from an
elected board twenty point four
to increase the quality of of
the Canada the quality of the
person that's going to be
working there or they can be
such decisions yes you know
based on what I see here we
don't have the staff to support
that and and I think that's
really important that if we're
going to have you we're gonna
have these expectations we
should also be able to to to
make sure that we have the staff
to support these positions and
that's really important to me
and I I noticed that and
Mr Mattis as you need me that
point are right before I got a
chance to speak and I appreciate
that so I think that's really
important and I think that we
have to to consider another
another madam chair noting that
came up that are kind of
concerned building was there was
a I don't know where it was but
there was a.
Madam or there was something
written that the that the agency
or the commission has to choose
between the are paying its lease
it or hiring employees and that
also concerns be I I I I you
know I I don't know if you're of
it we're putting this agency
through the ringer
I necessarily or or I I don't
know what's happening but we we
if we're gonna expect chair a
high quality professional
organization we do have to
supported and I I I think I
think this is something that the
if it does come up in the
catcher cleanup I think that you
should look at that thank you
madam chair.
You thank you Representative
glad I agree with you with that
of the next a person is
representative Anderson.
Thank you madam chairman madam
chairman the in the testimony of
I heard the that of of.
The PRC receive seven point
eight million dollars of general
fund.
Correct LFC analyst.
Who who can answer that.
We DFA is fine.
It.
It was on the slide presentation
I believe it was showing a seven
point eight.
Million dollars of general fund
is that correct
Representative Anderson so the
role of the entire agency in
this current year for FY twenty
one PRC has about eight point
seven million in general fund
and that's in all programs thank
you very much for that and then
the slip and went on to suggest
that of that eight point seven
million dollar general fund
generates.
Other revenues of twenty seven
point six million is that
correct.
Okay if I.
That was the fees of the they
can take that the PRC receives
for their regulatory.
All of fees and services.
Representative Anderson madam
chair I'll turn it over to chase
and I think that was part of his
presentation on this on the
revenues that PRC collects thank
you thank you madam chair
Representative Anderson the the
the slide if I need to I can
bring it back up easily but the
FY twenty revenue of twenty
seven point six million that
you're referring to is is the
some of all of the funds that
the PRC currently manages and
and generates the FY twenty
transfers to the general fund
and the department of
transportation accounts for
about seventeen point seven
using FY twenty revenue numbers
just FYI and within that is
where we were explaining the PRC
utility fees fund is fourteen
point six Representative help
answer your question okay thank
you very much then of the
recipients of the revenues
generated in the PRC our the
state in the general fund in the
fiscal year we're talking about
a seventeen point seven and in
addition to that the department
of transportation receives other
state revenues other state funds
for their budget is that
correct.
Madam chair representative so
that's correct.
Okay then I see that that in the
of chronic underfunding
statement we talk about of this
chronic under funding and how
what it suggests that New Mexico
is in a minority of states that
are.
Of back then up of all the fees
into the general fund and and as
we talked about is not quite
that what goes over to D. O. T.
but it theoretically reduces
DOT's General Fund
my question is should set a
minority of states and I'm
always curious how many states
constitute the minority that
you're referring to in your
study.
Madam chair representative going
to defer to commission I just a
Senator if you have that number
in hand or not one of minority
would represent.
The the study didn't cite the
state's
Representative Anderson it just
it made the statement that that
we were a minority of states
that the that are allowed to
retain any of the fees that we
collect.
Thank you commissioner for that
if you could just I'd be curious
twenty it's either twenty four
or it's one and it's a broad
range and the how many of their
names would be appreciated at a
subsequent to our discussion
today I wish you the best with
that the twenty three point four
percent occupancy rate of
because I think the the
important regulatory services
that you're trying to deliver.
I cannot tolerate that kind of
vacancies thank you madam chair.
Thank you Representative
Anderson and Mr Montoya will you
please get that information to
all up to the HFC staff at so
they can distributed to all yes
yes chair I just know that I
will get right back to thank you
Representative Brown.
Thank you madam chair good
morning Mr Montoya I've been
looking at the performance
measures for the public
regulation commission and this
is on page six of our packet and
I'm looking at P. code six one
particular there are several
trends that I'm noticing here
it looks like it's bouncing
around a lot in terms of what
happened actually in fiscal year
twenty twenty and what's
recommended for twenty one
twenty two and so forth so I'm
just going to take one of those
and ask if you could explain
what's going on there so I'm
going to look at
the output is second from the
bottom.
And it deals with the number of
total carrier inspections
the actual for FY twenty was one
hundred ninety one for the.
Budget for twenty one it was put
it seven hundred seventy five so
that's quite a difference and
then it kind of levels off at
about a half halfway point of
four hundred and that's the LFC
rack and the executive wrapped
they're the same for
twenty two so why the swing
there in those numbers could you
explain that please.
Madam chair representative brown
thank you for that question
ourselves have been trying to
deal with performance measures
internally right so we
constantly are are revisiting
those target numbers of those
goals as far as the
transportation division I I
think the main reason for the FY
twenty actual versus the FY
twenty one budget in the four
hundred drop was really due to
the travel restrictions that we
implemented back in March
due to the COVID are we took
initiative ourselves as an
agency to tell work everybody
the day of the public health
emergency order and we also
restricted travel so you
basically have March eighth
major four months of no travel
where we were able to conduct
these inspections set for that I
think.
Representative why the lower
number compared to four hundred
now now we really took a.
A really good look at what is
realistic.
And and and I know seven
intended I might be a high
number and when we look at the
number of motor carriers
that are regulated by the PRC
and what we can actually achieve
based on our budget constraints
and a number of inspectors we've
been targeted about four hundred
so I I hope that answers your
question I think now we are in
the process of conducting
inspections and investigations
in a very safe and prudent
manner as you can imagine but
again I think of transportation
vision that's where this more
carrier inspection falls under
what the division but but I have
to be honest our our budget for
travel in in P. six eleven
that's applied to transportation
has been limited.
And so we're constantly trying
to remain under budget in the
months of.
June.
You know may June time frame or
constantly just having to
restrict travel because of our
budget restrictions and so I
think that's where we kind of
need good look at what is an
achievable number and something
that is a fair representation of
what we can call I want to know
so that and units inspections
are required annually by statute
so we definitely prioritize that
a lot higher than the normal
more Kerry.
Thank you Mr I was very good
answer and madam chair thank you
very much.
Thank you representative brown
and representative of vice chair
Dixon.
I thank you madam chair
I really actually just have a
comment and that is for someone
you know this is my first term
and I am interested in spending
more time learning why the PRC
is
you know how we can address this
issue of sustainable funding and
making sure that particularly as
we're transitioning to an
appointed body and we have a
number of.
Major environmental.
And regulatory initiatives on
the horizon
To see what what what sort of
funding stream it sense and I'm
looking forward to learning more
about the fees and the general
funds interplay so I just wanted
to comment on that and I I
really appreciate the
presentations today thank you
very much thank you madam chair.
Your I may Representative thank
you I'd be happy to you know
have an ongoing discussion with
you introduce the PRC two little
bit more and that what we
actually do our mission and
vision so thank you.
Thank you and the I think that
staff has captured the fact that
there has to be discussion in at
the end of the budgetary process
to consider your requests of
vice chair I need a motion from
you.
I thank you madam chair I move
the LFC budget recommendation.
Representative Sariñana first
second and the we are I think
thank you all for being here
today
We appreciate all your input
that's a big a big task you have
to deal with the and we
appreciate what you do.
Thank you thank you all.
Thank you our next item on the
agenda is is office of Rep
superintendent of insurance
agency Martinez said Mr Patel.
Madam chair members of the
committee Jack Martinez of the
LFC and Andrew Miner will still
be representing the executive.
Let me share my screen here.
Thank you know look at the
different she's.
For the role of the entire
agency both recommendations
include a six hundred and forty
four thousand dollar increase in
other revenue and to decrease of
two hundred and sixty thousand
and fund balance in the
insurance policy program.
Recommendations also include
maintaining the patient
compensation fund flat with the
FY twenty one operating budget.
The agency currently has ninety
seven approved F. T. E. and the
request with fifty fifteen it
gives these and both
recommendations include an
increase in all expenditure
expenditure categories within
the insurance policy program and
this is due to that amendment
are you with the New Mexico
health exchange.
Our next program is insurance
policy and I'll turn it over to
Andrew Miner to present.
Thank you Jack one so turning to
P. seven ninety five madam chair
committee members again the
recommendations are same
soldiers talk about differences
from the FY twenty one OpBud on
revenue both recommendations
support the increase in other
revenue in the amount of two
hundred sixty thousand and
that's due to memorandum of
understanding with the New
Mexico health industry insurance
exchange that's effective from
January twenty twenty one your
December this year.
In the base and the personal
services employee benefits
category are both very eight
seven increase of a hundred
forty seven thousand and that'll
cover at ten percent of or
current FTE L. allocate time to
that help exchange imho your
that I just mentioned.
Contractual services category
increases at two hundred eleven
thousand that's for professional
services and then the other
category includes an increase of
twenty five thousand for rent
furniture equipment office
supplies and I. T..
As of that is that program and
then in the last program for OSI
the patient's compensation fund
up both recommendations are
equal and they are the same as
the FY twenty one operating
budget so and that concludes my
presentation and I will be to
the OS or.
Yes.
Good morning Mr office of the
superintendent I don't know your
name.
My name is Russell told and I am
the superintendent of insurance
I just sort of right.
second year with the OSI in
January and I'm delighted to be
back in front of the
Appropriations Committee on this
particularly.
Since the LFC and the governor's
recommendation are identical.
we're a small agency.
AS you madam chair and your
other members now we get no
general funds.
The money is the support us come
from the trees.
That the insurance companies
brokers agents producers.
Another such entities rate to be
licensed in the state so
we can continue operating at our
current your budget.
Although as a corollary I did
want to mention to you madam
chair members of the committee
that there is a bill.
in the house house bill two four
eight.
There was prepared and you're.
Impaired as a result of a
request from both the DFA and
the legislative finance
committee to identify.
how we might generate additional
revenue and so we undertook a
significant study to look at the
fees.
But all the other states
surrounding states I should say
are charging.
Bill two forty eight contains
our recommendations.
Well were enacted it would raise
an additional nine point four
million dollars.
And none of that would stay with
us.
All that nine point four million
will be just additional revenue.
That would go into the general
fund for you and your colleagues
to decide what to do with that
money.
But what did want to make you're
the committee aware of that
we're doing our part
to help deal with the budget
challenges that you're based.
Is that it Mr tell no we have
some slides here.
Okay.
I don't know if you can see
those.
We can yes yes Sir great all
right well I won't I'm not going
to.
Ways during the committee's time
to read through all this
narrative but I do want to say
you know we have invested some
serious new energy into the OSI.
that had been fairly moribund
and we have done a number of
things to.
Change are operating style and
filling vacancies is certainly
one of those but more
importantly is that we're trying
to fill them with the kind of
people who have a consumer
focused and who believe in being
a true service organization and
I think I know that many of your
members.
or where the fact that we
achieved something that hasn't
occurred in years last fall with
the premium rates that were
approved for the New Mexico
health insurance exchange
actually decreased.
You know and I suspect of
remember this committee like
most New Mexicans is used to the
fact that health insurance
premiums just keep going up and
up and up we were successful in
reducing those premiums making
the health exchange offerings
more affordable.
Now in fiscal year twenty we did
transfer a significant amount of
money to the general fund but
that will not happen again.
because the legislature quite
rightly transferred
responsibility for premium tax
collection to tax and
Representative that was a smooth
transition TRD has done a great
job in ensuring that they
collect the appropriate amounts
that the appropriate.
time.
One of the new people I want to
mention to you is on the line
today is our new a deputy
superintendent.
This agency has never had a
woman in that role before and it
certainly never had a Latina in
the roll for.
And we also in response thank
you also in response to the
COVID.
I'm gonna talk a little more
detail but one of the things
that we did was immediately set
up by a call assistance line for
anybody who is having trouble
with their insurance or coverage
or getting their tests.
And to date ten months in we've
had a call resolution rate in
excess of ninety six percent so
we've been able to resolve most
of those concerns that came to
us you see on this next slide
number of actions that we took
to respond to comment on the top
of the right you see that we
caused the auto insurers to
adjust rates based on lower risk
that alone resulted in sixty
seven million dollars begin
returned to New Mexicans and I'm
pleased to tell you madam chair
that we just made another such
request and hopefully will be
destroying some new numbers for
this year in April.
So we're going to continue to be
aggressive about those
responsibilities Mr.
Yes well I think you're becoming
our new hero.
Well
it's it's easy to do a good job
when you follow someone who
wasn't particularly doing their
job
so I don't want to take all the.
Reddit and I also want to its
expanding my appreciation much
like Jason to
to the staff was really done
just an incredible job you see
on the budget request
A call to our existing twenty
one budget
there we trip to continue to
transfer of money but.
Not as much as what we had the
text.
premiums this is our account for
as of January twenty fifth we
have hired three or four more
people so fill positions as gone
up to about eighty seven and I
hope to hire some more next week
I want to also echo another
thing that Jason said from PRC
and that is we desperately need
as a state to be able to
recognize.
folks are doing a good job and
make some kind of salary
adjustment
it is really hard to hold on to
people.
Who are really busting their
cans pardon the vernacular
with huge workload and getting
no recognition for all four at
all.
in terms of what we do
we collected over twenty six
million twenty nine million
dollars in licensing fees as you
see we have a large number of
complaints to address and
resolve every company that wants
to either do business or make
changes in their business as the
the door right filing or former
of you with us.
We did almost ninety five
hundred of those last year.
company exams are financial
exams we're we have reason to
believe there may be some.
The financial risk we have a
managed care grievances both
from the exchange and outside
the exchange.
Almost sixteen hundred service
of process efforts and a fifty
title inspections and audits I'm
pleased to tell you that for the
most part the insurance industry
and New Mexico is in good shape
we only have a few companies who
are in financial for serious
financial risk one of those you
may have heard of that closed
down at the end of December the
New Mexico health connections.
I don't think this was a failure
of the company don't work
frankly if anybody of the state
they never got the funding there
are expected from the federal
government and the federal
government for reasons are
complete mystery to us would not
let them sell.
So they went out to the business
at the end of December we seized
all their assets and have put
them into the first District
Court for them to allocate down
payments based on of the funds
that are available.
Slide eight is a listing of all
the revenues that we collect and
process for the last four years
again you'll know the big drop
from twenty from nineteen and
twenty and again that's because
the premium tax collections were
switched over to T. R. D. which
we supported that's where they
belong.
this is our fund distribution.
As you see it a significant
amount goes into fire protection
historically that's been to the
PRC that will switch to homeland
security there's going to be an
effort if you haven't seen it
already to try to increase the
amount of the coast of fire
protection
we support that.
And and then they amount going
into the general fund hopefully
will increase and twenty two if
you were able to support and
passed house bill two forty
eight.
So summary we have a very
essential role group people rely
on the fact that when they
purchase homeowner's insurance
or auto insurance.
That those are financially
solvent company behind that
insurance and they're doing so
as Jason noted we have not been
able to get out and do the
normal amount of education and
outreach that we do but we're
trying to do more and more
electronically.
We have formed a number of
groups around the state to help
with education and that's gone
well.
I commit to you and to members
of the committee that we will
continue to.
Right one of our.
Our process sees and make
operational improvements.
we're not going to settle on the
success that we had this past
year and I want to also ensure
you that across the board we
have the energy and the
enthusiasm and I believe the
capability of the beach to be
the agency that you of your
constituents.
And the other members of the
legislature have every right to
expect us to be.
So.
Apologize for the quick
presentation I'm happy to stand
for any questions that you may
have we have online and you can
see
first bait Rodriguez who is our
CFO
And we have generated such as
who is the new deputy
superintendent who also cannot
answer questions.
Thank you Mr toll I'll always
remember you from now on.
And.
And welcome to your new team I
don't see any questions.
Yes act of but I will not vote
before we go to representative
Garcia what we'll do is
Is ask for in the input from the
audience which I don't see.
Okay so I'm and messing with you
Representative Garcia go ahead.
Thank you madam chair make you
real brief.
Presenter I just have a question
this involved the towing
industry in the state of New
Mexico.
Who is liable what's happening
out here is
A little globally you're picking
up supplies and so forth that
have been in accidents and then
the insurance companies are just
dumping everything on the the
tool companies would report
present is this industry have
prevent that from happening.
Madam chair representative
Garcia I have to confess I'm not
familiar with those but if
there's insurance involved in
anyway we certainly can step in
to help so if you could have
some of these two companies
contract or officer would be
happy to look into it thank you
Mr Russell madam chair because
you know it is a it is a big
issue.
Matter of fact I will be going
companies and I and I did this
all the time you know well we
pick up an accident no insurance
coverage but they don't wanna.
A for what the bill is an issue
with our responsibility and
profit this well I I will be in
touch Mister Russell think that
thank you madam chair that
didn't go through a two minutes.
Well I can tell you madam chair
and a representative Garcia
that.
we are holding the insurance
coverage during new degree of
accountability and so yes this
is shortening their
responsibility to pay for things
we absolutely will look into.
Thank you Mr Russell the madam
chair thank you.
Thank you to both of you and
Representative Garcia I am
really impressed.
I don't have.
I don't have any other folks
raising their hands
so will you Representative Dixon
vice chair moved a motion.
Thank you madam chair I move the
LFC recommendation.
Chair thank you Mr
Representative Garcia.
The next item on the agenda.
Is the thank you Mr told and
your in your group thank you
madam chair.
The next item on the agenda is
the department of game and fish
then.
Will you go ahead analysts.
Thank you madam chair and
members good morning my name is
Caitlyn one with the legislative
finance committee.
Joining us we have Andrew Miner
DFA analyst and game and fish
director Michael Sloan I will
start with the HSD summary and
then Andrew and I will each
present to programs of the
agency are you a little skit are
you gonna posted on.
Yes I can put up a different
street now
The LFC it recommendation and
narrative for this agency can be
found in your volume to
beginning on page one seventy
eight and fund balances of the
agency are in volume three on
page seventy four.
The department of game and fish
is supported by revenue from
state sources such as hunting
and fishing license fees and
federal sources the agency does
not receive general fund.
Both LFC in the executive
recommended revenue flat with
the FY twenty one operating
budget and the executive and LFC
recommendations for the base
budget are also equal and they
include add minor repair to
station of funds from the person
and other costs budgets to
contractual services Andrew.
Thank you madam chair members of
the committee as Kaelin said the
recommendations for Gator also
just go over a few minor changes
that that happened so turning to
P. seven one six the fuel
operations program and revenue
here LFC and executive
recommendations both included a
revenue reduction of sixty
thousand in this program to
implement increase requested by
the agency in the program
support program and then in the
baseball of recommendations
reduce the other costs budget by
sixty thousand to align with
agencies request.
In the conservation services
program.
Both LFC and be Executive
recommendations capped revenue
and expenditures the same as the
FY twenty one operating budget
and so I'll turn to K. one to
finish it out.
Thank you madam chair in the
wildlife depredation and
nuisance abatement program again
recommendations are the same
revenue is capped at FY twenty
one levels and both
recommendations cap the
expenditure levels for each
budget category the same as the
FY twenty one operating budget
as well.
Finally in program support well
the LFC and Executive
recommendations increased other
revenues by sixty thousand
dollars again that is this the
program transferred that injury
mentioned of both
recommendations increased that
contractual services budget by
sixty thousand dollars to align
with agency expenditures and on
this and all the other programs
at LFC and yet they staff also
reached ansys on performance
measure targets that concludes
the analyst presentation madam
chair all turned over to the
directors on.
Welcome director Sloan are you
ready.
Madam chair representative thank
you for allowing me to speak
with you today and thank you
also to Mister miner in this
line for their presentations in
the interest of reducing zoom
fatigue I will keep my remarks
short and I do not have a
presentation
as as you just heard the
department and enterprise agency
relying solely on the sale of
license fees or sales licenses
and federal funds so we're very
careful stewards of wildlife
resources and financial
resources that we have.
During the pandemic we created
innovative online services to
meet the needs of New Mexicans
as they increasingly seek solace
in the great outdoors.
We also continue to sustainably
manage the state's wildlife and
habitat resources for the
benefit of all New Mexicans.
We believe that the flat budget
recommendation before you will
allow us to continue these
innovative practices.
And to manage the wildlife and
habitat across the state.
And with a brief statement I'll
stand for any questions.
Thank you Mr of.
Mr Sloan I don't see any
questions is there any input
from the audience.
Representative Anderson go
ahead.
Madam chair of.
I put my hand up late so you did
miss me
I was have a question of the
director of or or analyst I I
saw the number of FTEs go by on
the slide I think it was three
hundred and something is is did
I have the right what what what
did the slide show please F. T..
Madam chair representative I
believe are total of authorized
F. two years three hundred
seventeen.
Thank you of then of Mr rod
director of I was curious about
when you look at those three
hundred and seventeen employees.
And understanding that there may
be split responsibilities Under
to under the category of game
and non game under the category
of game physicians non game fish
to make I'm trying to break it
in a way that you don't have it
presented nor did I expected to
be presented that way but I was
curious of
of either your budget at at
about forty two million for the
three hundred and seventeen
employees what how would you
allocate of.
On a percentage basis what is
your guesstimate on how much
what percentage of the time and
manpower is dedicated to the
game and what percentage of time
and manpower dedicated did not
came.
Mr Chairman representative
madam chair excuse me miss
Representative
that's kind of a difficult
question to answer certainly our
our officers make up a large
field presence and they do do is
on game work but they're
primarily associated with with
game species Enforcement I'm
looking just at our conservation
services division which is
somewhere on the order of a
hundred and twenty FTEs I would
say somewhere between.
Probably around a third of those
employees maybe a little more
than that are focused
exclusively on non game species
while the remaining balance of
those employees are Stokes on
game species.
Thank you very much for
venturing that as much I
certainly wouldn't hold it to
you but it was
It was the answer I was hoping
to hear a last if I could have a
quick comment on the
commission's position on exotics
of non game game well I'm
curious because I see in the
Florida ever Carrillo Everglades
over run by a pet snakes being
released and that turns out the
habitat is ideal and they have a
unexpected problem I'm just
curious if you're satisfied that
New Mexico is watching they are
exotic the growth of exotic
populations and we're trying our
best to contain their
propagation.
Madam chair representative I I
do believe that we do have a
strong program monitoring both
importation and then the
existing populations for example
or X. nine X. in the state and
try to contain those that keep
those numbers within limits
there is one area that we could
explore in the future which
would be having some additional
authority over those species
once they're in the state.
That's that's an area of concern
for our for us in terms of if
the animals transferred was
brought in illegally what is
transferred to somebody who
didn't imported we have
difficulty of regulating that.
Thank you and the for thank you
for the good answer and we
should not forget about that it
example you used as big an area
where you may need increased
responsibility thank you madam
chairman.
Thank you Representative
Anderson will go to
Representative Chatfield.
Thank you madam.
Thank you madam chair good
morning director Sloan just
didn't seem right to to let you
get out of here without some
questions.
Madam chair director how many
federal dollars does your agency
bring into our state annually
through
it would Roberts and funds of
various habitat improvement
projects X. Center.
Madam chair representative will
bring in between ten and fifteen
million dollars or more
generally in the twelve to
thirteen million dollar range
depending on the year and
whether we can reimburse the
capital project will switch
things.
Thank you madam chair no more
questions.
Thank you very much
Representative Chatfield I don't
see no I don't see any of the
questions so Representative
Dixon vice chair do have a
motion.
I thank you madam chair I move
the LFC budget recommendation.
I second that
thank you very much Mr Sloan I
really appreciate your time and
effort.
And
keep those makes open for
fishing.
We'll do our best thank you
madam chair thank you sentence
thank you we now have the the
livestock board this is we
missed one and Mr today I.
Thank you madam chair I standing
in for Jeremy drugs from DFA is
going to be Andrew Miner again
and we also have from the
livestock board executive
director Belinda garlands this
is agency code five zero eight
L. hello my screen for that.
The LFC recommendations for the
livestock or it can be found in
LFC is going to on pages one
seventy six and one seventy
seven.
I'll briefly at present be at
agency differences at and the
recommendations on revenue at
the LFC recommendation reduced
general fund revenue by five
percent and offset the reduction
with an increase and fund
balance the executive
recommendation reduce general
fund by one and a half thousand
dollars and recommended a
smaller increase and fund
balance but overall the total
revenue recommendations from the
LFC and the executive are equal
both recommended an increase of
two hundred ninety six point
five thousand dollars.
And the recommendations for the
base budget are also the same
with an increase and the other
costs budget to purchase
vehicles and on performance
measures LFC and DFA staff reach
consensus on all targets and you
would you like to add anything
before reflects the agency thank
you Kayla number check number
madam chair and committee
members are not really as says
Gillen said the recommendations
are pretty much very similar the
only difference being that
slight revenue swap where the
executive captain General Fund
close to flat and LFC used fund
balance instead but that's all I
have thank you.
Thank you both very much and is
that then the next person Mr
Ralph Zimmerman.
Madam chair this is Belinda
garland I'm the executive
director yes okay I apologize
thank you.
Thank you madam chair members of
the committee.
we appreciate your time this
morning to talk to us about our
proposed budgets this is gonna
be kind of a joint presentation
this morning I have assisting me
our CFO the stranded Silva who's
gonna talk some about our fund
balance.
And also I'm gonna allow Mister
Dr Ralph Zimmerman who is your
state that to talk about some
animal health issues.
So with that in your approval
will move forward are you go
ahead thank you madam chair our
first flight just basically
talks about the mission of the
livestock board on the historic
mission is to protect the
livestock industry again slight
loss of livestock right after
spring to help control the
spread of dangerous disease of
livestock and to prevent their
direction of foreign animal
diseases whether by natural
occurrence or bioterrorism.
Sorry next slide.
So some important facts about
our agency is the New Mexico
livestock ordinance predecessor
agencies are New Mexico's oldest
law law enforcement agency we do
come from the cattle sanitary
board and the the sheep sanitary
board which move March into the
they now existing New Mexico
livestock or.
The New Mexico livestock or
regulates and protects the New
Mexico our livestock industry
which is about three to four
billion dollars in the state
annually.
So Mexico livestock board has a
strong history stability program
and brand laws in the nation I
can tell you that I have spoken
with other states around the
nation and they are very envious
of our brand laws and the way
that we do protect our producers
in the state.
So Mexico has the world's
largest land cattle port at
Santa Theresa there are at that
point there are approximately
six hundred forty thousand had
of Mexican origin cattle what
crossed each calendar year this
is a huge undertaking for our
nation to ensure safety for all
of our producers across this
nation.
And this agency is ninety
percent self funded we are
funded by agency generated
revenues inspection fees and
some of our revenue also comes
from mill levy taxes from the
county.
So we said here before year two
days with some operational
issues and some of you may
recall we thought we were before
you last year with some of the
this one major issue that we're
facing our fleet of vehicles
that basically
probably ninety five percent of
our staff operate out of is
aging and so this year we're
before you again with some new
proposals on how to maybe
correct this so we are asking
for your consideration for the
fleet budget.
And with that and there will
also be talking about our
diminished on balance that will
be coming with some of our
proposals.
Our aging fleet issue it is in
dire need of correction in FY
twenty are aging fleet had
twenty eight vehicles over a
hundred twenty thousand miles
which that might not seem like a
lot of miles if you're driving
down the highway every day but
you have to remember these are
pickups are basically going down
dirt roads and taking tremendous
beating every day.
So at the end of FY twenty one
New Mexico Alliance for New
Mexico livestock board agents
late will have thirty vehicles
over a hundred twenty thousand
miles.
So maintenance costs during the
current year and last year and
the year before increased by
thirty percent so we feel that
we are spending our budget and
our money our funds to keep old
vehicles on the road instead of
replacing them annually.
So over the past several years
our agencies budget included
three hundred fifty thousand to
replace ten high mileage
vehicles each year.
FY twenty one operating budget
was reduced by the funding
allocated for vehicles and
shifted to the state or New
Mexico's capital outlay Senate
bill so just as a comment here
that was a kind of a different
approach at maybe trying to
correct our fleet and pull it up
to the standard that it needed
to be and of course with that
COVID came around and our
capital outlay for the vehicles
was removed.
So as a result of the New Mexico
last on board had no budget to
support purchased vehicles in FY
twenty one.
And the New Mexico livestock or
is requesting to increase the FY
twenty two operating budget to
include the three hundred fifty
thousand to replace it out yet
ten high mileage vehicles each
year.
So and we'll talk a little bit
on how we're proposing to do
that
there were as I mentioned
previously there was some
different directions on a chance
to bring our fleet up to the
standard that it needed to be so
we just a high management within
the agency was shut down we
sharpen our pencils and we
figured we try to figure out a
way that we could tackle our
issue and
Hopefully bring our fleet up to
the standard that it needs to
be.
And so the New Mexico livestock
board is requesting a special
appropriation of four four
hundred fifty thousand to
replace fifteen high mileage
vehicles we feel that that will
bring us closer to having our
our vehicles to where we need
them.
And then we and then after that
we can build into our budget to
rotate them on a yearly basis.
So with that Andrew is going to
talk about our diminished fund
balance.
Go ahead and do.
Hi everybody hear me.
Just.
Good morning madam chair members
of the committee.
Discuss the fund balance with
you a little bit this morning.
The one point one dollars
consists of livestock.
Industry revenues such as
inspections no levy in requests
so these this one balanced place
to important very necessary
roles in the operations of the
agency.
The first is emergencies.
The board's goal since I've been
here is to maintain a million
dollars in the fund balance to
ensure the agency has the
resources to respond immediately
to emergency situations as
required by law.
The second.
Is to stabilize agency revenues
the board's goal here is to
maintain a million dollars in
the fund balance to support
agency generated revenues such
as military inspections that are
highly susceptible to we are
predictable forces of mother
nature such as weather and
market values.
just a commentary on that over
the past three years.
In will we will utilized three
million dollars or fund but or
of funding for operations alone.
In FY twenty one the HSD is
budgeted to utilize nine hundred
and sixty six thousand dollars
of the fund balance to
supplement agency.
Jennifer generated revenues.
To fund operating costs so at
the end of FY twenty one that'll
leave us our fund balance with
about two point five million.
And FY twenty two FY twenty two
our fund balance may drop to one
point two million dollars based
on
if we actually use the one point
three million that schedule to
be utilized FY twenty two if
that's what we that's where
operating budget has will.
So this chart demonstrates how
the FY two thousand twenty one
and twenty two operating budgets
will affect the agencies fund
balance you can see that the
beginning balance in FY twenty
one was three point five million
dollars that's the audited fund
balance.
Then we have our projected
expenses
And general funds federal funds
and then HSD generated revenues.
we will also need nine point
nine hundred sixty six thousand
dollars to supplement.
That budget.
And in doing using this line
sixty six thousand it reduces
our fund balance by that amount
and at the end of FY twenty one
you will have two point five
million dollars left in our fund
balance we carry that over to FY
twenty two.
That's are starting fund balance
and we have to utilize one point
three almost one point four
million dollars to supplement
the operating budget and that
reduces our fund balance to one
point two million dollars.
The reason that's important to
bring up is because.
we show before we need about two
million dollars in our fund
balance every year.
Million for emergencies and
million to supplement and you
can see here in FY twenty one
realizing million dollars.
In FY twenty two again utilize
one point four million.
So FY two thousand twenty three
will only have one point one
million dollars left to
supplement our agency and for
emergencies.
So that could cause a bit of an
issue.
The other thing to talk about
real quick is the special
appropriation we're asking for
this year.
We at the end of this year will
have thirty vehicles that are
over a hundred twenty thousand
miles.
We have requested.
Three hundred thousand in our in
our operating budget that's
funded through our
fund balance to buy ten vehicles
that leaves twenty vehicles that
are over a hundred twenty
thousand so we're asking for a
special appropriation form fifty
thousand to buy fifty more
vehicles if we don't get that
then we'll have to use one of
our fund balance.
To buy more vehicles if we have
to use four hundred fifty
thousand dollars to one more
vehicles that'll reduce.
Our fund balance two eight
hundred thousand dollars.
Which is gonna this precarious
for agency because we utilize
almost a million every year just
for operating expense.
Then that's my presentation for
the fund balance.
And.
So with that madam chair
hopefully
doctor call him doc Dr Ralph
Simmons online just so you all
know please bear with him he is
actually testing cattle at a
dairy in Roswell so he's coming
to you from there.
Well.
Morning madam chair members of
the committee I appreciate.
I appreciate the opportunity to
visit with you today we've been
out here for two weeks we're
wrapping up testing twenty seven
thousand head of cattle these
are all under quarantine for
bovine tuberculosis I don't know
if many of you're aware but we
have had an on and off of fair
with to be in the state building
a border state for quite a few
years and we have I dairies and
their corresponding I have for
facilities under quarantine
we're out here every ninety days
for two to two and a half weeks
in order to get all the testing
done and we work in conjunction
with our federal partners we
don't have enough staff we're
small agency the office of the
state veterinarian myself and to
feel better and Ariens.
We we rely on federal funding
for our operational budget
the two hundred little short of
two hundred and twenty thousand
dollars that entry pointed out
this presentation federal funds
those are cooperative agreements
that we get each year from the
the federal government to work
federal this animal disease
programs none of that funding is
allowed to go into any of our
state programs such as
trichomoniasis issuing cattle
They've cut seventy thousand
dollars off of my budget this
year and we still have the
expenses of having to come out
here three that inner institute
for livestock inspectors every
ninety days for two and a half
weeks at a time so we've got
motel built.
The bills are it's an expensive
adventure that runs just thirty
to forty five thousand dollars
every time depending on how many
staff we can get out here.
It's.
Hi the federal funding will
we'll see where it goes this
coming year for our our next
group the co ops but they're
they're telling me to expect
less the issue with the court in
the importance of the fund
balance is that it's pretty well
agreed among the reddit
regulatory that in areas in this
country that Senator is the will
very well be are ground zero for
foot and mouth disease virus
introduction on it won't be
accidental they do a great job
of inspecting the cattle but
it'll be a terrorist activity
and.
With the number of cattle that
flow through that port every day
they bring in they start in the
low to mid ten twelve trucks are
often multiple different states
and if we've got animals
carrying the virus and they have
not been picked up we're gonna
blow a giant hole in the in the
beef industry in this country.
An estimated that a moderate
break in the Midwest would cost
two hundred to three hundred
billion over a ten year period
might take that long if possible
to replicate the disease.
So it's it's.
We rely for emergency disease
response on the fund balance and
an activity like foot and mouth
disease we don't have time to
wait for emergency funds to be
dispensed from the minute we
know we've we've got it we have
to start tracing down more all
those cattle of guns that we can
pinpoint where they are in
trying to limit breaks and
multiple other states so having
access to the fund balance is
crucial in order to do that
three veterinarians can't chase
down all those cattle we'll have
to hire some of our New Mexico
alert veterinarians to help us
to the tracing to trace down
where all these cattle we're
gonna traceability is far better
coming out of the port and it
was just three years ago but
that would be a massive
undertaking looking at the
quantity of cattle that come
through there every day.
this is the top of the list of
the foreign animal diseases
that.
Everybody in this country and
not just New Mexico should be
concerned about African swine
fever classical swine fever
avian influenza high path those
are all concerns from the New
Mexico point of view we have
very small poultry industry and
a very small swine industry so
that would be much easier to
manage than a foot and mouth
disease outbreak.
But that's what we need to have
those funds available so that we
can respond instantaneously and
not allow the disease to get a
great thing to get a hold of
this.
I'm willing to answer any
questions if anybody has any
thank you for the opportunity
madam chair and members of the
committee thank you very much I
know you're doing god's work out
there.
this garden.
So.
I just just another I want to
cover real quickly sent the
other special appropriations
that we submitted
first of all we didn't put it on
a slide but I would like to
mention that we did submit a
special appropriation for fifty
thousand to help us cover the
body cameras that are required
of our law enforcement officers
we did the shuffle some funding
around and we got all of our
equipment purchased and put in
place our law enforcement
officers are meeting that news
on law that is in place that for
the last special session but in
order to kind of re fund some of
those programs are still away
from we did ask that special
appropriations we also have
submitted special appropriations
for a possible new meat
inspection program house bill
thirty three has been introduced
and I believe will be heard next
week before the act committee in
the event that bill is passed
and signed into law a meat
inspection program the state of
New Mexico and that bill
identifies the New Mexico
livestock board is the agency
which will operate the program
in FY twenty two.
The New Mexico livestock board
will require budget to support
the payroll expense for the new
FTEs and other expenses to
operate the program New Mexico
livestock point fund balance
consists of livestock industry
revenues such as inspection
Miller building brands but
Because the meat inspection
program will be brand new we
have what we have proposed if
you go to the next slide and
replace.
For FY twenty one we are
requesting supplemental to our
current budget of five hundred
thousand of general funds to
begin establishing the meat and
poultry inspection program.
So eighty thousand seven hundred
seventy five will be payroll to
hire the program director of
financial specialist information
technology person human resource
and legal counsel positions for
may and June of twenty twenty
one.
And for that four hundred
nineteen thousand two hundred
twenty five will be for
operating expenses such as
purchasing vehicles computers
and office furniture for each of
the five positions hired in FY
twenty one we are requesting
that it that full amount is not
expended by the yeah and of FY
twenty one that it does rolling
to FY twenty two so yes you of
brief overview those are the
basic ground people that we feel
that will need to be in place in
order to establish the meat
inspection program.
For FY twenty two we have a
special appropriations for one
million five hundred seventy
eight thousand seven hundred
thirty four dollars a general
funds for operation of the meat
and poultry inspection program.
So one million three hundred
seventy five two hundred seventy
five dollars is payroll for
seventeen full time positions.
And eight thousand three hundred
eighty seven is for I. T.
services that would need to come
into place.
One hundred ninety five thousand
seventy one dollars as operating
expenses such as the purchasing
and outfitting and maintenance
of vehicles field I. T.
department training in office
please.
So with that I stand for
questions.
Thank you very much we
appreciate your your comments
Representative I'm miss garland
I do have for people who wish to
speak but before I do that I'm
looking for audience.
Of questions I don't see any.
So we're going to go ahead and
go to Representative Chatfield
David Dixon David Garcia David
Anderson that brown and let's
try to make our questions a
short and a response is short
thank you.
Sir.
Thank you madam chair thank you
director ground for your
presentation I have a memory
like an elephant and I do
remember when the legislature
swept a million dollars of the
livestock boards fund balance a
few years back and was any of
that money
with all that money from fees
collected by the last four.
Madam chair representative
Chatfield yes thank you for
remembering that and that was
all funds that we were self
generated from our brands and
our inspections in the mill
levies and that is not been
restored back to the agency but
we didn't
thank you for remembering that
again but we know what the COVID
situation the state probably is
a No.
I guess financial state to
reimburse our agency for that.
Thank you madam chair I I
realize that I just wonder if
that money could have provided
some of the necessary vehicles
to get your officers safely from
place to place and I really hope
that whenever we consider the
special appropriations that we
stop and think about that not I
wonder do any of the
Of the the end of the objective
or the LFC is budgets take into
consideration these are they're
they're up a for for
consideration at another time.
Madam chair representative the
like in just that real quickly
in terms of vehicles both the
LESC and the executive
recommendation recommended three
hundred and sixty thousand from
the general fund for our goals
for special appropriation then
terms of that and the meat
inspection program the executive
recommended a million dollars
from the general fund for that
contingent on passage of that
legislation that million dollars
could be spent in the remainder
of FY twenty one or through FY
twenty two.
Madam chair may I just add on to
that regarding the state meat
inspection program that was a
request that came in after the
LFC is recommendation process
for special appropriations so
the LFC at I it's it wouldn't be
accurate necessarily to say that
the LESC did not recommend that
funding but rather that request
was not consider in time for the
LFC recommendation process but
does special recommendations
will be coming before H. F. C. I
believe next week.
Thank you.
I'm is that it thank you madam
chair will be looking forward to
it okay and the next person on
my list is Harry Representative
Harry Garcia.
Thank you madam chair.
Of.
These kids.
Got a lot of background noise.
You need a million three hundred
and seventy five thousand for a
seventy positions.
Is the paper for these people
right about eighty thousand
dollars a year.
So madam chair representative
Garcia and date it ranges all
the way from director down to
the
another HR person so
I would say that the annual
salaries ranging anywhere from
Thousand down to thirty
thousand.
So there there are many
positions in those seventeen
there is some law enforcement
that will be required in order
to enforce our regulations which
is required by the FAA yes FSIS
to enter into a meat inspection
program with them
you need a director to
completely oversee and manage
the program you we feel that we
have to have a support staff
that was some of the failure
noted and the past mean
inspection program when it no
longer existed is that there was
not enough support such as
financial HR and IT.
So there are some very salary
ranges down through there.
Thank you madam chair the legend
did a division audited seventeen
into three and that number came
up to the eighty thousand eight
hundred dollars a year of madam
chair I just have one question
on the she asked for an
appropriation of fifty thousand
dollars for a body cam covers
you know and we passed
legislation the legislation was
on funded so I'm kept jumping
cleanup we might want to look at
that who we kind of force that
on people and the people don't
have the the funds for it we
kind of have to step up and see
how we can help more for that
madam chair thank you for your
time thank you.
Thank you the next person on my
list is a Representative Dixon.
Followed by representatives.
Thank you madam chair director
garland thank you very much for
this.
Presentation I have a couple of
questions
Can you tell me
how when the last time fees were
raised I see that there are you
know a very important part of
revenue for the livestock board
and I'm just curious how
frequently their razor perhaps
the last time that some of the
fees were raised thank you.
So madam chair
by your Dixon you know I'm gonna
have to be honest I don't know
but I can tell you it's been a
very very very long time since
they raised to change because it
has to be a legislative action I
do it's my understanding I've
been in this job a little over a
year so it's my understanding a
couple years it was brought
before the legislature but he
was killed by the producers it
is still being discussed but
I personally want to meet with
some of the producers and of
course the COVID has not allowed
for that so it was not
introduced at this the session.
But.
It could be brought up at a
later time yes.
I'm at thank you madam chair and
director garland another
question that I have is I was
also reading about the impact of
extreme drought in New Mexico
particularly on our livestock
and I was just wondering if the
livestock board is exploring
that and
making recommendations on what
can be done to protect
Our livestock industry here in
New Mexico from of from the
continuing drought.
Thank you.
So madam chair vice president or
vice chair to extend so we work
closely with the NMDA who does a
lot of research and educating a
lot producers across the state
so we work with them and we if
we are producers that ask us
questions in regards to the
drought if you know we we can
guide them as best we can but
NMCA really has more the
educational process is for that
but we do work closely with them
and yes we are very concerned
about the drought situation as
well I can tell you that during
the fall river what we call the
fall run when people are leaning
and shipping their cattle there
was a lot of culling of cattle
going on as well we were
extremely busy a lot of cattle
left the state.
Okay thank you miss garland and
thank you chairman.
Thank you.
Person on my list as
Representative Anderson followed
by Representative round followed
by a range of Representative
data.
Of madam chairman I wanted to.
As the director.
Well short answers please but
how many factors do we have
approximately in the field today
Mr Anderson before anyone
responsible of of Mr Zimmerman
will deal mute your your phone
because we're hearing a lot of
cattle or something
Thank you go ahead Mr.
Yes question how many brand
inspectors do we have in the
field today.
So madam chairman Representative
Anderson approximately sixty
five full time
livestock and brand inspectors
and then we have approximately
anywhere from twenty five to
fifty on contract.
Thank you for that of in the
vehicle a replacement
calculation are the contract
brand inspectors included in the
ten per year.
Madam chairman Representative
Anderson no they're not they're
required to do to supply their
own vehicles this is strictly
for the full FTEs.
And is there any such thing as
an approximate average mileage
per year per pick up.
Madam chair representative
Anderson we are we think that we
average about thirty five to
forty thousand miles per year
per vehicle.
Well then director I'm just
going to say that that your
calculations wrong and the
reason is it ten vehicles per
year on sixty five vehicles
putting on thirty thousand a
year and you're turning about a
hundred twenty thousand you're
you're actually going farther
and farther back than you
already are but the other two
quick question is I don't know
where in America you buy a brand
new pick up for thirty five
thousand of these four wheel
drive I meant to ask you that
director.
Madam chair representative
Anderson yes some of them are we
are trying to put our.
livestock inspectors in our
brand inspectors that are having
to travel down a lot of their
money your roads into four wheel
drive vehicles because we're
finding that if not they spend a
lot of time in the day so we are
trying to a quit them as best we
can in the last quick question
is does it include the bells and
whistles that would be the
flashing lights the emblems the
communications.
Thirty five thousand vehicle.
Madam chair representative
Anderson we we do put of course
our New Mexico livestock Ford
emblems on them the law
enforcement officers the ones
that are certified law
enforcement officers they do
have the lights on the vehicles
because they do have full law
enforcement capabilities.
Thank you well I think we're
getting a great bargain I'm very
puzzled help pick up trucks
fully loaded in B. thirty five
thousand but I wish you good
luck with the program but I do
think you're going backwards
thank you madam chair.
Thank you.
Thank you Mr Anderson
Representative Anderson
Representative president pound
Representative Ladda
Representative Chatfield.
Thank you madam chair this
question as it relates to the
potential for house bill thirty
three to pass and for us to.
Once again have a need
inspection programs that state
run
could you tell me miss garland I
think we used to have a needs
inspection programs done by the
state and the federal government
close that down a few years ago
and now we're looking at doing
it again could you tell me what
would be different this time
terms of having a program that's
not gonna be under I guess a
consideration by the federal
government for some deficiency.
So madam chair representative
brown
I'm just going to be honest with
you
I have almost thirty years of
experience with state government
and county governments I I
understand I understand fully
the importance of count
accountability for our employees
and my prod a projection for
this new program would be that
we put together all of the
requirements that USDA requires
of us and other not for rules
policies and procedures for this
agency to continually meet those
requirements.
So
I have looked back on the old
program of course I wasn't it
with this agency at that time I
don't know particularly what was
going on but I've I've read the
report from the USDA on on some
of the points and and I know
this some of the areas that we
have to address with I've also
been meeting with the FSIS and
talking to them and trying to I
guess get a full conception of
what is required for this
program to be sustainable for
many many years to come.
And I I hope that answers your
question.
You I I think it does thank you
this garland and madam chair I I
just want to be sure that I I
mean I think it's a good idea to
have a state run program I think
it's also a good idea to not
lowball the funding and and
scream and yeah I think we need
to have adequate funding to a to
make this a successful program
right out the gate so I just
make that observation and hope
things will indeed come together
thank you madam chair.
Thank you.
Thank you and now we have
Representative Lotta
Representative Representative
Chatfield and take a look.
Thank you madam chair out thank
you are director garden for the
presentation I really
appreciated was very informative
you know the the Kallikratis
yourself that this is in my
legislative district and I know
how important that is for our
state so I just wanted to make
the COVID the director garland
you know when you have a chance
I'd like to speak with you
offline and see how I can
support you you go with your
efforts in south that is some
thank you thank you madam chair.
Thank you.
The next person is the
Representative chat Chattfield.
Thank you madam chair thank you
for letting me have a look
second run and it I wanted to
make a little swipe at the at
the issue of draft which affects
us all agency for it's tough to
get through in our industry but
I wanted you to be aware there's
two bills out there what I'm is
a yes one twenty one and that
would to put it apartment in the
New Mexico department of
agriculture agriculture that
would help establish packing
houses in our state and along
with the local it with the state
inspections that would give us
the ability to keep our meet in
our state keep the processing in
our state have a local supply of
beef and it would allow ranchers
to keep a little more that money
maybe even quite a bit of more
of the of the money from the
cattle that they produce it
would help our industry be able
to survive this strategy if you
get a little more profit on the
roof that you produce and you're
able to make a living on with a
little feet lower stocking right
before a to before you pass that
the line where you're not making
a profit also
to say speak just a little bit
about the closing down of the of
the inspection in the past so
one of my good friends smiles
Coversin I was in charge of us.
Dismantling that program after a
the state gave it up he wasn't
there when they gave it up but
he to get a he found jobs for
the people that were working
there and I called him yesterday
and and he said it'd be really
really thought that it would be
a good idea to have that
think back you know you see the
I. eighty so it was something we
could do and and one of these so
maybe the next time with these
bills come up get miles to come
and talk to us a little bit
about that but I think these are
some beneficial things that they
can help with the producers of
our state in the driver's seat
we're we're not so much
dependent on the grass and
outside entities to make our
lives thank you madam chair.
So madam chair if I might be
allowed to just make a comment
thank you Representative
Chatfield for that comment but
just just so you know if we do
pass the state inspection
program to come back into effect
once the program is up and
running and meeting federal
requirements there is the the
possibility that we can get
reimbursed up to fifty or sixty
percent of our expenses but they
do require that that you get up
to their operating standards and
so that that's gonna take that's
not immediate turnaround that's
about a two to two to three may
possibly for your process so the
state has to be willing to to
step up and and be willing to
fund that for awhile
one of the that's the components
that the reason the last program
failed was there was not enough
funding out there to support the
program so that's why we are
requesting the amount that we
are.
Thank you madam chair thank you
director garden thank you thank
you and miss one.
Thank you madam chair this is
killing your LFC analysts again
I was just asked to advise the
committee that only one at
request from the livestock board
is in the LFC recommendation for
special and supplemental
appropriations so the additional
request for the meat inspection
program and the HSD is revised
request for vehicles and body
cameras
we need to be considered outside
of the normal process it would
need to be considered a
different way because those
requests were I did not go
through that regular LFC process
Ford special supplemental so
thank you madam chair thank you
and the Caitlyn and Andrew so at
the end of this.
Process when everything goes to
catch up cleanup is there a way
that you two can work with this
but the livestock board people
to ensure that so there's
requests are heard and possibly
met.
Madam chair I think we can
continue this conversation at
the direction of the committee
on it yes you'd like us to work
with HSC staff and the agency we
will get that get that set up
yes and of course under the
direction of the HFC chair of
Lundstrom thank you so much and
now I.
I have a more Representative
Dixon promotion.
I thank you madam chairwoman I I
move the LFC budget
recommendation.
And I second that that thank you
all thank you all for a very
informative
A presentation that we thank you
for your hard work the scarlet
didn't.
directors Zimmerman thank you so
much or doctors amendment.
Thank you we appreciate it thank
you very much in the final
presentation now is of five to
two youth conservation corps
miss one and Mr minor.
Thank you madam chair I in
addition to Andrew and myself we
have from the youth conservation
corps Melissa laughs YCC
Commission chair and YCC
executive director at Sarah
would.
So I will present the difference
she.
Or where you.
Okay so that I youth
conservation corps LFC
recommendations can be found in
volume two pages one ninety and
one ninety one.
All recommendations from LFC and
exec.
Agencies are.
That you conservation corps is
supported primarily by a
distribution of governmental
groups receipts tax revenue and
associated fund balance and does
not receive general fund so both
the LFC and Executive
recommendations increased
revenue by nine hundred twenty
four point six thousand dollars
over the FY twenty one operating
budget and the recommendations
are for the allocation of those
funds within the base budget are
also the same old support every
prior to the.
Alan other costs to contract
services for grants awarded it
to provide youth employment
projects and LFC and DFA staff
came to consensus on performance
measure targets thank you madam
chair thank you.
Mr minor.
Madam chair committee members
again under the great job that
the recommendations are the same
so I have nothing further that.
Thank you I had director.
Yes hello madam chair members of
the committee thank you for
having this hearing and I would
like our chair Melissa locks she
has a few words to say of
introduction.
Good morning madam chair and
members of the committee I have
the pleasure today of speaking
to you as a youth conservation
corps commissioner the YCC funds
improvement projects to hire and
train New Mexico units ages
fourteen to twenty five.
Dissipation and YCC program has
the potential to change their
lives before life can change
them project sponsors invest in
our youth with career life
skills and practical training
opportunities to earn high
school GED or college credits
are encouraged and many corps
members go on to permanent
employment in their communities
after working in YCC programs
the budget recommendations from
the executive and legislative
branches for fiscal year twenty
to correspond and the increase
is from YC sees Fund balance and
will provide jobs and training
for youth affected by twenty
twenties events thank you for
your time and for your attention
at this time executive director
Sir would will present
additional details.
Thank you what.
Thank you thank you madam chair
members of the committee I'm
going to share my screen and
just show some highlights from.
This year.
Is that showing up.
The presentation.
Not not yet Sir.
here we go.
Okay so as chair logs
summarized we are a program that
provides funds to hard to
entities that want to hire and
train use at least seventy
percent of each contract goes to
use wages and ten percent of the
time must be devoted to training
and then returning core members
are eligible for a fifteen
hundred dollar educational
voucher R. five hundred dollar
cash compensation so this is a
photo of
use conservation corps member
they learned be keeping this
year at Robert F. Kennedy high
school and the south valley so
here's our gonna station chart
we are governed by a nine member
commission I governor appointees
and for state agency designees
and there's just two full time
staff myself and our
administrator Christine Sanchez.
So this year are COVID did hit
us I was pleased that we were
able to get in a central worker
designation in April so after
some reconfiguration and
regrouping up twenty seven.
Of the project Sanchez decided
to carry out their projects in
most cases what they did was
split up large cruise into small
individual Cruz and they took
longer in completing their
projects but you can see here
this is a the amount awarded
this year and not expended these
figures are not complete we
still have some reimbursements
coming in
and they still manage to
contribute a substantial amount
in in kind contributions.
and again we saw this is just
continuing recital less use
hired and also
less training and work hours but
still there was some pretty
great projects Santa Clara
pueblo they hired about twenty
three use and they split them up
into small groups and worked on
restoration appreciate cliffs
and then capacity builders in
Farmington another large group
that was split up into small
crews and they put in a skate
park at this only parking
Shiprock so that was very cool
they learned a lot of great
skills such as welding and
cement laying.
core member benefits so we've
initiated a process to ensure
more corps members receive their
benefits so this year we've
notified forty five crew members
so far nineteen have responded
and we also decided to make this
a performance based based budget
measure that every year eighty
five percent of those who are
eligible receive their benefits
and we're also working with
outdoor recreation and National
Park Service on a cradle to
career initiative to ensure that
corps members understand how
there were YCC experience can
benefit them and how they can
use their skills and what are
job opportunities and and
careers might be open to them so
as opposed to Andrew and and
Caitlin explained our budget
request for from both the
legislative.
And executive branches agree
and this just shows that the
changes personal services there
is a decrease because
the outdoor equity fund was
transferred to economic
Development Department we're
increasing contractual services
to spend on our fund balance and
because we are hoping to get.
Many more projects in FY twenty
two as the state recovers from
the COVID pandemic operating
costs are down due to less
office rent.
And
then we other financing uses is
a hundred twenty five thousand
two EMNRD that help us with
budget procurement person and
governor liaison services would
you tell us what M. nerd is oh
sure yes energy minerals and
natural resources department.
Thank you and so this is just
part chart that shows.
How our money is spent
the vast majority goes to
contractual services and then
the rest is divided between
personnel services and operating
costs and other financing uses
so I'm this is the just a little
slice of some more photos of
projects this year and then I've
also put in an appendix I
believe you all got this
presentation ahead of time which
just details out the projects we
had this year.
So that concludes my
presentation I also have our
budget director
With us to answer questions.
Thank you very much for your
presentation great slides I have
Representative Anderson followed
by Representative brown.
Thank you madam chairman of
Madam chairman of appreciate
that excellent presentation of
agency would of and my question
was answered in your
presentation that had to do with
extra work pushing these young
of students in your summer
programs to understand the
opportunity of the outdoors of
four employment in a career so I
I salute you on that rather than
ask you any further questions
because it sounds like of that
is working well for you last
question on the scholarships I
think I heard forty five out of
nineteen of I think I
interpreted that that there were
forty five.
participants of Corman ideas
and.
Nineteen are are in line to
receive a benefit that is of
fifteen hundred dollar
scholarship it is that the
correct calculation I I see
you're not a.
We.
Thank you thank you Sir Senator
underscored Representative
Anderson for that question madam
chair members of the committee
so we notified there's forty
five eligible court members and
those forty five were notified
and so so far we've received
responses from and have been
able to process a budget for
nineteen of them.
Thank you you on that just a
quick follow up you get it it's
really at if they qualify they
apply they will achieve the
scholarship money is.
Assuming they're going to school
and few other things like that
but I met there's no other
academic criteria or anything.
I'm.
That is correct Representative
Anderson madam chair members of
the committee.
The benefits are allocated on
the basis of the time spent in
the quorum court members who
have worked at least thirty two
weeks over a four year period.
Get a budget thank you thank you
to director would I really
salute you for what you do and I
hope you have a great year thank
you thank you thank you
Representative Brown.
Yes thank you madam chair.
So I have just a couple of
questions for director would and
it's my understanding this is
the state youth conservation
corps and I've certainly heard
of there's federal one as well.
Could you give us just a little
bit of information about hello.
It is I see there's no federal
revenue coming in so have you
ever considered doing a joint
project with the federal used
car percent con conservation
corps on something that would
benefit New Mexico is that even
thought about.
Thank you for the question
Representative brown I believe
with the passage of the the what
is it the great.
It funding L. W. C. F. money
there that has been definitely
discussed as a of.
Federal conservation corps in
New Mexico and there are several
other private as well as the BLM
runs a conservation corps so to
answer your question yes those
those folks actually are
eligible to apply for funds with
New Mexico youth conservation
corps and sometimes they do.
So as.
I think we're going to see more
conservation corps activities
specially from the federal land
so we we definitely will be
talking with them and
collaborating with them okay
thank you.
Question madam chair and
director would is how do I
encourage young people ages
fourteen to twenty five to
provide you at it I'm I don't
know that it's really all that
will advertise to do you work
through workforce solutions or
how do you get the word out that
this great opportunity exists.
Representative Brown madam chair
members of the committee so of
that is another push that that I
am working on I've just added a
jobs posting page to our website
so that when the awards for this
year are announced we can list
that contact information and
then use can go there and apply
of contact that projects sponsor
and apply with them for the
projects in their area that
interests them
and
We are also working
with on a bill that we hope will
streamline why C. C.'s process
and makes the application more
accessible to more entities
and also have a faster
turnaround so those are all in
the works because.
It is sometimes
difficult for people to find us
and know we exist so any
anything you could do to spread
the word would be very helpful I
will madam chair I will
certainly do that in I have to
plug in my computer it might
disappear so thank you very much
thank you.
Representative Dixon I thank you
thank you madam chair woman and
director would
I was wondering about
involvement in state park
project and what efforts we can
do with the youth conservation
corps to coordinate with our
state parks on some of the
projects that they may have just
you know and this could be
especially helpful in some of
our rural areas thank you.
Thank you Representative Dixon
madam chair members of the
committee yes state parks
actually is in EMNRD and I used
to work for state parks so that
they are eligible to apply for
these funds as well and I've
been working with the director
to Fauria
On on that because of our
process is confidential and we
still haven't announced the
grant awards for this year I
can't say much beyond that but
indeed we are.
Very well connected with state
park.
Thank you thank you madam chair.
Thank you I don't see any other
people on my list and I don't
see any audience questions so
Representative Representative
Brown.
Yes yes thank you madam chair I
just quickly I did not receive
the packet of that was
referenced earlier and so if we
could make sure that all the
committee members get that I
would appreciate that thank you.
Thank you staff I hope you heard
that and the now Representative
of Dixon for the motion I move
to approve the LFC budget
recommendation.
I'm sure.
Thank you Mr of Representative.
Madam chair you muted.
I knew that I was testing you.
So actually I have here in my
mouth sorry now.
Thank you all very very much
this is all going to go back to
the full committee for further
consideration you all did a
terrific job of of presenting
your for your issues and
concerns and I want to thank you
all for being here.
At this point in time I will.
Recess I guess it's recessing
until it goes to the full
committee thank you
Appropriations Committee staff
for all your hard work you all
have a great rest of the day and
some of us still have the
committees so thank you you all
have a good evening they.
Time.
By.
My manager.
