And I think just with the Human
Services Department our first
agency agency code six thirty.
We are going to be.
Doing a full committee hearing
but we will be as will
become quite clear there are
very substantial differences in
the DFA and LFC recommendations
and so we're going to
undertake a full committee
hearing but at this point we are
not going to be adopting a
recommendation today.
So we'll do a full committee
hearing
and but we will not be adopting
a recommendation on HSD code six
thirty.
Mr Chairman will that also be
true one D. O. H. is well.
Thank you Representative
Anderson no I think on on the
Department of Health Agency code
six six five we should expect
that to adopt a recommendation
although as with all the
recommendations we are we're
continuing to work through since
thank you thank you.
Okay then with that said thanks
everybody again for for being
part of this pairing with
we're gonna go ahead and get
started.
With the full sharing for the
Human Services Department
courses agency code six thirty
we have the deck of slides here
from the Human Services
Department it is always we're
gonna go ahead and get started
with our LFC analysts before we
go to DFA so I'd ask Miss ruby
and ask about to kick off the
committee today it's.
Good morning Mr chairman and
good morning members of the
committee thank you and and it's
nice to see you are.
As you indicated at this is
agency code six thirty the Human
Services Department and I'll
just run through first of all
ciment introductions and then
what's in your packet and then
we can begin I again RubyAnn
just give wireless with the LFC
my counterpart with the
executive is miss Mary Beth and
more.
And of course we have secretary
Scrase with us to the secretary
the Human Services department
and health introduced his whole
team one feud that began portion
of today's presentation.
What you have in your packet
your differentiate packet for
the Human Services Department we
start with this high level
spreadsheet which will we'll go
through that at a high level and
then following that is really
that.
Potatoes we start first with the
roll cage which is on page four.
And at the top of this page on
page four which lays out the
whole department you'll see at
the very top LFC volumes listed
so make note of those right now
for the committee.
In volume one which is the LFC
policy volume from pages one
twenty one to one twenty six
there's a whole write up about
the major policy issues
affecting the Human Services
Department Medicaid and just
behavioral health really going
into all of the start the policy
areas that are so important in
the state of New Mexico and are
clearly impacted by this budget
today.
In volume two which is more the
technical number document of the
LFC if you look at their on
pages two hundred and sixty five
through page two eighty that's
where we have the more detailed
budgetary discussion for the
Human Services Department and it
goes program by program and talk
about the major fiscal issues
impacting each program.
And then lastly is volume three
which is our data book if you
will and I on pages eighty six
through ninety three and that
data book we have several tables
on Human Services Department
everything from
Medicaid enrollment projections
and trends looking at the
tobacco settlement revenue which
is the portion of the of the
budget here looking at managed
care contracts looking at all of
the pandemic map all of the
programs that comprise a lot of
the income support program those
are all listed out as well and
with numbers attached to them so
lots of data for you to to look
at and to help inform this
discussion this morning.
That I'll begin going through
this high level which is on year
round page the first page of
your packet from the LFC.
And as the chairman indicated
the big number that jumps out is
the on road for basically for
the Medicaid program and that
the first program listed here on
the sheet is Medicaid we can sum
it up in one number we're
basically different between the
executive and the LESC by a
hundred fifteen point seven
million dollars that the big
number
So the LFC is higher in general
fund in recurring revenue of
about a hundred fifteen hundred
sixteen million for Medicaid so
that basically thumbed up in
line or rope for on the
spreadsheet you'll hear a state
that's a lot as we go through
this presentation so I might as
well just start now you can't
look though at.
Thank you Mr Mrs Department
budget without pulling and a
whole bunch of other pieces you
have to look at the special
appropriation the R. but
nonrecurring component.
All of these components the
expansion items because all of
them come together and really
and form the budget so and and
although the LFC recommendation
clearly is higher by a hundred
and sixty million and recurring
general fund revenue I'll say
right up front the executive has
a special appropriation requests
for nonrecurring revenue that is
a hundred and twenty six million
so that makes the numbers if you
add their nonrecurring revenue
plus the executives recurring
revenue that makes our to
Medicaid numbers much more
almost almost and think.
So what much more about that but
I'll continue on with the high
level.
If you go down we'll just.
Thank you we'll discuss them in
detail in the program if you go
down to rose thirty eight and
thirty nine on the first page of
your high level.
You'll see that Medicaid
administration so that that the
administrative work that helps
keep the Medicaid program going
on there the executive
recommendation for you recurring
general fund this is just
general fund on this high level
there higher by about a million
dollars a little over a million.
So that were person primarily
so.
I wanted to point that out.
If you flip your second page of
your high level.
Are all fine.
The first program at the top of
the income support and you'll
see quite a few differences
popping out there but the
largest zoom row forty eight
the.
Agency requests for FY twenty
three and the executive funded a
large increase I two point seven
million to support.
Senator.
Hiring and billing a vacancies
and increased M..
Recruitment of frontline workers
within the income support
offices across the region the
LFC took a different approach to
person really across most
department one we did not make
any reductions in the funded
vacancy rate so a lot of times I
think the committee will be used
to seeing and lean years when we
don't have as much general fund
your be used to seeing a lot of
negative numbers and the
personal services employee
benefits so we're reduction if
you will and funded vacancy rate
LESC did not do that and an
agency we do not do that
anywhere we left in the funded
vacancy rate in you'll see in
your PS help that included I
think this committees used to
seeing that warm that that
funded vacancy rates are pretty
high right now across all of HSD
up most of HSD so LESC didn't
make any reductions to funded
vacancy rate however we didn't
increase of funding for
personnel costs just knowing
that right now it's hard to
track professional personality
process a lot of the area areas
of of government and across a
lot of the areas of our state
and in addition of course the
you know the LFC had the
recommendation across all of
government to increase
at.
Right by seven percent so that's
the approach taken by the LFC
slightly different than the
approach taken by the executive
I wanted to point that out
that's the major difference in
income support and I'll move on
this high level and just go down
to behavioral health services
division rose seventy eight
another large difference there
that jumps out to you two point
six million so what that is is
the
that federal nine eight eight
crisis now line and the reason
why we all have to now dial that
the pre thank you know I know I
five seven five because some of
us have nine eight eight in our
phone number so the again we
have a different approach and
that the executive this item and
recurring based thank you see
that the executive hired by that
two point six million in general
fund the legislative finance
committee funded a portion of
the operating costs a recurring
one point five million however
the LFC I funded two point three
million and special so when you
add those pieces together again
the executive and the LESC are
almost the same so I wanted to
put that one out for you and I
think
That the main big differences on
a high level that I'll point out
and that you'll see at the
bottom line wanted to that
basically when you pull in and
out all the pieces of LFC is
about a hundred twelve million
higher overall for the
department.
So that level.
Overall and I think
we can begin.
With the sheep that goes with
this with the actual narrative
and then I'll flip it over to
you MaryBeth I think it will
start to in the back and forth
thank.
He.
Okay great.
The committee will please turn
to.
That are hearing.
Okay as I'm looking for here we
up the high level of the page.
For.
Your overall sheet that looks
like this page for the packet.
This is the overall high level
for the different sheet for the
Human Services Department.
The their breaks out.
In the sources and the uses.
And then also the expansion
items so I think I'll just
actually go through this sheet
and look at the different items
and also
starting on revenue.
At the top you'll see and I'm
gonna go to the far calling
because we have the base we have
expansion and then the whole
different so
We'll have to go through each of
those pieces for each program.
So if you go clear to the fire
column here you'll see that
overall difference that I just
mentioned in the high level
hundred and eleven million point
eight in general fund with LESC
of course the higher.
You'll see the next number of
seven million in other transfers
and LFC is higher by seven
million and that's actually what
we're going to require a
technical adjustment with LFC is
basically not aligned between
the department of health and
agency for that DD that
developmental disabilities
Medicaid waiver that the
minister within the department
of health
we're off by seven million
there's we're gonna need a
technical adjustment so just so
you know what that is.
And then you'll see the next
number is federal funds and LFC
is higher by four hundred twenty
one point eight million in
federal funds and that's simply
because we have a hundred
sixteen point five million more
in recurring revenue in Medicaid
of course we have the matching
federal funds for that.
All right so moving down to
expenditures.
The that the executive is about.
Three point eight million higher
in personal services employee
benefits and that falls
primarily in the income support
division which I talked about
that two point eight million and
a portion in Medicaid
administration so that's
primarily where that following.
And surprisingly for contractual
services overall not by that
much three hundred eighty four
thousand is a drop in the bucket
in this department so I'm pretty
close on that one and then in
the other that big difference
five hundred forty four million
in other that Medicaid federal
funds rate there so that the
differences.
What really ties out and laid
out in the overall Department.
All right and we're we're on
just slightly off by a few FTE
with LFC being slightly lower
and that falls within Medicaid
administration and some and
behavioral health services
division as well.
And now if you go to the last
brought her here on page four
this is the expansion the
summary of the expansion
expansion items that the agency
requests.
Thank you see here.
The main difference again the
first line under expansion it
says that nine eight eight in
prices now implementation that
that behavioral health hotline.
that's the difference that we
talked about that the executive
has two point six million more
in general fund recurring but
however the LFC has two point
three million and special
appropriation.
The next item is the behavioral
health collaborative expansion
request the executive didn't
find this when the LFC put in
two hundred and seventy thousand
in general fund recurring
revenue for to support for eight
local behavioral health
collaborative.
Is the mood and hunger
initiative hunger really.
You'll see a difference there of
eighty one thousand the
executive included eighty one
thousand per per person a person
to help with this initiative
within HSD however both the
executive and the LESC funded
food food banks but different
approach LFC has five million
for the food or food banks
statewide food banks in and
Arbon I'm recurring
package of of of special
appropriation.
Executive has five point nine
million for its turned it HSD
mail gap within the department
of finance and administration
actual budget it's consolidated
their so again different
approach but.
Similar funding for both side.
If we go down.
We have a small difference and
what's termed hiring and
onboarding basically what this
is this is within programs
support an office if you more
resources
LFC funded
Port per person there to help
just with all the the
administration in person
operations across the department
so this is a little higher
there.
Also another thing that will I
want to point out that we're
moving into behavioral health
here it's implementation of
trauma response and it cut off
there but it's evidence based
approaches.
The those of you who are on the
legislative finance committee
will recall that during the
interim we held multiple
hearings on behavioral health
and stress the need within our
program evaluation we had a
program evaluation done on
behavioral health in really
stressing the need for
preventive care both during our
system of behavioral health
access are providers provider
rate maintaining all of that and
of course we're seeing every
headline every day in hospitals
in trouble yes the need for care
suicide that so all of this
week's to I need to really
bolster and continuing support
recurring support for our health
system our hospitals and our
behavioral health system in the
state that's why you see the
approach in the LFC that you see
here a recurring funding needed
to send the message trong late
that we support our systems we
support our providers that will
and we'll keep those funding
streams going and that's what
this item is here LFC put in it
that amount is just a little
higher in the difference in
terms of the difference a
hundred eight thousand but if
you jump to the second to the
last item that I'm to increase.
The provider rate increases for
behavioral health providers were
not in the Medicaid system so
the department requested.
One point two million for that
and the LFC fully funded that
and in recurring revenue and
executive budget happen that.
So thank you that portion of the
overall again.
You are item on the.
I don't go through the
narratives that basically
already talked about that but I
am on page I I do want to point
out in language but it's it's
always important to talk about
language especially in this
department because we have a lot
of language in this department
and the LFC has substantially
more language in Medicaid we
have some languages that conform
to how we.
And the LESC recommendation that
conforms to how we always
compiled the General
Appropration Act I wanted to
point that out LFC also in
Medicaid behavioral health has a
portion of language identifying
and a minimum of fifty thousand
that's transferred age
administrative hearings off for
for hearing officers for
behavioral health.
And that in income support we
have a lot of language and that
language is really required even
though a lot of that is federal
funds were required to have all
of that language federal so why
it's.
More important than a lot of
other agencies that we get the
language right in this
department so
There's that piece and I think
that all of the language pieces
thank you I really wanted to
noted in this in this department
because that is pretty important
and that performance measures
We had differences but we've
gone through and have all
consensus on all of that so
thank you Mary Beth and.
That our expansion then and what
I talked about that already we
have.
Quite a few differences in those
now and we'll talk about those
as we go through each program
all right long winded opening
thank you so much for your
attention and I think very back
you can go next year programs
support thank you.
You miss us go truly.
And the skins are plates.
Thank you thank you thank you Mr
chair good morning everyone
members of the committee I'm a
representative more in the DFA
analyst for the Human Services
Department I'm gonna take you
through the first program it's
P. five two two and it's program
support also the and information
technology division for the
agency.
I so overall with revenues the
executive recommends.
Three thousand more general fund
revenue than in the LFC
recommendations and that one
has.
I yield the recommendations work
federal funds is near the
requested level it's one point
five eight million over the
executive recommendation.
So basically the executive
recommends a hundred and twenty
four point five thousand over
the LFC in general fund and
federal funds support for
personal which RubyAnn went over
a little bit
However the LFC recommends an
additional one hundred and sixty
five thousand for person in
expansion which again is not
hiring
expansion that that that agency
have requested.
The LFC recommendation includes
an additional one point five
million in federal funds over
the executive these federal
funds support the following
items.
Four million more income in
contractual services which
includes I. T. maintenance
operations security software and
just a little bit more in
operating cost nineteen
thousand.
performance measures we went
through everything we have
reconciled our differences and
I'll just reiterate again with
the expansions is one of the
areas are with a bit of a
difference in the expansions of
the LFC recommended seventy
thousand in general fund and
ninety five thousand in federal
funds I'm for the expansion at
the office of human resources
department wide hiring other
person the executive Justin Fund
not particularly initiatives
that's about it for the
differences in the program
support though not too not too
significant and with that I will
pass it back to ruby and for the
next program.
Thank you Mary Beth.
The next program is on page
nine.
When you're different she packet
and it's child support and merry
bathroom itself well because we
don't have any differences and
that went but I do want to point
out we didn't have any
differences but there is an
important policy issue here we
both supported it but at the
director of the child support
program miss McCracken she yeah
I'd be remiss to talk to us so
much about the peace and and
should be able to explain it
much better than I but it's an
important thing it's been
written about in the newspapers
on about
That that recruitment and trying
to directly give money to child
support families and not
reimbursed the department with
federal TANF recruitments but
instead just basically sending
that money directly to child
support families so there's the
about one point seven million in
this number here that both
numbers have and it's an
important policy issue and that
we're we're pleased to all
support that so thank you and
merry back you get Medicaid.
Mr chair members of the
committee again yes I I will go
over Medicaid with you RubyAnn
is already giving you a great
introduction to the differences
and I'm sure that we will be
discussing them and that further
but but let me take you through
a little more information so as
noted in the base B. LFC
recommends that a hundred and
fifteen point seven million more
in recurring general fund
support for Medicaid in the
executive
but again it's really important
to note that a key component of
the executive recommendation is
that half of the increase it was
recommended is in a nonrecurring
special okay so you will see a
hundred and twenty eight point
six million of an increase in
the executive base and then
you'll see the same thing in
nonrecurring so so overall than
what this means is LFC
recommends an increase for
Medicaid for about two hundred
and forty five point five
million for FY twenty three when
you add in the special but the
executive has supported the
increase is.
About two hundred and fifty
seven point two million and
again that's one twenty eight
point six million in recurring
one twenty eight point six
nonrecurring so again as you
mentioned a few minutes ago when
you add that in they are much
closer that it that it looks
like at first glance okay
again I would be a mentioned a
minute ago
in other transfers LFC is seven
million higher that's just a
technical correction needs to be
done
to match what the O. H. would be
sending over to HSD for the the
Medicaid waiver program.
and then also the LFC
recommendation includes an
additional four hundred nineteen
point two million in federal
Medicaid matching funds and
again that is that is merely
because in LFC is basically
their higher with general fund
so as a result federal funds due
to the match are going to show
higher as well.
When you get yes I'm.
So again maybe I mentioned this
but the executive recommends one
point two million more than LFC
for personal in Medicaid
administration LFC is funded
vacancy rate recommendation it's
ten point six percent I'll just
note here this is one place
executive we fully funded and
supported the Medicaid admin ask
LFC just came in a little bit
lower.
I'm okay and L. and then again
the executive recommends let's
see five hundred and forty six
thousand one LFC for recurring
contractual services the
executive also recommends in a
special seven hundred and
seventy thousand in nonrecurring
this is for automated system
program eligibility noted
cantonments you'll see just a
very quick notes is one point
four million aren't federal that
is incorrect it's more like two
point three so that's adopted we
will make that money to make a
correction on our side
but the general fund amount in
their seven seventy that is
correct for those enhancements.
And then we get to the other
operating costs so again you'll
see LFC higher here about five
hundred forty three point seven
million more that's both general
fund and federal fund recurring
support for Medicaid so again
the combination of the increased
general fund federal fund match
on LESC side in the base is
going to result in higher other
operating costs as that's where
the bulk of Medicaid rest in the
budget.
Let's see.
So this includes back filling
for the projected shortfall from
FY twenty two it supports an
increase for medical inflation
supports health care provider
rate provided increasing minimum
wages particularly in long term
services and supports also
covers increase Medicare costs
of healthcare workforce
initiatives and funds the
extension of postpartum care
from three months to a year I
will know of that is in both
recommendations all fully
supported that expansion of the
post part of Medicaid at a
general fund cost about fourteen
point four million so they're
both sides.
I'm.
I'm just as a separate executive
supports many of these above
initiatives but have risen
recurring and half is a
nonrecurring so again you won't
see it on the base but it is it
is basically there okay just
funded differently.
I'm there's some different
language I'm not going to read
them you're welcome to go
through them I'm sure we can
answer questions that there are
any but as the incentives it's
important to point out the
language and support this
program.
again performance measures we
have gone through and we have
reconciled everything and I
believe that that just about
covers that for the Medicaid
overview so with that I'll turn
it back over to RubyAnn for
income support.
Thank you.
Support Mr chairman and members
of the committee begins on page
thirteen of your packet.
You'll see we have a few
expansion items here so all.
Point out the base amount right
here and then at the end of the
spreadsheet the total amount
differences.
For in the base we're we have a
difference of between the
executive and LFC of
of three point two million out
with the executive being hired
that largely that person that
two point seven two point eight
million that we talked about
that he's there and then we have
a difference in the face of nine
hundred and seventy five point
three in federal funds.
That is with the LFC being
higher in federal funds and that
actually it has a policy piece
attached to it so as we're going
through all of these are more
than just numbers right these
are all it have huge policy
ramifications associated with
them so that he I will point out
what that is
The LFC and November that we met
with the department and went
through an updated what we call
updated economic projections
camp Canada is the temporary
assistance for needy families
program and there's multiple
components and that we just they
can but there is cash assistance
general assistance that
supplemental nutrition
assistance program many programs
but so with those updated
projections on the LFC
recommendation adjusted its
numbers her the updated
projection so that's why you see
a slightly higher federal
funding for there and that's
just support cash assistance and
I want to alert the committee to
that because I think for a lot
of years prior to the pandemic.
We were seeing that member
AUMENT declining we we
definitely think Senator Roman
general assistance cash
assistance enrollment declining
but of course that's been going
at but the interesting thing and
which we found out in November
is that projection forward is
that those numbers are going at
are projected to continue
climbing so that's something
that I wanted to point out for
the committee hence that
difference in that federal funds
number you go to the in column
here.
you see basically that overall
difference in general fund
support three point three
million and the federal okay and
I need to reiterate that and I
will not going to go through the
expenditures if we just talk
about what those are and I will
just remind the committee again
about that the first expansion
item listed here on the bottom
of the page right here the food
and hunger initiative just
remember again that the funding
for that the executive has of
funding for one percent in the
base to help with that but the
real funding to support.
Food food and commodities is in
special so five million four in
nonrecurring arpa funds for the
LFC and five point nine million
in the department of finance and
administration the agency budget
for the executive.
The point that out and then this
again is that program that I at
highlighted that we have some
some pretty big language
differences that will need to be
sure to always reconcile that
language that's important.
One thing I will point out in in
the base expenditures Mr
chairman and committee members
We're going to see this
throughout the department and I
think that sometimes we we gloss
over I. T. but at I. T.
information technology systems
but I do the huge part of this
this agency at the huge part of
this agency budget and although
we don't have many differences
in the funding for Judy which is
which is good.
Warning something we look at and
follow closely all year so we do
have a slight difference it's
just I'm three hundred fifty
thousand.
The LFC is three hundred fifty
thousand less than contractual
services to support
The aspen IT system so what that
is that you you'll you'll hear
these names and all that aspen
I. T. system is that the
enrollment system at the
enrollment system that ties
together Medicaid and snap and
all the all the systems for a
moment for program so that an
estimate we do have support for
this system throughout multiple
programs that doesn't reside in
just one program so that's an
important thing to note
another.
That we're not mentioning
overtly here in these different
sheets but I will just mention
it for the committee because I
know many of you said on the.
LFC and we had hearings this
summer on the Medicaid
management information system
replacement I. T. project are
what we term MMI S. R. miser
that pro that new I. T. system
it's the largest I. T. system
replacement ever in New Mexico
government history it's it's
over two hundred million dollars
for this I. T. system it's it's
a lot of money and it's ninety
percent funded thank the next by
the federal government but we
have to provide ten percent of
that system and it's it's been
multiple years already now and
it it slated to be finished
twenty twenty three twenty
twenty four we'll see however
think of with its its at large
endeavor and I we we we
appreciate the hard work of many
people to work on this HSD and
we're all just keeping our
fingers crossed that it keeps
going to the it'll be a huge
boon to the day when it went up
it's working correctly will be
able to gather a lot more data
and information but I'm it's
it's a big left so just wanted
to mention that okay.
As I said we have language
differences so and we have those
differences already pointed out
an expansion so I think we're
good and we reconcile
Department.
Thank you for your indulgence on
that I just want to mention some
of these really large important
items that are kind of buried in
here.
Right and MaryBeth Medicaid
behavioral health.
Thanks again beyond Mr chair
members of the committee hi this
is my softball there are no
differences in this part of the
the HSD this program between the
two recommendations we've all
well recommendations supported
the HSD us here as I mentioned
before this call out for you
there is that one language
difference
for the fifty thousand dollar
transfer to the administrative
hearings office here but that's
the only difference in this
program again be reconciled all
of our performance measures and
targets I'm and so I'll turn it
back over to RubyAnn one last
time for the behavior health
services.
Thank you Mary Beth the last
you'll be glad the last program
is the behavioral health
services division of the HSD
and.
The total difference.
Isn't that much we have a
different
in the base of nine hundred
ninety one thousand five hundred
with them LFC being higher in
general fund support by nine
hundred ninety one in the face
of that and then the executive
but then when you pull and the
program change pieces let so
then act.
The fire column here under
general fund.
Right there so I'm six hundred
and seventy six point eight
thousand in general fund with
the executive being slightly
higher so let's look at the
components of.
So the Executive.
Is higher in that in the base.
Overall for person so at the
eight I actually that backwards
sorry getting my number's gonna
be there the LFC sorry it higher
in the base at for person so if
you look at that.
Numbers right here LFC is.
Four million nine hundred fifty
eight point eight thousand in
the base for personal services
employee benefits and the
executive had four million four
hundred sixty seven point three
so that's a difference of four
hundred ninety one point five to
support base person in
in that Hey the health services
division and the base and this
was one of those areas where the
the funded vacancy rate was a
little bit lower hanshi the the
higher number and the LESC
recommendation I talked about
the overall approach we're
trying to keep that funded
vacancy rate up so in any area
where we saw the funded vacancy
rate with a little more we
boosted that eight funding in
the LFC approach.
However if you go across to
that in number for person you'll
see that expansion denoted there
that the executive funded and
the LESC did it now this gets to
that approach that and the LFC
that we're we're seeing across
all of the state where it's just
so hard right now I'm fortunate
to recruit people and in some
cases retain people as well so
that's why you see that LFC
didn't find expansion position
additional positions are funded
based up but not those expansion
is just because of the
difficulty in recruitment and
retention however the executive
did and.
Additional positions to help
with the behavioral health
collaborative and that that nine
eight eight prices Gallup
limitation those areas and so
that they come in with a higher
number of their.
All right and then if we go to
contractual services.
You'll see that
I want to point out a number
here and contractual services in
the base you'll see two numbers
LFC that seventy two point two
million and the executive is
that seventy one point seven
million and there's a five
hundred thousand dollar
difference there in the base
that the program different so
the LFC does include an
additional five hundred thousand
recurring funding for the
linkages housing support program
so this is a program to give us
a little more flexibility than
the hide programs then that
mortgage finance programs which
all have a little more strings
attached in this program we're
able to directly support
housing for people who are in
different ten US housing support
positions with a little less
requirement so LFC has an
additional five hundred thousand
dollars for that.
In addition to.
To note that one and if you go
across the contractual services
though
the the LFC is lower by nine
hundred twenty seven thousand
and that's tied to
that crisis now that the ninety
eight that hotline.
And then the other amount is
small so I won't even talk about
that the last piece of talk
about is just to reiterate the
expansion items just we're
trying to think some of the
things over and over but it'll
start you know the repetition
will hopefully start triggering
questions in your mind and and
hopefully start helping to make
sense of all of this so what
what we can our differences and
the expansion items are in that
behavioral health national
crisis not light with the
executive having to point at six
more in the base for recurring
and the LESC funding to two
point three million in non
recurring a special so almost
the same different funding
approach at the LFC supported
the executive did not two
hundred seventy point four for
local behavioral health
collaborative.
For trauma response in evidence
here the LFC supported a little
bit more hundred eight thousand
a hundred nine thousand and
lastly
the LFC put in the full amount
of one point two five that was
requested for for behavioral
health provider rate increases
for providers who are not on
Medicaid.
So that was a lot but that.
I think that hopefully that
gives you a clearer picture Mary
Beth did we miss anything or get
okay and I think we've hopefully
given them a good overview of
very get help leading compete
too much with that I think are
handed over at with the
chairman's permission to
secretary great thank you so
much.
Thank you well this has to be
honest and more for going
through with incredible detail
and I think with clarity and
played secretary Scrase.
You know please introduce
yourself your team before going
into your presentation.
I'm I'm I'm very happy to do
that Mr chair at delays to be
here members of the committee I
I'm coming today from my DH
office I don't want to confuse
people and then tomorrow at
Senate finance out of the
hearing from my just do this to
Monday thank you for your
flexibility in allowing us to
add to it can remotely we've got
a very large group here today
you've met them before so just
go through very quickly actually
meant and from.
Excuse me Angelman drama are
deputy cabinet secretary I carry
on the how another deputy
cabinet secretary Nicole Comeaux
are at Medicaid director and
power it's not our general
counsel in addition the teen
Gonzalez McCracken's and child
support hello to just this year
Smith our strategic planning at
and special projects manager
breast pain sure the C. R. B.
Ross collaborative in the sand
of all our and then services
director Judy McGinnis order
communications director Judy
parks are acting human resources
director no Martinez income
support division director
Neal Bowen behavioral health
division director Ryan o'connor
Sallee Jamison project managers
John Kerr said R. I. D. D.
information technology division
director and CIO and Shelly
Begay our tribal liaison I think
with that I'm going to share my
screen and share the
presentation we've been asked
today to give a very brief
presentation everyone here knows
that's going to be tough for me
but I'm going to do my absolute
best to do it at ten slides and
and I'm you we have some
materials for a we've already
passed out today the date of Oct
the HSD version of our score
cards and then in the appendix
we usually find a lot of sides
of appendix information to
support what were at addressing
here today and that that
information will be sent to you
by email I just wanted to thank
you Mr chair and members of the
committee for doing this work
this is just incredibly
important work I want to thank
the LFC director Avid trial
Sallee and our in ruby and SQL
import.
Take killer you know to manage a
nine billion dollar budget we
meet on a quarterly basis you
are Medicaid in great detail and
that really get into the weeds
on this and I think the
relationship we developed is a
model for other departments were
very appreciative of that time
to go over and wrestle with
these issues I think the waiver
our plan that we're are going
through is a is a result and get
it out growth of that
relationship as well and when
you add in the specials and
you'll hear me talk about how
important it is to do that as
well you know we're only one
point three percent part the
numbers look big but we're
really only about one one
percent part and I think that's
a testimony our relationship
I wanted to next I just remind
us that a minister to decide to
go very briefly but I just want
to hit the high points I think
today of some of the differences
on a little bit more on the
executive perspective on my we
need things were asking for
we're currently serving one
million fifty one thousand seven
hundred fifty five New Mexicans
are those of you who know that
there's two point one million
people in New Mexico in easily
figure out that that's exactly
half and that the spike share
our minds when we pay our that
pandemic EBT benefit to students
like our extra money if there
during remote learning the fed
started distribute days on a
regular basis and so so they
kind that they come in spurts
sent that's why they show up as
additional unduplicated members
here but this budget is
incredibly important not only to
this committee our department
but to the people of New Mexico
half of whom half of them
receive one benefit or another
for me just state I'm on the
next slide I wanted to highlight
again I I don't know how many
times of that Senator twenty
eight point six million
approach in a special for
Medicaid and I want and I wanted
to.
Why I think that's happening I
think when the build back better
bill fails.
In the Senate.
In the US Congress I'm that
build back better built on
Google the maintenance of
efforts which is that six point
two percent F. map we get in
return for keeping everyone on
Medicaid it on Google that from
the public health emergency and
signal that we would have to
take everybody off of Medicaid
starting April first now in the
bill failed that means that it's
highly likely that they'll be an
additional quarter of funding
which I'll speak to you in just
a second and that those balls
that we've been juggling in the
air and watching for two years
and meeting with quarterly with
our LFC and DFA partners to try
to figure out what to do they
stay in the air it's just are
bigger now than they were before
and so we think that that we
really don't know I think our
governor thanks legislation to
this effect is not likely to the
summer or fall and so we think
this approach allows us the
funding we need assuming the
specials approved to cover
Medicaid but then ensure that we
can be flexible highly flexible
whenever the rules coming down
about how we have to real people
off of Medicaid so that was
important to explain that I'm
going to highlight a couple of
the differences that are already
been discussed in the medical
assistance at at at mad Division
administration for positions I'm
gonna talk briefly about income
support which is been discussed
a couple times at behavioral
health on the on the ninety
eight our line and then lastly I
wanted to thank LFC and all of
you for your initial support we
came up with a whole bunch of
new initiatives we thought that
would benefit New Mexicans and
we're not gonna spend time
talking about them today because
we're not really debating them
things like you know Medicaid
I'm for women who are are post
partum for a whole year rather
than just sixty days up
tremendous.
Are coming together and agreeing
on really important purpose so
you'll hear me talk just a
little bit about most of these
and then lastly I'm gonna say
something at the end and I can't
say very much about our
settlement with have been asked
and why that needs why that's
prudent to be fully funded
rather than partially so
Medicaid continues to grow we
probably will have over a
hundred sixty thousand
additional people on Medicaid
when we finally decide to wind
this down you can see is nine
hundred and sixty two thousand
total beneficiaries last month
and we're anticipating another
seventeen thousand as people
stay on Medicaid so that wind
out is going to be a huge effort
and Medicaid of course as a make
is not primary pair are both in
dollars and in in not numbers of
members in New Mexico at we have
been talking our latest
projection are shortfall in
Medicaid is two hundred ninety
nine million that that's what
these appropriations are the LFC
appropriations intended to
address appropriately it's what
that executive appropriation of
special are intended to address
why are we how could we possibly
see that big of a gap going
forward and as you can see from
this bar graph graph there
really is the change in the F.
map and EF map here and so we're
getting four point nine federal
dollars for every dollar of
general fund we spent when this
public health emergency ends
when the maintenance or effort
and that will drop to three
point five seven and that is one
time of money here and accounts
for most of the differences are
so I'm gonna say today we can
talk about the line items I
think ruby Allen and Mary Beth
are you and I forgot this I
wanted to specifically recognize
MaryBeth Dennis Moore who
actually adopted HSD what what
six weeks or two months ago and
you know learning the H..
Yes the budget in two months and
doing as good a job as she did
as she said that you know it up
against the veteran RubyAnn who
knows the staff inner sleeve it
always does a tremendous job at
I think you are a tremendous
debt of gratitude there's only
one kind that kind of thing like
that that I can think of worse
than having to do the DFA
portion of both HSD and D. O. H.
so thank you very much for a
bathroom for efforts to that end
and it first you too RubyAnn
this is this one is really hard
to explain so if you ask me
questions I then immediately
refer you to in the call but the
complex city of the our home
based community service fund
it's going to allow
HSPA M. D. O. H. together to
invest almost eight hundred
million extra dollars in
services requires a non
reverting language and I don't
like nonrecurring language I've
said that before I know you all
like it less than I can Mr chair
I know you like it a lot less at
and so the only reason we are
for a proposing this is because
in the bill back better bill
sorry in the in home base
community services
Span and home based community
services which has an incredibly
broad definition between April
of last year in March of this
year.
We get ten percent off of that
we then.
More accurately ten percent of
that federal funds that we then
can use to match federal funds
so we get a hundred twenty
million dollars as a result of
what we're spending here that we
think can spend a roll of these
new programs like getting
everyone out the way less
expanding personal services and
on other things like that and so
without that non reverting
language this money goes back
into the general fund and
according to federal law cannot
then be used to get a federal
match and so we what the what
we've offered you very very
specific language we're not
asking for any other non
reverting language at all and
won't next year either except
for the US this is really
critical to be in both the our
our the idea H. and H. as state
budget language because just the
act of writing Act funds that
money are ten percent a hundred
twenty million to the general
fund no longer makes it eligible
for federal match so I don't
want to overstate my case here
your call to answer questions
about this or Danny I cannot but
I think I I think I understood
it well enough to give you the
basics on that today couple
other things and then we'll
close Mr chair I'm I'm a
Medicaid funding support we've
been asked by LFC staff and by
you all to define every single
general fund dollars that we can
leverage with the federal dollar
and this schedule that we have
here on the right shows you that
for
the general fund investment of a
hundred ninety seven million in
other agencies now D. O. H. as
been able are sorry ages do this
actually been able to come up
with another four hundred
seventy five million in federal
funds the trouble is that each
of these things that includes
the I. aged just twenty twenty
program and things like that it
requires a lot of staff time to
manage the waivers and the real.
Licensure to CMS and to ensure
that these funds continuing to
ensure that these other agencies
and we love the other agencies
not being critical to ensure
they keep track of their time to
document their time so that
funding stream will continue
that takes people and so I
understand the LFC approach
across all agencies not to fund
positions are but that one
million dollars we need really
helps us continue receiving this
one and seventy five million in
additional revenue and that I do
that I do believe that there are
people out there that we can
hire will help us do this work
so I that's one of them the
second one the the end of the
maintenance of effort a couple
things eighty five thousand
people will come off of Medicaid
in a very short period of time
and a lot of people particularly
people bumping up against the
minimum wage Cherry giving you
just one example and I messed
this up in December at the
hearings I'm not going to mess
it up we gave an example of
someone who is get at making
eleven fifty an hour and getting
seventy three hundred ninety two
dollars per year per month per
year in snap benefits when that
maintenance of effort and they
will start getting twelve
hundred eighty one dollars
that's going to take a lot of
communication a lot of hand
holding as I've said I think to
you Mr chair last night if we're
not able to handle these calls
you're going to be the ones
getting them and members of the
activity and and so we really do
need to staff up we did caught
seven positions by three more
than three percent in the middle
of twenty twenty and we have to
be ready for the changeover and
so that's why we're asking for
those positions and and one
thing I miss you know these
positions in rural communities
you know we have offices all
over the state and most of these
positions are actually in rural
communities their palm jobs I
mean people in.
You know Hobbes have friends who
are wanting to you know who are
there any jobs open yet are
there any jobs of the yet so we
don't believe we're gonna have
as difficult of a time filling
these jobs and while we may be
at full employment that's full
employment with the pandemic
going on and the maintenance of
effort in my view it which is a
little different the director
Abby's but I totally respect is
you my view is that when people
are make getting six thousand
dollars less a year in snap
benefits or no longer eligible
for Medicaid that they would
help there will be more people
returning to work more people in
the same family going to get
additional income so we believe
that we have a good shot at
hiring these people and we think
it's really important to our
actually be funded for some of
those positions okay now this is
a slide at second the last of
the federal government gave me
permission to show you I ask you
not to ask any questions is
about a settlement it is not yet
finalized if you have questions
you can ask me offline if you
like but in our twenty eighteen
at the US department of
agriculture food nutrition
services that they run the staff
program find HSD hundred sixty
seven hundred sixty three point
seven million dollars for
behaviors we dead in twenty
sixteen and they have a good
case and so we have gotten to go
she Asians to the phase we're
now the lawyers are just working
out the language in the
agreement but because it's not
elected it's not public.
And the structure of the
arrangement is there's a
relatively small cash up front
payment and then there's three
years of lost in investing
general fund dollars to improve
the snap program if you I if you
want more detail we can get that
in the queue in a
and the way the agreement
appears to be going is either we
make those investments or we
just pay the same amount in cash
so I just want to highlight the
difference I think probably this
one's on me because I was
limited what I can communicate
and I don't think I communicated
this very well to RubyAnn and
others but if you accept that
five point five I LFC
recommendation.
Then that's fine but then we're
gonna have to come back for an
additional special for three
point three nine million to send
just a happen as as a fine
rather than investing at and HSD
in our snap program to improve
quality to improve customer
service and even jump very
important money to improve
salaries as well so I it's just
a quirky little thing is clever
on their part of how they set up
these agreements it kind of
frankly forces us to allocate
the money for improvement but I
just want to make sure we are
all on the same page that we
don't allocate that fully we
have to pay the remainder in
cast and federal government
rather than investing and then
lastly I I'm I'm pleased to
recall as close as we are on the
suicide prevention again when
you add together specials and
other things were good with that
but this is really important
program I think that most of you
are aware that New Mexico is
number one and suicide will talk
about this on the right side
where there's a big gas there as
well but nine eight allows
people to call in number when
they're in behavioral crisis I
guess some behavioral health
help immediately kind of like if
I start having a heart attack
because I have to give two
presentations are up this
morning and provide one one and
they would send me an ambulance
and I called nine eight eight
which maybe I was actually
thinking about doing this
morning I would you know they
would walk me through and and
get directly warm hand off get
need to be able there's also a
mobile crisis units we're gonna
go out into communities of
people who are I'm receiving in
our in in crisis and so I just
want to make sure this is just
the base I've got on the side
with the numbers but the special
gets is within that I think that
I think MaryBeth said have a
million or so really important
purpose critical New Mexico
eight nation more in the next
presentation so that's really at
the.
Because of the high points was
of the what we think are the
most urgent needs so we wanted
to argue for on behalf of the
people New Mexico and with that
Mr chair I want to I'm gonna
turn on the I'm just not The
presentation turn this back over
here and we may require some
elevation of some people to
presenter to answer questions
and we can work together with
your staff to do that thank you
very much.
Thank you so much Secretary
Scrase at your service to New
Mexico and your team your
incredible team that supports
you and all of us is is really
exemplary.
We I know we'll have a lot of
questions again just to make the
announcement that I made at the
beginning for the Human Services
Department we are undergoing a
full hearing today but we will
not be taking action as a
committee on a recommendation.
With that said however I want to
I do want to go
to committee questions and
expect there to be a significant
amount of those want to first go
to Representative Sweetser that
I'm gonna go to Representative
stock index all.
Yes Mr chair and thank you
everyone for ascension in depth
presentation I have just a
couple of kind of service
professionals to try to get my
hands around our my arms around
the difference and I guess I
understand why we would want to
do some of the nine eight eight
funding out of non recurring
because I do think there's a lot
of up front start up costs that
probably wouldn't be continuing
on.
But I think this is for you I
can't quite get my arms around
why we would have the Medicaid
expansion partly a nonrecurring
charge and I hate to put you on
the spot because as Dr Scrase
that you did such a wonderful
job of stepping and but but I'm
I'm I guess Mr Chairman just
trying to figure out the
philosophy behind it so I can
analyze it a little bit more.
Sure Mr chair representative I
will do my very best I mean you
can't over to and Nicole at some
point but
So so here here's how we're kind
of looking at it is there's
still a lot of uncertainty you
know with we all know this with
the pandemic with funding was
how much the federal government
is going to continue giving
additionally right to these
programs is six point two
percent F. map increase and you
know obviously the longer the
public health emergency goes on.
You know we expect to continue
to get this this increase.
Because of that uncertainty the
executive was thinking it it may
not be the best approach this
year to put all of the need in
the base when we may not need it
all of it in the base now.
I believe the executive
understands the need overall
which is why you see such a
close you know number between
the two of them I think it's
it's pretty clear that the
priorities of the agency you're
pretty well supported I think
it's in all sides were very very
you know we're I think we all
worked very well together but on
the executive side just a little
bit different this year to try
to hedge the bets necessarily
but.
To be as responsible as we can
with the funding mechanisms that
we have and I'm especially in
light of other you know
competing state needs that this
gives HSD the flexibility to hit
that high number if they have to
but if they don't we haven't put
it all in the base and and tied
it up so
That's that's my understanding I
think that I was kind of how we
were doing and I see secretaries
raised has to stand up so I'm
going to pass that along to.
I think and I know you like to
do this so I am really glad for
the question I think what
happens in Medicaid was
illustrated on our slide number
six where we to ask you for a
thirty nine point five million
million supplemental.
Appreciation I just to cover
Medicaid for this year and then
when the build back better bill
failed that thirty nine million
supplemental that we need eight
at.
Is going to turn into like a
twenty some million reversion
and so things can flip on a dime
sixty seventy eighty million
dollars with just you know I'm.
What you know when people start
thinking differently in
Washington DC and I think I
think we thought this was coming
to an end because of the bill
back better bell now we're not
so sure and I don't know I and
then one other thing on that the
nine eight hotline I think the
difference between a base plus
special in that and based
primarily based appropriation
just the speed of implementation
we get that special we can work
faster and start right away and
and I showed you the time and
we're moving along very very
nicely and have the ability to
tobacco thank you thank you and
Mister chair I think RubyAnn had
something that as well.
Thank you Mr chairman thank you
Representative we Sir I just
wanted to take a step back and
talk about.
Congress where we're at now.
So we're talking about the
extension of the public health
emergency so let me address that
a little bit with the committee.
Right now the public health
emergency go through basically
another week and when we.
How this works damn my calendar
quarter quarters so since the
public health emergency has been
designated by HHS the federal
department of health and Human
Services they do this
designation and through the
beginning of January currently
that's where it stands so we get
revenue that additional six
point two percent enhanced F.
map that that federal matching
rate that's what F. Matt stand
for.
Through the end of March so
that's all taken into
consideration and all the
numbers you're seeing before you
so what we're doing now when we
talk about using other non
recurring revenue if we get
build back better installed
right now that had some
additional F. map in it but it
was stepped down it went from by
we're at six point two percent
build back better went to five
percent and then ratcheted down
to like one and a half so we
would have to make that even
under build back better we would
have to make that revenue for
the program not at the current
rate so we don't know now if the
public health
American CD PHP is what you'll
hear people say public health
emergency designation will be
extended so I just wanted to be
clear on that we're I still mean
that
it probably will be that they
the administration about
administration will continue
that that's the assumption being
discussed here.
Build back better is holder
Stalder whatever you want to
stay
and that the by demonstration
will continue that so that will
affect if they do one more one
more continuation of that we can
get another quarter and that
will wipe out basically as the
secretary just said that need
probably for that supplemental
now but will that will those
quarters continue stacking up
into FY twenty three that's like
Mary Beth said that we can hedge
their bets but I think it you
know I'll quote director Avid
this is here we have recurring
revenue available we know that.
I'm just we we know how
important our systems are in
maintaining we know hospitals
are struggling now Medicaid we
have the largest Medicaid
program in the country per
capita New Mexico so
I think it's.
Martin consideration about being
prudent and responsible and just
looking at how all of these
pieces potentially fit together
thank you Mr chairman.
Thank you Mr chairman thank you
all for all of the answers and
all of the care that's put in
the number that's in my head
right now is that eighty five
thousand
people that will drop it
immediately I mean that's a
scary clips and so I appreciate
all the thought and
consideration that's going into
making sure that those people
have a.
A softer landing if you if for
lack of a better term if you
will
just one other thing I at as a
former broadcaster I hated
paying fines so I definitely
want to get my two cents in the
better to invest that money than
to pay a fine for the FNS
agreement even though we're not
talking really about it and I
know my colleagues have a lot of
questions I actually had a list
I'm gonna turn it over but
Dr Scrase I'm gonna have to call
that PTSD line as well because
your front page says January
twelfth twenty twenty at the I
look at so that was was just
immediately terrified.
Just so you know you for me on
to our panic right off the bat
so anyway thank you very much I
appreciate I so appreciate all
the work done on this department
very much thank you Mr chair
thank you Representative
Sweetser great questions next
we're going to go to
Representative Hochman Vigil and
then it'll be Representative
Crowder.
Thank you very much Mr chair and
I appreciate the fact that many
of my colleagues are in line to
ask questions as well so I'm
just gonna ask two quick ones
and I can take the rest offline
Mr chair Dr Scrase or whoever
feels the best situated to
answer this question I want a
little more information on the
implementation of the MMI S.
system more specifically where
are we with regards to
Getting all of our contractors
in line to fill the contract and
the second question I have is
are we still on track to get
that federal reimbursement or
federal payment on the system I
know that we were at risk of
losing out at one point.
Mr chair and Representative
Hochman Vigil members of the
committee act I have a ton of
information I'm super excited
about this but I I think Kerry
army and John Pearson I think
Kerry is on we've done all the
work and let you tell that tell
you all the committee where we
stand with the project and some
incredibly exciting news we got
yesterday Kerry.
Thank you Secretary Mr Chairman
Representative Hochman Vigil as
well start with the great news
which is that we got our federal
financing approval yesterday
actually so that takes us to you
three hundred and forty six
million dollars approved at
about an eighty nine percent of
that is coming from the federal
government so about a thirty
eight million dollar investment
from New Mexico resulting in
that three hundred forty six
million dollar I. T. project
that is very much on track the
other good news is that we've
got a report out today is that
the risk rating for our project
has decreased that's the lowest
but it's been since two thousand
seventeen lots of great work has
gone into that with our project
team and a lot of progress to
come in the next few months so
we are on track with our system
integrator that's really the hub
of our project and about to
enter into a contract with the
financial services vendor so
that issue is progressing on
schedule and will soon be in
negotiations for another
contract related to our provider
management models I think
they're really progressing lots
of great work over the past
several months at and if you
have any specific questions
about particular vendors at the
happy to answer that was.
Thank you Mr chair thank you
miss army how I do but I will
take them offline with you in
the interest of time the second
question I have Mister chair I
think this is probably for
RubyAnn can RubyAnn can you
explain to me the difference are
at in the LFC recommendation for
the expansion of trauma on
evidence based behavioral health
care and where are we going to
for if we were to implement the
LFC budget on the in this case
where would we would where would
we be providing those services.
Thank you Mr chairman
Representative Hochman Vigil so
the LFC recommendation is a
hundred eighty thousand higher
than the executive and the
The the information we have from
the executive was they provided
us some data on some addition an
array of different different
behavioral health services that
are evidence based they don't
have those all at my fingertips
but there was no designation and
the data that we received as to
where they would be provided at
this point so I might that
question to the secretary are to
the division director director
of L. and.
Neil are you able to a new and
then speak perfect certainly Mr
chair Representative Hochman
Vigil and members of the
committee thank you so much for
that question and.
Representative stated the answer
the question is that the design
of of the service improvements
is is centered around training
which is available statewide
training and then and then a way
of of of ensuring the fidelity
of the delivery of of evidence
based practices so that eight I
don't think it's a reduction in
funding results in a reduction
in and how far we we reach
across the state should be
available to all of our all of
our neighbors.
Thank you very much Mr chairman
Dr Bowen so if we were to expand
these evidence based programming
with with trauma based
Services is this just within the
scope of substance abuse
disorders or is this for
everybody.
Mr chair representative public
dealing members that's a great
question and of course the
answer is but I for me of course
the answer is it's it's for
everyone it is it is.
I think it's a losing
proposition to to do is to
divorce substance use treatment
from overall mental health
treatment as especially in the
in the state which has such high
levels of trauma as New Mexico
does because the to travel
together so that the service
system used to travel together
as well and that that's the
design.
Thank you very much Mr chairman
Dr Bonnie I just interest me
because I've had some Senator
conversations about this with
regards to the implementation of
the pilot programs for medicated
assisted treatment and DLC the
corrections context and then
subsequently county jails are
not some just trying to get my
sea legs and and see where you
guys are going with that so
thank you very much Mr chairman
everybody great to see you here
today.
Thank thank you very much
Representative Hochman Vigil
next we have Representative
Crowder.
Thank you Mr chairman and and
thank you Dr Scrase and and your
staff for your presentation it
may take me to three weeks to
read through all of what you
just brought to us but I
appreciate having it and I'll do
my best to understand all the
documents that you brought us.
Mr chairman I I kind of did what
madam chair asked me to do I I
took all three of my books home
with me last evening and I
plowed through a mall and
I had a few questions they've
already been asked but I I in in
going through all the books find
myself more perplexed than I was
when I began.
Not sure some of what I
discovered as I went through
this process.
When I started in volume three.
Sorry volume to our big book.
The budget summary is the same
information we were handed out
today and what I was trying to
do is just take an overall look
at the department of health.
department Human Services and
see is a healthy Department
how's it working is that is it
functioning well and.
What's the overall temperament
of that department.
So as I looked in the Human
Services department budget on
page two sixty five of our.
Well you to.
And I just went down to the
personal service employee
benefit line.
In that has their the actuals
for FY twenty one FY twenty two
is the budgeted amount and then
our FY twenty three recommended
amount.
And as I looked at that I
noticed that are from the FY
twenty one.
To the FY twenty three
recommended there's a thirteen
million one hundred forty eight
point five thousand dollar
increase in PSEB.
If we just look for FY twenty
two to FY twenty three what last
year to this year seven point
four four million increased and
a personal service employee
benefit category.
Is a drop down down to the
bottom under total FTE I noticed
from FY twenty one FY twenty
three there's an increase of
twenty four employees.
In FY twenty two to FY twenty
three there's actually a three
employed decrease.
And so I just kind of
contemplate a little bit.
We're spending thirteen million
one hundred forty eight thousand
dollars.
Extra or additional in PSE be.
Then what we did two years ago
and we've increased it by twenty
one employees.
So I.
I I don't understand how we can
put that much money into
employees are what percent is I
didn't do the percentage.
But it's hard for me to
understand if you don't at
employees and putting that much
money in.
Then your performance rating
should really be going up.
And the.
I I didn't find that when I got
to the end of my process last
evening when I got in this
morning I looked at the the.
Human Services Department yes
cap sheets.
Knows there's five hundred
twenty five.
The vacant FTEs in this
department in this department.
Funded vacancy was six million
eight hundred and forty one
thousand dollars.
That they have the money but
those positions are not filled
but after I looked at that I
went over to our volume three.
To look at their Trancers out of
PSEB so on page two or nine.
And they're reversions.
And now
they're transfers out of PSEB.
Last year they they transferred
million four hundred thirty six
thousand out of there a personal
service employee benefit even
though the.
They reverted a tremendous
amount of money they still
transferred out of there not I
don't understand that.
In FY twenty one this past year
the transfer about three
quarters of a million seven
hundred twenty eight thousand
dollars this transfer will spur
it's to put to other so it seems
to me like there was adequate
monies funded by our our body to
hire more employees there was
ample funding there but it was
used for other purposes and and
transferred away.
And I looked at the reversions
from this department and in FY
twenty they reverted a hundred
and thirty nine million dollars.
Back to the general fund in FY
twenty one they reverted eight
million five hundred and fifty
seven thousand dollars.
So to me those are are are
massive reversions that their
hat there's so much money there
that they simply can't put it to
work is what it seems to me.
Yes.
It.
I don't know if you have that
many funded vacancies in
transfer that much money back to
the general fund or transferred
out of PSDP.
It it shocked me there are
people out there to be hired for
these jobs.
We have a problem.
But the thing that affected me
the most was when I went to
volume one.
When I looked at the Human
Services department report cards
one by one page one twenty one.
It says A. J..
HSD underperformed in the
medicated income support
programs New Mexico as the
largest Medicare Medicaid
program in the country.
But throughout FY twenty one
Medicaid reported quarterly
performance data on just three
performance measures despite
collaborating in FY twenty to
report on substantially more
performance measures.
There's another sense not just
try to stay on one page not
going to four eight just days
twenty one.
Fourth quarter performance
report did not include new
quarterly data for the annual
measures due to a lag in data
reporting.
So as we look at the report
card.
They're stumbling and getting
their reporting done said the
Medicaid program has a red
rating because of declining
performance and a lack of
reporting performance data.
The Medicaid program is to.
Is portent to proceed with
quarterly performance reporting
on just a handful of measures.
And it goes on it says they
didn't report on a couple of
other measures that were
required in the general
appropriation act.
And if you're going through
those Human Services Department
this document it is just a.
And outstanding document that
that the LFC staff put together.
Kind of telling us as the
appropriators here's the grade.
For the.
Human Services Department and
there's more red dots in this
then that I was expecting at I
was quite shocked.
So.
Mr chairman what I got the end
of the process.
It was small County are actually
woke up about one thirty this
morning and I had the the tower
in Miami that collapsed on my
mind.
And I don't know why.
But I believe that the Human
Services department has grown to
the point that the foundation.
Is no longer substantial enough
to hold.
This department in place.
If you when we do.
Department of Health this
afternoon you read there's a new
agency over there where the
increased their funding three
fold over a seven year period
three times they triple the
amount of money they're putting
in.
And yet the performance declined
so I don't believe adding up a
bunch more money to this agency.
Is gonna just fix the problems
that seem to exist.
I do believe.
The the failing foundation of
this.
Clearly predates Dr Scrase the
current administration it goes
back a long ways.
And I think that we need to
bring in some type of outside.
Analyst.
Or.
Actuary someone I don't I don't
really know we need to bring
someone in.
To examine this agency.
I believe the department of
health this is the same way we
need to bring someone in to go
through those agencies we need
to restructure all before the
foundation underneath them
totally collapses.
When I walked in this morning I
pretty much made up my mind that
if we vote today.
Out of a vote of protest.
I would probably pick none of
the above I agree with
What David Abbey and and the
LESC have done that the work
they have done I have great
respect for David Abbey I have
great respect for Dr Scrase.
But I think the foundation
underneath this agency it's got
a lot of cracks in it and it
needs a thorough outside
examination to come in and help
us but this agency back together
and so Mr chairman thank you for
the latitude to express my
feelings and thoughts
Thank you very much thank you
Representative Crowder next
we're gonna go to Representative
Anderson.
I thank you Mr chairman Mr
chairman of I will love I've got
a couple quick questions for Dr
Scrase and I've got a couple of
relative to our analysts
presentation Dr Scrase first of
all of if there is such a thing
as a short answer as we listen
to of the progress being made on
visor.
And aspen.
My question is eyes with F. T.
E. of over two thousand
employees do you think these.
New systems mark will result in
fewer F. T. at a future date
question.
Mr chair and
representative of Anderson great
question I think I think the way
we think about automation is the
goal is to actually put the
tools in our customers hands and
the people of New Mexico to get
the benefits and services they
can if that's how they prefer to
do it I'm sure we all remember
back when you used to do travel
at ease travel agents to make
plane reservations actually
that's not true I'm sure like
only a very small group of us
remember that but out you know
that now we all just go online
and get those reservations made
so we've found that when we get
people online access to apply
for Medicaid thirty percent of
those folks as you're able to
get a benefit determination
right that either to be rules
are that they don't qualify we
put our management team to the
exercise of applying for
Medicaid Medicaid last spring
and was revealing so we're
working on that but I think I
think we will increased costs
and I. T. over time to have a
much a bigger I. T. foundation
for department at the same time
we will do I thought I would
think we will need a less
employees or our employees will
shift over to more intensive
work with those people who don't
have access to computers don't
have good broadband which
hopefully will be at go away
soon or who just you know we're
older and can't really manage
that the technology that
everybody younger than us you
know it can do so easily on
their front so the answer is yes
Mr chair and representative and
thank you Dr Scrase for that my
second question Dr Scrase is one
I believe I may have asked you
previously in the LFC but a
short answer and it goes like
this given your vacancy rate do
you think.
It will be helpful if New Mexico
work to reform of some of the
pair up requirements of that of
penalize retirees to be
returning to work and Dr you.
Do you think that might be
helpful to you Dr Scrase in
trying to fill some of your
vacancy spots question.
Mr chair and representative
Anderson another fantastic
question
You know the rules have changed
around are being able to work
and receive retirement from the
state we've got some superstars
like Danny Santa who predate
that rule change you are still
with us and then we've got folks
that that I'm.
I'm not going to call nine eight
again for about you know we're
eligible for retirement and I
think still have a lot of good
years ahead of them I in both
departments and so I think I
think from a retention point of
you retaining the best people
you know you somebody works in
Medicaid for twenty years and
really gets to understand our
process sees our finances and
everything else we want that
person around longer serve from
a retention point of you I'd say
an unqualified yes Mr chairman
and a representative of Anderson
Anderson infirmary creating
point of you I have not thought
of that question before and so I
got to think about that and get
back to you I suspect there's
some good folks out there that
hi who would who have good years
left in a mode like to come back
but couldn't because of the
existing way we've structured
things up that's a probably just
as well I just have a list of
the subject thank you thank you
Dr Scrase for that response and
I would encourage you to ask
your.
Lawyers to review house bill
fifty on the pre introductions
which is a.
reform return to work bill which
I am familiar with
next I'd like to ask the analyst
is chairman I could and we need
to seek short answers because we
have another agency following so
if it's a long answer we're
gonna do we're gonna go offline
my question is I listen to some
of the differences that we're
going to see in the language and
I listened to the LFC defense of
their language as.
Necessary under federal
requirement so my question to
DFA analyst is do you concur
with that observation do you
have any clear objection to HB
to language proposed by LFC for
this agency.
Thank you for the question Mr
chair representative I would
have to go through one by one
just to see but I believe that
the executive supports similar
language it's just that the
numbers are sometimes different
based on you know the amounts
that were funded in each
individual recommendations so I
don't think that we're typically
to far off on that and I also
think that of course if there is
a federal requirement to have
language in house bill two that
the executive would support
insuring that that language is
included thank you thank you
that answer was certainly the
one I hope to hear their on page
four
ruby and we talk about technical
adjustments of seven million
dollars I'm always kind of
curious about technical
adjustments is static cache item
of that affects our general fund
and why are we doing this this
year and what if we don't do it
question.
Mr Chairman representative
Anderson no it does not affect
general fund this is an transfer
so we have to tie up the
transfers between the department
of health for the team Medicaid
waiver that and that a man is
that reflected in agencies
budget and we made the LFC made
an adjustment in the DD waiver
and we weren't able to adjusted
in HSD so it's not general fund
it's just a transfer between the
two departments and we have to
ratchet that number down seven
million so I it really is just a
technical tying out.
Okay thank you very much
I think I do understand that of
last time to the executive I'm
gonna ask on page four I'm
curious why you did not find of
the expansion request for
behavioral health collaboratives
worthy of indoors question.
Get missed and or and in this
case there is any follow up also
from Dr Scrase and his team on
that difference they're welcome
to to answer Representative
Anderson question also.
Thank you Mr chair
representative I'm sorry I just
was choking Water State minutes
the bus and so please forgive me
You know I'm not sure that there
is one specific answer for this
it May truly just come down to a
variety of tasks and you know
funding the highest priorities
that that we could for the
executive I certainly don't want
to make sweeping
generalizations the executive
certainly supports behavioral
health service is to help the
state but from my perspective
I'll just say you know it's it's
a question of not being able to
find everything but I'll
certainly pass it off to anybody
HSD who might have more specific
information about that but
that's just from where I'm
coming from thank you Mr chair
thank you for that answer and
and I certainly accept that as a
valid answer not to be
misinterpreted as in a black of
interest
and the same question really.
Goes to the our provider rate
increases not provided for non
Medicaid and I think the answer
is much the same so I'm gonna
differ from pursuing that and
the last question to Dr Scrase
Dr Scrase when we look at your
very large budget and Dr Scrase
when I first was in service to
New Mexico on the legislature we
used to get our our LFC budget
and printed on the cover of the
entire state budget it told us
to disregard any numbers
generated by your agency.
And when we're dealing with the
largest single agency in the
state that is not very
reassuring.
To fiscal conservative
representatives who are trying
to understand these complex
budgets with a great deal of
money running through them.
So my question is so I salute
you I say you know we have a
better handle on this eight
point six four nine nine hundred
and seven million dollar budget
then we watched it.
And.
I know that's a great deal of
effort under pandemic difficult
circumstances my question is
this when you compare your DFA
budget to your LFC budget.
Are you satisfied Dr that either
one is going to provide.
The necessary health care for
New Mexicans in this next budget
year question.
Mr chair and Phelps Anderson
that's a really really great
question that I wish I'd thought
of last night and prepared for
but I'm not really here to
advocate for the executive
budget I I hit the high points
on what I thought were key
differences that were most
important across that special
appropriation funding the FNS
settlement.
More FTEs to wind on the
pandemic I do think while I
respect the across the board we
don't need anymore people
approach the LFC is taking I
think managing an apartment
requires more nuance than that
we didn't come asking for
reduced that they can see rates
in everyone of our divisions we
asked for reduced vacancy rates
in Medicaid so we could leverage
a very modest general fund us
against what I told you was born
seventy five million dollars
additional federal revenue we
asked for additional FTE ease in
income support division because
we believe that there is going
to it's going to be a lot of
work W. blue six thousand
dollars a year in their food
benefit or drop off of Medicaid
entirely and as Representative
Sweetser pointed out having had
all of that happened in a matter
of a couple months is gonna be
very disruptive and we are all
we're trying to do is be be
fully prepared and and and gear
up for what we know is coming
thank if we knew exactly what
was coming I have an even better
argument so I would say that I
like every time I so the stable
either things about both budgets
I really like I admire that
creativity and that I think we
we don't want to lose sight of
the fact that were whatever that
is ninety eight point seven
percent you know
within the same amount and but I
do think there are some some new
ones in the details for under a
for a secretary and managing an
apartment with the executive
budget years be a little bit
more ability to improve services
for New Mexicans.
Thank you very much for that
answer Dr Scrase of I did in
your answer here
cause me to pause and think
about the Medicaid and then
difference and specifically and
before we adopt the budget I'd
like to talk to LFC analyst
about that difference thank you
Mr chairman.
Mr Chairman did you wanna
response now Representative
Anderson.
I think this one is going to be
better to wait we're not taking
action today thank you Rubio
okay I would just follow one
quickly Mr chairman the LFC
recommendation certainly doesn't
they don't hire more people I
would note the comments that
Representative Crowder said
about the funded vacancy rate
there is funding in the face to
hire we but you know six seven
million in the base and we have
a high funded vacancy rate so we
certainly advocate for health
hiring more people and using the
money that in the face to fund
additional person thank you.
Thank you for that the answer
and I never did hear the vacancy
rate for the entire agency.
The.
Mr Chairman I needed the funded
vacancy rate as six percent in
the funded vacancy dollars is
seven million.
Thank you very much thank you Mr
chairman.
Thank you very much
Representative Anderson next
we're gonna Representative
Castellano then Representative
Armstrong.
Thank you Mr chair.
Dr Scrase everybody my question
Dr Scrase you spoke a little bit
of a snap a while ago in the
rural communities I I think
that's a very important program
I know that you spoke about
hiring more employees in the
wilderness for snap how do you
plan on doing that and and what
is it going to affect the
housing an impact or funding are
we going to get the phone from.
That's a really good question
and I'm going to ask some of my
staff to talk about a little bit
about the recruitment process
the I I one thing I wanted to
mention about the current
vacancy rate is we went through
all of this state this call your
twenty one with no hiring at all
during the pandemic that
immediately followed that
three percent decrease in our
budget and so that was a whole
year and so we are now gearing
up and you'll hear a little bit
in the second about you know
hiring events we're doing in
bringing people on but at and we
came off of a what basically a
one year of hiring almost no one
and so that's we're in the
process of re recovering from
that the nice thing about that
funding for federal programs is
they pay a generous portion of
I'm sorry for folks we add to
the for the snap program and I
know it's either fifty percent
or sixty seven percent I forget
which may be Danny can not I
just pipe up and say what the
number is Mister chair Mister
Santa but so we get a generous
federal funding for all of our
admin expenses in Medicaid and
snap and if if we have time Mr
chair I just have one of my
staff speak to efforts were
doing right now to close the
budget vacancy rate our
intention and our budget is that
even if we completely closed the
budget they can see right that's
not going to be a so that will
be less people than we had a
couple years ago not be
sufficient number of people to
actually meet our members needs
when the main maintenance of
effort the public health
emergency Ms thank you Secretary
space please at have one of your
team yeah let's let's address
Representative customs question
would you like to address I'm
in July then it turned to you
chair thank you Secretary Mr
chair Representative Castellano
thank you for the call.
Session HSD has engaged and
quite a few activities related
to filling our vacancy rates in
particularly and most recently
we have partnered with our state
personnel office and our
department workforce solutions
to participate and rapid higher
events that have occurred over
the last couple of weeks last
week and this week and we're
finding them to be successful
for our especially our income
support division offices and in
addition our income support
division team has done some
community partnerships to try to
identify additional potential
candidates either partnering
with rotary clubs or are better
business bureaus in local
communities and and and
conducting our efforts in
outreach in those ways so
please let me know if if if that
answers your question.
Mr chair yes thank you and I
guess it's very important to me
being from a rural community
that we get it you know
employment out there those rural
communities I mean knowing that
Las Vegas for one you know right
now employment to be a good
thing and not just Australia's
all rural New Mexico and and I
think it's very important that
we do that and I thank you guys
for your presentation thank you
Dr Scrase and think annual thank
you Mr chairman.
Thank you very much
Representative Castellano next
we're gonna go to representative
Armstrong.
Thank you Mr chairman and thank
you are Dr Scrase and RubyAnn
and everyone for the
presentation
I just want to give a few kudos
out for inviting myself and a
couple others to try to help us
understand how this whole
program works it's still a
giant.
Monster and it's really
difficult so and a difficult
situation I'm I am
I'm proud to say that we're all
learning more and more about
this program one of the
questions I did have though is
on number eight is the
children's health insurance
program what is that who
qualifies and where does it go.
Mr chair with your permission
I'd like to call on director com
chat who's our expert on them
and knows everything about it
please.
At Mr chair thank you call.
Effectively manage my technology
there are Mr chair members the
committee at representative
Armstrong thanks for the
question I'm.
I'm sorry children's health
insurance program that was
established at the years ago
hello in federal legislation and
provides health insurance
coverage to eligible kiddos in
some state service operates
program and be here in New
Mexico I we cover all children
and adults under our senior
Medicaid program but we cover
them at different income
thresholds I so we have a chart
that I think I'm sure job before
that shows that for example we
cover childless adults at two
hundred thirty eight percent of
the federal poverty level but
for kids we covered them higher
poverty level so state police
three hundred for kids that are
each six so that's kind of the
the variation the program is
just a different pockets of the
population in different income
thresholds for eligibility.
Okay thank you Mr chairman and
one so it's basically it's part
of the Medicaid.
It's.
Okay okay yeah okay thank you
for that I appreciate it the
other just a comment that I
wanted to make is the expansion
on the extent of our care from
three months to twelve months
I'm hoping that this my question
is is it for Medicaid only.
Yes.
Mr chair and members the
committee representative yes
this is.
Okay and so I'm hoping that this
might this portion of this may
include some advertising with
the safe haven R. type things
that are some of the situations
that we've just heard about
recently and and maybe possibly
an expansion not sure if it's
the right department but I think
this has a lot to do one with
the other and so I'm hoping that
we can get some kind of program
for advertisement what we have
here in New Mexico the other
question I have is I'm on the.
From what Representative Crowder
brought up the twenty three
million additional dollars
requests and then a seven
percent on top of that.
Four
salary increases is that the way
you all are reading this.
Mr chair representative
Armstrong thanks for the
question I think the way I'm
reading it is that HSD is
requesting specific money in
specific divisions are up.
Adjusting some positions and
FTEs and the LESC as an
alternative recommending a seven
and a half percent sorry seven
percent across the board salary
increase of percent in place in
D. O. H. we're gonna talk about
how that all plays out actually
in facilities and and those
specific range but I in HSD I
think it's I think you're being
offered two choices and two
approaches to happen okay yeah
and and and that Mary Beth
please correct me or add
anything inside if I'm because
that's just how I'm seeing it.
Mr chairman I'll just stress
again that point I made earlier
is that
That and actually that
Representative Crowder so
eloquently maybe when you look
at that funded vacancy rate the
agency has a large amount of
revenue that setting and
personal services employee
benefits and that they haven't
used to hire person yet and so
the LFC is just saying you
should use that money we haven't
made any reduction in personal
services and employee benefits
for just thank you for the money
that's already existing in the
base we're not growing over and
above that seven eight million
that's already in the face for
percent now so that I just want
to clarify that you want thank
you.
Mr chair representative by the
jump in very very briefly to
regardless of the the base
amounts of funding I just wanted
to point out that the seven
percent or or the compensation
is it's going to be in addition
to this regardless of which you
know whether the executive
compensation is taken or or the
LFC recommendation for
compensation is adopted when
you're looking at the base it
doesn't include those types of
targeted compensation amount so
really it's just a different
approach to funding the
executives recommending higher
levels and LESC overall but it
doesn't it's not intended to
include that amount for
compensation either I hope that
helps a little bit
thank you yes thank it does
thank you Mr chairman and and
all for the answers one of the
other questions I wanted to ask
about is Dr Scrase specifically
on the reimbursement rate the
increase for the reimbursement
rate is this including any and
all things that Medicaid or is
it just reimbursement to our
doctors only.
So I'm Mr chair Representative
Armstrong if I could just as
clarification are you referring
to the provider the money's in
the budget for provider rate
increases in behavioral health.
Yes.
Mr chair Representative
Armstrong then
I just to clarify a little bit
RubyAnn explained pretty well
all of these folks are actually
Medicaid providers we kind of
require them to be Medicaid
providers the people being
served are actually not on
Medicaid they're not eligible
for Medicaid or they're getting
services that Medicare doesn't
cover and so those folks are
getting paid at somewhere in the
sixty to sixty five percent of
Medicare range regular Medicaid
is paying in the neighborhood it
varies you know eighty five
ninety percent of regular
Medicare so all we're trying to
do we actually provide just
moving them halfway from where
they are now to what we're
paying other Medicaid providers
and so that's what that money
goes to is for people who aren't
eligible for those services
under Medicaid we pay the
providers to provide them and
it's all kinds of providers and
I would if I were gonna gas I
would gas that physicians are a
very very small percent because
you're behavioural services so
you may have some payments for
psychiatry and there but
certainly our therapists and you
know I community based programs
to help people with substance
use disorder depression anxiety
PTSD other major mental health
disorders eight and so that's
just a high level and our staff
can provide you a lot more
detail okay now that's good
thank you Mr chairman I was just
curious I wasn't sure what all
that covered I was a little lost
in that and then of course I'm
gonna put in my pitch for
raising reimbursement rates for
home health and hospice in rural
New Mexico so thank you Mr
chairman.
Thank you very much of Armstrong
great questions and and also
It focus on on the roll
reimbursements.
So
I don't see any other member
questions I have a number of
questions and just want to
really thank the committee thank
the presenters at and Dr Scrase
in your team yeah when we're
dealing with an eight plus
billion dollar total budget.
When we when we count the
federal funds that come in
through this program it is
absolutely appropriate that we
that we take this time to to
drill down so first.
Mr secretary and also to the
analyst yeah one of the
important points that was raised
focuses on the report card that
LFC does.
It's my understanding ms SQL
distance more and secretary
Scrase that much of the report
card appropriately is focused on
health care delivery basically
the more New Mexicans who are
going to their health care
provider whether that's a doctor
otherwise to get care that's a
significant part of the metrics
for the report card is that fair
to state.
On chairman.
What.
Yes sorry my bad the.
Mr chairman that's correct and
of I think you're you're heading
toward the really important
point here so yes okay thank you
and so secretary space obviously
you to at and I think
So that you in over the past
year plus in this when pressed
the in the in the worst public
health time of of our.
Collective lifetimes there were
many times in New Mexico other
states all across the world
where for.
Multiple reasons it was simply
impossible or very very
difficult for folks to go to
their health care provider so
I think we should it and at is
that fair to say miss SQL
secretary Scrase.
Yes Mr chairman and and did
report card actually in your
volume one point that out it at
during that portion and it's
time we were under public health
orders where people actually
couldn't access service because
that the services were on a
waiting period you're due to
public health orders so you're
correct Mr chair thank you
Secretary Scrase perhaps love
you even as we're in you even as
we work to.
Come out can you please address
just briefly the continuing
challenges including crisis
standards of care that is best
that for that that will that we
have to acknowledge will
continue to affect healthcare
delivery in New Mexico.
Hi Mister chair I just be happy
to do that replay OB I think
when we get to the point in our
state where major institutions
are bringing in dermatologist to
take care of sick people with
COVID in the hospital we know we
have a really serious problem
that's where we've been for the
past three to four weeks but all
throughout the pandemic you may
recall members of the committee
will recall that many health
provision of care facilities are
completely closed during the
spring of the year twenty twenty
that's the time and managed care
organizations go and collect
data from those charts to at to
cat tabulate the disclosure so
that additional chart review
component was absent most of the
time I'm and I and so there are
there are serious challenges are
on going challenges
you know I still see patients in
my office we have ongoing
challenges we have some of our
geriatricians you know just
disappear for a month or two and
are serving in the hospital
taking your patience of recovery
for them and so it has been a
major juggling act for every
health care provider in the
state and I I would be remiss if
I didn't say that they are all
very very weary of two straight
years of this kind of crisis
thank you thank you Secretary
state Scrase thank you Mr us
about and
It to so so Preciado as work
looking through that are working
through that also I think we
need to acknowledge the
importance of regular reporting
from HSD even in and during some
during the worst crises that
that that you all especially and
and health care workers from
workers one was all other New
Mexicans are are experiencing
daily and so it's not to say
that the.
Measurements are the wrong
measurements but we have to very
much the knowledge I think the
situation that we're and and
look to the future look to it
and Representative Anderson's
question about the appropriate
health care delivery for New
Mexicans is it was an excellent
question
so moving on briefly.
Representative Sweetser said
incredibly well far better to
invest in New Mexicans then pay
these exact same amount in fines
to the federal government as
regards the FNS
approach and so just incredibly
well said as we continue working
through this project
This asking about I would wonder
could you briefly again on the
F. map give us the important
dates for us to be tracking
especially and and secretary in
your team please.
During the set any of the most
important dates that they give
us some window into the
The continuation of the federal
health order increased
assessments.
Yes Mr chairman so January
eighteenth is the date that
we're going through currently
under the PTA so the federal
department of health and Human
Services wall
here shortly if they're going to
be extending that make that
announcement that way that
timing work state they would
extend it for another period of
time that they'll make that
decision if they choose to do so
so it could be through the state
April so then that will give us
April may June that quarter
because we're already covered
you January February March of
calendar year twenty twenty two
with the additional six point
two percent F. Matt if and when
they if they do extend it will
probably get pick up the next
quarter so that'll be it April
through June so that the timing.
Okay.
Thank you thank you.
Thank you Mr well that's super
helpful and and gives us all as
a committee
the the decision date as well as
a time frame that will of course
be us again as we continue
through the budgeting process ms
call mode secretary Scrase
anything to add there are just
we we want to make sure we have
that date on our radar screen I
was gonna and just mention that
it's a federal law that the
secretary of health and Human
Services can declare a public
health emergency and by law can
only last ninety days that has
to be re declared and very
similar to public health orders
to New Mexico that have to be
renewed every month by me next
call has some communication with
the federal government about
advance notice are likely to get
I know she wants to share that.
Please go ahead Mr come over Mr
chair members the committee
thank you for that opportunity
is clarify here because I think
when we come to you all with
these huge swings in our budget
request I know it's I can make
folks question you know what's
really happening with the
challenges every Medicaid
program across the country
spacing obviously I as we
continue to deal with the
uncertainty of the timing of
this public health emergency
declaration but I think folks
have captured that correctly
their ninety day drive Gration
made by the secretary at the
federal level but CMS committed
to all governors the
administration actually the
money administration committed
to all governors when they came
into office they would give
states at least sixty days
notice before they terminated
the declaration and so when we
came to all members at we had a
little bit of a lower with an
expectation that this I that
declaration page and bills are
in April but now that we're with
the sixty day window what you
see us coming to is with coming
to you as a higher number
because we now with.
Strong confidence at this point
given our communications with
that the senior process CMS that
we will have at least one work
order of this that will take us
to July so we will begin to
swirling folks at least until
that time it will have that
continued six point two percent
but will also have the continued
maintenance and maintaining all
the folks that we have now in
the program nearing nine hundred
and sixty thousand as you saw.
Thank you so much Mr moe and we
need to benefit immensely from
your expertise
so.
Analysts Mr secretary moving on.
One of the concerns we heard
about repeatedly through the
summer in which is actually.
Been been heightened during this
current COVID crisis in our
hospitals are hospitals staffing
rates is there funding in both
the executive and the
legislature and the LESC for the
enhanced.
Reimbursements.
Help support these critical
hospital staffing rates and and
is there more that we may end up
having to do their as we face
continued crises conditions
across the state.
Mr chairman that's a great point
and hence the recurring funding
in the LFC recommendation but
let me I see Director Abbey I
had a point to make so I'll get
to him.
Thank you director Avid please
I'm sorry to go back Mr Chairman
but.
January eighteenth decision on
one more quarter is pertinent to
this supplemental request.
But not to the FY twenty three.
So we're not gonna learn
anything before the end of the
session likely that it's gonna
impinging on the ability in the
first quarter any quarters in FY
twenty three to get that
enhanced F. map.
Okay thank thank you very much
Director Abbey that's helpful
and kind of bookending the.
The.
Station.
I just asked about the the
enhanced reimbursements and the
hospital staffing you yes yes Mr
chairman and director Avid that
really think ways into that same
point
That's a really important
question you heard a salute to
that in the presentation so the
question that also
representative Armstrong asked
about provider rate that would
be HSD but there's also provider
rate.
Embedded in the Medicaid number
and.
Those rates are helping hold up
our hospitals we have an
additional actually special
appropriation and the LESC
recommendation for nonrecurring
arpa Fund thirteen million to
enhance and build up again and
continue the good work that
secretaries right HSD is done to
boost up in some cases fifty
percent I see you right the
hospital so you'll see that when
we go through the nonrecurring
revenue there's thirteen million
there plus the federal match
and in the overall rate in the
recurring we also are trying to
get the message in the LFC
recommendation about the
importance of supporting the the
provider rate the Medicaid the
increasing minimum wage rates in
the rural areas in all areas of
for.
How many community based
services long term services and
supports the I think
It's.
Time yeah we go to secretary
Scrase because he communicated
to me before the session the
possibility of it being made
aware of that special of twelve
thirteen million combined with
Medicaid Sir I think that's
where you're going Mr chairman
secretary expiration can you
report on that status.
Yeah I'm Mr chair director Avid
and members of the committee we
are it is true that my father
build back better bill is
stalling we realize that that
thirty some million dollar
supplemental request would turn
into a twenty some million
dollar reversion and we began
tackling this from the Medicaid
but if you of using that general
fund which would have a federal
match to pay remarkably almost
exactly the same total amount of
money as director Abbey and his
team were considering from there
and all and not and we have
applied to CMS do they have to
prove that it is very very
similar almost identical to what
we did for hospitals and nursing
homes and not I think from
roughly April to September our
our April to June depending on
who you were twenty twenty
increasing I see right
prosperous increasing general
better rates Ross Perot's and
this time our purpose is really
to focus on those frontline
staff retaining them you know
they're working side by side
with travelling nurses to come
and go and make twice as much as
they do per hour it's very
demoralizing and so we're
working really hard to a secure
CMS role be to have you know get
that I'm get that all put
together on to the MCOS to pass
those rates on I would just
point out of it and this is
really important and I and
director Avid and I didn't talk
about it but if you do use our
pool funding for that that
cannot be matched by the fence
but if we use the month the
existing general fund for twenty
twenty two we can so that would
be my suggestion and and that
indeed is the LFC records to use
general fund about our part for
that okay could you clarify
timing like a like you did on.
The January eighteen thank what
about the ability to you're from
CMS on sorry Mr chairman I think
that can I am I helping their
equity at any it's all relevant
because to the point and for the
committee and also folks who are
attending we are going along we
only have one more HSD and these
are all dates that the full
committee should have on their
radar screen so that we can be.
Us and probing through this
process so please continue Mr
chairman I asked director call
mom who is intimately familiar
with CMS timelines and deals
with every day to give us her
best guess as to when we'll hear
back we literally cut and pasted
almost the entire document from
last time and alerted them to
that there is a slight bump for
transportation providers just
revving issues have been a call
what do you think.
Mr chair members the committee
thank you for that questions are
and and really thank you to
everyone for the support and
allowing us to make these
investments are providers we
hear from that often as well as
the members and we this is
really really needed time so I'm
like at the secretary signed I
will we submit those request
back into CMS this week we did
our call notified then that
would be re submitting them and
they have agreed to work as
quickly as possible and to get
those approved for us get make
any predictions but I do expect
us hopefully hear from them
within a two week period on an
update which we can share this
group as we on this recession
but I we hope to have them and
seated and retroactively I to
beginning of January that is a
challenge sometimes for the
providers and also for the NCOs
to retroactively make those
payments that we heard from
folks that was the desired
approach and so we are moving
forward in that manner so thank
the secretary said hospitals
nursing facilities in our
transportation mentors three
critical areas that we think
need support right now.
Thank you director come on thank
you director Avid for for
highlighting that okay again I I
want to wrap up now with as we
discussed multiple points today
we will not be taking action on
the recommendation we did want
to have a full hearing
couple more very brief things
one secretaries this ask you
value said overall HSD we're at
a six percent funded vacancy
level.
That's correct Mr chairman okay
I I I offline that seems to me a
slightly lower numbers and then
we were at the beginning of
Secretary spaces tenure
I'd like to confirm that offline
but I think that.
It really speaks to.
Melding the LFC and exec
approaches around employment
there's clearly significant
challenges around hiring and
retention we have to acknowledge
and appreciate the LFC approach
that I was proud to support
which.
working to drop down that funded
vacancy rate.
Get dollars that used
that are already existing and
already appropriated.
I think it does is you know we
should be open to an as
Representative Castellano talked
about
rural communities and
potentially some of the
challenges but also
opportunities that may exist
with hiring we we need to.
We look at melding the two
approaches filling critical
areas which
Thank you we can take a lot of.
Alright in in that the overall
and referred to ninety eight
point seven percent overlap in
overall budget numbers with very
significant differences that
that remain in approach but with
that I think we can conclude
today's hearing want to again
miss us on the stands for thank
you so much Secretary Scrase to
you and your team thank you you
are continuing to play a key
role in navigating New Mexicans
through this pandemic saving
lives.
Even during the toughest are you
for what's next and sorry.
Gonna go now to our Department
of Health Agency code six six
five.
And
We would ask our LFC analysts.
Miss Kelly client to pick this
up.
Thank you Mr chairman hi Clint
legislative finance committee
and Dr Scrase will be with us
again as our secretary acting
for departments health and
MaryBeth cents more we'll
continue on with us as well as
our DFA counterpart we also have
a Kathy Konkol forward you H.
secretary and now with the
office of the governor with us
and other D. which staff that
can be recognized after the
presentation concludes that
that's okay with the chair.
With with that I'd like us to
start with your packet here on
HSD code six six five department
of health.
And much like RubyAnn
presentation I'm gonna start
with the general fund high level
and go over it before you go
over the different sheets this
is again just general fund
revenue what I will notice a lot
of the thematic discussions that
you just had with the HSD is
going to roll into D. O. H. and
SO there's gonna be a lot of
discussion about person funding
the rate increases that HSD is
attempting to include in their
recommendations going forward
would affect you H. hospitals
I'm and so these agencies really
are aligned in really
interesting ways both
programmatic Lee but also
financially linked up to DSD for
example transfers a huge chunk
of their funding to HSD so that
we can fund and match Medicaid
dollars to the DDS to the
developmental disabilities
waivers program so you're gonna
hear a lot of really similar
thing is India H. without all
star on the high level and so
you're going to notice in the
very first program of the
General Fund high level of
public health program.
LFC recommendation increase
general fund revenue six point
one percent well the executive
increased almost thirteen
percent now I will notes cut
some of the really important
changes on this if you'll notice
on line eleven line eleven says
there's youth suicide prevention
the executive but two point four
million dollars into youth
suicide prevention and you'll
see that there's a zero on the
LFC rack now that's because this
is general fund revenue rack up
this does include other revenues
the LFC recommendation included
a million dollars of other
transfer revenue to go to the
you suicide prevention so there
is a million dollars for that
program and the LFC rack it is
just not shown in this general
fund high level.
Another one I'd like to take the
committee to take a look at is
this line ten by late we're
calling it violence intervention
that language can be changed
this is been both an executive
and a legislative priority it
did not come from the agency
request became in both the
executive and LESC
recommendations the executive
but one point five million in
the LFC put a million dollars
into this and this has a lot to
do with some of the credit
package legislation that many of
you members have been discussing
in other committees outside of
LFC you're probably very
familiar with and this is a
public health appropriations so
that we can also address some of
the violence and gun
intervention program of the
issues going on in the state as
a public health response and so
I'd like to call your attention
to one in ten there.
The other two lines that I like
to call your attention to in the
public health program are lines
thirteen and fourteen in fiscal
year twenty to the transfer from
tobacco settlement money to DO
age for tobacco cessation had
gone down by one point nine
million dollars the legislature
put one point nine million in
its operating budget last year
general fund revenue so that we
would not be cutting tobacco
cessation programs now that
revenue went back up in FY
twenty three meaning that
there's one point nine million
more increase for tobacco
sensation because the other
revenue came up and so I just
wanted to make everybody aware
that even though we're not
technically increasing general
fund revenue because that
revenue came in stronger there's
gonna be an increase of almost
two million dollars to tobacco
cessation programs naturally in
the public health program.
The next program on the general
fund high levels at the and
response program
major differences in this line
you'll notice is need trauma
services from the funding
services funding executive
recommended three point four
million I believe that's two
million more about my correct
above what the agency actually
asked for originally the HSD had
asked for one point four million
the executive recommendation put
in three point four million the
LFC did not put any general fund
revenue in this program for a
couple reasons mostly our
thinking has to do with as you
heard in Los recitation fifty
percent of New Mexico residents
are on Medicaid and part of that
is making sure that there is
medical services available to
provide to customers across the
state and so we would challenges
that the NCOs really need to
make sure that they're
leveraging Medicaid to make sure
that there is.
There is adequate network
service including trauma
services and that's something we
really need to work out with HSD
and your wage system why is.
I'm.
just a change in the between
the LFC and exec the executive
recommendation and could add one
point five million for adults
suicide prevention on including
the LFC recommendation and
included it's almost seven
hundred thousand dollars for the
family successful I will say
that the family successful
request was not included in the
agency requests or ask for by
LFC and therefore we were unable
to really contemplate that in
our recommendation.
The next program laboratory
services.
There it there's one large
difference and this and that
you'll see one thirty one.
A recommendation but one point
nine million dollars into
laboratory services to reduce
the vacancy rate this was not
included in the agency requests
and therefore LFC was never
asked for it or able to talk
about this the agency are
provided are.
Announces process of the budget
season that is why that's not
including the LFC recommendation
we did include three hundred and
fifty thousand dollars to help
RigCount classify FTS laboratory
services it's not the full
request but we do think that it
can be coupled with a seven
percent increase compensation
package which you heard about
earlier and those two couple
together might be a way for
laboratory services to take that
revenue and have a little bit
more flexibility on how they
reclassify some these people to
help their retention issues now
when we discuss with the agency
what the retention problems were
at laboratory services there
were still some work on HSD have
trying to figure out exactly who
they were eight losing their
person to where they losing them
to the national laboratories we
weren't really sure was it Hey
was it
the work environment thing
instilled laboratory services.
Response was that they would be
getting back to us on
researching what exactly their
retention issues were wasn't
just pay or because you know
when you think about what the
state laboratories are paying
that is far above the status
paying however the state has
better fringe benefits and so
when we're looking at retention
issues we need to really dig
into this a little bit more and
think about what is the strategy
to keep those person or we need
them.
On to the facilities management
program much like the laboratory
services.
The.
There's not that many changes
between two revisions actually
came in pretty close both LFC
and exec put in nearly three
hundred thousand dollars to
address bringing people up to
the minimum wage and facilities
however the executive also put
in nearly a million dollars to
hire on staff plumbing H. back
in elektrische in person see can
also show that of the state's
already paying for H. back
plumbing and electricity in
person we're doing it as
contracts though it's already
funded so the HSD wanted to
bring the staff on as personal
as permanent person it's not
necessarily a question of
providing more funding but
moving that funding from the
contractual services category
into the person category and
hiring those people on
permanently.
The next program is GSD
developmental disabilities
program sports program we were
actually pretty close on this
outside of one line line forty
nine the executive
recommendation but one point
five million dollars in person
funding this again was not asked
for in the executive
recommendation so LFC was unable
to look at it in our budget
process and so it's not included
not because we don't think it
merits funding but because we
were not asked order made aware
of it other than that.
We have the committee to take
one second to turn your volume
three.
Three hundred ninety five.
Thank you just give everyone a
minute.
This is really important when
we're thinking about EDS do
funding and where this program
is going policy wise in the
future.
So many of you if you were on
LFC during the summers and my
distance also LHS some of the
sources and uses table that
projects what PTSD funding could
look like using the our plan to
fund DDS di waiver going through
FY twenty seven.
Know what this does is a plan to
remove everybody off of the
weightless into services and
using this federal mechanisms to
lay the general fund need to
fund not out in FY twenty six.
Both the executive and the LESC
recommendation have enough money
in this record in this
recommendation to do this plan
and I know this is a big point
for a lot of people to make sure
that did we fund this correctly
even if you went low on the LFC
recommendation for DDS di and
input the one point five
additional money in person you
would still have enough money to
do this projected plan I just
wanted to make that point and
have everyone reminded of the
sources and uses that we went
over it's big and there's plenty
of time off line as many of you
want to go over what this plan
looks like.
Finally there's two more
programs we have the health
certifications oversight program
you might have heard them call
DH I.
The executive recommendation a
reduced because you rates again
in this the LFC did so to but
slightly under LFC
recommendation producing vacancy
rates was in particular to staff
up boarding home oversight which
we've heard in many committees
was a priority for the
legislature.
And then finally in program
supported the executive
recommendation put one point two
million dollars in person not
including the off your condition
because again this was not asked
for in the agency requests it
wasn't brought to the budget
process so the LESC was unable
to
Put it in your budget
recommendations process.
With that I will turn it over to
Mary Beth issues yes we comment
on the high level.
Thank you Kelly and Mr chair no
not at this time I think I hope
will probably go over the big
differences we go back and
forth.
Great we'll go on to the overall
different sheets all start with
the overall and then more will
continue interacting point
presentation.
Recommendation for general fund
was fifteen point four million
above the LFC I called out in
the general fund what a major
that fifteen million dollars was
and so it's really spread out
pretty significantly across the
programs not necessarily in one.
The LFC recommendation however
other transfers was one million
dollars above the executive in
the public health program and
that for that youth suicide
prevention funding that I
discussed earlier.
You'll see recommendations for
federal renew supported the
department's request well the
executive was three million
lower for miscellaneous
adjustments they made to federal
COVID nineteen response dollars.
The executive recommendation
reduced vacancy rates above the
department's request resulting
in a majority of the differences
in person between the LFC and
Executive recommendations.
For you suicide prevention and
contractual services these
active recommendation included
that two point four million
general fund revenue well the
LFC recommended one million of
other transfers.
Additionally the executive
recommendation was nearly one
point two million above the LFC
contractual services for adults
suicide prevention in the
epidemiology in response program
majority of the differences the
other categories from the
executive recommendation was
from that trauma services in the
app you response program.
With that I'm very best for the
first because.
Okay
Mister chair members of the
committee
Right now I'm do you what I'll
go over that Administration
there programs support with you
so there weren't a lot of
differences and that's the
biggest one is that the
executive recommendation for
general fund was one point two
million above the LFC
I'm I'm sure they you know what
it's probably going to be quite
a theme to talk about that that
staffing needs and hiring you
know not just today but across a
lot of agencies so specifically
with the department of health
the executive did put some
additional funding in
certain programs to help
decrease vacancy rates that are
currently at relatively high
levels so in this program in the
in HSD department they currently
have a vacancy rate of about
twenty two percent and that's
the OpBud twenty two vacancy
rate meaning they can only
afford to to provide about
seventy eight percent of their
possessions
so I so in this instance the
exec just wanted to give them a
little bit of flexibility to try
to bring that down so so this
one point two million it should
help them get to a vacancy rate
of about fifteen percent meaning
they could then find out eighty
five percent of their position
that's really the only
difference in I'm in this
program though so I am going to
give it back to Kelly
for public health which does
have some staff that that will
probably need to discuss thank
you.
Thank you very much clearer now
on P. code zero zero two public
health.
General fund recommendation was
nearly three point eight million
above the LFC the executive
recommendation for other
transfers included I'm sorry
else your recommendation
included that other transfers of
one million in revenue as we
discussed for the suicide
prevention do you want to know
that there is language regarding
this so this one million dollars
is contingent upon passage of
legislation and enactment so
this relates to the early
childhood care and education
funds currently the way the
statute is written now is there
is a thirty million dollar
distribution to the early care
and education departments which
has all been spent in both of
the LFC in the Executive
recommendations at ECECD.
The proposed legislation would
increase the distribution FY
twenty three from thirty million
to forty million allowing for
more distributions it would also
allow the legislature to
appropriate funding to other
appropriate trials related
services in other departments
and so we a team that if this
legislation were to pass this
would be an appropriate use its
use youth suicide prevention
from that fund from that extra
telling ten million dollars
which the legislation would
change in FY twenty three I will
know that after FY twenty three
it's not a set million it's
based on a three year average
and the projection for the early
care and education trust fund
one out past FY twenty three is
above sixty million in FY twenty
four and wraps up ramps up
pretty quickly over a hundred
million in twenty five I have
that chart can be found in
volume three if anybody wants to
look those projections we have
done and now you're projection
of increasing the distribution
one it's got a pretty nominal
the facts on distributions in
out years of less than a million
close to five hundred thousand
dollars if we take more from the
court early.
So that's regarding that one
million so it is it is
contingent on legislation being
enacted for that funding to go
through there's also million
CYFD was similar language and
the million in crime reparations
commission's which you'll
probably hear about later with
similar intentions.
You.
To the base the youth suicide
prevention and the executive
have the two point four million
we have the one million both
recommendations include funding
for the violence intervention
program however the executive
recommendation had over five
hundred thousand dollars above
the LFC.
And with that I will turn it
over to merry.
Holly Mr chair committee members
I'm going over the epidemiology
in response Division with you
I'm so for this program the
executive recommendation for
general fund revenue was four
point two million above the LFC
recommendation are the LFC
recommendation for federal
revenue sport of the
department's request the
executive was about three
million below and that's for
miscellaneous adjustments to the
federal COVID nineteen really
funds that our our budget.
So in the base of the executive
recommendation reduce the
federal COVID nineteen response
revenue for person the LFC
recommendation reduce the
vacancy rate and this results in
the LFC recommendation being
about three point five million
above the executive for person
just a couple things I'd like to
interject in here quickly about
the executive recommendation so
the the executive analysis and
show a very high need to put
extra funds in this you're in
this program to reduce the
vacancy rate they have a twenty
two operating budget vacancy
rate of about ten percent which
is pretty reasonable in in
addition to that the the
adjustment of federal funds is
is relatively simple throughout
the year so should the need
arise for for more federal funds
for prison also very easy I'm
adjustment for for them to do
I'm just to be clear on that
from the executive
the executive recommendation was
nearly one point two million
above the LFC in the contractual
service category for suicide
prevention this this difference
is on your call probably talking
a moment ago about the youth
suicide prevention and public
health division this is tied to
that
Entire kind of a suicide
prevention infrastructure that
the Do�a tribe asked to be
considered and if they ask for
about one point five million
dollars in the epidemiology
response division to work on
this the executive support about
but that the LFC didn't did not
support that amount so that's
that's going to be that the
basic difference there for your
your one point two million
and then the other large
difference which Holly also over
discussed a couple of minutes
ago is in the other category the
executive recommended three
point four million for trauma
services as opposed
to the LFC did not put anything
additional in their escalates
planed but the executive I felt
strongly about bumping up the
trauma services in the state
there's only about one in a one
point five one point six million
currently for trauma services
that amount has been cut
significantly over the past ten
or fifteen years back ten
fifteen years ago there were
only three I'm entities that
received from out of funds and
now we are up to nineteen so
that's the thinking behind the
executives are supporting the
trauma Fund Representative
request and again helping that
get to rural communities
throughout the state I'm those
are the major differences in
epidemiology the performance
measures we have gone over and
reconciled
and so I will send it back over
to Kelly for the next program.
We are now on two laboratory
services which is P. zero zero
four.
The executive recommendation for
general fund was nearly two
point two million above the LFC
well both recommendations
included funding to address a
request occasion for some exceed
a laboratory services program
the executive was three hundred
and eight thousand above the LFC
again the LFC was slightly lower
because in our recommendation
for this we were contemplating
the seven percent comp package
which we knew would also be
coupled with the LFC
recommendations which is not
included in the base it'll be in
the back of the bill going
forward.
Additionally the executive
recommendation included one
point eight million to reduce
the vacancy rate resulting in
the two point two million dollar
difference in personnel costs
and so you'll notice that that's
really there's not much of a
difference in laughter Services
else well there's not outside of
personal spending.
Okay thanks again Kelly Mr chair
we are on the facility's
Management Division
so in this program the executive
recommendation for general fund
was two million dollars of the
LFC.
So the executive did include
nine hundred fifty four thousand
in person to hire on the
journeymen F. T. E. this
resulted in the difference in
person at the the LFC is
approach was to use the funding
currently in contractual
services the executives was to
provide a little more wiggle
room for the agency I'm let's
see the other differences are
the executive recommendation
contractual services is one
point one million above the LFC
and this is for a least
medication dispensing system
the LFC recommendation includes
of a little over half a million
for this in a special the
executive funds it in the base
aside from that there's really
not that many differences pretty
close on this one colleague I'll
head back to forty.
Mr Chairman just make a couple
more comments of facilities that
that's okay please go ahead so I
just want to call the members
attention to a couple things
that are in special
supplementals that are really
consequential to facilities
management program the LFC
included a four point eight
million dollars special for the
operations and maintenance of
facilities now many of you are
on LFC or other committees might
remember that we put out a
pretty
big report on you H. facilities
about six months ago and and the
executive put in a request for
general fund to
address some of those findings.
I'm in both LFC and I don't
operate best but I in both of
our analysis as we did not fund
the agency requests on that line
I think we I at least felt that
some more Planning in detail for
that plan would probably be
appropriate but we recognize
that there is absolute need for
the facilities and so by putting
in a special request it does a
couple things allows the agency
to a tree that reaches the money
sooner than FY twenty three and
so they can get into the little
bit sooner and it allows them to
do it over a couple fiscal years
as we flesh out this plan a
little bit better and make sure
that we're all on the same page
and you can find that in the LFC
specials recommendations and
that's in volume two and it's on
page one ninety six if you want
to dig into the special
supplemental and efficiency
recommendations from the LFC.
One more thing that I'd like to
bring up regarding facilities
which is actually really
important actually there's two
things to bring up is when we're
talking we're talking about the
Medicaid rate adjustments that
really comes into play into this
program in particular so
facilities is a
Non Medicaid patients and
Medicare patients and so billing
is really important to this
program being financially stable
and so we do have a performance
measure on the if this program
being able to receive third
party billing it goes up and
down it hasn't always been the
strongest performance but we're
talking about financially we we
should always keep our thumb on
the pulse of that piece of it
and with a rate increase you
could see some financial
incentives coming into these
facilities as well that would
help their operational costs and
then.
The last would like to make a
facilities is when it comes to
capital outlay now if a couple
of you could if you wanted to
turn your volume three to the
capital outlay staff framework
and that's on page one seventy
two when it comes to department
of health again that's page one
seventy two this is just a
framework from the staff but it
does have financial consequence
on this program the first being
that many of you were on a sub
committee regarding the veterans
home and there is a plan to look
for federal reimbursement to
rebuild some of the pieces of
the veterans home the LFC
framework within twenty million
dollars for that piece we do
know thank you Kathy Konkol from
the governor's office for being
really responsive in
communications that the first
application process for that has
been submitted to the federal
government we're waiting for a
response back and there's a
couple there steps to applying
for it in total there's thirty
three point four million dollars
for duration the capital
framework and of that thirty
three point four eight point
four million is also for
just keep our health and safety
improvements at state facilities
and and you H. so not only is
there a four point eight million
dollar special there's also this
eight point four that's funny
that numbers are just what what
is known is that
for just the operational safety
improvements to the facilities
so outside of the normal
operating budget there is quite
a bit of funding for at this
point.
Okay now on to the GST thank you
Mr chair thank.
So do is do is because zero zero
seven we already went over the
main discussion earlier when I
talked about the DDS yes plan to
remove people off the wait list
and what that would look like
financially again I like to put
the offer out that any member
would like to go through that
plan in detail please contact me
offline and we're more than
happy to look at that I want to
thank secretary Scrase and do
some Cornwell and
hello a lot of HSD into each
Ways we worked really all hard
together this summer that
financial plan together the
outlook years and it was really
a model of how to work together
to get some transformational
change done in a way that was
financially feasible for the
state and leveraging federal
funds in a really creative the
way.
So outside of that the only
difference in DST is that one
point five million dollars in
person the LFC did not recommend
because it was not requested and
so we were unable to contemplate
that in our recommendation.
With that I will turn it over to
the US for DH I.
Thanks again Kelly Mr chair I
also just wanted to make a
couple comments about about the
developmental disability support
program real quickly
if that's all right for the
thank you I'm so I again back to
these vacancy rates I just
wanted to put out a couple
reasons the executive supports
additional funding in this
program there are there vacancy
rates are are relatively decent
right now the the amount lowers
the vacancy rate for the the
program to about ten percent
which is again it's it's pretty
reasonable for them but the
executives also thinks that
given that this ambitious
planned to get everybody off of
the waiting last over the next
couple of years that this
program may need some additional
funding for staffing yes
if the need arises this is a
going to be a lot more people
coming off of the waiting last
hopefully and they typically do
in a in a normal year you know
it's I mean I think typically
around three fifty if they get
funding that they've they've
received over the past few years
so.
That's going to be significantly
higher we help we want to make
sure that D. O. H. can
Can I can meet the needs of of
everybody who's coming off a
winless so just wanted out there
I thank you Mr chair and I'll
just take you to
the program is the health
certification licensing and
oversight again also known as
the division of health
improvement
this these two recommendations
were very close for this program
the executive was four hundred
and forty one point one thousand
above LFC.
Are both recommendations include
funding for personnel to reduce
the vacancy rate the executive
just put a little bit more in
this program to reduce the
vacancy rate about two hundred
and forty one thousand so so
that's the only difference in
person and then the HSD had
requested two hundred thousand
four and I. T. system the
executive supports that and
contractual services but that
was not in the LFC so that's the
only difference in contractual
services between the two
recommendations and there's
there's really nothing else
different about this program so
I'll give it back to Kelly for
the last program.
And then final program medical
cannabis this is really is
because there are no differences
between the on scene the
executive recommendation.
I just will note and for the
committee if they want to look
through all in ones
deal we begin on page.
Forty six through fifty four and
that's the policy area of from
one to if you just want to look
at the budget stats pages three
oh nine three three twenty two
and volume three when it comes
to just a DVD charts are page
ninety four and ninety five with
that I will turn it over to
secretary Scrase for comment.
Thank you both Mr secretary.
Secretary space.
Okay I was I'm here sorry about
that I just resist thank you Mr
chair members of the committee
it's going to be back although I
I have a left my chair and
delighted to talk about these
new programs and existing
programs to improve the health
of New Mexicans now I am
securing my screen so that part
work I did want to again thank
you director Avid Giles Sallee
Kelly Klein Kelly of the get up
to speed on some of these
programs and as always we get
really really good questions I
do remember that I started in
this role out in August August
first but before that I attended
that eligibility hearing on
facilities and we've done a lot
of hard work to try to come up
with a better system for
managing our facilities to
address the LESC concerns on
certainly talk more about that
the next slide just kind of is
my version from a policy more
point of view of the differences
and I'm gonna go through each of
these very briefly I think the
key here though is you'll see
reduce vacancy rate on funded
and almost every every one of
our divisions this number act as
up to six point two million and
that I just want to clarify a
couple items on this that could
be misconceptions I mean the
fact we have an existing vacancy
rate means the employees who are
working for us right now are
working a lot harder because
people they work with to do a
big part of work in a specific
program aren't there and so that
it's a vicious cycle the kind of
can create burned out and so it
isn't like we have extra
positions there really aren't
designated for anything and we
introduced new programs we
believe it's important to not
only provide programmatic
funding to get things up and
running and many thanks for
proposing here today frankly are
at your request and not but to
fund the staff it takes to get
those programs up and running
and so.
I just want to say that we
talked about a little bit in HSD
as well I also we talked in
December about facility workers
to put in an average you know we
have over thousand facility
workers to put in an average of
sixty eight extra ships in
twenty twenty I mean that's more
than half the weekend dates in
twenty twenty I'll M. and of
course PH Public Health Division
at B. working very long hours as
well with with high at hi over
time and working extra hours
just depending on their jobs and
so we see more turnover as a
result of this I talked to and I
think.
I think in December about the
CDC study burnout and public
health workers and so I'm you
know we really feel that new
programs really need new staff
and I mean this with all respect
that getting a new program
funded for the programmatic
pieces but not for the staff is
kind of like winning a prize
where you get free gasoline for
a year you don't own a car.
What year you're getting some
resources but without the people
that she move these programs
forward and so I think this is a
philosophical difference I
respect the wisdom of the
committee to sort through this
and figure this out but we do
want to expand into these new
areas and and you want some
support currently we have thirty
five twenty one budgeted
positions thirty nine fifty five
authorized positions twenty
eight eighty two I'm filled
positions for a budget vacancy
rate of eighteen point two
percent which I think is high
and we're working hard to both
retain our employees and keep
them from going elsewhere
because of because of the
crushing workload which by the
way has not really let up that
much as the pandemic
I go toward another general
remark I want to make is just
you know the pin to really
important LFC reports Kelly
client mentioned one of them
that was the facilities report
what a way to start a new job
and and for me and you know we
committed to making those
changes and so we came up with a
plan that we thought was
necessary to do this and some of
it's been funded some of it as
has intent I primarily by myself
for not better community
communicating why these things
are board and I'm gonna try to
do that one last time I'm pretty
the other really really
important report was the
September twenty twenty report
from Sherrie dean says I don't
know if it was ever presented to
this committee are to LFC but
I'm we had a whole the report we
had come talk to the bureau of
collaborative we work all year
on developing a plan for suicide
prevention the LFC report really
kind of called for a whole
rethinking of how we did that we
pulled different departments
together under the leadership of
rice Binger from are the bureau
of labor having came up with
that plan and so we're here
today trying to respond to the
things that the LFC is that.
Us asked us to do and we're just
sincerely asking you either to
fund those things or to tell us
what we need to change how we
need to better justify them so
that we can get that funding
I'm not going to spend a lot of
time in individual divisions are
public health probably hit the
hardest by the pandemic they're
the ones who give all the
vaccines that all the testing
work on the weekends are to
ensure that we can respond to
the pandemic people working
Christmas you know it's cetera
while we were with our families
and so they were retired most of
what we want to do there I is
and I giving them people to do
your programs one of our.
One of those programs is suicide
prevention and that falls into
two categories public health and
epidemiology in response I know
we had some directed funding
that instead of what went to
epidemiology went to public
health as people thought was
really a public health issue I
think was violence prevention
but I'm all of the department of
health is public health every
part of the apartment of health
is public health and so
epidemiology actually handles
some of these are violence
prevention programs and things
like that we can work that out
offline but I just wanted you to
understand that we're all
everything is public health I'm
thank you suicide prevention I'm
it's in both at B. and and
Public Health we're asking for
three point nine million
there is one million of funding
as was contingent that leaves a
two point nine million dollar
gap and I you know suicide is
the second leading cause of
death for you in New Mexico
one in five students hurts
themselves in New Mexico and one
in ten actually goes through
with the suicide attempt so I
just want to plead with you but
I don't think this is something
that we should just slap a
million dollars that is needs a
comprehensive approach our state
through the work that we've done
over this year our last year to
respond to the LESC report
focuses on the zero suicide
program and that will partner at
with providers and others to
implement seven core strategies
of leading leadership training
training people identifying
people who may be at risk
engaging communities on those
people treating them
transitioning them improving
them and you also heard of HSD
side about the ninety eight line
and the rapid intervention a
mobile crisis teams those to
come together like this so.
We're asking for awful funding I
believe this is a critical
public health issue gently of
the youth for the youth of New
Mexico not just for them for
adults as well I'm and so we are
fourth in the country with the
most recent full year data we do
have a current year data for New
Mexico for twenty twenty but we
don't have a the national
comparisons but we're our
suicide rate is almost double
the national rate and so we
think this warrants a
significant increase in we've
all identified here the various
components is there E. R. J.
this is the components and and
the I. we believe what we're
doing is evidence based as well
so we're asking you I seriously
to reconsider this and as a
physician and one is concerned
about the health of the state
and critically the youth of the
state and has a teenage son I'm
still I really ask you to think
about this as one of the most
significant things we can do to
really protect our vulnerable
teens and we've all been
teenagers we now what that self
esteem journey as light can
probably most of us have some
members say are we've got our
own kids very order where on
this can come to crisis and I
very quickly and we really want
to be prepared to help those
kids and adults as well so
instead of that and trauma I do
want to say a little bit more
this is one where I really feel
like I could have done a better
job describing what the trauma
services are there various
levels of trauma service there's
another one where they can do
everything for everybody we can
never have to transfer anybody
anywhere we have one in New
Mexico that's UNM there's level
to where they can do almost
everything but sometimes I have
to transfer people are bring
extra people in to deal with the
severe trauma we have zero
there's level three where they
can do a lot but
I also have to transfer the ball
as well we have six and
therefore hi in New Mexico of
level four and that's where
you're just basically set up to
get people more we have severe
trauma stabilize and ship them
off somewhere else and so we're
way behind other states in this
and this graph I think is really
really ill illustrative the line
the blue line is how much
funding at B. L. E. R. T. is
received we're trying you can
see at one point in fiscal year
on line it was when we had seven
programs it was a five million
we started with only three
programs we've been successful
we've reviews of funding to grow
trauma programs all over the
state we're now up to seventeen
programs but we do provide
services and training and
support it grants support for
new equipment and sadly we had
nineteen drama programs earlier
this year into of dropped out
one in Lee County they had to
and now they have one one Cibola
and you can see this red I
County there now they have zero
and that's a problem for me in
particular because trauma in New
Mexico is the third leading
cause of death and probably much
higher in need of populations
and here we have been seeing a
County no trauma centers Gallup
Indian Medical Center here and
then of course Sen regional and
are the Navajo but.
Very low out at San Juan I think
it's a level three and the
others are our level four so
this is something that general
portent public health issue we
want to keep that now we're
going we want to support you
programs there's a big swath of
the state where there is a long
drive to the nearest trauma
program and we use these funds
to get trump programs up and
running support them neat unique
needs or are most importantly
move them from and and I'll just
use in New Mexico example of how
I would spend a lot of the money
moving some of our lot six
level.
Three trauma centers level two I
think you do a lot more not and
just have to transfer one last
thing and trauma you can tell
I'm pretty I I dedicated to this
cost is during the pandemic
having one level one trauma
center has been a total disaster
for the state unanimous I've
been operating from a hundred
ten under fifty percent capacity
and their ability to take trauma
some nights has been
dramatically decrease that's
their first priority in the only
one level one trauma center
they've been taking at but they
have been stretched very very
sent these funds also help
support that I'm scientific lab
I do want to do a little bit
more of a patch.
I do think Mary Beth and Kelly
did a good job highlighting it
we really need some serious re
classification of positions an
SLT this is an extremely high
and lab I've toward it myself if
you have any doubts you should
go toward Mike Edwards will take
you on a tour this is the place
of there's a toxic airborne
event where all the samples will
be sent this is the place where
all do you all right samples are
sent to the lab provides expert
testimony in court and we're
paying people forty thousand
dollars a year to be chemists
and dot and provide expert tend
to testimony in court we've had
to be believed after being here
for three years getting other
jobs and border states are
making twenty thousand dollars
more a year than making forty
seven here forty forty five
they're making sixty five to
seventy in Texas or Colorado and
so this is kind of a crisis in
in addition
I we're losing people on the
left here but on the right you
can see that the demand for D.
DLI
samples and analysis is
dramatically increase our from
June of twenty twenty one here
and so they are really up
against it and I think it's
really important if we want to
retain the kind of quality
leaders we have in that lab we
need to make sure they have the
kind of quality staff they can
deal with these very complex
issues for example today I can
tell you
that we we have about seventy
percent almost crying in the
state of New Mexico because
well we have a signature pattern
on the prime it's shows up on
our SLT lab the machine so how
do the Jan Act sequencing we're
almost a hundred percent sure
it's on the prime seventy
percent of what they're looking
at the past week was on across
and so that really helps us
manage the pandemic knowing when
to start pulling levers because
we have an early.
Data I need R. I need the best
people in the country in that
lab and this is something where
I think we need to find a way to
transition transcend
philosophical differences and
and fix this one I think my
other division directors are
going to be probably maybe
disappointed me that I'm not
speaking as passionately about
other FTE issues this is kind of
their prices for department and
we need to address it I want a
little bit about facilities I
think we've gotten great support
appreciate the support for
operations and maintenance I I
think we'll have a better idea
of what does run rates are I
even if it isn't a special now
we can build that into the base
budget as the on if I understand
what was just said correctly ma
and I have an experience in
facilities I've been a CEO of a
you know ten hospital system and
and we do too much contracting
out for basic facility services
like electrician plumbing H. FAQ
person in response to the LFC
report one of our responses
actually to but in the budget to
have these people in the
facility sometimes these are
emergencies I mean if the
temperature if the H. FAQ goes
out in the budget so and it's
you know hundred juries out into
the consequences you want
someone there you want someone
you can bring rate in the facts
and that's on us to potentially
drive from somewhere else to do
it at the second one where we
have a big difference not non
funded request is automated
medication dispensing systems I
might get a little animated
about this one as well just to
warn you as a physician I work
in a major health system twenty
years ago to implement these
automated medication dispensing
systems you may remember
nineteen ninety ninety eight
that institute of medicine came
out of the big report about
medical errors and the number
one more in a hospitals is
medication administration third.
The seven percent and like ten
percent of patients have a
medication error.
Every and you know I in in in
mission and so I'm these systems
are developed to automate
dispensing getting those winds
up to the floor in the right
package for the right patients
and dramatically reduced errors
hi LFC is requiring us to move
our facilities in the current
online and this is an absolute
must have and I gotta say as a
physician I would not.
On the staff of a hospital
didn't deliver medicines in this
way and I'm and I think we have
a lot of work to do in
facilities this is when we
really need to have an air
secretary Cornwell is here today
to and she is really on the
ground working really hard disk
about these issues in the
facilities and so in the queue
in a I'm hoping we have an
opportunity for her to speak a
little bit more to these issues
issues Mr chair because I think
I think they're important I'm
and then.
I'm section eight in the rays
the raises this line is a little
confusing but what it basically
says in here you're kind of
gonna have to take my word for
it is that we have a very large
number of people in the O. H.
working in facilities sometimes
as housekeeper sometimes as
actual doing health care work
you know aids alike who are
making last when the people down
the street and McDonald's and so
some people are getting a raise
because there are ten dollars
and fifty cents going to eleven
dollars and fifty cents and the
minimum minimum wage and then
they're going to get another
seven percent on top of that
which I stand corrected that was
the right answer I gave the
wrong answer in the previous
hearing thanks very about our
and I guess the twelve dollars
and thirty cents an hour another
only a dollar seventy last and
what they can make of the
McDonald's on the straight into
the consequences are Las Vegas I
was in Moab Utah driving through
the other day eighteen dollars
an hour for a job in McDonald's
and so I think this is another
place where we're gonna have to
find a way to combine I need to
we're not what we're doing is
doing these emergency you know
requisitions to pay dietitians
about that we can give our
kitchens open you know Intel we
get we get to this budget period
but sixty seven percent of
people I will actually be helped
if we if we do a little bit more
I focused salary increases
on certain positions I think
across the board is wonderful
and I want to thank you on
behalf of everybody everyone who
works in state government making
more than fifteen dollars an
hour but actually the way
percentages work is if you give
everyone us across the board
increase you increase the
disparity sure the dollar
disparity between low income and
high income workers it and Mr
secretary eight I know we have a
lot.
Go through I want to wrap this
up at by twelve thirty.
I
thank you Mr chair I appreciate
encouragement you now you well
and you know I get into this
sometimes I get passionate so I
DDS State doubling the number of
people and services we're I
think we have a legitimate need
for more people to coordinate
the program hi Amanda I'm going
very quickly now provision
health improvement thank you for
the additional funding for the
The homes we are working on that
we're going up with the victory
at we're trying to have an
intermediate level of licensing
all that's an under way I and
that we think are the been short
on people for a really long time
because a lot of contractors and
we can save money I did doing at
FDA's center at I apologize to
Chris Burmeister and and
ideation
for a call from a for not
pitching harder for their FTEs
just lastly I want to echo what
Kelly said I think the solution
we've come up with our for the
waiver to get everyone on
services is America all and I
am completely attributable to a
close partnership between ages
State LFC and the O. H. working
all together to make this happen
so that I think we're in a I I
am I will stop and turn it back
to you Mr chair thank you thank
you so much Mr secretary we're
gonna go to questions first
we're gonna go to Representative
Anderson.
Okay now I'm live yes Sir thank
you Mr chairman
I had of just a few quick
questions as I dig it out of and
One is to the LFC in the exact I
I I just I look at this this
Let's see vacancy reduce the
vacancy rate and I noticed that
the LFC exceeds the executive a
time or two the executive
exceeds the LESC of I think both
of them have zero down for us
some of the.
Some agency efforts I was just
curious why there was such a
difference in of kind of the two
approaches on what seems to be a
relatively of the same idea
question.
Mr chair and
Representative Anderson USS
great questions and then start a
mess I think this is the same
kind of philosophical difference
we talked about it HSD with one
approaches across the board
increases and and
and I can't I'm not gonna try to
articulate LESC position but a
general feeling that if agencies
don't have other positions felt
they should first go there and
meet their needs and that there
may not be a need for additional
FTE is and then that I think the
executive position as we like to
be a little bit more directive
in giving critically low income
individuals make less than
people in towns raises and also
I I I think I'm that in fact in
many divisions who have been
underfunded for awhile they
really have people doing more
than one job and and that and
step one to fill the vacancy
rate is brand new people so each
person only has one job now I'm
if if I could I've been looking
for a way to call on secretary
come gliding Kelly content
Meredith may want to say
something to that
Mr chair could I have Kathy
speak to this with respect to
facilities briefly thank Dr
Scrase says excellent I would
ask them to knocked well because
we do have a full afternoon and
I do have a couple more
questions but.
Please why the difference
Secretary control please.
Thank you Mr chairman
Percent of Anderson members of
the board I I I can't speak to
the other divisions but as to
the facilities the request isn't
for additional FTE is which is
clear but for to raise the
minimum wage to somewhere we can
compete so I'm not really clear
why there would be a difference
Representative in all of the
divisions between the executive
and the LESC I cannot speak to
that but I can't speak I would
just echo what secretary R.
Scrase has said regarding the
desperate need we have to
compete in our facilities thank
you thank you Mr chair please.
The directive to Representative
question there's a large
difference in person
particularly the LFC and exec
because in many instances the
request to reduce that they can
see rate was not included in the
department requests to the LFC
and so was not put through the
budget process for instance the
one point two million dollars
and program support was not
included in the agency requests
there was also one in laboratory
services which was far above
with the HSD had requested and
so the LFC so there was a lot of
executive put in that never went
through the normal process of
LCV else consider and so that is
what's driving a lot of these
differences between personal
request I see thank you very
much and I think I'm gonna leave
that one there and move on to
line twenty two on the orange
first page over high overview
it's firearm safety and
specifically interested in of
that difference being so great
and and what does firearm safety
of bias.
It currently.
I'm here I have thought Mr
Representative Anderson give me
your project in the future
budget secretaries.
Yes please.
Got you so Representative
Anderson
in that line the LFC
recommendation is is higher and
so it's appropriate I believe
for agency contacts for Kelly to
answer that.
Yes Mr chair members the
committee so this was included
in the agency requests and a
smaller number which was rolled
up in an F. T. E. that they
thought were priority S. T. E.
and we pulled it out as
independent line because it had
received so much interest both
from the executive and the
legislative leadership that's
why C. and online it normally
would have been reduced in a
concert because technically
those positions exist but they
were unfunded went solvency
happens of existed which needed
to put the money back in now the
reason that the LFC is so much
higher than the executive is
because of the legislative
package to re help reduce crime
and violence in the state of New
Mexico and this is one of those
priority areas the executive
recommendation funds the agency
requests to fund those exceed
that exists but we're not
abundance of the that's why
that's a big difference there.
Thank you very much for that
Kelly then my question would
simply be if we provide the full
one hundred million how are we
going how is that going to
enhance fire arms safety
throughout New Mexico.
Mr chair members the committee
it just to clarify its one
million I'm not a hundred
million thank you thank and at
so this epidemiology response
program is one of the most
unique programs in the state
cover into Mexico remain in that
is the real research driven
program with highly qualified
researchers and backgrounds of
this and a lot of they they only
have put out one part that I've
done in my research for this but
a lot of what they can do is the
research work on policies that
could help change gun violence
in the state they could mine the
data for you know why these
things are happening you know is
it accidental is it then you
know is it it can be a lot of
things I think and so they they
have a real research on helping
both the executive and the
legislature figure out the
policies that we want to use are
not necessarily a direct
implementor of like services
things that make sense I think
that was the answer I was
looking for and I appreciate it
because it is it is given me
a good idea of where I think we
might go up to more questions
short answers please one is
cannabis up.
As a subject in D. O. H. I'm I'm
curious what we're doing and D.
O. H. with that money to reduce
cannabis use in New Mexico and I
read an article in a newspaper
thing was the Albuquerque
journal in in a state employee
not from a different agency was
quoted as saying Hey when it
comes to cannabis were all about
cannabis businesses and cannabis
consumers and I thought good
grief somebody better be for
cannabis affects all New
Mexicans and their help so
of any response Dr Scrase.
Thank you Mr chair.
And Representative Anderson
members of the committee I I
can't.
I don't have enough big enough
screen to see if Dominic are
director of our campus Division
is on and can comment to that I
think the medical there was a
bill passed by the legislature
to legalize cannabis in last
session that is gone live the
division of duties happened and
the medical cannabis programs
jail it resides in the O. H. we
overstate people using cannabis
for medical reasons connected
with our provider and a
certified them as
as being a needs a cannabis for
medical reasons the tax I'm
again this is different between
the two programs and we have a
board that oversees the medical
cannabis program that also has a
responsibility to look at issues
of use you know misuse of the
drugs substance use disorder as
they relate that to Canada so
that's about as details of an
answer I can give you today Dr
Scrase and that would of apply
to both medical and
recreational.
Mr chair and that Representative
Anderson I'm gonna have to check
on that I don't think you will I
don't know what that change of
our thirty extends to recreation
but I ate you know the work we
would do would of course apply
yeah well I'm I'm very
interested in pursuing that
offline and last but not least
can somebody please give me an
update on the family successful
lab and its development.
Mr chair I'm with your
permission I'd like to call I
carry army Health from each of
the were this will be funded AG
and she and Janis Gonzales have
the most information on that so
Kerry are you still with us.
Yes I am secretary thank you Mr
chair.
Good afternoon everyone again.
yes so we have been working with
the department of health you
know from the Medicaid side the
department of health and the
early childhood education care
department it's you you what is
included in the executive
request around a data linking
project across agencies that
specifics here at risk drug and
alcohol addicted babies so the
the refunding request which it
sounds to me like it may not
have been in the LFC request
eight that may need to be
clarified here but said that
really is to do the analytics
and research specific to this
small subset population so that
we can look at sort of at
linking them with the services
in the plans of care that they
need and so that is the current
status I think the HSD is
supportive and partnered with
our sister agencies here
and they want me one explain
that discrepancy in that thank.
Thank you very much for mission
MaryBeth has a greater
prominence valley these.
Thank you thank you Secretary
and and Mr chair yes I just
wanted to clarify that this
was an advocate in after the
request was submitted so the
full amount is in the executive
recommendation it's not in the
LFC side thank you thank you
very much Mr chairman I'll
conclude by simply saying that
Whatever motion we accept this
afternoon I hope we can perhaps
re visit the difference and
those two and talk to the
analysts further about
this issue thank you Mr chairman
thank you very much for seven
percent and now gonna go to
Representative Dixon.
Thank you Mr chair and it just
so happens that Representative
Anderson asked my question which
was about the family success lab
but first Mr chair Dr Scrase and
our analysts I just wanted to
thank you for the presentation
and Dr Scrase particularly
wanted to acknowledge the
efforts.
You all are putting in of for
youth suicide prevention I think
that is tremendously important
and so I really really
appreciate it
with regard to the family
success lab I guess I don't have
a question anymore I just wanted
to flag that I think using data
so that we can be very targeted
in our systems and approaches is
really important so I'm just
gonna second Representative
Anderson there I thank you Mr
chair.
Thank you very much
Representative Dixon okay I
don't see any other members
there for questions.
The secretary Scrase you've done
a very in depth job of
highlighting that some of the
areas of difference along of
course with our incredible
analyst as well as Kelly as you
pointed out and others have
noted that really exemplary work
on the DD waiver for instance
that is moving us really really
significantly forward.
At this time and I will you
obviously in dialogue with madam
chair while will drive
recommendation today there
remain key areas that members at
and have highlighted that likely
we should expect continued work
and I know madam chair will help
set set out the appropriate way
and then for us to do that in a
transparent and open right as we
always do so with that said I
will go to Representative
Sweetser for today's motion.
Thank you Mr chair and thank you
to everyone for the incredible
work yes through the whole year
plus on this budget and with
that Mr chairman of the LFC
recommendation okay there is a
motion for the LFC is there a
second.
Second.
Okay it's been moved by
Representative Sweetser second
by Representative Anderson is
their opposition to that motion.
None of the above.
Okay let's
set it and then I.
Let's
let's go ahead then we have a
motion and a second.
March second you please call the
roll
just so
especially because we're we're
kind of remote.
Can you please call the roll on
the secretary yes of course
Representative Allison or more
yes.
Representative Anderson yes.
Representative Armstrong
yes Representative brown.
Yes.
Representative Castellano.
Yes.
Representative Chatfield.
Yes.
Representative Crowder no.
Representative Dixon yes.
Representative etel.
No whole scale representative
Garcia.
People.
Representative.
You yes.
Laying.
Yes.
Mata.
Yes.
That the ana yes.
Representative but.
Yes.
Trujillo yes.
Small.
Yes.
And.
Representative Garcia.
Representative Anitta.
Meister we have fourteen yes and
to now.
Excellent thank you very much by
a vote of fourteen in the
affirmative and negative we have
a doubt the LFC recommendations
for HSD code six six five
department of health and again
want to note that.
A few areas of differences
remain and so we can expect
or or my expects continued work
thank you all members I know we
take extra time today for nine
million dollars with the budget
it's appropriate but deeply
appreciate everyone's time the
staff and secretary to you and
your team and our analysts thank
you all very much we're gonna
break now we'll be back at one
thirty thanks everyone for their
work this morning and we'll see
everybody so.
