So now members, what we're gonna
do first, welcome. We are
thrilled and excited, uh, to
have, uh, remarkable members who
are returning, um, and obviously
a number of new members, which
is always very exciting for the
committee, um, what we're gonna
do is first go to budget
director and uh budget chief of
staff writing. She's going to uh
have remarks introduce our
staff, uh, walk through a little
bit as members, you know, our
staff.
uh, both for this committee, uh,
for the majority, the minority,
and with uh director Sale and
Deputy Director Courtney at LFC
are, of course, an invaluable
resource. So, uh, we'll go to
budget director.
But cheap chief of staff, right.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Good
afternoon members. It's great to
see you all back. Um, my name is
Amanda Briding, that is bring as
in bride. I just got married, I
thought nothing would be harder
than Dick Petty, but writing
tends to trip people up, so it's
great to remeet you all. Um, I
am originally from southern New
Mexico, proudly, I was born in
Alamogordo. I grew up in Las
Cruces. I am privileged to be
your HAFC chief of staff for the
2nd year in a row. I worked.
LFC before this job, uh,
directorly hired me about 6
years ago, so I'm very grateful
for all my mentors, um, and all
of you. So I'm happy to be back.
Um
Just a couple housekeeping
things, as you all know this
committee works really hard. You
guys are gonna have a lot of
information before you. I really
highly recommend for your budget
volumes, uh, that you work with
LFC staff if you have questions
on that or HAFC staff. No
question is too big or too
small. We're here to help. We're
here to get you on the right
page in your binder. um, please
use us as a resource. We are
here for that.
Um, let's see.
A couple other things, so your
binders, we're gonna be talking
about your binders a lot. These
binders will be filled to the
brim probably by next week they
fill up really, really fast. So
right now there's not a ton in
them, but you do have an agenda
outlining kind of the 1st 30
days. This will probably change,
but it is a good sort of
guidepost for right now, if you
have any questions on that,
please feel free, uh, to talk to
me.
I would like to introduce some
of our HAFC staff very briefly,
so I'll ask them to stand up,
uh, when I call on them, of
course, we have back, we're very
lucky to have our lead analyst
Michael Mulligan Bath.
Mike's been with the committee
for how many years?
6 years, which is incredible,
um, and you do have bios of all
of the staff in your binder. So
if you want to learn a little
bit more about them, please
refer to that. We also have
Jessica Sely joining us for the
first time this year as an
analyst. Um, she'll be helping
me track legislation, as you all
know, we spend a lot of time in
this committee working on House
Bill 2, which can make tracking
legislation difficult, so we're
going to try and have a better
eye on some of that this year
with Jessica.
We also have Garrett Mosley. He
is a, uh, currently but almost
former student regent at NMSU.
He's going to be helping with
all sorts of things, including
environmental stuff, um, and
tracking some of those big
agencies. So he's not here
today, but he'll be here on
Thursday. We also have Annalisa,
Annalisa, could you please stand
up? Thank you. This is her first
year with HAFC, but we're very,
very lucky to have her. She has
a lot of highly technical
skills, um, and we'll be leaning
on her a lot for.
that.
Uh, your last page of your staff
directory has our incredible
committee assistance you all
probably know Jackie Garcia, our
lead committee assistant who
will be calling the role. She'll
be in here with us every single
day, uh, this place literally
could not function without her.
I couldn't function without her,
so thank you to Jackie. We also
have Felicia Leba in here, uh,
retired state employee. We're
really excited to bring her on,
um, and then we have Holland and
Alyssa. They might be, oh.
Um, OK, we'll start with
Holland.
We have Holland. She's a brand
new CA, uh, she'll be helping
with scheduling and kind of
keeping track of things, and
then we have Alyssa also helping
us with scheduling and office
hours. So that's HAFC, um, we
are here to help. We're
incredibly excited for this
session. We're going to work
hard. We are going to show up
for you all 100% every single
day. That is the one thing I can
promise. I can't promise much
else, um, but I'm
was always humbled and grateful
to be here. So thank you so
much, Mr. Cheng.
Awesome. Uh, thank you very
much, um, Director Bri. Um, OK,
members, uh, we're just want to
say a couple more things and
then we'll wrap up today.
Obviously it's been a very long
day, um, really just a big giant
welcome. Uh thank you for your
commitment of time, what, what
it takes as uh Amanda walked
through, um, you'll see in the
schedule that we, uh, you know,
we sort of get.
For Saturdays before the bill is
before the uh
Beginning and perhaps bulk of
our work is done during the 60
day session. So we're gonna be
taking that time. Um, the
agendas are here. If you have
any questions, your resources
are um immense, uh, our staff,
the LFC staff for whom Director
Sale will introduce the entire
staff tomorrow, um, you have
executive staff, you have uh uh
Mr. May and uh
minority staff, you have a
number of folks, and you always
have myself.
Vice chair, uh, the ranking
member and other members who've
been here ask if, if you have
that question. Another member
likely has a the similar or even
perhaps the same question. So
investigating that is great.
That takes us to once we dive
into the budget hearings
tomorrow.
Please bring your curiosity,
your questions, help sort of
uncover for yourself, your
community, for your fellow
members, uh,
things that you need to know
about agencies, about budgets,
questions that you have.
Obviously, there are a number of
us, and so how we balance that
time, how we uh spend how you
spend that time asking questions
and really diving deep with
whoever is there at the witness
table is super important and it
is a back and forth sometimes
the shorter questions and trying
to, to really as best you can
have a conversation to uncover
something about that budget item
that.
see that priority for the state
in your community, that's
golden.
Uh, and we're gonna do the very
best we can to give as much time
for folks to ask questions, dive
deep for yourself, your
community, and again for your
colleagues, um,
Last thing to just say, we take
the work super seriously. Uh,
one of the fundamental things
for us is that this is a place
of respect, dignity,
professionalism, we have a lot
of fun, um, and there will be
moments of, of levity, uh, and
just enjoyment and keeping it in
that sort of very focused,
excited, professional space
allows us to do the really hard
work that we're tasked to do.
Uh, that's all I want to say.
right now, um, the vice chair,
uh, and we'll go through as we
go through this week, uh, really
allowing yourself, you know, we
want to get to know you want to,
um, enhance the cohesion of this
committee, which through the
remarkable leadership in the
bipartisan leadership of folks
who are here today, others who
have, you know, moved on to very
important positions in the
legislature. We function where
the rest of the legislature can
rely upon us.
And we know that that's gonna be
the case this time again. Um.
No, no wrong question, no wrong
door. Um, and with that, uh,
members, thank you. Thank you
very much.
Could I add one more plug, Mr.
Chair. Sorry, I got too excited
and I forgot to mention um the
chair mentioned resources. I
also love to plug the new member
orientations that LFC does,
those will start on Thursday
with Medicaid 101. I go every
year even though I'm not a new
member because I learn something
every year, um, we'll make sure
to get you a full schedule of
those so you have them, but
they're really, really, uh
really useful. We also, yes, and
it's in this room, so you don't
have to go far and they'll feed
you. So it's a pretty good deal.
Um, it's in our room and there's
breakfast, um, also we do have a
little training session
tomorrow. Uh, you guys are gonna
have a ton of stuff in front of
you that's gonna be really
confusing to read, um, we're
lucky to have, uh, Kelly Klundt
from LFC. Come walk us through
some of that tomorrow. So, no
wrong questions, we're here to
support and we have
Awesome. All right. Well, thank
you all members. It's great to
see everybody they're really
excited.
Awesome. All right.
uh, thanks to the members of the
public, folks who tuned in uh
online. That'll conclude our
business for today and we'll see
everybody tomorrow a little bit
before 1:30
And yes, and uh as
Representative Garrett pointed
out, we'll conclude we'll head
