members were here to take up
final passage of House Bill 2,
the committee substitute, uh,
our committee substitute. We're
gonna go straight to Director
Sale.
Um
And um
Well, director, am I supposed to
go, should I come down,
typically, yeah, you would come
down, but we can also do it. We
practiced this last night
members so
Well, director, am I supposed to
go, should I come down,
typically, yeah, you would come
down, but we can also do it. We
practiced this last night,
members,
that's right.
Capable hands of the vice.
Mr. Chair, whenever you are
ready.
Excellent. Thank you very much,
Madam Vice Chair. Thank you
committee. Uh, we're here to
present uh house corporations
and Finance Committee substitute
for House Bill 2,
we'll go, I'll go to director of
writing and director Seli to go
through some of the top lines. I
just wanna say, uh, really and
truly thank you. We've asked a
great deal of folks who stayed
late, uh, several mornings have
been here started relatively
early. The committee is
performed.
Remarkably well with really good
questions, um, and I think
we're, uh, again on time, uh,
we're well within the budget
parameters that we set, we're
gonna be sending this over
committee under 6% recurring
spending growth, well within our
target of uh non-recurring uh uh
spending that we've adjusted
for. And uh I might just really
quickly start, and I'll go to
the director, uh, but
Committee, I think from our work
group approach, which you all
really uh leaned into and worked
hard on the recurring
adjustments that HAFC work
groups recommended in our
committee has adopted, uh, I
think very much reflect the
priorities and the, the, the
priorities of the committee and
in fact, uh, great parties in
the state and Madam Chair, that
means that public school support
received the most new recurring
funding on top of.
of the LSC recommendation
followed by the Department of
Public Safety. I want to really
thank ranking member Chatfield
and all the members but led by
ranking member Chatfield, the
raises for uh our state police
officers and Department of
Public Safety. That was followed
by $1.5 million recurring
increase for the office of the
state engineer. And so when we
think about it broadly, uh,
schools and kids.
Public safety and police
officers.
New Mexico's water, those were
the top 3 recurring uh
increases, then the subcommittee
work, uh, and out of $1.2
million there, $721,000 members
was for the livestock meat
inspection program, which has
been a priority for the
committee led again by the
ranking member, uh, and many
members, I know, uh, all across
the state, the ability to have
in-state inspections, uh, for
local New Mexico.
me is something that's of high
importance, followed by economic
development department and
creating more jobs and
opportunity for New Mexicans.
We heard the uh court personnel
and focusing this committee was
very clear in its focus on the
lowest paid personnel within our
courts, uh, and then, um, uh.
It, it kind of goes from there,
so I know time is short, but
members I do think that's worth
noting because that was driven
by you all in your work groups
and then in the full committee
and just want to say thanks.
With that, I'll turn over to
Director Bri, Director Salif.
Great. Thank you, Mr. Chair,
members of the committee, um,
the giant bill before you is the
culmination of all your work uh
in this committee. So every
spreadsheet you've had that was
this long with font this big is
all in that, um, we're happy to
help walk through sections of
the bill, Section 4 generally is
recurring, uh, section 5 is that
big one time uh money in section
6 is supplementals and so on,
so, uh, the chair just did a
really
great overview of your recurring
additions to the LFC
recommendation, um, again, that
spending is below 6% increase,
so a pretty tight budget, uh,
and then you're spending really
happened in that one time
appropriation section, so you
all were very diligent in doing
some rearranging, um, a little
bit of spending and
reprioritizing and that section
also reflects uh the same
priorities really, so a big
focus.
On water, um, and on cleanup.
A big focus on economic
development and a really big
focus, as we've all been talking
about for the past few days on
behavioral health. So, um, the
bullets before you that look
like this, that's a key hearing
issues that LFC put together,
uh, have some quick guides on
those big appropriations, uh,
we're happy to talk through
those more. Also, uh, just so
members know on page 4 of your
packet are the technical changes
that were made to House Bill 2.
No number change.
s are mostly some language stuff
and uh I'll defer to director
Seli to add more detail on that
or on anything else I missed in
the budget.
And the only other thing I
would, would highlight is the
Um
Good work of the, uh, work
groups on the healthcare
authority. This is obviously a
priority for HAFC and you were
able to rearrange within the LFC
General Fund recommendation to
continue to provide a
significant provider rate
increases in primary care,
infant and maternal.
Uh, behavioral health, you added
uh to rate increases uh for our
most vulnerable populations in
the state that are uh living in
assisted living facilities or
living in nursing homes, uh, as
well as people receiving
services in the community
through the DD waiver, uh, as
well as shoring up our income
support, uh, offices to make
sure that New Mexicans who
qualify for these services can
get them in a in a timely way.
You're able to rearrange and do
all of that stuff.
Within the LFC General Fund, uh,
target, uh, within this budget
as well, and I'd be happy to
stand for questions.
Thank you, we're gonna start
with uh Representative
Pettigrew.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Thank
you, Chairman. Thank you,
Director. Thank you.
Director, um.
For the first go, one question.
Can we get an updated version.
Of the special supplementals and
deficiency appropriations.
Before we hear this on the
floor.
Mr. Chair, Representative
Pettigrew, we have him in the
back, so we'll make sure those
get out. OK. I thought I grabbed
an updated one, but there's
stuff in here that I know is no
longer in the, in the, in-house
bill too, so.
Anyway.
The first go, madam chair. Thank
you.
Thank you, Representative.
We may let folks.
Look for just a minute.
See if we have questions.
If not,
Anyone have questions. I would
entertain emotion.
But we do pass.
Oh
Um, so it would, uh,
Do not pass on house bills 2 and
3, and a do pass on the
committee substitute.
Uh, the HAFC committee
substitute for House Bills 2 and
3.
Yes, Representative Pettigrew,
did you have a another.
Ah, a roll call vote. I think we
can do that. OK, so have we made
the motion properly? Are we
good?
And then we've got a 2nd.
OK,
Uh, so the motion was made by
Representative Lujan second by
Representative Garrett, um, and
we will do a roll call vote, uh,
Jackie.
OK, here we go. Representative
Baca.
Representative Brown.
Representative Chatfield.
Representative Dow.
Representative Duncan.
Representative Garrett.
Representative Hernandez. Yes.
Representative Herndon, yes.
Representative Herrera.
Representative Little.
Yes.
Representative Lujan.
Representative Pettigrew.
Representative Sanchez.
Representative Sareana. Yes.
Representative Silva, yes.
Representative Vincent.
Vice Chair Dixon.
The motion passes 15 I'll, I'll
vote yes. Oh, you vote. I'm
sorry.
Sorry,
didn't need my vote, but.
Chairs small.
The motion passes 16 to 1.
Thank you, Jackie. Uh, thank
you, Chairman. Thank you, uh,
Director Calli, Director
Briding, uh, and all of the LFC
staff that put in so many hours
to put this bill together. Thank
you.
Anything else or we adjourned?
All right. And no.
